AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
Amnesty International is a movement of 10 million people which
mobilizes the humanity in everyone and campaigns for change so we
can all enjoy our human rights. Our vision is of a world where those in
power keep their promises, respect international law and are held to
account. We are independent of any government, political ideology,
economic interest or religion and are funded mainly by our
membership and individual donations. We believe that acting in
solidarity and compassion with people everywhere can change our
societies for the better.
Amnesty International is impartial. We take no position on issues of
sovereignty, territorial disputes or international political or legal
arrangements that might be adopted to implement the right to selfdetermination. This report is organized according to the countries we
monitored during the year. In general, they are independent states
that are accountable for the human rights situation on their territory.

First published in 2021 by
Amnesty International Ltd
Peter Benenson House,
1, Easton Street,
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
© Amnesty International 2021
Index: POL 10/3202/2021
ISBN: 978-0-86210-501-3
A catalogue record for this book
is available from the British
Library.

Except where otherwise noted,
content in this document is
licensed under a
CreativeCommons (attribution,
non-commercial, no derivatives,
international 4.0) licence.
https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode
For more information please visit
the permissions page on our
website: www.amnesty.org
amnesty.org

This report documents Amnesty
International’s work and
concerns through 2020.
The absence of an entry in this
report on a particular country or
territory does not imply that no
human rights violations of
concern to Amnesty International
have taken place there during
the year. Nor is the length of a
country entry any basis for a
comparison of the extent and
depth of Amnesty International’s
concerns in a country.

Original language: English

ii

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2020/21
THE STATE OF THE WORLD’S HUMAN RIGHTS

iv

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

CONTENTS
ANNUAL REPORT 2020/21
Abbreviations 7
Preface 9
Global Analysis 14
Africa regional overview 18
Americas regional overview 26
Asia-Pacific regional overview 34
Europe and Central Asia regional
overview 41
Middle East and North Africa
regional overview 49
Afghanistan 58
Albania 61
Algeria 62
Angola 65
Argentina 68
Armenia 70
Australia 72
Austria 73
Azerbaijan 74
Bahrain 76
Bangladesh 79
Belarus 82
Belgium 86
Benin 87
Bolivia 89
Bosnia and Herzegovina 91
Botswana 93
Brazil 94
Bulgaria 99
Burkina Faso 101
Burundi 103
Cambodia 106
Cameroon 108
Canada 110
Central African Republic 113
Chad 115
Chile 117
China 119
Colombia 125
Congo (Republic of the) 129
Côte d'Ivoire 131
Croatia 133
Cuba 134
Cyprus 136

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Czech Republic 137
Democratic Republic of the
Congo 138
Denmark 142
Dominican Republic 143
Ecuador 145
Egypt 146
El Salvador 151
Equatorial Guinea 153
Eritrea 155
Estonia 156
Eswatini 157
Ethiopia 158
Fiji 161
Finland 162
France 163
Georgia 166
Germany 168
Ghana 170
Greece 172
Guatemala 174
Guinea 176
Honduras 178
Hungary 180
India 182
Indonesia 186
Iran 190
Iraq 195
Ireland 199
Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories 200
Italy 204
Japan 207
Jordan 209
Kazakhstan 212
Kenya 214
Kosovo 217
Kuwait 218
Kyrgyzstan 220
Latvia 222
Lebanon 223
Lesotho 226
Libya 228
Lithuania 232

v

Madagascar 233
Malawi 236
Malaysia 237
Mali 239
Malta 241
Mexico 243
Moldova 247
Mongolia 249
Montenegro 250
Morocco/Western Sahara 251
Mozambique 255
Myanmar 257
Nepal 260
Netherlands 262
New Zealand 263
Nicaragua 264
Niger 266
Nigeria 268
North Korea 273
North Macedonia 275
Norway 276
Oman 277
Pakistan 279
Palestine (State of) 282
Papua New Guinea 285
Paraguay 287
Peru 289
Philippines 291
Poland 293
Portugal 296
Puerto Rico 297
Qatar 298
Romania 301
Russian Federation 302
Rwanda 307
Saudi Arabia 309
Senegal 313
Serbia 314
Sierra Leone 316
Singapore 318
Slovakia 319
Slovenia 320
Somalia 322
South Africa 325
South Korea 328
South Sudan 330
Spain 334
Sri Lanka 337
Sudan 340
Sweden 342

vi

Switzerland 343
Syria 345
Taiwan 349
Tajikistan 350
Tanzania 352
Thailand 355
Togo 357
Trinidad and Tobago 359
Tunisia 360
Turkey 363
Turkmenistan 368
Uganda 369
Ukraine 372
United Arab Emirates 376
United Kingdom 378
United States of America 382
Uruguay 387
Uzbekistan 388
Venezuela 390
Viet Nam 395
Yemen 397
Zambia 401
Zimbabwe 403

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ABBREVIATIONS
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
AU
African Union
CEDAW
UN Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women
CEDAW Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
CERD
International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination
CERD Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination
CIA
US Central Intelligence Agency
COVID-19
Coronavirus disease-19
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States
EU
European Union
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

ICCPR
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
ICESCR
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
ICRC
International Committee of the Red Cross
ILO
International Labour Organization
International Convention against enforced
disappearance
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
LGBTI
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex
NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NGO
Non-governmental organization
OAS
Organization of American States
OCHA
United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
OHCHR
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights

European Convention on Human Rights
(European) Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

OSCE
Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe

ICC
International Criminal Court

PPE
Personal protective equipment

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

vii

UK
United Kingdom

UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund

UN
United Nations

UPR
UN Universal Periodic Review

UN Convention against Torture
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

USA
United States of America
WHO
World Health Organization

UN Refugee Convention
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
and human rights
UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of
expression
UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression
UN Special Rapporteur on racism
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance
UN Special Rapporteur on torture
Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment
UN Special Rapporteur on violence against
women
Special rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

viii

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PREFACE
In 2020, a mere cluster of molecules shook the whole world.
Smaller than can be seen by the naked eye, a very local virus unleashed
with marked rapidity a global pandemic. Whatever will be proven to be its
precise genesis, the coronavirus (COVID-19) and its mass casualties flourished
in part thanks to our global milieu of deeper, broader inequalities within and
between countries. It has been made far worse by austerity policies that
weakened public infrastructure and public health systems; by international
architecture enfeebled in form, function and leadership. And it has been made
far worse under pressure from leaders of states who demonize and exclude,
asserting archaic constructs of state sovereignty and peddling rejectionist
approaches to science, evidence and universal norms.
These are exceptional times. But have we risen to meet their challenge?
Exceptional times oblige exceptional responses and demand exceptional
leadership.
In 2020, exceptional leadership came not from power, privilege, or profits. It
came instead from nurses, doctors, and health workers on the frontlines of lifesaving services. It came from those who cared for older people. It came from
technicians and scientists running millions of tests and trials, frantically
searching for vaccines. It came from those who, bunched together more often
at the very bottom of the income scale, worked to feed the rest of us; who
cleaned our streets; cared for the bodies of the hundreds of thousands of
deceased; repaired our essential services; patrolled our streets; drove what
remained of our public transport.
In 2020, as so much of the world shut down, it was those people who stood
up, who stood out. So too, those who stayed home in solidarity, if they had a
home to live in, who maintained emotionally costly physical distance, and who
cared for those around them.
But underneath that heroism, pandemic times laid bare the devastating
consequences of abuse of power, structurally and historically. The COVID-19
pandemic may not define who we are, but it certainly has amplified what we
should not be.
Seeing this clearly, again people stood up. They rose against inequality, they
rose against police violence targeted disproportionately against Black people,
against minorities, poor, and homeless people. They rose against exclusion,
patriarchy, and the hateful rhetoric and cruel conduct of supremacist
leadership.
The demands of the Black Lives Matter and #MeToo movements echoed
the world over. Public protest against repression and inequality poured onto
the streets from Belarus to Poland, Iraq to Chile, Hong Kong to Nigeria. So
often, at risk to their own safety, it was the leadership of human rights
defenders and social justice activists the world over that urged us on.
At times we caught glimpses of exceptional political leadership, often from
women leaders, who took bold and difficult decisions to protect lives, sustain
health systems, make the investments needed for immediate solutions to be
found at unprecedented speed, and issue economic support desperately
needed by those whose livelihoods had all but disappeared.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ix

But the pandemic also amplified the mediocre and mendacious, the selfish
and the fraudulent, among the world’s political leaders.
As I write this, the richest countries have effected a near-monopoly of the
world’s supply of vaccines, leaving countries with the fewest resources to face
the worst health and human rights outcomes and thus the longest-lasting
economic and social disruption.
And as people die in their millions, and millions more lose their livelihoods,
what are we to make of the fact that top billionaires’ incomes have soared, that
tech-giants’ profits have escalated, that the stock markets across the world’s
financial centres have grown? Crucially, what are their proposals for
shouldering their fair share of the pandemic burden; for ensuring an enduring
fair and equitable recovery? In the early days of 2021, still their silence on this
is unbroken.
How can it be that, yet again, this time under a pandemic, the global
economy has meant that those who had the least gave the most?
2020 revealed, too, the weakness of international co-operation: a crumbling
multilateral system acquiescent to the most powerful and providing feebly for
the weakest; a system unable when not unwilling to scale up global solidarity.
China’s gross irresponsibility in the early days of the pandemic by suppressing
crucial information was utterly catastrophic, while the US decision in the midst
of the pandemic to withdraw from the World Health Organization (WHO)
showed an egregious disregard for the rest of the world.
Paltry half-measures – such as the G20 decision to suspend debt
repayments for 77 countries in 2020 while demanding that the money be
repaid with interest later – threatened to entrench structural inequalities and
economic hardship in the pandemic recovery, with grave consequences
potentially for millions of people’s economic and social rights.
After years of magisterial failure, 2020 provided only further evidence that
our global political institutions are not fit for the global purpose they should
serve.
The pandemic has cast a harsh light on the world’s inability to co-operate
effectively and equitably at the onset of a low-probability, high-impact global
event. Therefore, we can scarcely avoid a sense of impending peril as, looking
ahead, we contemplate a crisis of an altogether grander scale for which there
is no vaccine – namely the climate crisis.
In 2020, millions of people suffered the catastrophic effects of extreme
climate events. Disasters, exacerbated by global warming and climate
instability, severely affected millions of people’s enjoyment of rights to life,
food, health, housing, water, and sanitation, among others: from prolonged
drought in sub-Saharan Africa and India to devastating tropical storms
sweeping across Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, Southern Africa and the
Pacific, to the catastrophic fires that afflicted California and Australia. And in
reply? The commitment by developed countries, under the Paris Agreement, to
ensure at least US$100 billion worth of climate finance for developing
countries by 2020 was simply not met. And States signally failed to put forward
the commitments needed to meet the 2030 target of reducing global
greenhouse gas emissions by half. A drastic change of course is required to
avert a rise in the global temperature of more than 1.5 C over pre-industrial
levels that would trigger irreversible consequences.

x

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

2020: 366 days that saw the fostering of lethal selfishness, cowardice,
mediocrity, and toxic failures from xenophobia and racial hatred. 366 days that
illustrated just how unchanged and how contemporary is the violent legacy of
centuries of racism, patriarchy, and inequality. But 366 days that also gifted us
rich sources of inspiration for our strength and resilience as a human family;
days that showed people’s determination to stand up for their rights and for a
fair and a just recovery from the pandemic.
Exceptional times oblige exceptional responses and demand exceptional
leadership. So what do we need to see, to create a world much more resilient
to the huge challenges ahead of us?
The foundations for a sustainable, post-pandemic global society rest not
merely on recovery. It requires accountability, human rights, and a rethink and
reformulation of our relationship to our habitat, environment and the economy.
Immediately, authorities must work to accelerate production and delivery of
vaccines for all. That is a most fundamental, even rudimentary, test of the
world’s capacity for co-operation: to think globally, act locally, and to plan for
the long-term. This includes supporting a waiver to the World Trade
Organization TRIPS agreement that will allow for much-needed expanded
production of COVID-19 health products and ensuring pharmaceutical
companies share their innovations and technology through open and nonexclusive licences and initiatives such as the WHO’s COVID-19 Technology
Access Pool (C-TAP).
Beyond that first step, recovery that “builds back better” will demand more
than a reboot. It requires a reset that addresses the root causes of the crisis by
protecting and respecting rights, indivisibly and universally.
Firstly, it requires an end to governments’ agenda towards increasing
“security” which, since 9/11, has driven a widespread suppression of civic
space that has even expanded during the pandemic. That agenda, lending the
false hue of normality to extraordinary executive and policing powers, now
risks becoming permanent. It must be dismantled.
Secondly, fair and sustainable recovery demands resetting the world’s
public taxation regimes. Adequate taxation is a must to mobilize the resources
needed to fulfil economic and social rights including our rights to health,
education, and social security. Fair and human rights-compliant taxation of
transnational profits will be key, as will be concerted efforts to end tax evasion
and aggressive tax avoidance. States should put in place a new fossil fuel tax
on the components of energy companies’ profits and payments to
shareholders derived from their fossil fuel business, in order to push
shareholders and companies to move to renewable energy, and without
imposing the main burden on consumers.
Short-sighted decision-making has no place in a post-pandemic society. So
long as under-regulated, speculative, hyper-acquisitive investment in carbonintensive assets dominates the global economy, the climate crisis will only
deepen, carrying in its path multiple violations and accelerating us towards an
irreversible singularity that imperils the very existence of the human family.
Thirdly, we must confront the reality that the sovereign nation state acting
on its own for its own, is no better equipped to address these global challenges
than is a bicycle handbrake to halt a passenger jet.
Reforming global governance and repurposing global institutions to
strengthen and enable delivery on human rights is preconditional to robust

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

xi

recovery. We cannot accept the “pick and choose” approach adopted by some
states, who take their preferred cherries from the global governance cake while
leaving behind the “inconvenient” ingredients of human rights, accountability,
and transparency.
Fit-for-purpose global governance requires global scrutiny of how the
international norms and standards of human rights are implemented for the
prevention of genocide and crimes against humanity; of abuse of power and
corruption; of ruthless censorship and suppression of dissent; and of
discrimination, brute force and torture by those whose job it is to protect us.
The innovation, creativity and inventiveness that we need to find our way to
sustainable resilient recovery demand that our freedoms be upheld, defended
and protected, not curtailed. Global governance will not be fit for global
purposes until and unless, systematic engagement with, valuing of, and
respect for global civil society are woven deep into its operations. We must
demand that. We must claim that. We must organize for that. And as civil
society, we must ensure we are fit for that too.
2020 taught us, yet again, lessons that we ignore at the peril of generations
to come: the interdependence of the human family; the universality of what
“we, the peoples” require of governance in times of crisis, and just how
indivisible is our own future from the future we are creating for our planet. It
taught us again the essence, in other words, of human rights.
The question that remains to be answered is: will we be bold enough to see
what must be done and courageous enough to get on and do it, at scale and at
pace?
Agnès Callamard
Secretary General

xii

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2020/21
GLOBAL ANALYSIS AND REGIONAL OVERVIEWS

GLOBAL ANALYSIS
During 2020 the world was rocked by COVID-19. The pandemic and some of the measures
taken to tackle it had a devastating effect on the lives of millions, but also revealed, and
sometimes aggravated, existing patterns of abuses and inequalities. Some had roots in
discrimination based on race, gender and other grounds, which often intersected and
rendered certain populations uniquely vulnerable. Those abuses and inequalities were
spotlighted and vigorously challenged by people-powered movements such as Black Lives
Matter and women’s rights campaigns, whose resilience led to a few hard-won victories. The
pandemic threw into stark relief the human rights impact of years of political and financial
crises and flaws in global systems of governance and co-operation, which some states
exacerbated by shirking their responsibilities or attacking multilateral institutions. These
dynamics were illustrated by trends in three areas: violations of the rights to life, health and
social protection; gender-based violence and threats to sexual and reproductive rights; and
repression of dissent.
Meanwhile, in both long-running and new conflicts, government forces and armed groups
carried out indiscriminate and targeted attacks on civilians, killing thousands, and caused or
prolonged mass displacement and humanitarian crises. Despite a few notable convictions for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, impunity in times of war and peace remained the
norm and, in some countries, the rule of law was eroded. Millions of people suffered from
disasters exacerbated by the climate crisis.
The overall picture was of a world in disarray. However, by grounding measures aimed at
recovery from the pandemic and other crises in human rights, leaders have an opportunity to
resuscitate international co-operation and fashion a more just future.

LIVES, HEALTH AND SOCIAL PROTECTION
COVID-19 killed at least 1.8 million people worldwide in 2020. Health systems and social
protection programmes, weakened by decades of underinvestment and a lack of preparedness,
were ill-equipped to respond. Workers’ incomes were hit by rising unemployment and inactivity,
while the number of people facing acute food insecurity doubled to 270 million.
Governments failed to adequately protect health and other essential workers. Thousands lost
their lives due to COVID-19 and many others were taken seriously ill due to shortages in
personal protective equipment (PPE). Amnesty International documented allegations that state
authorities harassed or intimidated health or other essential workers in the context of the
pandemic in 42 out of the 149 countries it monitored; some faced reprisals, including arrest
and dismissal, for raising concerns about safety or working conditions. Women health and care
workers were particularly affected as they comprised 70% of the global workforce in the health
and social sector, where they already experienced a significant gender pay gap.
Some government measures to tackle COVID-19 had a discriminatory impact on
marginalized groups. Lockdowns and curfews led to particularly high numbers of workers in the
informal economy losing their incomes without recourse to adequate social protection. Since
they dominated the sector, women and girls were disproportionately affected. Another measure,
the introduction of online-only education without ensuring access to appropriate technology,
disadvantaged many learners from marginalized groups. Women primarily bore the burden of
homeschooling, as well as other unpaid care resulting from closures of public services,
including looking after sick relatives.

14

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Furthermore, COVID-19 worsened the already precarious situation of refugees and migrants,
trapping some in squalid camps or detention facilities and leaving others stranded by border
closures. In 42 of the 149 countries Amnesty International monitored, there were reports of
refugees and migrants being subjected to refoulement. While some governments took steps to
release detainees to curb the spread of COVID-19, overcrowding and unhygienic conditions in
places of detention endangered inmates. Continuing forced evictions (Amnesty International
recorded allegations of these in 42 out of the 149 countries it monitored) increased people’s
exposure to the virus by making them homeless.
In many countries, ethnic minorities and Indigenous peoples had disproportionately high
rates of infection and death, due in part to pre-existing inequalities and lack of access to health
care. Political and religious figures stigmatized marginalized groups, blaming them for
spreading the virus. Muslims in some South Asian countries and LGBTI people in several
African and European ones were among the targets.
When COVID-19 was declared a pandemic, states consistently referred to the urgent need to
contain, mitigate and defeat the pandemic while fully respecting human rights. While the World
Health Organization’s (WHO) COVAX facility represented a positive global initiative aimed at
ensuring more countries could access vaccines, it was undermined by the non-participation of
Russia and the USA, the hoarding of vaccines by rich countries and the failure of companies to
share their intellectual property. More than 90 countries introduced export restrictions affecting
items including medical equipment, PPE, pharmaceutical products and food.
Wealthy states also blocked adoption of a proposal at the World Trade Organization for a
temporary waiver of intellectual property rights for COVID-19 products that was designed to
facilitate universal access. Disagreement in the UN Security Council between the USA and
China over reference to the WHO delayed the passing of a resolution on a global ceasefire to
support the COVID-19 response for three months. While the G20 agreed a limited suspension
of debt payments from the poorest countries, it fell far short of delivering its own stated aim of a
co-ordinated large-scale response.
To reaffirm international co-operation and meet their human rights obligations, all
governments should ensure COVID-19 vaccines are available and accessible to everyone and
make them free at the point of care. They should also support the development of a global
social protection fund grounded in human rights standards. Rich countries and international
financial institutions should ensure that all states have the resources needed to respond to
and recover from the pandemic, including through the suspension and cancellation of debt.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
New legislation to counter violence against women and girls passed in Kuwait, South Korea and
Sudan. Some countries, including Croatia, Denmark, the Netherlands and Spain, took steps to
improve their rape laws to make them consent-based. In several African countries there were
unprecedented judicial developments aimed at ending impunity for rape and other sexual
violence in peace and conflict. The African Union looked set to prepare a new regional treaty to
combat violence against women. However, implementation of the Istanbul Convention, the
Council of Europe’s equivalent, was obstructed in three member states.
In practice, gender-based violence, including “honour” killings and caste-based, domestic
and sexual violence, remained shockingly high worldwide and authorities generally failed to
take adequate action to prevent it, prosecute perpetrators and grant survivors access to
remedies. Some authorities themselves carried out violence by, for example, punishing women
for perceived transgressions of Islamic law or subjecting men to anal testing amounting to
torture.
Long-standing discrimination in law and practice underpinned the violence and manifested
itself in other ways. Amnesty International recorded allegations of LGBTI individuals being

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

15

arrested or taken into detention in 2020 because of their sexual orientation or gender identity in
24 out of the 149 countries it monitored.
The situation was exacerbated by COVID-19 control measures. Support organizations across
the world reported a marked increase in gender-based and domestic violence; many women
and LGBTI people were confined with abusers under lockdown. Some governments took
emergency steps to assist survivors. However, many others classified support for them,
including sexual and reproductive health and counselling services, as non-essential, leading to
their suspension during lockdowns.
Some jurisdictions categorized abortion care in the same way, disproportionately impacting
marginalized groups. Others, on the contrary, adopted progressive policies such as allowing
access to abortion pills through telemedicine to mitigate the risk of infection. In positive
developments outside the context of the pandemic, abortion was decriminalized in Argentina,
Northern Ireland and South Korea. Nevertheless, abortion remained criminalized in most
countries in the Americas and a judicial decision further restricted access to it in one EU state.
At the international level, UN states marked the 25th anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action by adopting a welcome political declaration to reaffirm commitments to
advance women’s human rights and eliminate “all forms of violence and harmful practices
against all women and girls”. However, they did not include any explicit reference to sexual and
reproductive health and rights. Separately, some governments sought to undermine the existing
consensus around women’s rights and gender equality by continuing attempts to remove
“sexual and reproductive rights” from long-standing international commitments.
Governments must take urgent concerted action to stop the backlash against the rights of
women and LGBTI people and implement concrete measures to achieve gender justice.
They must also translate global initiatives such as the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and the Women, Peace and Security agenda into concrete measures to eliminate
gender-based violence, address its root causes, including discrimination, and guarantee
sexual and reproductive health and rights for all.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Many governments repressed dissent and otherwise restricted civic space. In response to
protests against unaccountable rulers, the erosion of social and economic rights and structural
racism (such as those led by the Black Lives Matter movement), security forces misused
firearms and less lethal weapons including tear gas, unlawfully killing hundreds and injuring
many more. They also targeted human rights defenders, journalists and political opponents with
intimidation and arbitrary detention. Some had exposed corruption or human rights violations.
Some were pursued in the context of elections marred by credible allegations of fraud or
restrictions on basic freedoms. Women human rights defenders often faced additional risks due
to their gender.
In a few countries, particularly in Asia and the Middle East and North Africa, authorities
prosecuted and even imprisoned human rights defenders and journalists using vaguely worded
charges such as spreading misinformation, leaking state secrets and insulting authorities, or
labelled them as “terrorists”. Some governments invested in digital surveillance equipment to
target them. Some hamstrung the operations of human rights organizations, including Amnesty
International. In Latin America and the Caribbean, which remained the most violent region for
human rights defenders, scores were killed by criminal groups in actions linked to the state or
business interests.
Some authorities in the Americas and the Middle East and North Africa issued legislation
criminalizing commentary related to the pandemic and subsequently prosecuted people for
spreading false news or obstructing government decisions. Others in Europe conflated the

16

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

public health crisis with national security concerns, rushing through national security legislation
or bolstering, or threatening to bolster, surveillance capabilities.
To enforce restrictions on assemblies during the pandemic, many governments imposed
blanket bans on demonstrations or used unlawful force, particularly in Africa and the Americas.
Furthermore, authorities punished those who criticized government actions on COVID-19,
exposed violations in the response to it or questioned the official narrative around it, particularly
in Asia and the Middle East and North Africa. Hundreds were detained arbitrarily and, in some
cases, charged and prosecuted. In some countries, the government used the pandemic as a
pretext to clamp down on unrelated criticism.
At the international level, progress was made at the UN Human Rights Council to address
human rights crises such as those in Libya, Venezuela and Yemen, by creating, maintaining
and enhancing investigative mechanisms that could contribute to criminal prosecutions. UN
member states failed, however, to deliver a credible response to repression of dissent and other
patterns of grave human rights situations in countries including China, Egypt and India. Some
governments fuelled the problems by continuing to sell crowd control equipment and munitions
to states that were highly likely to use them to commit violations of international law in law
enforcement, as well as conflict, situations. Several flagrantly violated UN Security Council arms
embargoes.
International Criminal Court (ICC) investigations were opened on Afghanistan and continued
on Myanmar/Bangladesh. Preliminary examinations were concluded on Nigeria and Ukraine,
with the Prosecutor announcing her intention to seek investigations into alleged war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Prosecutor also sought a ruling on the scope of the ICC’s
territorial jurisdiction in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, with a view to opening an
investigation.
However, powerful states continued to seek to block accountability for, and undermine
collective responses to, other patterns of serious human rights violations. The USA imposed
sanctions on employees of the ICC. UK obstructionism was a dominant factor in the Office of
the Prosecutor’s regrettable decision not to open an investigation into allegations concerning
the UK military in Iraq. China and Russia attacked the international human rights framework
and independent UN human rights monitors. Continuing political deadlock at the UN Security
Council hamstrung its ability to respond in a timely and effective way to human rights crises.
More broadly, various governments hampered the engagement of civil society actors with the
UN through reprisals and intimidation. The UN’s human rights mechanisms and institutions
also faced a funding and liquidity crisis caused by late or non-payment of contributions by
member states. The challenges were compounded by the pandemic.
To build a future where the institutions mandated to protect international law can effectively
prevent, respond to and pursue accountability for repression of dissent and other patterns of
grave human rights violations, all states should strengthen and fully finance the UN’s
human rights mechanisms and institutions. They should also fully co-operate with the ICC
on ongoing cases and call out political interference.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

17

AFRICA REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
If there was ever a glimmer of hope that
2020 would see a break in the cycle of
armed conflicts in Africa, continued
fighting in several war-torn countries
dashed any cause for optimism. The 2013
pledge by African leaders to “silence the
guns” by 2020 remained unrealized.
Instead, the sound of gunfire grew louder,
claiming thousands of lives in the process.
Serious violations and abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights
law remained common features of conflicts.
From the 10-year conflict in northeastern
Nigeria to the newly erupted conflict in the
Tigray region of Ethiopia, security forces,
armed groups and militias committed
atrocities with impunity.
The devastating impact of conflict was
compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic, as
well as locust invasions and climatic shocks.
These converging factors took their toll on
populations, revealing deep seated barriers
to, and structural fissures within, systems for
the protection of human rights. The
pandemic particularly exposed the deplorable
conditions of public health care as well as
inequalities in access to basic socioeconomic rights. Meanwhile lockdowns and
curfews increased the risk of sexual and
other gender-based violence which targeted
women and girls while survivors struggled to
access legal aid, justice, and health care. On
the positive side, there were some notable
advances in the protection of women and
girls from discrimination, ranging from the
first ever marital rape conviction in Eswatini
to criminalization of female genital mutilation
(FGM) in Sudan.
Governments used excessive force to
enforce COVID-19 regulations and to break
up protests. The pandemic also served as a
pretext for governments to escalate
crackdowns and the repression of dissent.

18

Meanwhile, elections were characterized by
widespread human rights violations.

ARMED CONFLICT AND
ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS
Conflicts with armed groups and attacks on
civilians continued or escalated in most parts
of the region. Armed groups maintained a
foothold in West Africa and the Sahel region,
attacking civilians in Burkina Faso, Mali,
Niger and Nigeria. In response, state security
forces also committed grave human rights
violations against civilians. In Central Africa,
armed groups blighted many lives in
Cameroon, the Central African Republic
(CAR) and Chad. In Southern Africa, the long
simmering violence in Mozambique’s Cabo
Delgado province intensified, becoming a
full-blown armed conflict. The Great Lakes
and Horn of Africa regions remained home to
protracted conflicts. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), Somalia, South
Sudan and Sudan, conflicts continued to
fester, albeit with varying degrees of intensity
and geographical coverage. A new conflict
flared in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, a
country also plagued by communal violence.
Between February and April, governments
in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger increased
military operations to fight armed groups. In
the process, security forces committed
serious human rights violations against
civilians, notably extrajudicial executions and
enforced disappearances. In Nigeria,
government forces launched indiscriminate
attacks in the context of the conflict in the
Northeast. In one such incident, at least 10
children and seven women were killed when
the Air Force bombed a village in Borno
state.
In Mozambique, by September, 1,500
people had been killed in the conflict in the
Cabo Delgado province. While armed groups
beheaded civilians, burned houses, looted
villages and abducted women and girls,
security forces arbitrarily detained, forcibly
disappeared, tortured and extrajudicially

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

executed alleged armed groups members or
sympathizers.
In Somalia, the US military’s Africa
Command (USAFRICOM) continued to use
drones and manned aircrafts to carry out
more than 53 airstrikes during the year. Two
airstrikes in February killed two civilians and
injured three others. In South Sudan,
sporadic clashes between parties to the
armed conflict continued. Soldiers looted
civilians’ belongings, burned villages and
destroyed properties, including hospitals,
churches and schools.
In Burkina Faso, clashes between armed
groups, and attacks against civilians, often
along ethnic lines, continued. Attacks and
killings by different armed groups took place
in villages, mosques and cattle markets in the
Northern, Sahel and Eastern regions of the
country. In Mali, dozens of civilians were
killed by various armed groups, especially in
the central regions. Notably, in July, gunmen
thought to be affiliated with the Group for the
Support of Islam and Muslims, attacked
several villages in the Tori and Diallassagou
communes, killing at least 32 civilians. In
Nigeria, Boko Haram was responsible for
more than 420 civilian deaths and continued
to recruit child soldiers and abduct women
and girls.
The crisis in the Anglophone region of
Cameroon continued unabated. Separatist
armed groups targeted people perceived as
government supporters. A new low in October
saw gunmen kill eight school children and
injure several others in the South-West
region. In the Far North region, the armed
group Boko Haram continued to carry out
hundreds of attacks targeting civilians.
Inter-communal violence intensified in
Ethiopia. In November, at least 54 people
from the Amhara ethnic group in Gawa
Qanqa village in Guliso District of West
Welega Zone were killed in an attack by
suspected members of the Oromo Liberation
Army, an armed group. In the same month,
an armed conflict erupted in the Tigray region
and scores of ethnic-Amhara residents, likely
hundreds, were massacred in Mai-Kadra

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

town on 9 November. This attack was carried
out by local militia.
In Niger, armed groups, including the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS),
targeted civilians and humanitarian workers.
In June, 10 humanitarian workers were
abducted by gunmen in Bossey Bangou in
the Tillabéry region while in August, seven
humanitarian workers were killed by ISGS
members at the Kouré giraffe reserve. Similar
violations were recorded in CAR where there
were 267 attacks against aid workers,
resulting in two deaths. In Mali, attacks by
armed groups extended to UN personnel, two
of whom were killed.
Al-Shabaab continued to target civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Somalia. In
August, it detonated a car bomb in a
beachside hotel in the capital, Mogadishu,
killing at least 11 people and injuring 18
others. In South Sudan, fighting between
ethnic groups and clans surged, resulting in
the killing of at least 600 people and 450
injuries and the displacement of thousands
more.
All parties to armed conflicts should
immediately end indiscriminate or targeted
attacks on civilians, non-combatants or
civilian infrastructure. The African Union
(AU), the UN and member states need to
enhance pressure for protection of civilians
and respect of international law during
conflicts.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for crimes under international law
and other serious human rights violations and
abuses remained pervasive. In conflict
countries, the pursuit of justice presented a
mixed picture of progress undercut by
retrogressive steps taken by governments.
CAR’s criminal court of Bangui convicted
five leaders of the armed group Anti-Balaka
of war crimes and crimes against humanity in
February while the Special Criminal Court
confirmed in September that 10 cases were
under investigation. Yet several armed group
leaders continued to hold roles in

19

government while their members committed
human rights abuses.
In DRC, the North-Kivu operational military
court sentenced Ntabo Ntaberi alias Sheka,
leader of the militia group Nduma Defence of
Congo, to life imprisonment for crimes
against civilians in North-Kivu between 2007
and 2017. Charges included rape of some
400 women, men and children in 2010.
In South Sudan, civilian and military courts
convicted several soldiers of conflict-related
sexual violence. At the same time, there was
no discernible action to establish the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan, provided for in the
2015 and 2018 peace agreements.
Moreover, the President appointed a former
opposition commander suspected of
widespread conflict-related sexual violence as
governor of Western Equatoria state.

ICC
There were new developments at the ICC
concerning several country situations,
including Mali, Nigeria and Sudan.
In June, Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-AlRahman (also known as Ali Kushayb), a
former Sudanese senior militia commander,
surrendered to the ICC after 13 years spent
evading justice for crimes against humanity
and war crimes allegedly committed in
Darfur. However, by the year’s end, the
Sudanese authorities had failed to hand over
former President al-Bashir and two others to
the ICC to answer allegations against them.
In July, the trial of Al Hasan ag Abdoul Aziz
ag Mohamed before the ICC began. He is
accused of crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed in Timbuktu while he was
a member of the Ansar Eddine, an armed
group which controlled the city during the
Islamist occupation of northern Mali between
2012 and 2013.
In December, the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC concluded a 10-year preliminary
investigation into crimes against humanity
and war crimes allegedly committed by Boko
Haram and Nigerian security forces. It
decided it will request authorization to open a
formal investigation.

20

Developments connected to the 1994
genocide in Rwanda included the arrest, in
France during May, of Félicien Kabuga,
suspected chief financier of the genocide,
and his transfer in October to the custody of
the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) in The Hague.
Also in May, the IRMCT’s Chief Prosecutor
confirmed that Augustin Bizimana, indicted
by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda in 2001 for genocide, had died in
2000 in the Republic of the Congo.
African governments must re-commit to the
fight against impunity by undertaking
thorough, independent, impartial, effective,
and transparent investigations into crimes
under international law and by bringing
suspected perpetrators to justice.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
AND FREEDOMS
In a region where state overreach and
repression were already major concerns,
2020 saw the situation worsen. Governments
took advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to
intensify restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly and
association. In almost every country
monitored, states of emergency were
imposed to curb the spread of COVID-19.
However, these measures were frequently
used to violate human rights, including by
security forces using excessive force to
enforce them.
Crackdowns on human rights in the
context of elections also deepened. While 22
elections were scheduled to take place,
several were postponed or suspended. Those
that went ahead took place in a climate of
fear and formed the backdrop for widespread
human rights violations.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The use of excessive force to enforce
COVID-19 regulations was common. In many
instances, such force led to deaths and
injuries, including in Angola, Kenya, South
Africa, Togo and Uganda.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In Angola, a 14-year-old boy was among
dozens of people shot dead by the police. In
Kenya, at least six people, including a 13year-old boy, died from police violence in the
first 10 days of a nationwide curfew. While
the President publicly apologized, police
excesses continued throughout the year.
In Rwanda, an outcry on social media
prompted the President and the Minister of
Justice to condemn police violence in curfew
enforcement and promise accountability. In
Uganda, security forces killed at least 12
people, including an 80-year-old woman. In
South Africa, the death of Collins Khosa after
he was brutally beaten by military and police
officers enforcing a national lockdown
reflected a longstanding concern about the
security forces’ use of excessive force.

CRACKDOWN ON PEACEFUL PROTESTS
Security forces continued to unleash violence
on peaceful protesters. In Ethiopia, security
forces used excessive force to break up
protests, killing hundreds of people. In June,
the violent dispersal of protests triggered by
the killing of a renowned Oromiffa musician,
led to at least 166 deaths in Oromia alone. In
August, security forces killed at least 16
people following protests over the arrest of
zone administration officials, community
leaders and activists in Wolaita zone.
In Nigeria, the #EndSARS protests led to
the dissolution of the Special Anti-Robbery
Squad (SARS), a police unit notorious for
human rights violations. But this came at a
heavy price when, in October, at least 56
people were killed nationwide as security
forces attempted to control or stop the
protests. Among the dead were 12 killed after
the military opened fire on protesters at the
Lekki Toll Gate in Lagos city.
In Guinea, seven people were killed in May
during demonstrations against the security
forces’ enforcement of COVID-19 movement
restrictions. Many more died during
demonstrations against a bid to change the
Constitution to allow President Conde to run
for a third term. On 22 March, the day of the
constitutional referendum, 12 demonstrators
were killed, nine of them by gunfire. In the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

days following the October presidential
election, security forces killed at least 16
people while they protested the results.
Crackdowns on protests took other forms,
including unlawful bans, judicial harassment
and arbitrary arrests. In Burkina Faso, several
protests were arbitrarily banned or stopped,
including a January sit-in outside the
Ouagadougou Court that had been organized
to demand justice for the killing of 50 people
by an armed group in 2019. In Côte d'Ivoire,
dozens of people were arbitrarily arrested in
August for having participated in
demonstrations against President Ouattara’s
running for a third term. In Cameroon,
authorities issued a nationwide ban on
demonstrations after the opposition
Cameroon Renaissance Movement (MRC)
called for street action against the
government’s decision to hold regional
elections in December. On 22 September, at
least 500 MRC supporters who turned up for
protests were arbitrarily arrested.
On a positive note, Uganda’s Constitutional
Court in March nullified parts of the Public
Order Management Act which had given
police excessive powers to prohibit public
gatherings and protests.

ATTACKS ON HUMAN RIGHTS
DEFENDERS AND OPPOSITION
ACTIVISTS
Even amid a pandemic, attacks on human
rights defenders and opposition activists did
not relent. This was particularly the case in
countries that held or headed towards
elections, like Burundi, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea,
Niger, Tanzania and Uganda.
In Burundi, more than 600 opposition
party members were arrested before and
during election day on 20 May. In Niger, a
wave of arrests of political activists preceded
the December presidential election. In
Tanzania, at least 77 opposition leaders and
supporters were arrested and arbitrarily
detained in the aftermath of the October
elections. Before the Tanzanian elections,
authorities had suspended the activities or
frozen the bank accounts of several human
rights NGOs.

21

Elsewhere, human rights defenders were
abducted, forcibly disappeared or killed. In
Mali, an anti-corruption activist was abducted
by hooded intelligence service agents and
detained incommunicado for 12 days.
Spurious charges brought against him were
later thrown out by a court. In Mozambique,
security forces arrested two activists who
were later found dead along with another 12
civilians. Meanwhile, community radio
journalist Ibraimo Abú Mbaruco was forcibly
disappeared by army officers; his
whereabouts were unknown at the end of the
year.
In Niger, South Sudan and Zimbabwe,
human rights defenders and activists
exposing allegations of corruption and
demanding accountability were particularly
targeted. In Zimbabwe, the criminal justice
system was misused to persecute
investigative journalist Hopewell Chin’ono,
among other human rights defenders.
A few positive developments were
recorded. A Ugandan High Court ordered the
release of Stella Nyanzi for wrongful
conviction and violation of her human rights,
in February, days before she had completed
an 18-month prison sentence after a
magistrate’s court found her guilty of the
cyber harassment of the President. In June,
the Burundian Supreme Court set aside an
appeal court decision upholding Germain
Rukuki’s conviction and ordered a fresh
hearing of the appeal.

MEDIA FREEDOM
Repression of dissent was also manifest in
governments’ curtailment of media freedom.
In Mozambique, unidentified assailants
firebombed the offices of independent
newspaper, Canal de Moçambique, around
the same time that the authorities issued
trumped-up charges against two of the
paper’s senior staff members. In Tanzania,
newspapers and broadcasting stations critical
of the government were penalized,
suspended or banned. Regulations on radio
and television broadcasting were also
amended to limit international media
coverage of the elections.

22

In Togo, a new Press and Communication
Code passed in January provided for
journalists to be punished with hefty fines for
insulting government officials. In March, two
newspapers were suspended for running a
story about the French ambassador. A third
newspaper was suspended for criticizing the
suspensions. Journalists, including in Niger
and the Republic of the Congo, were also
harassed for criticizing the governments’
response to COVID-19.
In a positive development, Somalia’s
Attorney General established the office of a
Special Prosecutor to deal with crimes
against journalists.
Governments must ensure that security
forces act in accordance with international
human rights standards on the use of force
and firearms and that cases of excessive
use of force are promptly, thoroughly,
independently and transparently
investigated and suspected perpetrators
brought to justice.
They must respect the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly, release
all those arbitrarily detained, and carry out
prompt, effective and transparent
investigations into reports of excessive use
of force against protesters, bring to justice
suspected perpetrators and ensure access
to justice and effective remedies for
victims.
They must end harassment and intimidation
of human rights defenders and immediately
and unconditionally release those who are
detained or imprisoned.
Governments must respect media freedom
and ensure that media outlets are free to
operate independently, and that media
practitioners are able to carry out their job
without intimidation, harassment and fear
of reprisals.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND
CULTURAL RIGHTS
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The first case of COVID-19 in sub-Saharan
Africa was reported in Nigeria on 28
February. By the year’s end, there were more
than 2.6 million confirmed cases and more
than 63,000 COVID-19-related deaths
throughout Africa. With a dire lack of medical
equipment, such as ventilators and PPE for
health workers, most health care systems in
the region were ill-prepared to respond
adequately to the pandemic. Insufficient
testing capacity led to serious delays in the
provision of test results. Lesotho, for instance,
had no testing capacity until mid-May, before
which samples were sent to South Africa.
Some countries withheld or stopped
publishing COVID-19-related information,
while others disregarded WHO public health
guidance. In May, the governments of
Burundi and Equatorial Guinea expelled
senior WHO staff members from their
countries. Response to the pandemic was
also hampered by poor road infrastructure,
and a lack of hospitals and health care
workers.
The pandemic highlighted decades of
neglect and chronic under-resourcing of
public health sectors across the region,
despite commitments made by African
governments in 2001 to devote at least 15%
of their annual budgets to health care. The
pandemic also exposed inherent corruption
in the sector. Theft and misappropriation of
COVID-19 funds, medical equipment and
care packages were reported in many
countries, including in Kenya, Nigeria, South
Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
On the positive side, at least 20
governments in the region sought to
decongest prisons as part of broader
responses to the pandemic. Even so, most
prisons in the region remained overcrowded,
putting prisoners’ health at risk.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

HEALTH WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Governments across the region failed to
adequately protect health workers from
exposure to COVID-19. Workers operated in
insanitary and unsafe environments due to
shortages of PPE and sanitizers. In South
Africa, by early August, at least 240 health
workers had died after contracting COVID-19.
By July, about 2,065 health workers in Ghana
had been infected and six had died due to
COVID-19-related complications.
Despite facing increased workloads and
additional occupational risks, health workers
in most countries remained without adequate
compensation. As the pandemic’s impact
became unbearable, health workers resorted
to industrial action to demand better working
conditions. Health workers across the region
raised their concerns through formal
complaints, protests and strikes, including in
Burkina Faso, Kenya, Lesotho, the Republic
of the Congo, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Togo and Zimbabwe. Meanwhile,
governments responded with various forms of
reprisal.
In Equatorial Guinea, a nurse faced
executive and judicial harassment for
complaining in a WhatsApp message about
the lack of oxygen in Malabo’s Sampaka
Hospital. In Zimbabwe, 17 nurses were
arrested for contravening lockdown
regulations after they protested to demand
improved wages and working conditions.

IMPACT ON LIVELIHOOD AND THE RIGHT
TO FOOD
COVID-19 had a devastating impact on the
region’s already fragile economies. Curfews,
lockdowns and stay-at-home orders had a
disproportionate impact on people working in
the informal economy who constituted 71%
of the region’s workforce. Many of them lost
their livelihoods and incomes and could not
afford food or other essential supplies. This
exacerbated an already dire situation for
those facing long-term food insecurity
including as a result of recurrent droughts
and the locust invasions.

23

Businesses and companies were forced to
stop operations, leaving thousands of workers
unemployed. In Lesotho, more than 40,000
workers in the mining and manufacturing
sectors were laid off. While most
governments implemented social relief
programmes, including the provision of food
to those living in poverty, this support was
often insufficient.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Governments also continued to violate the
right to adequate housing even as COVID-19
highlighted its importance. In Ethiopia,
Ghana and Kenya, government demolitions of
informal settlements in the capital cities of
Addis Ababa, Accra and Nairobi,
respectively, left thousands of people
homeless and at greater risk of contracting
COVID-19. Meanwhile in Eswatini and
Lesotho, thousands lived in perpetual fear of
forcible eviction by the authorities and private
actors.
In a positive development, the Zambian
High Court ruled in April that the forced
displacement of the Serenje rural
communities from their ancestral land
violated a series of their human rights.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted learning
as schools were shut down across the region,
especially in the first half of the year. The use
of online education meant that millions of
children were unable to access their right to
education due to lack of appropriate
technology. This also entrenched existing
patterns of inequality and poverty. In conflictridden countries, like Burkina Faso,
Cameroon and Mali, access to education was
also undermined by insecurity and constant
attacks by armed groups.
African governments must utilize the
maximum available resources to urgently
address the chronic under-resourcing of
public health sectors and also seek further
regional and international co-operation to
strengthen their health care systems. They
must also listen to and address safety and
other concerns of health workers and end

24

all forms of harassments and arbitrary
prosecutions.
Governments must also ensure that
evictions comply with international
standards and that all children have access
to education.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES,
ASYLUM-SEEKERS,
MIGRANTS AND
INTERNALLY DISPLACED
PEOPLE
Millions of people continued to be displaced
from their homes by armed conflict,
humanitarian crises and persistent human
rights violations. In Burkina Faso, the number
of internally displaced people reached 1
million. In CAR, 660,000 people had been
displaced by conflict by 31 July. Eritreans
continued to flee the country in droves,
primarily to avoid indefinite national service.
In Somalia, a worsening humanitarian crisis
arising from conflict, drought, floods and a
locust invasion had displaced almost
900,000 people by August. In Mozambique,
by September, the conflict in Cabo Delgado
had displaced over 250,000 people
Refugees, migrants, and asylum-seekers
were among those disproportionately affected
by COVID-19. Border closures left many of
them stranded. The South African
government’s COVID-19 social relief
programmes excluded refugees and asylumseekers during the first half of the year.
Governments must respect the right to seek
asylum. They must keep borders open for
refugees and asylum-seekers, while taking
appropriate public health measures at
border crossing points. Governments must
also guarantee access for all asylumseekers, refugees and migrants to national
health and social protection systems.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

DISCRIMINATION AND
MARGINALIZATION
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
COVID-19 lockdowns or curfews increased
the risk of sexual and gender-based violence
which targeted women and girls. Survivors
often struggled to access justice, health care,
legal aid and counselling services. In South
Africa, sexual and gender-based violence
continued to soar with a rate almost five
times higher than the global average.
COVID-19 also had a devastating effect on
women’s reproductive health and rights as it
disrupted access to maternal health care
services.
Rape and other sexual and gender-based
violence also continued in conflict situations.
In CAR, the UN recorded 60 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape, forced marriage, and sexual slavery,
between June and October. In DRC, there
was an increase in sexual violence against
women and girls in the context of the conflict
in the east.
There were, however, some advances in
the protection from discrimination of women
and girls. In January, a man was convicted of
marital rape for the first time in Eswatini. In
February, South Africa announced that it
would draft a regional treaty on violence
against women. Sudan criminalized FGM in
April. The following month, the Rwandan
President pardoned 36 women convicted for
abortion. Sierra Leone established the first
Sexual Offences Model Court to fast-track
rape cases in July.

PEOPLE WITH ALBINISM
People with albinism continued to face
violent attacks and mutilation. In Zambia, the
dismembered body of a 43-year-old man was
discovered in March; his eyes, tongue and
arms had been removed. In April, a man’s
body was exhumed from a grave and his
body parts stolen. In Malawi, the grave of a
two-year-old boy was tampered with in
January. The following month, a 92-year-old

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

woman had two toes severed in an attack by
an unidentified assailant.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Discrimination against LGBTI people
continued and consensual same-sex relations
remained criminalized in most countries. In
Madagascar, a woman was held in pre-trial
detention on charges of “corruption of
minors” after she was suspected of having a
consensual same-sex relationship with a 19year-old woman. In Eswatini, the authorities
rejected an application from the LGBTI
advocacy group, Eswatini Sexual and Gender
Minorities, for registration. In Uganda, police
arrested 23 youths from a shelter for LGBTI
people on the pretext of enforcing COVID-19
directives. While four were released on
medical grounds during the first three days of
arrest, the rest were held for 44 days without
access to their lawyers and medical
treatment.
Governments should strengthen measures
for prevention of and protection from
gender-based violence especially in the
context of lockdowns, curfews and conflict
situations. More steps are also needed to
eliminate all forms of discrimination against
women and girls, in law and in practice,
including ensuring conformity with
international obligations.
African governments must take measures to
end all forms of attacks and discrimination
against marginalized groups. Urgent
measures are needed to offer effective
protections for people with albinism, to
bring suspected perpetrators of crimes to
justice and to ensure access to justice and
effective remedies for victims. Governments
must also repeal laws which marginalize
LGBTI people and criminalize same-sex
relations.

25

AMERICAS
REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
The Americas began 2020 as the world’s
most unequal region and the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated this
inequality. Some of those most affected
were from marginalized communities and,
by the end of the year, poverty levels were
set to soar. Government responses to the
crisis had far reaching impacts on human
rights, with frequently devastating
consequences for vast numbers of people.
COVID-19 restrictions hit the region’s large
informal economy hard, while government
measures frequently undermined the social,
economic and cultural rights of those in the
most precarious situations. Confused health
messages, lack of transparency and
inadequate protective measures for
marginalized communities compounded
already weak and unequal access to health
care, with devastating results. The region,
home to just 13% of the world’s population,
recorded 49% of all COVID-19 deaths
globally. Lack of PPE, plus poor and
precarious working conditions, exacted a
terrible toll on health workers, who were often
prohibited from speaking out and sanctioned
if they did.
Across the region, COVID-19 confinement
measures led to a marked increase in
violence against women, including domestic
violence and killings. Almost everywhere,
measures to protect women and girls were
inadequate. In some countries support
programmes were cut; in others, state actors
themselves perpetrated the violence. Several
governments did not do enough to prioritize
sexual and reproductive health as essential
services during the pandemic.
Freedom of expression was threatened by
governments in at least a dozen countries.
Rights to freedom of association and peaceful

26

assembly were also denied or unduly
restricted by the police or military, with
unlawful use of force recorded in more than a
dozen countries. Impunity and a lack of
access to justice remained a serious concern.
Arbitrary arrests were common and often
linked to the enforcement of COVID-19
restrictions. In some countries, people were
forcibly quarantined in state-run centres that
failed to meet sanitary and physical
distancing standards. A denial of the right to
health was also seen in the prison systems of
about one third of the region’s countries.
Some governments detained refugees,
asylum-seekers and migrants in conditions
that left them at high risk of contracting
COVID-19. Others forcibly returned people
without proper consideration of their asylum
claims.
The unprecedent Regional Agreement on
Access to Information, Public Participation
and Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin
America and the Caribbean (Escazú
Agreement) was finally set to come into force,
following its ratification by Mexico in
November. However, the rights of Indigenous
Peoples remained under threat and the
Americas continued to be one of the world’s
most dangerous regions for human rights
defenders, especially those working on issues
related to the land, territory and the
environment.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND
CULTURAL RIGHTS
In October, the UN Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean forecast
that the region’s economies would contract
by 9.1%, with 37.3% of the population living
in poverty by the end of the year: the worst
figure since 2006.
In some cases, the hardship was
particularly severe. By June, 40.9% of the
Argentine population was living in poverty. In
July, 96% of Venezuelan households were in
income poverty, with 79% in extreme income
poverty and unable to purchase basic foods.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Many governments failed to mitigate the
social and economic effects of COVID-19 on
the most vulnerable. In Brazil, financial aid to
those on a low income was insufficient and
implementation of the federal assistance
programme was flawed. In Guatemala,
neighbourhoods and communities were left
without access to water, preventing people
from adopting appropriate hygiene practices
during the pandemic.
Some government measures resulted in
discriminatory practices that undermined
social, economic and cultural rights. For
example, the Colombian government stepped
up its forced eradication of coca production,
despite its effects on campesino communities
that depend on coca for their livelihoods. In
Venezuela, the government delayed providing
full access to the World Food Programme
while national food distribution systems
continued to operate according to politically
discriminatory criteria. The governments of
Ecuador and Mexico implemented austerity
measures at the height of the pandemic
without sufficient protection of the basic
social and economic needs of disadvantaged
individuals and groups.
Governments must guarantee access to
economic, social and cultural rights without
discrimination. Plans for economic recovery
should include all necessary measures to
address the disproportionate effects that
the pandemic and the crisis has had on
certain people historically disadvantaged
due to ethno-racial, gender, legal and socioeconomic status. Before embarking on
austerity measures, states must
exhaustively examine all other options and
conduct a human rights impact assessment,
as well as prioritizing the most
disadvantaged people when allocating
resources.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The pandemic had a devastating impact in
many countries where access to health care
was limited and unequal. During the year,
more than 750,000 people died from
COVID-19 in the Americas. In terms of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

recorded COVID-19 deaths per million
inhabitants, the countries worst affected were
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru and the
USA.
Many governments broadly followed World
Health Organization (WHO) guidelines in their
responses to the pandemic. However, the
governments of Brazil, Nicaragua, the USA
and Venezuela often issued confused health
messages, failed to implement policies to
protect those most at risk and showed a lack
of transparency.
In Brazil, health messages from federal
and state authorities were often contradictory,
while measures to mitigate the impact of
COVID-19 among Indigenous Peoples were
ineffective. According to the Articulation of
Indigenous Peoples of Brazil, 158 Indigenous
Peoples were affected by the pandemic and
by 8 October more than 840 deaths had
been registered.
In Nicaragua, the authorities promoted
mass gatherings where physical distancing
was not possible and official information
about the response to COVID-19 lacked
transparency.
In the USA, inadequate and uneven
government responses to the pandemic had
a disproportionate and discriminatory impact
on many people based on their race, socioeconomic status and other characteristics.
The USA also initiated its withdrawal from the
WHO.
In Venezuela, there was a lack of
transparency from the authorities on testing,
rates of infection and deaths due to
COVID-19. There were also reports that
pregnant women suspected of having
COVID-19 were denied adequate care by
public health services.

HEALTH WORKERS
The pandemic had a devastating impact on
health care workers in the region; at least
8,000 died with COVID-19. On 2 September,
the Pan American Health Organization
reported that some 570,000 health care
workers had contracted COVID-19 in the
Americas, “the highest number of health care
workers infected in the world”.

27

Health professionals in almost every
country complained about governments’
failure to provide sufficient PPE and safe
working conditions, which many blamed for
high levels of deaths and infections. El
Salvador’s President vetoed Decree 620,
which aimed to guarantee health insurance
and biosafety equipment to health workers;
the Constitutional Chamber subsequently
declared the Decree constitutional. The
Brazilian Association of Collective Health and
the Brazilian Society of Family and
Community Medicine criticized the lack of
social protection for health workers’ families
and precarious employment contracts.
Health workers in Mexico faced irregular
contracts and lack of sick pay and benefits.
Health workers who spoke out about
inadequate health provision and working
conditions faced sanctions. In several
Honduran hospitals, health workers were
asked to sign confidentiality agreements
prohibiting them from speaking publicly
about their concerns. In Nicaragua, at least
31 health workers were dismissed after
expressing concerns about working
conditions, lack of PPE and the state
response to the pandemic. Venezuelan
health workers who made critical public
statements about the government’s response
to the pandemic faced short-term detention
and subsequent restrictions.

PRISON CONDITIONS
Poor sanitary conditions and overcrowding
were features of many of the region’s prisons,
including in Brazil, Chile, El Salvador,
Nicaragua, Paraguay, Trinidad and Tobago
and the USA. Inadequate state measures
denied prisoners their right to health and put
them at risk of contracting and dying of
COVID-19.
Thousands of prisoners, including those
awaiting trial, were held in overcrowded and
insanitary conditions in Uruguay, which had
one of the highest incarceration rates in the
region.
According to Brazil’s National Council of
Justice, as of October, more than 39,000

28

cases and 199 deaths caused by COVID-19
had been registered in Brazilian prisons.
Between March and May, there were some
90 riots in different prisons in the region
protesting the precarious conditions and
increasing concern about COVID-19. In two
of the worst incidents, 73 people died, 50 in
Los Llanos in Venezuela and 23 in the
Modelo prison in Bogotá, Colombia.
Governments have a duty to guarantee the
right to health of people held in custody.
This means ensuring that preventive care,
goods and services are available to
everybody. COVID-19 vaccine, treatment
and testing plans should be accessible,
inclusive and non-discriminatory. States
should consider factors that may heighten
an individual’s or a community’s risk to
COVID-19 and pay attention to marginalized
groups and those with intersecting
identities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was under
threat in Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Mexico,
Uruguay and Venezuela, sometimes because
of COVID-19 restrictions.
In Mexico, at least 19 journalists were
killed during the year. A letter signed by 650
journalists and intellectuals accused the
President of actions harmful to the right to
freedom of expression. Information also
emerged showing that the state news agency
was involved in a social media smear
campaign, allegedly financed with public
funds, against several journalists.
In Brazil, between January 2019 and
September 2020, members of the federal
government attacked journalists and their
work 449 times. In Venezuela, civil society
organizations reported that between January
and April 2020 there were more than 400
attacks on journalists and other media
workers, including intimidation, arbitrary
detentions and physical assaults. Health
workers and journalists reporting on the
pandemic were also harassed, threatened
and charged with inciting hatred.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Between March and July, Nicaragua’s
Observatory of Aggressions on the
Independent Press reported 351 attacks
including unjust prosecutions, arbitrary
detentions and harassment of media workers
and their families.
Governments should recognize the
important role journalists play in society
and ensure that they are able to carry out
their work free of harassment and violence.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Excessive use of force by law enforcement
officials and the military was recorded in
more than a dozen countries in the region. It
was often used to deny people their right to
freedom of peaceful assembly, and
marginalized communities were
disproportionately targeted.
In Brazil, during the first six months of the
year, at least 3,181 people were killed by the
police, an increase of 7.1% compared to the
same period in 2019. According to the
Brazilian Public Security Forum, 79.1% of
the people killed by the police were Black.
Unlawful use of force by the police,
military and armed groups against
demonstrators was widespread in Venezuela.
The OHCHR reported that at least 1,324
people were killed in the country in the
context of security operations between 1
January and 31 May.
In the USA, at least 1,000 people were
killed in 2020 by police using firearms.
Between 26 May and 5 June alone 125
separate incidents were documented, in 40
states and Washington DC, of unlawful use of
force by the police against people protesting
at unlawful killings of Black people.
In other countries, there were also
examples of excessive or unnecessary use of
force in the context of the enforcement of
COVID-19 lockdowns. In Argentina, police
were involved in physical attacks on
members of an Indigenous community
during operations related to supposed
violations of COVID-19 restrictions. In Mexico,
a 30-year-old bricklayer was beaten to death
by police after being detained in Jalisco state,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

allegedly for not wearing a mask. In Chile, the
government filed over 1,000 lawsuits against
peaceful protesters using the State Security
Law, which is not in line with international
human rights law and can facilitate politically
motivated charges.
All governments should ensure that
protocols and practices are consistent with
international standards, including the UN
Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Cases of arbitrary detention were reported in
the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Venezuela and at the US Naval
Base in Guantánamo Bay. In some countries,
arbitrary detentions were linked to measures
adopted to curb the spread of COVID-19.
The Venezuelan human rights organization
Penal Forum reported that arbitrary,
politically motivated detention increased after
the declaration of a state of emergency in
March in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. It recorded 413 arbitrary
detentions as of October. Venezuelans
returning to the country were placed in
mandatory quarantine in state-run centres
from at least April onwards. By August,
90,000 people were officially reported to have
passed through the centres known as
Comprehensive Social Service Points.
In Mexico, police officers arbitrarily
detained at least 27 people during protests in
the city of Guadalajara in June. Protesters
were abducted in unmarked vehicles and
their whereabouts were unknown for several
hours.
In the Dominican Republic, police carried
out an estimated 85,000 detentions between
20 March and 30 June, for alleged noncompliance with the evening curfew imposed
in response to the pandemic. Among those
detained were people on their way to buy
food and other essentials. After Guatemala
introduced a mandatory curfew in March,
more than 40,000 people were detained,
including people working in the informal
economy.

29

In some countries the authorities placed
tens of thousands of people in state-run
quarantine centres. These often fell well short
of minimum sanitary and physical distancing
standards to protect people from COVID-19.
In El Salvador, more than 2,000 people were
detained in such centres for alleged violations
of the mandatory quarantine imposed in
March; some were held for up to 40 days. In
Paraguay, some 8,000 people – mostly
Paraguayans returning from neighbouring
Brazil – were in mandatory quarantine as of
late June.
Governments in the region must not use the
pandemic as an excuse to justify excessive
use of force or arbitrary detention.
Repression is not protection.

IMPUNITY AND ACCESS TO
JUSTICE
Impunity for human rights violations and
crimes under international law remained a
serious concern in several countries –
including Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, El Salvador,
Guatemala and Venezuela – as did violations
relating to the past US secret detention
programme.
Those responsible for human rights
violations during Bolivia’s post-election crisis
that began in October 2019 were not brought
to justice. At least 35 people were killed and
833 injured by the National Police and the
armed forces who used excessive force to
repress demonstrations. An International
Group of Independent Experts to investigate
these events, announced by the interim
government in January, was finally
established in November.
Chile’s National Human Rights Institute
expressed concern at the slow pace of
investigations into human rights violations
committed during mass protests in October
2019; formal charges against some of the
policemen involved were filed almost a year
after the incidents took place. Administrative
investigations and sanctions by the Chilean
National Police were ineffective and often

30

based on less serious administrative
offences.
In September, the independent UN FactFinding Mission on Venezuela called for
those suspected of criminal responsibility for
crimes against humanity to be held
accountable. The Mission investigated 53
extrajudicial executions and 5,094 killings by
members of the security forces. The Mission
concluded: “these crimes were coordinated
and committed pursuant to State policies,
with the knowledge or direct support of
commanding officers and senior government
officials.”
Governments must ensure redress and
reparation for victims of human rights
violations, carry out prompt and impartial
investigations and bring those bearing
criminal responsibility to justice in fair
trials to break the cycle of violations
fostered by impunity.

VIOLENCE AGAINST
WOMEN AND GIRLS
Across the region, COVID-19 confinement
measures led to a marked increase in
violence against women, including domestic
violence, rape, homicide and femicide.
One of the worst affected countries was
Mexico: in 2020, 3,752 killings of women
had been reported, 969 of which were
investigated as femicides. Over the year,
reports of incidents of violence against
women in the country were set to exceed the
197,693 reported in 2019.
In Brazil, almost 120,000 cases of physical
domestic violence were reported in the first
six months of the year. The femicide rate
increased in 14 out of 26 states between
March and May, with increases of between
100% and 400% in some states.
In Colombia, according to the NGO No es
Hora de Callar, 99 femicides were reported in
the first six months of 2020, including cases
in which women were impaled, set on fire,
sexually abused, tortured and dismembered.
In Argentina, emergency calls about
violence against women to helplines had

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

increased by over 18% compared to 2019,
and there were at least 298 femicides
according to civil society monitoring groups.
In some countries, government leaders
downplayed violence against women and cut
support programmes. In others, state actors
themselves perpetrated the violence. For
example, in the Dominican Republic, which
has one of the highest rates of gender-based
killings of women in the world, the authorities
failed to implement a national protocol for
investigating torture. This was despite
compelling evidence that the police routinely
raped, beat and humiliated women engaged
in sex work in actions that may amount to
torture or other ill-treatment.
Measures to protect women and girls were
inadequate throughout the region and cases
of violence against women were not
thoroughly investigated. For example, in its
response to recommendations from the UN
Committee against Torture, the Canadian
government failed to commit to ensure justice
for survivors of forced and coerced
sterilization of Indigenous women and girls.
In the USA, where gun shops were
classified as essential businesses during the
pandemic, an exponential rise in purchases
of firearms increased the risks of gun
violence against women and children from
unsecured firearms in homes where people
were forced to quarantine with their abusers.
The COVID-19 pandemic underscored and
intensified the global crisis of violence
against women and girls. The voices of
women and girls must be central to
governments’ post-COVID-19 recovery
plans, which should prioritize eliminating
gender-based violence and addressing its
root causes.

SEXUAL AND
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
AND RIGHTS
Many governments – including those of
Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay
and Venezuela – did not do enough to
prioritize sexual and reproductive health as

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

essential services during the pandemic. This
was an indirect consequence of strained
health care systems, disruption in care and
redirected resources to the pandemic.
By August, Paraguay’s Ministry of Health
had registered 339 births to girls aged
between 10 and 14, and 9,382 births to
adolescents aged 15 to 19. In June, Peru’s
Ombudsperson’s Office highlighted cases
where emergency kits for victims of sexual
violence were not being provided to girls and
women during the pandemic.
A bill to legalize abortion was approved by
the Argentinian Congress in December.
Despite some signs of progress, abortion
remained criminalized in most countries in
the region, posing a serious obstacle to the
right to health. In the Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica and
Nicaragua there was a total ban on abortion,
while in countries such as Brazil, Guatemala
and Paraguay it was only permitted to save a
woman’s life. In El Salvador, 18 women
remained in jail on charges related to
obstetric emergencies.
Governments must ensure access to sexual
and reproductive rights, including abortion,
and repeal laws that criminalize the
procedure.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY,
BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER
AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI people were the targets of violence
and killings in several countries in the region,
including Colombia, Honduras, Paraguay,
Puerto Rico and the USA. At least 287 trans
and gender-diverse people were killed in the
continent. The most deaths in a single
country happened in Brazil.
COVID-19 also had an impact on LGBTI
people. As health systems focused on the
pandemic, other key services for LGBTI
people, such as mental health and sexual
counselling, were harder to access. In many
countries, HIV testing has been suspended.

31

Despite some positive judicial rulings in
Bolivia and Chile, same-sex partnerships and
marriage were not recognized in many
countries.
Governments must ensure mechanisms to
protect LGBTI people against all forms of
violence and discrimination and include
their specific needs in measures to reduce
the socio-economic impact of the
pandemic.

RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES
Indigenous Peoples in the Americas were
heavily affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
because of inadequate access to clean water,
sanitation, health services and social
benefits, as well as a lack of culturally
appropriate mechanisms to protect their
rights to health and livelihoods. This was
particularly acute in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru and
Venezuela.
In many countries, governments failed to
ensure the free, prior and informed consent
of Indigenous Peoples before allowing major
extractive, agricultural and infrastructure
projects affecting them to proceed. In
Argentina, concerns remained over projects
for possible lithium extraction on Indigenous
Peoples’ lands without the consent of
affected communities. In several countries
mining was declared an essential sector
during the pandemic, exposing Indigenous
Peoples to contagion.
In Brazil, the rights of Indigenous Peoples
and other traditional communities continued
to be threatened by illegal mining, wildfires
and the seizure of land for illegal cattle
farming and agrobusiness. The National
Institute for Space Research registered a
9.5% increase in forest destruction in Brazil
between August 2019 and July 2020
compared to the same period a year earlier.
In Canada, there was some progress in
recognizing the land rights of Indigenous
Peoples. However, Canada’s Federal Court of
Appeal dismissed an appeal by Indigenous

32

groups challenging construction of the Trans
Mountain pipeline.
Governments must ensure the right of
Indigenous Peoples to free, prior and
informed consent on all projects affecting
their rights substantially.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES,
ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
Tens of thousands of people – mostly from
Cuba, El Salvador, Honduras and Venezuela
– continued to flee violence, poverty and
inequality.
As part of COVID-19 border control
measures, some governments, including
Canada, Peru and the USA, prohibited the
entry of refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants. Many countries, including
Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico, Trinidad and
Tobago, and the USA, forcibly returned
people without proper consideration of their
refugee and asylum claims.
The US authorities halted all processing of
asylum-seekers on the US-Mexico border
and unlawfully detained and expelled nearly
330,000 migrants and asylum-seekers
between March and September, including
approximately 13,000 unaccompanied
children. In Mexico, migrants, refugees, and
asylum-seekers continued to be subject to
excessive use of force and arbitrary detention
by the authorities, and abductions, assaults
and killings by non-state actors. The Mexican
authorities detained 87,260 migrants,
including more than 11,000 children, and
deported 53,891 people.
Refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants
detained in immigration centres in Mexico,
Trinidad and Tobago, and the USA were at
high risk of contracting COVID-19 due to poor
sanitary conditions and the impossibility of
physical distancing. For example, despite a
serious outbreak of COVID-19 in civil
immigration detention facilities, US
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
refused to release detainees, over 8,000 of
whom contracted the virus in detention.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Governments should release all people held
in detention solely for immigration purposes
and ensure refugees and asylum-seekers are
protected in accordance with international
law.

HUMAN RIGHTS
DEFENDERS
The Americas remained one of the world’s
most dangerous regions to defend human
rights.
Human rights defenders were killed in
Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, Peru and
Venezuela. A 2020 report by the NGO Global
Witness described Colombia as the world’s
most lethal country for environmental and
human rights workers. By August, the
OHCHR had documented 97 killings of
human rights defenders and verified 45
homicides in the country.
Human rights defenders and journalists
were also subjected to attacks, threats,
prosecutions, arbitrary detention and
unlawful surveillance in Bolivia, Brazil,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Peru, the USA and Venezuela.
In Venezuela, the Centre for Defenders
and Justice reported that, as of June, there
had been more than 100 attacks against
women human rights defenders, including
criminalization, harassment, digital attacks
and arbitrary detention.
Governments must create a safe
environment for human rights defenders.
They must ensure that protection measures
are comprehensive, including aspects of
individual and collective protection, taking
into account the intersectional dimensions
of violations and the particular needs of
women human rights defenders.

affecting at least 5.2 million people.
Argentina, Brazil’s western border areas and
Paraguay were hit by severe drought causing
vast agricultural losses. The USA recorded
the largest wildfires ever, as a result of
widespread drought and extreme heat.
However, action on climate change
remained limited. Although Chile was the first
country in the region, and one of the first in
the world, to submit a 2030 emission
reduction target, major wealthy emitters failed
to follow suit. The Canadian government
tabled a bill to achieve carbon neutrality by
2050, but NGOs indicated that it failed to
demonstrate it was taking all feasible steps to
reach zero carbon emissions before this
period.
Argentina submitted an improved but still
insufficient emission reduction target for
2030 and in early 2020 the government tried
to amend the Native Forest Protection Act, a
potentially backward step. Brazil significantly
weakened its climate ambition target and its
international commitments to stop illegal
deforestation and restore forests.
In an important sign of progress, the
Escazú Agreement was finally due to enter
into force. However, several governments,
including those of Bolivia, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua
and Paraguay, had yet to adopt policies and
protocols to protect human rights defenders
working on environmental issues.
Governments must urgently adopt and
implement emission reduction targets and
strategies that protect human rights from
the climate crisis and ensure a just and
human rights-consistent transition to a zerocarbon economy and resilient society. They
should also ratify and implement the
Escazú Agreement.

CLIMATE CRISIS
A range of climate-related impacts continued
to undermine human rights in the Americas.
Central America experienced unprecedented
back-to-back hurricanes in November,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

33

ASIAPACIFIC REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
The onslaught of the COVID-19 pandemic
exacerbated the human rights situation in
the Asia-Pacific region. It was the first
region affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
as the first cases were reported in the
Chinese city of Wuhan in December 2019.
When Chinese authorities reprimanded
health workers who had raised warnings
about a new virus, it sparked calls for
transparency not only from people in China,
but also from other countries in the region.
It was the first of many moments
throughout the year when governments
seized on the pandemic as a pretext to
muzzle critical voices and unduly limit the
right to freedom of expression, including
the right to receive and impart information
on COVID-19.
Many governments in the region enacted
laws and measures to punish the spreading
of “misinformation” or “false information”
about COVID-19. In countries where
authorities had a history of routinely abusing
their powers, these laws were used to
intensify existing crackdowns especially on
the freedoms of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. Open debate and
criticism of government responses to the
pandemic were severely restricted.
Governments across the region subjected
many human rights defenders, journalists,
lawyers and members of the political
opposition to attacks, including harassment,
intimidation, threats, violence and arbitrary
arrests for their legitimate expression of
dissent and criticism of government actions.
To prevent the further spread of COVID-19,
various degrees of lockdown and other
limitations on movement were put in place by
governments. Public assemblies were often
not allowed, greatly restricting protests

34

demanding political reforms. As the year
progressed, however, people in India,
Thailand and Hong Kong in particular took to
the streets to oppose government oppression.
Police used excessive and unnecessary force
to disperse these public assemblies.
Many governments also further responded
to the COVID-19 pandemic by adopting or
weaponizing repressive national security or
counter-terrorism laws. These laws
consolidated the power that some of the
governments in this region already wielded.
In India, peaceful dissent was punished and
restrictions on communications and key
freedoms in Jammu and Kashmir continued;
journalists and human rights defenders were
questioned for allegedly “anti-national”
activities.
While the Asia-Pacific region suffered
fewer deaths than other parts of the world,
the pandemic was economically devastating
and further deepened pre-existing social
divides. It disproportionately affected already
disadvantaged groups such as migrant
workers, refugees, people living in poverty,
ethnic and religious minority groups, and
incarcerated people.
The policies developed and imposed by
many governments to address the spread of
COVID-19 reflected existing patriarchal
norms that discriminate against women. The
lockdowns also contributed to a sharp
increase in the number of cases of sexual
and gender-based violence against women
and girls, and governments in the region did
not provide adequate resources to address
this issue.
Religious and ethnic minorities were
attacked across the region. The Chinese
authorities pressed on with their systematic
repression of Uyghurs and other Turkic
Muslims in the Xinjiang region. Muslims
came under attack in India and were
demonized during the pandemic and denied
medical access. The Myanmar military
continued to elude accountability for its
crimes against the Rohingya. In Afghanistan
and Pakistan, members of the minority
communities were killed by armed groups.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The Asia-Pacific region was swept by
natural disasters related to climate change.
Countries in the region responsible for high
percentages of global greenhouse gas
emissions failed to set adequate reduction
targets that would contribute to avoiding the
worst human rights impacts of climate
change.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Within days of the news of the COVID-19
outbreak, authorities in several countries
across the region tried to suppress
information about it and punished those who
criticized government actions. The Chinese
authorities sought to control information
about COVID-19, both online and offline.
Hundreds of keywords related to the virus
were blocked and online protests demanding
the right to receive and impart information on
COVID-19 were deleted. Doctor Li Wenliang,
one of eight people who tried to spread
information about the new virus before the
government disclosed the outbreak, was
reprimanded by the police after he messaged
colleagues to wear PPE to avoid infection. He
subsequently died from the effects of
COVID-19.
Several other countries in the region
imposed similar restrictions on what could or
could not be said about COVID-19, often on
the pretext of suppressing false or inaccurate
information. In April, the Indonesian
authorities ordered the police to scour the
internet and act against “hoax spreaders”
and those who insulted the government. At
least 57 people were arrested. Journalists,
academics, students and activists were
subjected to intimidation online, including
threats of physical violence through text
messages. In India and Nepal, authorities
arrested or charged dozens of individuals,
many of them journalists, for allegedly
spreading “misinformation” or “fake news”
about the pandemic.
Many individuals, including journalists,
who criticized government responses
regarding the COVID-19 pandemic were
punished under draconian laws. In Sri Lanka,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the police warned that legal action would be
taken against people publishing posts on
social media that were critical of the
government’s COVID-19 response. Several
social media commentators were arrested
following the announcement. In Bangladesh,
nearly 1,000 people were charged under the
country’s Digital Security Act, while 353
people were detained. Among the first targets
were journalists Mohiuddin Sarker and Toufiq
Imroz Khalidi, both editors of online portals.
The authorities arrested them in April for their
reports which alleged corruption in the use of
funds designated for COVID-19 relief efforts.
In Pakistan, the Electronic Crimes Act was
repeatedly invoked to charge or arrest
journalists for critical comments made online,
often accompanied by vicious and coordinated online attacks.
Journalists continued to face reprisals for
reporting news not favoured by the
government. In Myanmar, following the
designation of the ethnic minority armed
opposition group the Arakan Army as a
“terrorist organization”, at least three
journalists were prosecuted under counterterrorism laws and the Unlawful Associations
Act for contacting the group. In Jammu and
Kashmir, the Indian police attacked or
summoned 18 journalists for their reporting
and the offices of the Kashmir Times were
sealed after its editor sued the government
over its shutdown of internet and telephone
services in the region. In Nepal, the
government introduced several new bills that
threatened the right to freedom of expression,
online and offline. In Singapore, even as it
was being challenged in court, the authorities
used the Protection from Online Falsehoods
and Manipulation Act throughout the year to
muzzle government critics and independent
media outlets. In the Philippines, journalists
Maria Ressa and Reynaldo Santos, were
convicted of “cyber libel” and lawmakers
denied the renewal of the franchise of ABSCBN, one of the country’s largest
independent broadcasting networks.
The right to freedom of expression, which
includes the right to receive and impart
information, is especially critical during a

35

public health crisis. Governments must
understand fully that access to credible,
objective and evidence-based information
on the COVID-19 pandemic saves lives. The
role of journalists and media in providing
reliable information to the public during a
public health crisis is vital. They also play
an important role in calling attention to
matters of public interest and upholding
human rights. Rather than thwarting such
efforts, governments must enable, promote
and protect robust and independent media
in the region.

HUMAN RIGHTS
DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders, including
journalists, lawyers and members of the
political opposition continued to be attacked,
harassed, intimidated, threatened and killed
for their legitimate support for human rights,
expression of dissent and criticism of
government actions and corruption.
In China, human rights defenders and
activists were subjected to harassment,
intimidation, enforced disappearances,
torture and other ill-treatment, and arbitrary
and incommunicado detention. They were
also often charged with vaguely worded
offences such as “leaking state secrets”.
Their trials were routinely held in secret and
they were deprived of their right to access
legal counsel. Many lawyers of these human
rights defenders were denied their right to
freedom of movement and were unable to
meet with their clients and access case
materials.
During the year, many governments in the
region attempted to undermine the
operations of human rights NGOs to prevent
human rights defenders from continuing to
expose human rights violations. Cambodian
authorities used the repressive Law on
Associations and NGOs (LANGO) to
designate as illegal groups of human rights
defenders exposing practices that caused
environmental degradation. In September,
Amnesty International India was forced to

36

close its operations after Indian authorities
froze the organization’s bank accounts.
During the year, the organization had
published reports on human rights violations
that occurred during and after the riots in
Delhi in February where 53 people, mostly
Muslims, were killed and more than 500
injured. The riots followed incendiary
speeches by government officials and
lawmakers, but had not been effectively
investigated months later, including
documented complicity and participation in
the riot by Delhi police. Amnesty International
India also released a report on Jammu and
Kashmir, documenting the violations that
occurred there after the territory’s special
status was revoked in August 2019.
In Malaysia and Afghanistan, human rights
defenders who called attention to corrupt
practices of government authorities faced
serious challenges during the year. Cynthia
Gabriel of the Center to Combat Corruption
and Cronyism, together with other human
rights defenders Thomas Fann and Sevan
Doraisamy, were investigated by Malaysian
authorities for raising corruption scandals
linked to public officials. Human rights
defenders who made allegations of corruption
against officials in Helmand province in
Afghanistan were hospitalized for injuries
they suffered after government officials had
assaulted them. Also, human rights
defenders, activists, journalists and moderate
religious authorities were subjected
to targeted attacks and assassinations by
armed groups in particular.
Governments used counter-terrorism
measures against human rights defenders or
labelled them as “terrorists” in countries
including the Philippines and India.
Philippine authorities continued the practice
of “red-tagging” human rights defenders and
activists as “terrorists” or sympathizers of
armed communist groups. In August, Randall
Echanis and Zara Alvarez were killed within a
week of each other in different cities. They
had both been “tagged” as “terrorists” by the
government for their activism and human
rights work. During the year India’s National
Investigation Agency (NIA), the country’s

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

main counter-terrorism agency, arrested
several human rights defenders and raided
their homes and offices. Among those
arrested were seven human rights defenders
who worked with marginalized groups and
nine students who protested peacefully
against the discriminatory Citizenship
(Amendment) Act. The NIA also raided the
offices and homes of Kashmiri defender
Khurram Parvez and three of his associates.
As the conflict in Afghanistan entered its
twentieth year, human rights defenders were
also wounded and killed by unknown
gunmen thought to belong to armed groups,
including two staff members of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission,
who were killed in an attack on their car in
Kabul. In December, President Ghani created
a joint commission for the protection of
human rights defenders. This was viewed by
human rights organizations as a first
significant move forward. However, it
appeared to be the only development in the
region that promised to address the
systematic patterns of violations against
human rights defenders.
In Sri Lanka, the new government
continued to crack down on human rights
defenders, including activists, journalists, law
enforcement officers and lawyers.
Governments must effectively address acts
of violence against human rights defenders
and perpetrators of these acts must be held
accountable. It is crucial that human rights
defenders are able to do their work free of
fear of punishment, reprisal or intimidation
so that everyone can effectively enjoy all
human rights.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted and
exacerbated gaps in equal access to health
care and pre-existing social divides in the
region. In North Korea, the lack of medical
supplies prompted the emerging middle class
to secure medicines or health services in the
so-called “grey markets”. In Papua New
Guinea, high rates of poverty and other

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

chronic illnesses compounded the situation
of those infected with COVID-19.
The anti-drug campaigns which
emphasized criminalization and the practice
of arbitrarily detaining without charge people
who used drugs continued in Cambodia and
the Philippines, which led to excessively
overcrowded prisons that continued to violate
detainees’ right to health. In the Philippines,
the Supreme Court ordered the release of
over 80,000 prisoners to prevent the spread
of COVID-19 in prisons. In Cambodia, the
authorities revealed plans to reduce prison
overcrowding, but implementation was
limited.
In Malaysia, the authorities conducted
immigration raids in areas with high migrantworker populations and arrested and
detained many migrants and refugees. A
COVID-19 outbreak hit immigration detention
centres, and over 600 people were infected.
Governments must ensure access to health
facilities and services without
discrimination.

DISCRIMINATION ATTACKS ON ETHNIC AND
RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Across the region, ethnic and religious
minorities continued to experience
discrimination, violence and other forms of
persecution at the hands of authorities.
In January, the International Court of
Justice ordered the government of Myanmar
to prevent genocidal acts against the
Rohingya. The Myanmar authorities failed to
ensure accountability for the military
operations in Rakhine State during 2017,
which caused over 700,000 Rohingyas to flee
to Bangladesh. In the context of counterinsurgency operations, the security forces
continued to commit human rights violations
and violations of international humanitarian
law against other ethnic minority groups in
Rakhine, Chin, Kachin and Shan States.
In China, authorities justified their
discrimination and persecution of Tibetans
and of Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslim

37

peoples in the region of Xinjiang on the
grounds of countering “separatism”,
“extremism” and “terrorism”. The Chinese
authorities continued to subject Uyghurs and
other Turkic Muslims to arbitrary detention
without trial, political indoctrination, and
forced cultural assimilation. They tightened
restrictions on access to Xinjiang and
continued to establish mass internment
camps throughout the year.
Iminjan Seydin, who had disappeared for
three years, appeared in May and praised
Chinese authorities in an apparently coerced
testimony. Mahira Yacub, a Uyghur who
worked for an insurance company, was
charged with “giving material support to
terrorist activity” for sending money to her
parents in Australia to help them buy a
house. Nagyz Muhammed, a Kazakh writer
who has been detained since March 2018,
was convicted in secret for “separatism” for a
dinner he had with friends on Kazakhstan
Independence Day nearly a decade ago.
Uyghurs also faced pressure outside of
China. Chinese embassies and agents
continued to harass and intimidate people
who had left the country and gone into exile.
Chinese security agents harassed Uyghurs
abroad through messaging apps, demanding
their ID numbers, locations of residence and
other details. Some received phone calls from
the Chinese security police, asking them to
spy on Uyghur diaspora communities.
In Inner Mongolia, protests erupted over a
new language policy for schools that would
change the teaching medium for some
classes from Mongolian to Mandarin Chinese.
Hundreds of people who protested –
students, parents, teachers, pregnant
women, children – were reportedly arrested
for “picking quarrels and provoking trouble”.
Hu Baolong, a human rights lawyer who
spoke out during the protests, was reportedly
arrested on charges of “leaking state secrets
overseas”.
In some countries, ethnic and religious
minority groups suffered the brunt of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. India’s
Muslims were among those who were further
marginalized. After a Muslim group, the

38

Tablighi Jamaat, was accused of spreading
the virus at a public gathering, many Muslims
were denied access to medical services and
essential commodities. On social media,
there were calls to boycott Muslim
businesses. In Sri Lanka, the authorities
prevented Muslims from burying people who
had died as a result of COVID-19 according
to religious rites and forcibly cremated the
bodies instead. The Sri Lankan government
reportedly racially profiled the country’s
Muslim community by identifying it as a
source of higher risk during the pandemic.
In Afghanistan, at least 25 people were
killed when the armed group calling itself
“Islamic State” attacked one of the few Sikh
temples in the country. The country’s mainly
Shi’a Hazara community also suffered many
attacks from armed groups, including an
October bombing of a school that killed 30
people, mostly children, in Kabul.
In Pakistan, the Ahmadiyya community
was subjected to attacks, social and
economic boycotts and at least five targeted
killings. During the Muslim holy month of
Muharram, hate preachers incited violence
against the country’s Shi’a minority as nearly
40 blasphemy cases were filed against Shi’a
clerics. In July, bowing to pressure from
politicians, some media outlets and clerics,
the Pakistani authorities halted the
construction of a Hindu temple in the capital,
Islamabad, denying the community its right
to freedom of religion and belief. The
Pakistani government failed to take effective
action against the forced conversions to Islam
of women and girls from Hindu and Christian
communities.
Governments must ensure that the human
rights of ethnic and religious minorities are
protected. Moreover, they must facilitate
equal access to health care for all minority
groups and take steps to end systemic
discrimination against them.

WOMEN AND GIRLS
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted and
exacerbated the existing inequalities between
men and women in the region. Government

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

responses to the pandemic reflected
patriarchal norms and gender stereotypes
that undervalue women.
In the informal sector, where women were
typically paid less than men, thousands of
women were suddenly deprived of their
livelihoods and forced to assume additional
care responsibilities at home, such as
homeschooling children or caring for sick
relatives. In previous years, women across
the Asia-Pacific region carried out more than
four times as much unpaid work at home
than men. Those numbers rose sharply
during the pandemic.
Women also constituted the majority of
essential workers during the pandemic,
including doctors, nurses, sanitation workers
and other roles. In Pakistan, when violence
against health workers erupted in May, a
group of women health workers were forced
to lock themselves in a room for their own
protection as disgruntled relatives of patients
vandalized the hospital they were working in.
Migrant domestic workers in the Gulf, who
overwhelmingly come from the Asia-Pacific
region, lost their jobs and were forced to
return home at the onset of the pandemic. In
most of the national financial stimulus
packages in the region, there was no special
provision for the needs of these women,
including social protections.
Many governments in the region did not
classify services for women as essential and
that could continue during lockdowns,
including those that are aimed to support or
assist women experiencing sexual or genderbased violence. Women and girls who had
already been living with abusive partners or
family members were at further risk of
violence. The number of cases of domestic
violence and intimate partner violence rose
sharply across the region. In Japan, there
were 13,000 cases reported in April alone – a
29% increase on the same month in 2019.
Women continued to be subjected to
vicious misogynistic attacks. In Indonesia, the
targets of digital attacks included feminist
news outlets. One journalist’s account was
hacked, and she was harassed by attackers
who sent pornographic pictures and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

demeaning statements about women. In
South Korea, the pervasiveness of online
violence against women and girls became
increasingly apparent with the arrests of the
perpetrators of digital sex crimes, who had
blackmailed more than 70 women and girls
into sharing sexually exploitative videos and
photographs that the perpetrators then
circulated through messaging apps.
In Cambodia, Prime Minister Hun Sen led
a public attack on women’s right to freedom
of expression, invoking arbitrary notions of
“tradition” and “culture” to justify the policing
of women’s bodies and choices. In January,
he ordered the police to take action against
women advertising products on Facebook in
purportedly “revealing” clothes. Within days,
a Facebook vendor was arrested and charged
with producing “pornography” for the clothes
she wore. The assault on women’s rights in
Cambodia intensified in June, when the
government sought to turn these penalties
into law, criminalizing the wearing of clothes
that were deemed “too short” or “too seethrough”. The draft law triggered online
protests from many women and girls.
Violence against women and impunity for
these crimes persisted in several countries.
In Papua New Guinea, allegations of sorcery
put women at a heightened risk of violence.
In Afghanistan, women continued to face
discrimination and gender-based violence,
especially in Taliban-controlled areas, where
violent “punishments” were meted out for
perceived transgressions of the armed
group’s interpretations of Islamic law. Over
100 murder cases related to violence against
women were reported in Afghanistan during
the year, and these highlighted the persistent
failure of the government to investigate these
murders or tackle violence against women
effectively. In Fiji, a former rugby captain
convicted of rape and sentenced to eight
years’ imprisonment was allowed to resume
training after serving less than a year of his
sentence.
In Pakistan, an annual march on
International Women’s Day came under
sustained attack, first from the courts, when
there was an attempt to ban the march, and

39

then on the day, when a religious group
attacked marchers in Islamabad with rocks.
The police failed to protect the protesters. In
September, the gang rape of a woman on a
national highway sparked national outrage,
with calls for the resignation of the top
provincial police officer and harsher
punishments for rapists. In December, the
government passed an ordinance that sought
to speed up trials for rape and punish
perpetrators with forced chemical castration.
Amnesty International expressed its concern
that forced chemical castration violates
Pakistan’s international and constitutional
obligations to prohibit torture and other cruel,
inhuman, or degrading treatment.
In India and Nepal, the rapes of Dalit
women sparked fury. In May, a 12-year-old
Dalit girl was forcibly married to her alleged
rapist, a man from a dominant caste, in
Nepal’s Rupandehi district. In September,
another 12-year-old Dalit girl was raped and
killed in Bajhang district, allegedly by a man
who had evaded prosecution for another rape
of a 14-year-old girl a month before. Also in
September, a Dalit woman was raped and
murdered by a group of men from the
dominant caste in Hathras, in India’s Uttar
Pradesh state. Her body was cremated by the
police without the consent of the family. The
accused men were only arrested after
protests erupted across the country
demanding justice and accountability.
To address the various problems of
violence against women, steps were taken in
South Korea, where the government passed
laws to enhance the protection of women and
girls from sexual exploitation and abuse. The
National Assembly increased punishments
for digital sex crimes. The age of consent was
also raised from 13 to 16, without
discrimination, and the statute of limitations
was removed for crimes involving the sexual
exploitation of children.
In developing their post-pandemic response
and recovery, governments must give
priority to advancing gender equality and
eliminating gender-based violence and
harmful gender stereotypes. Women must
also be involved in all stages of legislative,

40

policy and budgetary decision-making
processes in developing the post-pandemic
response and recovery plans of governments
in the region.

FAILURE TO PREVENT
CLIMATE CHANGE
The Asia-Pacific region is particularly
vulnerable to the effects of the climate crisis.
In 2020, a series of climate shocks affected
human rights in the region. India was
severely hit by super-typhoon Amphan, while
Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar suffered
widespread flooding that left
millions displaced. Australia
experienced unprecedented bushfires which
caused displacement and air pollution.
Despite the severity of the impacts,
countries in the region most responsible for
global emissions failed to set adequate
reduction targets that would contribute to
avoiding the worst human rights impacts of
climate change. Australia, which became the
largest fossil fuel exporter in the world, failed
to set a more ambitious emission reduction
target for 2030 or commit to reach net-zero
emission in the long-term. While Japan and
South Korea announced carbon neutrality
targets for 2050 – and China for 2060 – they
failed to demonstrate that they were taking all
feasible steps to reach zero carbon emissions
before this date as they are required to do in
order to refrain from causing significant harm
to the human rights of people in and outside
of their countries.
Governments must urgently adopt and
implement emission reduction targets and
strategies that protect human rights from
the climate crisis and ensure a just and
human rights-consistent transition to a zerocarbon economy and resilient society.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EUROPE AND
CENTRAL ASIA
REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
Government responses to COVID-19
threatened a wide range of rights in Europe
and Central Asia and exposed the human
cost of social exclusion, inequality and state
overreach. Under-resourcing of health
systems and failure to provide adequate
PPE exacerbated the death rates, workers
faced barriers in accessing adequate social
security, and public health measures
disproportionately affected marginalized
individuals and groups. Many governments
also used the pandemic as a smokescreen
for power grabs, clampdowns on freedoms
and a pretext to ignore human rights
obligations.
In a number of countries, governments
continued to erode the independence of the
judiciary. Contested presidential elections in
Belarus provoked a human rights emergency
in which all semblance to the right to a fair
trial and accountability was eroded.
Unresolved conflicts in the region negatively
affected freedom of movement and rights
such as to health. Armed conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan saw all sides use
banned cluster munitions on civilian areas,
and commit war crimes.
The space for human rights defenders
shrank, through restrictive laws and a
pandemic-related reduction in funding.
Support organizations reported spikes in
domestic violence during COVID-19
lockdowns, while such measures limited
access to services.
The pandemic also worsened the already
precarious situation of refugees and
migrants. Several countries delayed or
suspended asylum requests, and many
refugees and migrants were particularly at

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

risk as they were forced to live in
overcrowded and unhealthy conditions.
States failed to set targets to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions at a pace which
would avoid the worst human rights impacts
of the climate crisis. Attacks on the European
human rights framework continued. Arms
sales to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates persisted, despite the risk of human
rights violations in the Yemen conflict.

RIGHTS TO HEALTH AND
SOCIAL SECURITY
The Europe and Central Asia region was hit
hard by the COVID-19 pandemic, with some
27 million cases and 585,000 deaths in the
region by the year’s end, amounting to close
to a third of the global total. Numbers may
well have been higher due to under-reporting,
which, in some cases, was deliberate as in
Turkmenistan. Government responses to the
pandemic varied dramatically, as did the
quality of health care and data collection.
This led to vastly differing reported rates of
infection and death.
Infections and deaths also varied widely
across different groups of the population.
According to the WHO, up to half of those
who died due to COVID-19 in some countries
were older people in long-term care homes.
Health care workers and care home workers
were infected and died at a greater rate than
the rest of the population, sometimes owing
to a failure to provide adequate and sufficient
PPE. As of September, as per available data,
the highest rate of death among health
workers was in the UK, Russia, Italy,
Kyrgyzstan, and Spain. The pandemic
highlighted the weakened state of many
western European health care systems after
years of austerity measures, and the chronic
under-resourcing of health systems in eastern
Europe and Central Asia.
COVID-19–related lockdown measures had
an immediate impact on the economy and
workers’ rights. Many workers, especially
those in informal employment, experienced
barriers to accessing social security schemes,

41

including furlough, sick leave and other
income-supporting mechanisms. Particularly
affected were gig workers, seasonal workers,
cleaners, care home workers, and sex
workers. The pandemic revealed the
essential role of migrant workers in the
agricultural and other sectors, as some
governments such as the UK and Germany
flew them in at the peak of the first lockdown,
and others such as Spain, Italy and Portugal
quickly regularized some.
In many countries, people of colour and
ethnic minority origin had disproportionately
high rates of infection and death. This
reflected multiple challenges faced by these
populations, including barriers to adequate
health care and a higher incidence of
underlying health conditions, exacerbated by
poverty, systemic racism and discrimination.
Authorities generally failed to fulfil early
promises to release older prisoners and
detainees or juveniles, women with children
or those with underlying health conditions. A
tragic consequence was the death on 25 July
– reportedly of pneumonia – of Kyrgyzstani
human rights defender and prisoner of
conscience Azimjan Askarov. He had been
sentenced to life imprisonment in 2010 on
false charges and repeated calls had been
made for his release including due to the
COVID-19 risk to his health.
Governments must investigate the
disproportionate deaths in settings such as
care homes, and failures to provide
adequate PPE. Equal access to vaccines
within and across countries is also urgent,
and co-operation between states imperative,
to ensure that treatment and vaccines are
acceptable, affordable, accessible and
available to all.

STATE OVERREACH
Close to one half of all countries in the region
imposed states of emergency related to
COVID-19. Governments restricted not only
freedom of movement, but also other rights
such as freedoms of expression and peaceful
assembly. Some political movements sought
to hijack human rights discourse in opposing

42

lockdown measures and the wearing of
masks, but the human toll of the virus
underlined the importance of science and
facts. President Alyaksandr Lukashenka in
Belarus, for example, defied both when he
dismissed COVID-19 as a “psychosis”.
A record number of countries (10 at midyear) derogated from provisions of the
European Convention on Human Rights,
several for extended periods of time. While
under certain conditions countries can
derogate from some of their human rights
obligations in times of crisis, restrictions must
be temporary, necessary and proportionate.
The enforcement of lockdowns and other
COVID-19 related public health measures
disproportionately hit marginalized individuals
and groups who were targeted with violence,
discriminatory identity checks, forced
quarantines and fines. Such practices
highlighted institutional racism,
discrimination and the lack of accountability
regarding allegations of unlawful use of force
by law enforcement officials. Roma and
people on the move, such as refugees and
asylum-seekers, were placed under
discriminatory “forced quarantines” in
Bulgaria, Cyprus, France, Greece, Hungary,
Russia, Serbia, and Slovakia. Monitors
recorded the unlawful use of force by law
enforcement officials together with other
violations in Belgium, France, Georgia,
Greece, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Poland, Romania and Spain. In Azerbaijan,
arrests on politically motivated charges
intensified under the pretext of containing the
pandemic, and government critics were
arrested, when in March the President
declared he would “isolate” and “clear” the
opposition.
In contexts where freedoms were already
severely circumscribed, 2020 saw several
countries restricting them even further.
Russian authorities moved beyond
organizations, stigmatizing individuals also as
“foreign agents” and clamped down further
on single person pickets. The authorities in
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan adopted or
proposed new restrictive laws on assemblies.
When allegations of election fraud prompted

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

mass protests, police in Belarus responded
with massive and unprecedented violence,
torture and other ill-treatment. Independent
voices were brutally suppressed as arbitrary
arrests, politically motivated prosecutions and
other reprisals escalated against opposition
candidates and their supporters, political and
civil society activists and independent media.
While the need for timely, accurate,
science-based information was urgent to
combat the pandemic, a number of
governments imposed unjustified restrictions
on freedom of expression and access to
information. Governments misused existing
and new legislation to curtail freedom of
expression in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, Hungary,
Kazakhstan, Poland, Romania, Russia,
Serbia, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan.
Governments took insufficient measures to
protect journalists and whistle-blowers,
including health workers, at times targeting
those who criticized government responses to
COVID-19. This was the case in Albania,
Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Poland,
Russia, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine and
Uzbekistan. In Tajikistan and Turkmenistan,
medical and essential workers did not dare
speak out against already egregious freedom
of expression restrictions. In Turkey, the
government orchestrated troll armies and
imposed online restrictions and misnavigations to distract from certain websites,
accounts and inconvenient information.
Some governments conflated the public
health crisis with national security concerns,
such as in Hungary. In France and Turkey,
for example, national security legislation was
rushed through in expedited proceedings,
while governments in Russia and elsewhere
bolstered surveillance capabilities, hoarded
and sometimes disclosed personal data,
posing a long-term threat to privacy and other
rights. The EU’s Counter-Terrorism Agenda,
launched in December, promised to harness
the power of technology to keep people safe
from violent attacks. But the Agenda would
vastly expand surveillance capacity and the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

use of predictive technologies at the expense
of freedom of expression and the right to
privacy, fair trial and non-discrimination.
Governments must cease using the
pandemic as a pretext to crack down on
dissent, rein in police overreach, ensure
accountability for misconduct, and stop the
slide into surveillance states.

UNDERMINING JUDICIAL
INDEPENDENCE
In a number of countries, governments
continued to take steps that eroded the
independence of the judiciary. One common
measure was to discipline judges or interfere
with their appointment or the security of their
tenure, for demonstrating independence,
criticizing the authorities, or passing
judgments that went against the wishes of the
government.
In Poland, Parliament adopted a new law
prohibiting judges from questioning the
credentials of judges appointed by the
President at the Disciplinary Chamber of the
Supreme Court. The state initiated
disciplinary proceedings in August against
1,278 judges who had asked the OSCE to
monitor the presidential election. Despite an
April decision by the Court of Justice of the
EU (CJEU) requiring the Polish government
to immediately suspend its new system of
disciplinary proceedings against judges, the
authorities refused to implement this ruling.
In Hungary, senior members of the
government contested final judgments in
official government communications and in
the media, delaying their execution. In
Turkey, the Council of Judges and
Prosecutors initiated disciplinary proceedings
against the three judges who acquitted the
Gezi trial defendants, following the
President’s criticism of the acquittal decision.
The authorities in Turkey also undermined
fair trial guarantees by taking steps to control
bar associations and targeting lawyers for
their professional activities. In July,
Parliament passed a law changing the
structure of the bar associations, weakening

43

their ability to voice concerns about issues
such as the lack of independence of the
judiciary and human rights. In September, 47
lawyers were detained by police on suspicion
of “membership of a terrorist organization”,
based solely on their work. Also, in
September, the Court of Cassation upheld the
prison sentences of 14 lawyers prosecuted
under terrorism-related charges.
In Russia and in much of Eastern Europe
and Central Asia, violations of the right to a
fair trial remained widespread and the
authorities cited the pandemic to deny
detainees meetings with lawyers and prohibit
public observation of trials. During Belarus’
human rights emergency all semblance of
adherence to the right to a fair trial and
accountability was eroded: not only were
killings and torture of peaceful protesters not
investigated, but authorities made every effort
to halt or obstruct attempts by victims of
violations to file complaints against
perpetrators.
Governments must ensure respect for the
rule of law, protect the independence of the
judiciary and uphold fair trial guarantees.

HUMAN RIGHTS IN
CONFLICT ZONES
Conflicts in countries of the former Soviet
Union continued to hold back human
development and regional co-operation, and
lines of contact along unrecognized territories
constrained the rights of residents on both
sides.
In Georgia, Russia and the breakaway
territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia/
Tskhinvali Region continued to restrict
freedom of movement with the rest of the
county, including through the further
installation of physical barriers. Crossing
points shut in 2019 remained closed, and at
least 10 residents were said to have died
after being refused permission for medical
transfer to the rest of Georgia. In Moldova,
the de facto authorities in the unrecognized
Transdniestria region introduced restrictions
on travel from government-controlled territory,

44

affecting medical provisions to the local
population. In Ukraine both government
forces and those of Russian-backed
separatists in the east of the country imposed
restrictions on travel across the contact line,
often appearing as reciprocal measures, with
the number of crossings dropping from a
monthly average of one million to tens of
thousands by October. These and COVID-19
restrictions meant that scores of people
suffered family separation, and lack of access
to health care, pensions and workplaces.
Older people and vulnerable groups were
among those most severely affected.
The most serious clashes were in
September when heavy fighting erupted
between Azerbaijan and Armenia and
Armenian-supported forces in Azerbaijan’s
breakaway region of Nagorno-Karabakh.
More than 5,000 deaths resulted. All sides
used heavy explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in densely populated civilian areas,
including ballistic missiles and notoriously
inaccurate rocket artillery salvos. These
caused civilian deaths, injuries and
widespread damage to civilian areas. Cluster
munitions banned under international
humanitarian law were deployed on
Stepanakert/Khankendi, the capital of
Nagorno-Karabakh, and on Barda city in an
area under Azerbaijan government control.
Both Azerbaijani and Armenian forces
committed war crimes including extrajudicial
execution, torture of captives and desecration
of corpses of opposing forces.
All parties to the conflicts must fully
respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians from the effects of
hostilities. Any restrictions on freedom of
movement should be strictly necessary,
dictated by genuine security and military
considerations, and proportionate.

HUMAN RIGHTS
DEFENDERS
Some governments further limited the space
for human rights defenders and NGOs
through restrictive laws and policies, and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

stigmatizing rhetoric. This trend accelerated
during the pandemic, which thinned the
ranks of civil society through financial
attrition, as funding streams from individuals,
foundations, businesses and governments
dried up as a consequence of COVID-19related economic hardship.
Turkey continued to repress and harass
NGOs, human rights defenders and
dissenting voices, while failing to implement a
key European Court of Human Rights
judgment calling for the immediate release of
unjustly detained civil society activist Osman
Kavala. The governments in Kazakhstan and
Russia continued moves to silence NGOs
through smear campaigns, and tax
authorities in Kazakhstan threatened over a
dozen human rights NGOs with suspension
based on alleged reporting violations around
foreign income. In Russia peaceful
protesters, human rights defenders and civic
and political activists faced arrests and
prosecution. In Kyrgyzstan proposed
amendments to NGO legislation created
onerous financial reporting requirements.
In the context of counter-terrorism, France
and Austria moved to dissolve a number of
Muslim associations on the basis of
problematic procedures. Restrictive new
NGO legislation was mooted in Bulgaria,
Greece, Poland, and Serbia, while
governments in France, Italy, Malta and
elsewhere continued to obstruct and
sometimes criminalize the work of NGOs
involved in rescuing or providing
humanitarian assistance to migrants and
asylum-seekers.
In a positive development, the CJEU struck
down a 2017 restrictive NGO law in Hungary
as being in breach of EU law. The year also
saw the strengthening of social movements
focussed on the environment, accountability,
women’s rights and anti-racism. Protesters
mobilized against contested election results
in Belarus, corruption in Bulgaria and
regressive moves by the new government in
Slovenia. Thousands challenged a
controversial security law proposed in France
and a ruling further restricting access to safe
abortion care in Poland.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Governments must halt the stigmatization
of NGOs and human rights defenders and
ensure a safe and enabling environment in
which it is possible to defend and promote
human rights without fear of punishment,
reprisal or intimidation.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND
LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND
INTERSEX (LGBTI) PEOPLE
Progress on combating domestic violence
stalled – and even reversed – in many
countries. The year saw no new signatures or
ratifications to the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence (the Istanbul Convention). On the
contrary, the Hungarian Parliament refused
to ratify it, while the Polish Minister of Justice
announced plans to withdraw from the
Convention and Turkey’s President mooted
the same idea.
As many women were confined in their
homes with abusers under lockdown, support
organizations in a number of countries
reported spikes in domestic violence, while
accessing support services became more
difficult. In Ukraine and many other countries
in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, strict
quarantine measures meant that many
survivors could not access free legal aid
offered online as they continued to share
living space with their abuser or could not
travel to shelters. Some governments in the
EU took special steps to assist victims during
the pandemic by renting hotel rooms instead
of sending women to shelters where the risk
of infection was higher, or creating new
helplines. Some countries, including Croatia,
Denmark, the Netherlands and Spain finally
took steps to improve their rape laws to make
them consent-based.
Under lockdown, some jurisdictions
categorized abortion care as non-essential
medical treatment, placing new obstacles to
women’s sexual and reproductive health and

45

rights. While a legislative initiative to further
restrict access to abortion care in Slovakia
narrowly failed, the Constitutional Tribunal in
Poland struck down a provision which
allowed women to terminate a pregnancy in
cases of fatal or severe foetal abnormality.
This move prompted mass protests by
women and allies in the country. Peaceful
protesters were met with police violence and
faced administrative and criminal charges.
Meanwhile, 11 women’s rights activists in
Greece were arrested and charged for
breaching public health rules after staging a
symbolic action against gender-based
violence.
In several countries, religious and political
figures used COVID-19 as an excuse for
engaging in advocacy of hatred against the
LGBTI community, blaming them for the
pandemic. Monitors also reported COVIDrelated spikes in domestic abuse against
LGBTI people. Some countries used the
pandemic as a pretext to restrict access to
hormone therapy and other medical
treatment for trans people. A number of local
governments in Poland declared themselves
to be “LGBTI-free zones” and incumbent
President Andrzej Duda engaged in advocacy
of hatred against the LGBTI community
during his campaign for re-election. At the
end of the year, the Hungarian government
proposed a raft of legislation restricting LGBTI
rights. In a related development, the
Romanian Parliament passed a law
prohibiting the teaching of gender studies,
which remained contested at the
Constitutional Tribunal at the year’s end.
Governments must bolster support services
for women and LGBTI victims of domestic
violence, remove obstacles to accessing
sexual and reproductive rights, and combat
discrimination against women and LGBTI
people.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS

countries delayed or suspended processing
asylum requests. Many refugees and
migrants were particularly at risk of COVID-19
as they lived in overcrowded, insalubrious
detention facilities, camps, or squats. The
most emblematic case was the Moria camp
on the Greek island of Lesvos, where a fire
left 13,000 refugees and migrants without
shelter. Border closures deprived seasonal
workers and labour migrants of subsistence
and their families of remittances, including in
Central Asia.
Pushbacks and violence at land and sea
borders continued. In a cynical and
dangerous move, Turkey instrumentalized
refugees and migrants for political purposes
by encouraging them to travel from Turkey to
Greece’s land border, sometimes even
facilitating their transport. In turn, the Greek
authorities committed human rights violations
against people on the move, including
excessive use of force, beatings, use of live
ammunition, and pushbacks into Turkey.
Croatia continued forcible expulsions of
asylum-seekers, often accompanied with
violence and abuse. Governments throughout
southern Europe prohibited ships in the
Mediterranean from disembarking rescued
migrants and refugees, leaving them
stranded at sea for record periods of time. In
a clear attempt to circumvent legal
obligations against pushbacks, Italy, Malta
and the EU continued to co-operate with
Libya, where disembarked migrants and
refugees were subjected to serious human
rights violations. The EU began to discuss a
new migration pact which continued the EU’s
main policy thrust of deterring migration
rather than managing it in a human rights
compliant manner.
Governments must expand the provision of
safe and regular pathways of migration,
particularly for persons in need of
protection to come to Europe, including
humanitarian visas, resettlement,
community sponsorship and family
reunification.

COVID-19 worsened the already precarious
situation of refugees and migrants. Several

46

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PREVENTION OF CLIMATE
CHANGE AND CORPORATE
ACCOUNTABILITY
In December, the European Council decided
to cut greenhouse gas emissions by at least
55% by 2030. While an advance from its
previous, even more inadequate, pledge, this
target would still fail to reduce emissions at a
pace that avoids the worst human rights
impacts of the climate crisis and would put
an excessive burden on developing countries.
At national level, the vast majority
of European countries announcing net-zero
emission targets continued only to commit to
reaching this by 2050. In order to refrain
from causing significant harm to rights of
people in and outside of Europe, they are
required to aim for carbon neutrality well
before this date. In addition, in most cases
net-zero plans included loopholes that could
delay climate action, together with measures
that would be detrimental for the enjoyment
of human rights. Several countries,
such as France, Germany, Italy, Russia and
the UK allowed fossil fuel companies, the
aviation industry and other carbon-polluting
companies to benefit from economic stimulus
measures, such as tax rebates and loans,
without any conditions to reduce their carbon
footprint.
There was a significant increase in climate
litigation targeting governments and
corporations, with major new cases being
filed in France (applying the recent ‘law of
vigilance’), Germany, Poland, Spain and
the UK, among others, as well as a case
by six Portuguese children and young
adults to the European Court of Human
Rights targeting 33 member states. The Irish
Supreme Court required the government to
adopt more ambitious emissions reductions
targets, whereas the Swiss Federal Court
rejected a similar claim.
Following years of pressure from civil
society and trade unions, the European
Commission began the process of
introducing a law obliging corporations to
respect human rights and environmental

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

standards through businesses’ entire global
value chains. In November, while a majority
of Swiss voters voted in favour of introducing
a similar law, the initiative failed as it did not
receive the support of most cantons.
Governments must accelerate inadequate
timetables to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, reach zero-carbon emissions and
eliminate loopholes delaying climate action.
They should condition any economic
support measure to high-emitting
companies with time-bound commitments
to phase out fossil fuels. EU legislators
must ensure laws effectively hold
businesses accountable for human rights
and environmental harm within their value
chain and provide victims with access to
remedy.

HUMAN RIGHTS AT HOME
AND IN THE WORLD
Attacks on the European human rights
framework continued in 2020. In the OSCE,
states could not agree on the leadership of
the key human rights institutions and allowed
mandates to lapse for many months before
approving replacements. Council of Europe
member states continued to delay the
implementation or selectively implement
judgments of the European Court of Human
Rights. A striking indicator of backsliding was
the growth in judgments finding a violation of
Article 18 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, which prohibits using
restrictions on rights for any purpose other
than those prescribed by the Convention.
Member states such as Azerbaijan, Russia
and Turkey were found to have abusively
detained or prosecuted individuals or
otherwise restricted their rights. Article 18
violations should ring loud alarm bells: they
indicate political persecution.
The EU continued to struggle to address
the ongoing erosion of the rule of law in
Hungary and Poland, although it activated
proceedings against the two states for risking
a serious breach of the union’s core values.
At the year’s end, EU member states agreed

47

to link EU funding, including COVID-19
recovery and climate-related funds, to
compliance with the rule of law, but how this
linkage could be triggered in the future
remained unclear. Despite some important
human rights-related judgments of the CJEU
on the independence of the judiciary and
attacks on NGOs, the failure of the EU to
reverse or arrest the shrinking space for
NGOs and migration-related human rights
violations strained internal/external
coherence and made it more difficult for the
EU to engage credibly on human rights in
foreign policy.
In Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Russia
and China continued to wield political,
economic and sometimes military influence,
and undermined the international human
rights framework and the institutions
mandated to protect it. Russia offered
financial and media support to the Belarusian
authorities as they waged a full-fledged
violent assault on the population, and the EU,
UN and regional human rights institutions
were unable to muster political weight to halt
the egregious violations. In Western Europe,
Belgium, the Czech Republic, France and
the UK were among those permitting arms
sales to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates, despite the high likelihood that
these arms would be used to commit human
rights violations in the conflict in Yemen.
Notwithstanding internal challenges, the
EU and its member states remained
important players in promoting human rights
worldwide. In 2020, the EU took significant
steps to boost its human rights policy,
including by adopting a new Human Rights
Action Plan.
States must fulfil the treaty obligations they
have chosen to take upon themselves and
respect the human rights architecture of
which they are a part. Where they have
undertaken to respect the decisions of
international human rights courts, they
must implement those rulings.

48

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA
REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
Governments across the region responded to
the COVID-19 pandemic by declaring states
of emergency or passing legislation with
excessive restrictions on freedom of
expression. People were prosecuted for their
legitimate criticism of their governments’
handed response to the pandemic. Health
workers protested a lack protection at work,
including inadequate protective gear and
access to testing, but faced arrest and
prosecution for raising concerns about
conditions of work and public health.
Governments discriminated in their
responses to the pandemic, including in
vaccine distribution.
The region’s human rights defenders
continued their work despite the high risk of
imprisonment, prosecution, travel bans or
other reprisals. Security forces used unlawful
lethal or less-lethal force that killed or injured
hundreds of people with impunity.
Overcrowding and insanitary conditions put
prisoners in the region at particular risk of
COVID-19, a situation that was exacerbated
by inadequate health care and torture or
other ill-treatment in prisons.
Parties to armed conflicts committed war
crimes and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law. In the midst
of the pandemic, the authorities restricted
humanitarian aid, exacerbating the poor state
of health care systems which were already
depleted. Other military powers fuelled
violations through illicit arms transfers and
direct military support to combatants. Smaller
countries continued to host over 3 million
refugees from Syria but a range of push
factors forced many Syrians to return. Military
offensives and other fighting and insecurity in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

several countries displaced hundreds of
thousands of people from their homes.
Workers across the region faced summary
dismissal or reduced wages as the
pandemic’s economic impact caused
hardship. Migrant workers were particularly
vulnerable given that the kafala (sponsorship)
system ties their residency to employment in
many countries. Domestic violence
increased, especially during national
lockdown periods, and “honour” killings
continued with impunity.
Authorities heavily repressed the rights of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people, arresting them for their real
or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity and subjecting some men to forced
anal examinations.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers in Tunisia and Morocco
organized protests against the lack of
adequate protection measures provided to
them, citing insufficient PPE, access to
testing and failures to designate COVID-19 as
an occupational disease. In Egypt and Iran,
health workers faced reprisals, including
arrests, threats and intimidation for voicing
their concerns or other criticism of the
authorities’ response. The Egyptian
authorities arrested at least nine workers who
expressed safety concerns or criticized the
government’s handling of the pandemic and
detained them pending investigations into
“terrorism”-related charges and “spreading
false news”.
The Syrian government failed to provide
adequate protective gear or access to testing
for health workers. In December, the Israeli
Health Ministry distributed COVID-19
vaccines exclusively to citizens and residents
of Israel, including Palestinians living in
illegally annexed East Jerusalem,
discriminating against the nearly 5 million
Palestinians living under Israeli military
occupation in the West Bank and Gaza in
violation of its obligation as occupying power
to ensure preventive measures to combat the
spread of epidemics. In southern Libya,

49

Tabus and Touaregs faced barriers in
accessing adequate health care as rival
armed groups controlled access to major
hospitals and, in some cases, because they
did not have identity documents.
Authorities should ensure that the health
care they provide, including preventive
vaccines, is delivered without
discrimination, that health care workers are
adequately protected and that any
restrictions on rights to combat the
pandemic are necessary and proportionate.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Governments across the region used the
COVID-19 health crisis to justify further
clampdowns on freedom of expression,
thereby denying people the right to
information on the virus or to debate
government responses. The authorities in
Algeria, Jordan and Morocco issued decrees
or legislation citing a state of emergency that
criminalized legitimate expression about the
pandemic. These were promptly
implemented, with the authorities
prosecuting people for “spreading false
news” or “obstructing” government
decisions. In Bahrain, Iran, Oman and Saudi
Arabia judicial authorities dedicated teams to
prosecuting people for spreading “rumours”
about the pandemic that disturb public
opinion. Authorities in Egypt and Iran
arrested or otherwise harassed journalists
and social media users for questioning the
official narrative around COVID-19. Shorterterm arrests or criminal investigations
occurred in Jordan and Tunisia for criticizing
the government or local authorities’ handling
of the crisis.
Across the region, authorities used overly
broad and subjective Penal Code provisions,
criminalizing “insult” to silence online
criticism of the authorities and leading to
harsh prison sentences including against the
writer Abdullah al-Maliki in Saudi Arabia, who
was sentenced to seven years. Journalists in
Egypt and Libya faced prosecution and
imprisonment for their work and additionally,
in Iran, one journalist was executed. The

50

Lebanese authorities investigated dozens of
journalists or activists who had taken part in
the October 2019 protest movement. In
Tunisia, nine social media users faced
criminal investigation and, at times, brief
periods of detention for publishing Facebook
posts criticizing local authorities or the police.
Regional governments continued to censor
the internet; the Egyptian and Palestinian
authorities blocked access to websites, and
the Iranian authorities blocked social media
channels. Governments invested in expensive
digital surveillance equipment like that
produced by the NSO Group, an Israeli
spyware company, to target human rights
defenders. Amnesty International
investigations revealed how the Moroccan
authorities used the NSO Group’s notorious
Pegasus software to target human rights
defender and academic Maati Monjib and
independent journalist Omar Radi, both of
whom were arrested and faced prosecution
on trumped-up charges. In July, a Tel Aviv
court rejected a case brought by Amnesty
International and others asking the Israeli
Ministry of Defense to revoke the NSO
Group’s security export licence.
Governments must release all prisoners of
conscience immediately and
unconditionally, halt all investigations or
prosecutions related to peaceful online or
offline expression, and stop blocking
websites without due process. As a priority,
authorities should repeal subjective
provisions that criminalize “insult” and
must decriminalize defamation.

HUMAN RIGHTS
DEFENDERS AND FREEDOM
OF ASSOCIATION
Human rights defenders continued to pay a
heavy price for their bravery. The authorities
tried to silence and punish them for their
work, using various tactics. The Israeli
authorities used raids, judicial harassment
and travel bans against critics of the military
occupation, including Amnesty International
employee Laith Abu Zeyad whose travel ban

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

was upheld by the Jerusalem District Court in
November. The Iranian authorities unlawfully
closed businesses or froze assets of human
rights defenders and carried out reprisals
against their relatives, including their children
or parents. In Egypt, security forces arrested
three staff members from the Egyptian
Initiative for Personal Rights and, in a rare
move, released them weeks later, following a
global campaign. At the same time, judicial
authorities arbitrarily added at least five
human rights defenders to “terrorists lists” for
five years. Virtually all Saudi Arabian human
rights defenders were in exile or imprisoned.
In December, a court sentenced women’s
rights defender Loujain al-Hathloul to five
years and eight months in prison.
The Algerian authorities passed legislation
further restricting freedom of association,
introducing a 14-year prison sentence for
receiving foreign funding to undermine “the
fundamental interests of Algeria”. The
Moroccan authorities arrested Maati Monjib
in December and investigated him on
charges related to the receipt of foreign
funding.
In June, Nabeel Rajab, head of the
outlawed Bahrain Centre for Human Rights,
was released on probation, after serving a
four-year prison sentence for a Twitter post in
which he criticized the government’s human
rights record.
States must recognize their obligations to
respect and guarantee the right to defend
human rights by ensuring that human rights
defenders are able to work free from
arbitrary arrest and prosecution, threats,
attacks and harassment. Authorities must
respect the right to freedom of association
and remove arbitrary restrictions on civil
society organizations.

PROTESTS AND THE
UNLAWFUL USE OF FORCE
Protest movements in Algeria, Iraq and
Lebanon continued to organize in the first few
months of the year until the spread of
COVID-19 led to their suspension. Peaceful

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

protesters faced arrest, beatings and, at
times, prosecution for participating in
protests. In Iraq, federal security forces
arrested thousands of protesters in the first
few months of the year. Kurdistan Regional
Government officials cited COVID-19 as
justification for dispersing protesters in May
in the city of Dohuk and charged them with
“misusing electronic devices” in organizing a
protest.
Security forces throughout the region used
force to disperse protests, including through
use of less-lethal weapons. The force used
was frequently unlawful, often because it was
unnecessary or excessive, and weapons were
used in a manner they were not designed for.
In Iraq, security forces used live ammunition
and military-grade tear gas grenades, killing
dozens of protesters in Baghdad, Basra,
Karbala, Diyala, Najaf and Nasriya. In
Lebanon, security forces used rubber pellets
in a shoot-to-harm manner in January and
February, injuring hundreds of protesters. In
Tunisia, police used unnecessary and
excessive force when dispersing a peaceful
protest in the southern governorate of
Tataouine, recklessly firing tear gas in densely
populated residential areas with canisters
landing inside homes and near a hospital. In
Iran, security forces fired pointed pellets,
rubber bullets and tear gas, beating and
arresting scores of peaceful protesters.
As economic hardship increased, sporadic
protests took place later in the year against
worsening living conditions in a number of
countries. In Libya, there were rare protests
in the east and west against corruption and
unaccountable militias and armed groups,
who responded to protests by abducting
protesters and using live ammunition against
them, killing at least one man. In the city of
Sulaymaniyah in northern Iraq, protests
against unpaid wages and corruption were
met with live ammunition by Kurdish
authorities leading to scores of deaths. In
Egypt, rare protests led to the arrests of
hundreds of protesters and bystanders who
remained in detention pending investigations
into "terrorism" and protest-related charges.

51

Authorities should ensure that their law
enforcement officers comply with
international standards on the use of
firearms and less-lethal weapons,
investigate the unlawful use of force and
hold law enforcement officers to account.
States should always uphold the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly.

DETENTION CONDITIONS
AND TORTURE
Prisoners in several countries were at
heightened risk of contracting COVID-19 due
to overcrowding, insanitary conditions and
poor ventilation in conditions that amounted
to torture and other cruel and inhuman
treatment. Overcrowding was common
because of arbitrary detention practices,
including prolonged pre-trial detention
without effective appeal, as in Egypt for
example, or administrative detention, such as
in Israel and Palestine. In Morocco, the
authorities increased the prison population
when they imprisoned people solely for
breaching pandemic-related measures.
Prison visits were banned during national
lockdowns and sometimes beyond, for
example in Bahrain and Egypt. Prisoners
were not provided with alternative means to
communicate with their families.
In Egypt, prison officials failed to distribute
adequate sanitation products or to introduce
testing and isolation measures and punished
prisoners who raised safety concerns. In Iran,
where prison authorities themselves
acknowledged the lack of resources
to respond to the pandemic, security forces
responded to prison protests and riots calling
for better protection from COVID-19 with
unlawful force, including by using live
ammunition, pellets and tear gas, in some
cases leading to killings. Prison health care
was often inadequate and in Egypt, Iran and
Saudi Arabia, prisoners with a political
background were sometimes deliberately
denied health care as a punishment. In
Egypt, at least 35 detainees died in prison or
shortly after release, following medical

52

complications and, in some cases, denial of
adequate health care.
Torture or other ill-treatment in state
custody continued in at least 18 countries,
particularly during the interrogation phase to
extract “confessions”. Across the region,
courts convicted defendants on the basis of
torture-tainted evidence. Prison officials in
Bahrain, Egypt, Iran and Morocco used
prolonged and indefinite solitary
confinement, itself often amounting to
torture, to punish prisoners for their political
views or speech or to extract “confessions”.
Authorities should prioritize medical care
and overcrowding in prisons. To counter the
spread of COVID-19, they should release all
those arbitrarily detained or detained
without necessity, such as pre-trial
detainees. Judicial officials should
investigate torture and other ill-treatment in
places of detention as well as punitive illtreatment in prisons, including the use of
prolonged solitary confinement, and end the
use of torture-tainted statements in legal
proceedings.

IMPUNITY AND ACCESS TO
JUSTICE
Across the region, security forces enjoyed
impunity for human rights violations,
especially for the unlawful use of lethal or
less-lethal force and torture. In June, the
Iranian authorities revealed for the first time
the official figures for those killed during the
November 2019 protests, but continued to
cover up the real death toll , and publicly
praised security and intelligence forces for
their role in the crackdown. In Iraq, the new
Prime Minister’s promises to investigate the
killing of hundreds of protesters and to
compensate their families were not realized.
In Lebanon, judicial authorities failed to
investigate over 40 complaints of torture and
the unlawful use of less-lethal weapons that
had caused hundreds of injuries to protesters
between 2019 and 2020. In Egypt,
prosecutors routinely failed to effectively
investigate torture and enforced

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

disappearance complaints, with the rare
exception of deaths in custody in nonpolitical cases like that of shop owner Islam
al-Australy who died two days after his arrest
in September.
There were some steps towards
accountability, often a long struggle, at the
international level. In June, the UN Human
Rights Council established a fact-finding
mission to investigate violations and abuses
of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed by
all parties to the conflict in Libya since 2016.
In December, seven UN experts wrote to the
Iranian government warning that past and
ongoing violations related to prison
massacres in 1988 may amount to crimes
against humanity and that they would call for
an international investigation if these
violations persisted.
Ten years after its revolution, Tunisia’s
transitional justice process continued, with
the government finally publishing the Truth
and Dignity Commission’s concluding report
and establishing a reparations fund. Dozens
of trials continued before dedicated criminal
courts but security force and police unions
continued to boycott the process while
accused officers refused to respond to court
summons.
In countries including Egypt, Iran, Israel
and the Occupied Palestinian Territories
(OPT), Libya, Saudi Arabia and Syria,
exceptional courts, such as military,
revolutionary and security courts, were used
extensively, and trials grossly violated fair trial
standards. Trials before ordinary criminal
courts were often equally problematic, with
mass trials continuing to take place. In some
countries, notably Egypt, Iran, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia, the death penalty was imposed and
implemented following grossly unfair trials.
Israel continued to carry out systematic
violations, including crimes under
international law, against Palestinians with
impunity. A pre-trial chamber at the
International Criminal Court was still looking
at the question of the court’s jurisdiction in
the OPT, the result of which may allow for the
Office of the Prosecutor to open an

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

investigation into crimes under international
law.
Israel continued to impose institutionalized
discrimination against Palestinians living
under its rule in Israel and the OPT,
displacing at least 996 Palestinians in Israel
and the occupied West Bank through home
demolitions.
National judicial authorities should hold
members of security services to account for
abuses, to ensure judicial oversight of the
executive, and uphold due process
standards without recourse to the death
penalty.

VIOLATIONS IN ARMED
CONFLICT
The lives of civilians in Iraq, Libya, Syria and
Yemen continued to be afflicted by years of
armed conflict, where fluctuating levels of
violence by state and non-state parties to
these conflicts reflected shifting alliances on
the ground and the interests of external
military powers. Multiple parties in the
conflicts committed war crimes and other
serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Some carried out direct
attacks against civilians or civilian
infrastructure. In Libya, armed groups and
militias continued to attack medical facilities
and abduct health workers. Al-Khadra
General Hospital in the capital, Tripoli,
designated by the Health Ministry to treat
COVID-19 patients, was shelled in April and
May. Syrian and Russian government forces
carried out direct attacks on civilians and
civilian objects, including hospitals and
schools, through the aerial bombing of cities
in the governorates of Idlib, Hama and
Aleppo.
Almost all parties to the fighting in the
region carried out indiscriminate attacks that
killed and injured civilians in the form of air
strikes and shelling of residential areas with
artillery, mortars and rockets. The transfer of
weapons used to commit war crimes and
other violations continued. The United Arab
Emirates (UAE) continued to illicitly divert

53

weapons and military equipment to militias in
Yemen. In Libya, countries including Russia,
Turkey and the UAE, continued to supply
their allies with arms and military equipment,
including banned anti-personnel mines in
violation of the UN arms embargo. Turkey
and the UAE directly intervened in hostilities
through airstrikes which killed civilians and
people not directly participating in hostilities.
In Syria, Russia maintained its direct support
of military campaigns by government forces
that violated international law, while Turkey
backed armed groups that engaged in
abductions and summary killings.
Some actors continued to restrict
humanitarian access as a tactic, exacerbating
socio-economic hardship and particularly
undermining the access of affected civilians
to health care during the pandemic. In
Yemen, all parties to the conflict arbitrarily
restricted humanitarian assistance, further
worsening the state of the already depleted
health care system, which had only 50% of
its hospitals and other medical facilities
operating. The Syrian government continued
to impede access to UN humanitarian aid
agencies and Damascus-based international
NGOs, so that the UN Security Councilauthorized mechanism for cross-border aid
from Turkey remained the only lifeline for
some communities, although the number of
crossing points was reduced from four to two.
In Gaza and southern Israel, sporadic
bursts of armed hostilities flared up between
Israel and Palestinian armed groups. Israel
maintained its illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip.
Parties to armed conflicts must abide by
international humanitarian law. In particular
they must end direct attacks against
civilians or civilian infrastructure and
indiscriminate attacks, and refrain from
using explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in civilian areas. Military powers
must halt arms transfers where there is a
significant risk that they will be used in
violation of international law, as was the
case in the ongoing conflicts in the region.

54

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES,
ASYLUM-SEEKERS,
MIGRANTS AND
INTERNALLY DISPLACED
PEOPLE
Already at heightened risk due to
overcrowding, refugees, migrants
and internally displaced people (IDPs) living
in camps were hit hard by movement
restrictions imposed to prevent the spread of
COVID-19, limiting their access to
employment outside the camps and the
ability of humanitarian workers to deliver aid.
The barrage of attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure in northwest Syria
increased the population of already
overstretched IDP camps close to the Turkish
border by nearly 1 million people. In Iraq, the
authorities closed at least 10 IDP camps,
subjecting tens of thousands of people to
secondary displacement and, for those
perceived to have ties to the armed group
calling itself Islamic State, the risk of arbitrary
detention and enforced disappearance.
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey continued to
host most of the 5 million refugees who had
fled Syria since the start of the crisis in 2011,
illustrating the failure of the international
community to share the burden of
responsibility. In Jordan, Syrian refugees
were among those most affected by the
national lockdown due to their largely
informal employment and a lack of written
contracts, social security and health
insurance cover or valid work permits.
In Libya, the suffering of refugees, asylumseekers and migrants was compounded by
the economic impact of COVID-19, border
closures and movement restrictions. State
and non-state actors subjected them to
indefinite arbitrary detention, abductions,
unlawful killings, torture and other illtreatment, rape and other sexual violence,
and forced labour. Thousands were forcibly
disappeared upon disembarkation by the EUsupported Libyan Coast Guard, while at least

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

6,000 were expelled from eastern Libya
without due process.
Authorities continued to arrest and detain
undocumented migrants, often without legal
grounds. Algerian authorities denied detained
migrants any access to legal recourse,
sometimes for months, expelling over 17,000
of them. In Tunisia, a group of 22 migrants
won a case challenging their detention in
Ouardia Center and the Ministry of Interior
complied by releasing them gradually.
Governments must halt the direct and
constructive refoulement of refugees and
asylum-seekers to Syria and other countries,
while western and other states must take a
much greater share of their responsibilities,
including through resettlement.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The economic impact of the pandemic led to
widespread job losses across the region. In
Egypt, tens of thousands of private sector
workers were dismissed, forced to accept
reduced wages, work without protective
equipment or take open-ended unpaid leave.
Workers and trade unionists often faced
arrest solely for exercising their right to strike.
In Jordan, a protracted dispute between the
government and the teachers’ union was
exacerbated by the government’s decision to
freeze public sector pay until the end of 2020
due to COVID-19, which was met by new
protests in August. Jordanian police raided
13 union branches, arrested dozens of union
and board members and a court ordered the
union’s dissolution.
The pandemic aggravated the already
vulnerable position of migrant workers whose
employment was governed by the kafala
system in Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE.
Inadequately protected from abuse by their
employers and agents, migrant workers faced
arbitrary dismissals and unpaid wages and
were also at heightened risk of COVID-19,
due to insanitary conditions and
overcrowding in camps or shelters. They
rarely had access to social protection or
alternative employment since emergency in-

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

kind and cash assistance was limited to
country nationals, for example in Jordan,
where only daily workers who were Jordanian
were eligible. Thousands of migrant workers
who lost their jobs also lost their residency
status, and were therefore at risk of arrest,
detention and deportation. Those wishing to
leave the country often could not do so
because of COVID-19-related travel
restrictions. Governments, including in
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, extended residency
permits or announced amnesties for permit
violators, allowing them to leave the country
without paying fines if they had no debts or
ongoing court cases.
Reforms to improve protection for migrant
workers were announced in several
countries, particularly in the Gulf, where they
constituted a high proportion of the
workforce. In Oman and Qatar, the authorities
made legislative changes to allow migrant
workers to change jobs without their
employers’ permission. In Kuwait, the
authorities prosecuted at least three cases of
physical abuse by employers against migrant
domestic workers as well as cases of human
trafficking and illegal visa traders.
Governments should ensure that workers’
rights are upheld, that they protect the right
to strike, extend labour law protections to
migrant workers, including migrant
domestic workers, and abolish the kafala
system.

WOMEN AND GIRLS’
RIGHTS
Women’s rights organizations, helplines or
shelters for survivors of violence reported an
increase in calls for help due to domestic
violence, and requests for emergency shelter
during national lockdown periods, including
in Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia.
“Honour” killings continued in Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait and Palestine where the authorities
failed to take action to prosecute the
perpetrators. In Libya, state and non-state
actors subjected women and girls to
gendered abuse, intimidation online,

55

abduction and assassination, as in the case
of lawyer Hanan al-Barassi in Benghazi. In
Iran, the “morality” police enforced
discriminatory forced veiling laws by
subjecting women and girls to daily
harassment and violent attacks.
Women continued to face entrenched
discrimination in law, including in relation to
marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance
and, in Saudi Arabia and Iran, employment
and political office. The suspension of court
proceedings during lockdowns had an
adverse impact on women’s access to a
remedy, including in prosecutions of violence
against women in Morocco.
In Egypt, an online campaign by young
feminists led to the arrest of several men
accused of rape, resulting in one trial, but the
authorities also arrested survivors and
witnesses who had testified in these cases. At
least nine women social media influencers in
Egypt were prosecuted on charges of
“violating family principles” for their videos
on TikTok.
In a positive step, the Kuwaiti Parliament
approved a bill criminalizing domestic
violence, offering further protections for
victims of domestic violence as well as legal
and medical services.
In addition to addressing long-standing
discrimination against women in law and
practice, authorities should publicly
condemn all forms of violence against
women. They should prioritize policies to
ensure that women and girls who are
victims of violence are accorded an
effective remedy and that their abusers are
held to account.

countries, forced anal examinations, a
practice amounting to torture, took place to
gather evidence of same-sex sexual conduct
in the case of gay men. Criminal courts
continued to treat consensual same-sex
sexual relations as a crime, often sentencing
men, and sometimes women, either under
public decency or dedicated provisions.
Algerian police arrested 44 people for a party
they described as a “homosexual wedding”,
and a court later sentenced the hosts and all
guests to three years and one year in prison,
respectively, for “inciting homosexuality” and
“debauchery”. Tunisian courts convicted at
least 15 men and one woman under Article
230 of the Penal Code, which criminalizes
“sodomy”. In Libya, Al-Radaa Forces
continued to detain men for their perceived
sexual orientation or gender identity, and
tortured and otherwise ill-treated them.
Governments must release all those
detained for their real or perceived sexual
orientation and drop all charges against
those facing prosecution. Legislative
authorities must repeal provisions
criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual
relations, scrap anal examinations and
enact legislation prohibiting discrimination
on the basis of sexual orientation or gender
identity.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY,
BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER
AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Throughout the region, LGBTI people faced
harassment, arrest and prosecution, on the
basis of their real or perceived sexual
orientation or gender identity. In some

56

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2020/21
A-Z COUNTRY ENTRIES

AFGHANISTAN
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Head of state and government: Mohammad Ashraf
Ghani
The current conflict in Afghanistan entered
its twentieth year and continued to claim
large numbers of civilian casualties. Attacks
by the Taliban and other armed groups
deliberately targeted civilians and civilian
objects in violation of international
humanitarian law; sites that were attacked
included a maternity hospital and
educational institutions. There was no
accountability for these crimes as impunity
persisted. Women and girls continued to
face violence, harassment and intimidation.
Violence against children persisted. Afghan
asylum-seekers continued to be forcibly
returned to Afghanistan, particularly from
Iran where some had been attacked by the
Iranian security forces. The Afghan
Government established a Joint Commission
for protection of human rights defenders
and civil society activists in Afghanistan;
the Commission will work under the Second
Vice-President Mohammad Sarwar Danish,
and the members include activists and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission.

BACKGROUND
In February the Afghan Taliban signed a
peace agreement with the USA ahead of a
proposed withdrawal of US troops. The
agreement included a pledge to release “up
to 5,000” Taliban fighters held in Afghan
government prisons from a list initially given
to the USA, in exchange for 1,000 members
of the Afghan security forces held by the
armed group. The Afghan government
resisted releasing 400 fighters from the list,
who were alleged to be responsible for
serious crimes. The proposed release of
certain Taliban fighters also triggered
concerns from France and Australia as it
included those responsible for killing their

58

soldiers. However, under pressure from the
USA they too were released; a few who were
accused of killing foreign citizens were
subsequently transferred to Qatar. Eventually,
more than 5,000 Taliban prisoners were
released, including prisoners accused of
serious crimes.
The US-Taliban peace agreement deferred
the question of a political settlement in
Afghanistan to direct talks between
representatives of the Afghan government
and various mainly political groups on one
side, and representatives of the Taliban on
the other. The so-called “intra-Afghan talks”
began in September in Doha, Qatar. There
was little representation of women on the side
of the Afghan government, and no
representation of women in the Taliban
delegation. There was also no representation
of conflict victims, despite the demands of
human rights groups. By December, the
negotiating teams had only agreed on an
internal guiding principle for the negotiation
processes.

ARMED CONFLICT
Despite the peace talks, the armed conflict
continued to see civilians injured and killed
throughout the year and a rise in the number
of people internally displaced. According to
the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), 2,177 civilians were killed and
3,822 wounded between 1 January and 30
September. Although the figures represented
a 30% reduction in civilian casualties
compared with the same period in 2019, the
number of civilian deaths remained
almost the same.
UNAMA reported that the Taliban was
responsible for 45% of the civilian casualties,
and the armed group calling itself the Islamic
State in Khorasan was responsible for 7% of
the civilian casualties between 1 January and
30 September. Armed groups were
collectively responsible for the deliberate
targeting and killing of civilians, including
teachers, health workers, humanitarian
workers, judges, tribal and religious leaders,
and state employees. The attacks included
violations of international humanitarian law,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

including war crimes, with civilians and
civilian objects deliberately targeted. In May,
a maternity hospital in the Dasht-e-Barchi
neighbourhood in the west of the capital,
Kabul, was attacked by gunmen. They killed
24 people, including new-born babies,
pregnant women and health workers. No
group claimed responsibility for the attack.
Pro-government forces were responsible
for more than a quarter of all deaths and
injuries between 1 January and 30
September, with 602 people killed and 1,038
injured. These included 83 people killed and
30 injured by international military forces.
According to UNAMA, the number of civilian
casualties attributed to the Afghan National
Army had increased in comparison to the
previous year, mainly from airstrikes and
ground engagements. UNAMA said violence
increased in the lead-up to the peace talks.
Children continued to be recruited for
combat, particularly by armed groups and
the Afghan security forces – pro-government
militias and local police – and faced multiple
abuses, including sexual abuse. Afghanistan
continued to be, according to UNAMA, “one
of the deadliest countries in the world for
children”, with both pro-government and
anti-government forces responsible for more
than 700 child casualties each. In October,
First Vice-President Amrullah Saleh
announced ordering the arrest of an
individual who reported civilian casualties in
an Afghan government air strike on a school,
which had killed 12 children. Later, the
Takhar provincial governor’s spokesperson
reported that he was removed from his
position for reporting on child civilian
causalities caused by the Afghan security
forces.

IMPUNITY
The peace agreement between the USA and
the Taliban made no mention of human rights
or of women. Under the agreement, impunity
was preserved for serious crimes under
international law by all parties. In September,
the US administration cemented this position
by imposing sanctions, including asset
freezes, against the Prosecutor of the ICC,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

who was poised to lead an investigation into
war crimes and crimes against humanity by
all parties to the conflict since 2003.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Afghanistan’s weak health care infrastructure
was overwhelmed when COVID-19 swept
across the country. A total of 52,011 cases
and 2,237 deaths were recorded, which
almost certainly did not represent the true
scale of infection in the country. In most
Afghan provinces there was no possibility of
receiving a COVID-19 test, and samples were
transported to the capital. The government’s
response – implemented with the support of
international donors – was sharply criticized,
with allegations of corruption, and people
with the greatest need of assistance being left
behind. During quarantine, there were many
reported cases of poor households having not
been included in lists for the distribution of
bread because they were not members of the
community mosque, while those who were
relatively better off received bread.
Internally displaced people, who were
already living in precarious conditions before
the pandemic, faced particular difficulties in
accessing health care and basic amenities.
Across the country, the number of people
living in poverty remained high, at 55% of the
population, and this figure was predicted to
rise because of economic slowdown caused
by the pandemic.

REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Iran, Pakistan, Turkey and EU countries
continued to forcibly return migrants and
asylum-seekers to Afghanistan, in violation of
the principle of non-refoulement. These
returns, which slowed for a period during the
pandemic, were alarming in light of the
health care situation in Afghanistan, the
unabated conflict, and high levels of poverty.
The Iranian authorities forcibly returned
nearly 700,000 people between 1 January
and 31 October. Iranian border forces were
also responsible for attacks on Afghan
migrants, including cases of torture and
drowning in May and an arson attack on a

59

vehicle carrying migrants in June. The
attacks were not investigated, and no action
was taken against the perpetrators.
According to the International Organization
for Migration, there were 4 million people
internally displaced in Afghanistan in 2020,
an increase from 1.2 million in 2016 and half
a million in 2013. Throughout this time,
internally displaced people languished on the
brink of survival, in many cases living in
densely populated camps and facing
constant difficulties accessing clean water,
health care and employment. Their situation
deteriorated further as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

provincial and local governments remained
largely restricted, particularly in the social
protection and education sectors. The few
women in government faced intimidation,
harassment and discrimination. They were
not able to access office resources on
equitable terms with male colleagues and
were often denied overtime work and
payment. Women were further denied
adequate opportunities in decision-making
roles and the attacks they faced while
working in government offices were rarely
investigated, with impunity persisting for the
perpetrators.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

Children continued to face harassment and
sexual violence. Despite the sexual abuse of
children being well-publicized, and the
abusive practice of “bacha bazi” (male
children being sexually abused by older men)
being criminalized in 2018, the authorities
made little effort to end impunity and hold
perpetrators accountable.
Children lacked adequate opportunities to
pursue their right to quality education.
According to UNICEF, over 2 million girls
remained out of school, and according to
government figures about 7,000 schools in
the country had no building. Large numbers
of children continued to be pressed into
forced labour or begging on the streets.

Violence against women and girls
Women and girls continued to face genderbased discrimination and violence throughout
Afghanistan, especially in areas under
Taliban control, where their rights were
violated with impunity and violent
“punishments” were meted out for perceived
transgressions of the armed group’s
interpretation of Islamic law.
Violence against women and girls
remained chronically under-reported, with
women often fearing reprisals and lacking
confidence in the authorities if they came
forward. According to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission
(AIHRC), more than 100 cases of murder
were reported during the year. Where these
cases were reported, there was a persistent
failure to investigate them. In some cases,
victims of violence came under pressure from
their communities or state officials to
withdraw their complaints, or “mediation”
was used to resolve complaints beyond the
protection of the law. As a result, there was
widespread impunity for the perpetrators of
beatings, killings, torture and other illtreatment, and corporal punishments.

Women’s participation in government
Women’s participation in government
remained limited despite some key
improvements in the situation of women
since 2000. Women’s participation in roles in

60

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The conditions grew more difficult for
journalists, media workers, and activists to
function due to increasing insecurity and the
targeted killings of activists, journalists, and
moderate religious scholars. Journalists
raised concerns over the lack of access to
information and did not enjoy adequate
protection from attacks by armed groups.
The government introduced a draft
mass media bill, which would have imposed
further restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression. It was forced to withdraw the bill
in the face of widespread criticism.
Discussions were ongoing in parliament
over a draft bill on public gatherings, strikes

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and demonstrations, which if passed would
significantly restrict the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly.
The cabinet rejected a third draft bill on
NGOs after Amnesty International raised
concerns that it placed unnecessary
restrictions on registration processes and
operational independence.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Attacks and targeted killings against activists,
human rights defenders and journalists
increased. Human rights defenders
continued to come under attack, facing
intimidation, violence and killings. In March,
government officials in Helmand province
physically assaulted human rights defenders
who had alleged corruption. They needed
hospital treatment for their injuries. In May,
Mohammad Ibrahim Ebrat, a facilitator of the
Civil Society Joint Working Group, was
attacked and wounded by unknown gunmen
in Zabul province. He subsequently died of
his injuries. In June, two staff members of the
AIHRC, Fatima Khalil and Jawad Folad, were
killed in an attack on their car in Kabul.
In December, the Afghan government
established the Joint Commission for
protection of human rights defenders and
civil society activists in Afghanistan. The
Commission will work under the Second VicePresident Mohammad Sarwar Danish, and
the members include activists and the
AIHRC. It remained too early to assess the
Commission’s effectiveness in protecting
activists or ensuring attacks and threats are
investigated and perpetrators are prosecuted.

ALBANIA
Republic of Albania
Head of state: Ilir Meta
Head of government: Edi Rama
Domestic violence against women increased
during lockdown. The Prime Minister
threatened to use extraordinary powers to
close media for “spreading panic” over

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

COVID-19. Roma and LGBTI people
continued to face discrimination.

BACKGROUND
Between 31 March and 23 June, Albania
derogated from certain European Convention
on Human Rights obligations in the name of
containing COVID-19. Excessive measures
were used to enforce the lockdown.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Gender-based violence worsened during the
lockdown. A women’s rights NGO reported a
threefold annual increase in calls to the
national Counseling Line for Women and Girls
during the March-May period.
The sexual abuse of a 15-year-old girl by
her school’s guard and three other men
sparked public outrage in June. Hundreds
protested gender-based violence in the
capital, Tirana.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In March, the Prime Minister threatened
media organizations with closure for
“spreading panic” over COVID-19.
The authorities retracted a controversial
anti-defamation law that threatened online
media freedom.
In August, the authorities seized Ora News
TV following an investigation into the owner’s
assets. The media group remained
operational.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
UN Rapporteurs expressed concern and the
Ombudsman found serious human rights
violations in Harun Çelik’s expulsion to Turkey
on 1 January. Harun Çelik, a Turkish teacher
linked to the so-called Gülen movement, had
applied for asylum in Albania.

DISCRIMINATION
In April, Roma activists protested
discrimination in the government’s allocation
of financial emergency assistance that did
not cover those working in the informal
sector.

61

Parliament adopted amendments to the
law on discrimination, significantly expanding
the scope of groups covered by legal
protection.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI people remained subject to
widespread discrimination, including being
denied the right to same-sex partnerships.
The Order of Psychologists prohibited its
members from performing conversion
therapy. The Ministry of Health banned
medical intervention on newborn intersex
children.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Activists protesting the demolition of the
National Theatre in Tirana on 17 May faced
disproportionate use of police force. Two
journalists covering the protest were verbally
assaulted and hit by police officers; one was
temporarily detained.
Street clashes erupted in several cities
following the shooting of a 25-year-old man
by a police officer enforcing a COVID-linked
curfew on 8 December. Two journalists
covering the protests were detained and
assaulted. The Council of Europe’s
Commissioner for Human Rights called on
authorities to reverse blanket bans on
freedom of assembly.

ALGERIA
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria
Head of state: Abdelmadjid Tebboune
Head of government: Abdelaziz Djerad
The authorities continued to detain and
prosecute peaceful protesters, journalists,
activists and citizens for exercising their
rights to peaceful assembly and expression
relating to the mass protest movement
known as Hirak. Legislative changes
imposed further restrictions on freedoms of
expression and association, by imposing
heavy criminal sanctions for spreading “fake

62

news” and for receiving certain types of
foreign funds. A new Constitution was
adopted, which improved protection for
women but imposed undue restrictions on
rights and freedoms by making the exercise
of freedom of speech conditional on
religious and cultural values. The
authorities prevented Christian churches
from operating and harassed members of
the Ahmadiyya religious community. They
also proceeded with mass and arbitrary
expulsions of migrants. Discrimination
against women in law and practice
continued, as did gender-based violence
and femicide. Consensual same-sex sexual
relations remained criminalized and several
arrests were made. The right to form trade
unions remained restricted.

BACKGROUND
The peaceful protest movement Hirak, which
began in 2019 calling for radical political
change in Algeria, continued early in the
year, with protests halting in March due to
COVID-19 restriction measures.
The country went into a national lockdown
in response to COVID-19 from 4 April until
June, when measures were eased. In
December, the National Syndicate of Liberal
Doctors reported that at least 139 health
workers had died as a result of COVID-19.
In April, Parliament adopted the
Preventing and Combating Discrimination
and Hate Speech Law, which includes a
penalty of up to 10 years’ imprisonment for
those who breach it. However, the Law failed
to refer to discrimination based on religion,
sexuality or gender identity.
In November, a new Constitution was
adopted by referendum that saw a very low
turnout due to controversy over the process.
The Constitution improved language on
women's rights and social and economic
rights, but maintained the death penalty and
fell short of international standards on
freedoms of expression, assembly and
judicial independence.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Hirak protests continued until March when
protesters decided to suspend protests to
prevent the spread of COVID-19. In January
2020, the authorities released more than 70
protesters, but at least 93 people, including
journalists as well as civil society and political
activists, remained in detention for online
posts or for participating in Hirak at the end
of the year, according to the National
Committee for the Liberation of Detainees.
The authorities used COVID-19 as a
justification to increase the arrests of
activists, journalists and bloggers for online
speech critical of the authorities, prosecuting
many of them under Penal Code provisions.
The authorities took advantage of the
international focus on the COVID-19
pandemic to pass amendments to the Penal
Code that criminalize the spread of “fake
news”, punishable by up to three years in
prison.1
In March, an appeals court in the capital,
Algiers, sentenced Karim Tabbou, head of the
unrecognized opposition political party
Democratic and Social Union, to one year in
prison and a fine for videos published on
Facebook in which he criticized the army’s
role in politics. He was released on parole on
2 July after nine months of detention.
On 15 April, the authorities admitted
blocking two online independent media
outlets, Maghreb Emergent and Radio M,
pending legal proceedings against their
Director for defamation of the President. As
of December, both sites remained blocked.
On 21 June, a court in Chéraga, a suburb
of Algiers, sentenced Amira Bouraoui, a
doctor and activist, to one year in prison for
online posts that criticized the President,
before provisionally releasing her pending
appeal.2 On 8 November, another court in
Algiers sentenced her to three years in prison
in her absence for an online post she
published about the Prophet Muhammed.
In August, prominent journalist Khaled
Drareni was sentenced, on appeal, to two
years in prison for “incitement to unarmed

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

gathering” and “harming the integrity of the
national territory” for his independent
reporting on Hirak. A court in Algiers also
sentenced activists Samir Benlarbi and
Slimane Hamitouche to a year in prison, eight
months of which were suspended, for their
online publications and participation in the
protests.3
On 8 October, over 20 people were
arrested in the north-western city of Oran
during a protest organized by women’s rights
groups to denounce the prevalence of
gender-based violence and the rape and
murder of a 19-year-old woman. All those
arrested were released later that day without
charge.
Also in October, 42 peaceful
demonstrators were arrested in Algiers while
commemorating the 1988 youth protests.
Thirty-three, including at least five women,
were provisionally released, and nine were
imprisoned in El Harrach prison, in a suburb
of Algiers, before eventually being released.
In November, a first instance court in the
north-western city of Relizane, sentenced
political activist Abdallah Benaoum to one
year in prison for Facebook posts he
published criticizing the authorities and
opposing the holding of presidential
elections.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
A Penal Code provision introduced in April
provided for up to 14 years’ imprisonment for
members of associations who receive foreign
funding to carry out activities deemed
detrimental to state security and the
"fundamental interests of Algeria”. This vague
language could lead to the limitation of
legitimate activities of associations disliked by
the authorities.
The authorities kept many associations,
including Amnesty International Algeria, in
legal limbo by failing to respond to
registration applications submitted in line
with the highly restrictive Associations Law.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The 2006 Decree 06-03 continued to restrict
the exercise of religions other than Islam. The

63

Decree stipulates that non-Muslim religious
worship can only take place in buildings that
have received a licence from the “National
Commission for Non-Muslim Religious
Groups”, though it is unclear how operational
the Commission is. According to the
Protestant Church of Algeria, authorities
rarely approve their request for licensing,
putting their churches at constant risk of
closure.
The Ahmadiyya community, who consider
themselves as Muslims, continued to face
harassment on the basis of their religious
beliefs. In January, the Prosecutor’s Office in
Constantine interrogated seven Ahmadis and
confiscated their passports after interviewing
them in relation to their religious beliefs and
practices, then prosecuting them for forming
an illegal association. At the end of
December, the Court of First Instance
acquitted them but the authorities did not
return their passports.
On 25 November, an appeals court in the
eastern city of Khenchela sentenced Amazigh
and Hirak activist Yacine Mebarki to one year
in prison and a fine of DZD50,000 (around
US$385), for “insulting Islam” in relation to
social media posts in which he appeared to
criticize a Salafi scholar for calling for jihad.
In December, a judge at a court in Tizi
Ouzou sentenced 31 Ahmadis to a twomonth suspended prison sentence on
accusations of “undermining the integrity of
the national territory” under Article 79 of the
Penal Code, because of their religious beliefs.

using violence and confiscating their
belongings.
Algerian authorities denied detained
migrants any possibility to exercise legal
recourse, sometimes for months. As of 31
December, at least seven Yemeni asylumseekers registered with UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, and awaiting approval of
their asylum applications, remained in
government detention centres in Algiers, at
risk of imminent expulsion and deportation to
Yemen.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE

Detentions and mass expulsions of migrants
from Algeria to neighbouring Niger and Mali
continued throughout the lockdown period,
despite closed borders and the health risks
related to COVID-19 in removal centres.
According to humanitarian organizations in
Niger, between January and October, the
Algerian authorities expelled over 17,000
migrants to Niger – around 8,900 Nigeriens
and 8,100 people of other nationalities. Local
NGOs said that Algerian military personnel
treated migrants harshly during expulsions,

64

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code and Family Code continued
to unlawfully discriminate against women in
matters of inheritance, marriage, divorce,
child custody and guardianship. The Penal
Code’s “forgiveness clause” allows rapists to
escape sentencing if they obtain a pardon
from their victim, and does not explicitly
recognize marital rape as a crime.
The Centre of Information on the Rights of
Women and Children reported 39 cases of
homicide and intentional assault and battery
resulting in the death of women during the
COVID-19 lockdown period. The women’s
group Feminicides Algérie said the true
number of cases of violence against women
far exceeded the official figures. Women’s
rights group Réseau Wassila recorded an
increase in calls to their helpline reporting
domestic violence perpetrated by family
members in May, suggesting this was due to
confinement measures.

The Penal Code continued to criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual relations,
carrying a prison sentence of between two
months and two years and a fine.
In September, police in Constantine
arrested 44 people for attending a party that
the media falsely described as a
“homosexual wedding”. The majority of those
arrested were sentenced to one year in
prison, while the host and his supposed
partner were both sentenced to three years’

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

imprisonment. The court convicted them of
“inciting homosexuality” and “debauchery”
under Article 338 of the Penal Code, and of
breaking lockdown measures.

2. Algeria: Constitutional reform process undermined by crackdown
(Press release, 25 June)

WORKERS' RIGHTS

ANGOLA

The Labour Code continued to restrict the
right to form trade unions by limiting trade
union federations and confederations to
single occupational sectors; allowing only
Algerian-born people or those who had held
Algerian nationality for at least 10 years to
create trade union organizations; and
imposing restrictions on foreign funding for
trade unions.
The authorities continued to deny
registration to the independent General
Autonomous Confederation for Algerian
Workers, which first filed its application in
2013.

INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY
The new Constitution failed to end the
executive’s control over the judiciary and
uphold judicial independence.
In February, the Justice Ministry ordered
the transfer of prosecutor Mohamed Sid
Ahmed Belhadi to El Oued, 600km south of
Algiers, two days after he had urged an
Algiers court to acquit 16 people arrested for
their peaceful participation in Hirak in
January. The National Union of Algerian
Magistrates described the transfer as
“political punishment and retaliation”.
Lawyers organized a national strike on 30
September and 1 October to demand respect
for the rights of defence and fair trial.

DEATH PENALTY
The Justice Minister announced on 11
October that a new law to prevent kidnapping
would include capital punishment for child
abduction resulting in the victim’s death.
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences. No executions have been carried
out since 1993.
1. Algeria: End repression against Hirak activists and journalists amid
COVID-19 (Press release, 27 April)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

3. Algeria: Authorities pursue crackdown on Hirak, sentencing journalist
Khaled Drareni to three years in prison (Press release, 10 August)

Republic of Angola
Head of state and government: João Lourenço
The security forces used excessive force to
impose COVID-19 restrictions and dozens of
people, including children, were unlawfully
killed. Human rights defenders were
arrested for disseminating health
information and distributing masks and
hand sanitizer to Indigenous communities.
The rights to freedom of expression,
assembly and association were restricted
and activists faced arbitrary arrests and
detentions. Commercial farmers colluded
with government officials to forcibly evict
agro-pastoral communities from their land,
undermining their rights to food, water and
housing. The government failed to
guarantee the right to food for low-income
families during the nine-month lockdown
period.

BACKGROUND
In February, international media disclosed
the “Luanda Leaks” which revealed how
former President dos Santos’ daughter
embezzled state funds in offshore bank
accounts. In October, President Lourenço
said that his predecessor’s administration
illegally withdrew US$24 billion from the
country through fraudulent contracts with
state oil and diamond companies. Also in
October, the Public Prosecutor confiscated
assets worth billions of dollars which had
been acquired fraudulently by the former
President’s military generals and his VicePresident.
Economic and social conditions worsened
amid the groundswell of pressure from youth
who demanded that the President fulfil his
promise, made during the 2017 electoral

65

campaign, to create 500,000 jobs, and
protests against the high cost of living.
On 27 March, the government introduced
a state of emergency which was followed by
natural disaster regulations to address the
COVID-19 pandemic. These remained in
force until October and were used to impose
arbitrary restrictions which undermined
human rights. Lockdown measures restricting
movement between provinces continued at
the end of the year.

RIGHT TO FOOD
During the nine-month lockdown period, the
government failed to guarantee the right to
food, especially in low-income
neighbourhoods where most people
depended on the informal economy for their
livelihoods, for example by selling goods in
the streets and daily markets.
The authorities took punitive measures
against those in poor neighbourhoods who
were forced to leave their homes in search of
food, an act which was criminalized under
the state of emergency rules. While the
government introduced a food relief
programme for those living in poverty,
families in the Luanda and Benguela
provinces said they were not properly
informed about who qualified for the aid or
how the government decided which
communities should benefit.1 Rural
communities in the south were also
disproportionately affected by food shortages
as a result of the ongoing drought.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The security forces used excessive force to
impose restrictive COVID-19 measures which
resulted in dozens of deaths. Most of those
killed were young people, the youngest being
a 14-year-old boy, and were from poor
neighbourhoods. In many cases, Angolan
National Police (PNA) and Angolan Armed
Forces (FAA) officers were responsible.2
On 17 June, PNA officers stopped 20year-old João de Assunção for not wearing a
mask in the Palanca neighbourhood. He
offered to get his mask but the officers
ordered him to perform acrobatics at

66

gunpoint. When he said he was tired and ill,
an officer fired into the air next to his head
causing him to fall. Neighbours told the
officers that João de Assunção suffered from
a heart problem and hypertension. The police
took him to Hospital Cajueiros, where he died
the same day.
On 3 July, the police shot and killed 15year-old Mabiala Mienandi in Luanda
province. At around 7am, he was playing
soccer with friends. Witnesses said a police
vehicle approached and, without warning,
officers shot at the boys who ran for cover.
Mabiala Mienandi was hit by a bullet, after
which three policemen got out of their car
and kicked him three times before driving
away.
The next day, police officers shot 16-yearold Clinton Dongala Carlos dead as he
returned from dinner at his aunt’s house in
the Cacuaco municipality, Luanda province.
According to witnesses, two FAA and three
PNA officers pursued him and one of them
shot him in the back.
On 13 July, José Manuel was shot dead in
street in the Prenda neighbourhood at
around midnight. He and his 16-year-old
friend, Maurício, heard local people shouting
that the police were coming and while they
were running away, a police officer fired at
them hitting Maurício in the shoulder and
killing José Manuel instantly.
These cases and others were under police
investigation at the end of the year. No
findings or information as to the progress of
investigations were made public and
impunity for such crimes remained
widespread.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Those deemed to have flouted the
COVID-19 restrictions, including political
activists and human rights defenders, were
subjected to arbitrary arrests, detentions and
torture or other ill-treatment.
On 2 April, nine human rights defenders
from MBATIKA, a local civil society
organization, were distributing information
about COVID-19 and essential protective
products like soap and sanitizer, to the San

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Indigenous people and other traditional
communities in Cuando Cubango province.
Police beat them with batons and threatened
them with guns before arresting them. They
were released eight hours later without
charge.3
On 4 April, police beat 10 men in the
street in Buco-Zau municipality, Cabinda
province, and arrested them. Local people
said that seven of them had been on their
way to buy food. They were initially held
together in one cell in poor conditions and
released without charge at various points
between 5 and 7 April.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to repress the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly in Cabinda province.
Political activists and human rights defenders
were harassed, beaten and arbitrarily
detained. From September onwards, people
regularly protested against widespread
hunger, poverty and the high cost of living.
Authorities responded with unlawful force,
with security forces using water cannons,
rubber bullets, batons and tear gas to
unlawfully disperse the protesters.4
On 28 June, plain-clothes police officers
physically assaulted, arbitrarily arrested and
detained Maurício Gimbi, President of the
Union for the Independence of Cabinda
(UIC), and André Bonzela, Director of the
UIC President’s Office, at a taxi stop in
Cabinda city. Some days before, they and
their colleague, João Mampuela, UIC VicePresident, had displayed leaflets in Cabinda
city bearing the slogan “Cabinda is not
Angola” and calling for an “end to the right to
bear arms”.
On 29 June, the police searched João
Mampuela’s home at 5am and arrested him
after finding UIC leaflets. Charges brought
against the three men included “rebellion”,
“criminal association” and “outrage against
the state”. In September, the Cabinda Court
granted André Bonzela bail of 300,000
Angolan kwanza (US$350), a sum which he
could not afford, and he remained in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

detention. Maurício Gimbi and João
Mampuela were refused bail on grounds of
prior criminal records. The records related to
their participation in a peaceful
demonstration in 2019 after which they had
been charged with “outrage against the
state” and “public disturbance and
resistance”, among other trumped-up
charges. The men remained in detention in
Cabinda Province Civil Prison at the end of
the year.5

FORCED EVICTIONS
Diversion of land use in favour of business,
mainly in the southern province of Huíla,
continued to devastate local pastoral and
peasant farmer communities. Large scale
farming landowners, as well as local
authorities, blocked local communities from
accessing their farmlands and diverted their
water supplies to force them from their land.
Civil society organizations who lodged formal
complaints with the government, or took
other action to try and halt evictions, received
no response. The authorities failed to carry
out meaningful consultations with the
affected communities or to provide them with
compensation or reasonable alternatives.
Consequently, families were forcibly evicted
from their land, denied their livelihoods,
seriously undermining their rights to food,
water, housing and health.
In August, a spate of land diversion moves
affected families. A commercial farmer
initiated an extrajudicial process to evict the
community of Kamphanda, a remote village
in Gambos municipality, from their
communal land. He coerced illiterate
residents to sign over their land using their
fingerprints.
In the same month, the Communal
Administrator for Cainda, Quipungo
municipality, made an order for communal
agro-pastoral land farmed by local families to
be fenced off and handed over to another
commercial farmer. When residents
protested, the local authorities threatened
them with imprisonment.
Local government officials colluded with
farming businesses to evict the Cuvangue

67

communities from their land in the Matala
municipality, in order to privatize areas of the
Cunene river, blocking the communities’
access to water.
The water company, Água Preciosa, began
an unlawful process to force the Tyihonguelo
community, in Lubango municipality, from its
communal land, home to hundreds of
families, obstructing the canal that supplied
their water.
By the end of the year, the government
had not acted to protect communities from
forced evictions, or to protect their rights to
basic necessities.
1. Southern Africa: Governments must move beyond politics in
distribution of COVID-19 food aid (Press release, 6 May)
2. Angola: Witnesses describe horrific killings of teenagers by police
(Press release, 25 August)
3. Angola: Activists prevented from distributing COVID-19 essentials
(AFR 12/2146/2020)
4. Angola: Authorities escalate use of excessive force to crack down on
dissent (Press release, 8 December)
5. Statement on the Continued Detention of André Bonzela, Maurício
Gimbi and João Mampuela and the Human Rights Situation in
Cabinda, Angola (Joint statement with Advancing rights in Southern
Africa and Human Rights Watch, 6 October)

ARGENTINA
Argentine Republic
Head of state and government: Alberto Fernández
The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated the
country’s ongoing economic crisis.
Measures to curb the spread of the virus
saw an increase in gender-based violence.
Indigenous Peoples were disproportionately
impacted by the pandemic. Enforced
disappearances and excessive use of force
by the police were reported. Abortion was
decriminalized and legalized within the first
14 weeks of pregnancy.

BACKGROUND
Argentina continued to experience a
profound economic and social crisis.
According to official figures, by June, 40.9%
of the population was living in poverty and

68

the unemployment rate was 13.1%.
Concerns remained over debt repayments
and the obligation of states to protect
economic and social rights during the
pandemic and the recovery period.
In March, Decree 297/20 imposed a
nationwide lockdown and restricted freedom
of movement to curb the spread of
COVID-19.
Strict controls on movement between
provinces left hundreds of people stranded
across borders, without access to adequate
health care, hygiene and, in some cases,
family reunification. In November, the
National Supreme Court ordered the province
of Formosa to allow 8,300 people return to
their homes after eight months of the
restrictive measures. Full implementation of
the ruling was pending.
The Ministry of Security approved a new
police protocol that provides for the use of
open-source intelligence during the health
emergency, raising concerns about potential
online mass surveillance.
Health and essential workers were central
to the COVID-19 response. By 18 December,
64,958 health workers had been infected
with the virus.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The pandemic exacerbated and underscored
existing gender inequalities. Data showed
that unpaid domestic and care work would
represent 16% of GDP if it were paid. Women
performed over 75% of domestic and care
work in the country.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
During the pandemic there was a rise in
violence against women; by November,
emergency calls to helplines had increased
by an average of more than 18% compared
to 2019.
According to civil society monitoring
groups, there were at least 298 femicides in
2020.
As lockdown measures led to a greater
engagement online, women experienced
violence and abuse on social media,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

especially when seeking to defend women’s
human rights.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In December, the Congress took a historic
step by decriminalizing and legalizing
abortion within the first 14 weeks of
pregnancy. After that, abortions are permitted
where the pregnancy poses a risk to the life
or health of the pregnant person or is the
result of rape. The Thousand Days
Programme – to strengthen comprehensive
care for women and children in the first years
of life – was unanimously approved
by the Senate in December.
According to official data, every four hours
a girl aged under 15 gives birth in Argentina.
Most are forced to carry to term pregnancies
that are the result of sexual violence.
During the pandemic, there were
increased barriers to accessing legal
abortion. In addition, women and adolescents
had their contraceptive treatment interrupted
for fear of COVID-19 at health facilities.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous communities still lacked legal
recognition of their land rights, even though
the Constitution recognizes their right to
ancestral territories.
Encroachment on the ancestral territories
of Indigenous Peoples by private individuals
or state forces continued. Communities were
subjected to violence, restrictions on their
movement and food supplies, inadequate
access to clean water and a lack of hygienic
and sanitary conditions.
Concerns were raised over the impact of
COVID-19 on Indigenous Peoples, who
continued to experience obstacles to
accessing social benefits.
The federal government declared mining
an essential sector during the pandemic.
Concerns remained over projects for possible
lithium extraction on Indigenous Peoples’
lands without an exhaustive study of the
possible impact on natural resources and
without ensuring the free, prior and informed
consent of the Indigenous communities
affected. In the Salinas Grandes Salt flat,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Indigenous communities continued to
demand information about the potential
impacts of mining on their water sources.

IMPUNITY
Trials before ordinary civilian courts
continued for crimes against humanity
committed under the 1976-1983 military
regime. Between 2006 and December 2020,
250 rulings were handed down, bringing the
total number of convictions to 1,013 and
acquittals to 164.
In September, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights found the
state responsible for violating the rights to life
and physical integrity of the victims, as well
as for cover-up operations that resulted in
impunity, in relation to the bombing of the
Jewish mutual society AMIA in Buenos Aires
in July 1994.
At the end of the year, the investigation
into the disappearance and death of Santiago
Maldonado continued. His body had been
found in 2017 in a river on Mapuche territory
in Chubut province, 78 days after the security
forces had closed off the area.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
There were numerous incidents of excessive
use of force in the context of the enforcement
of COVID-19 lockdowns. Police officers killed
Luis Espinoza in Tucumán province in May;
his body was not discovered until a week
after his death.
In May, security forces violently entered
the homes of members of the Qom
Indigenous People in Fontana, Chaco
province, and took three men and a 16-yearold girl into custody. Those held reported that
they were tortured and otherwise ill-treated,
including the sexual abuse of the girl.
The body of Facundo Astudillo Castro was
found 107 days after he was reported
missing in late April. He was last seen at a
police checkpoint in Buenos Aires province.
The autopsy found he died of asphyxiation.
Contradictory police accounts and other
evidence suggested that the Buenos Aires

69

police could be responsible for his
disappearance and death.
Concerns remained over the lack of
institutional public policies on effective
searches for missing persons and
investigations of enforced disappearances.

RIGHTS OF MIGRANTS, REFUGEES AND
ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Executive Order 70/2017, which modified the
Migration Act and introduced serious
regressive measures regarding migrants'
rights, remained in force even though several
human rights mechanisms had deemed it
unconstitutional.
Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
experienced obstacles to completing
regularization proceedings and accessing
social assistance programmes. With limited
access to the formal labour market and
adequate housing, these groups were among
the most affected by the COVID-19 crisis.
The closure of borders affected the
resettlement of refugees through Argentina’s
community sponsorship-based Syria
Programme. Nine Syrian refugee families
who had been approved to travel to Argentina
had their resettlement stalled and new
community sponsorship applications were
suspended.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
Argentina ratified the Regional Agreement on
Access to Information, Public Participation
and Justice in Environmental Matters in Latin
America and the Caribbean (the Escazú
Agreement).
More than 120,000 hectares in 11
provinces were affected by forest fires, many
of them linked to deforestation.

ARMENIA
Republic of Armenia
Head of state: Armen Sarkissian
Head of government: Nikol Pashinyan
Military conflict with Azerbaijan, in which
both sides committed war crimes and

70

carried out indiscriminate attacks in
populated areas, resulted in numerous
civilian deaths, injuries and displacement.
Freedoms of expression and peaceful
assembly were restricted by the state of
emergency introduced to deal with the
COVID-19 pandemic, and by martial law
declared because of the conflict.
Environmental concerns remained regarding
the Amulsar gold mine, amid
demonstrations which saw dozens of
peaceful protesters arrested and fined.

BACKGROUND
On 27 September, heavy fighting erupted
between Azerbaijan and Armenia and
Armenian-supported forces in Azerbaijan’s
break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh. On
9 November, under a Russian-brokered
ceasefire agreement, Armenia conceded
most of the Azerbaijani territory it had
previously occupied. The regional capital of
Stepanakert/Khankendi and parts of the
disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region remained
under the control of the Armenia-backed de
facto authorities, dependent for protection on
Russian peacekeepers. The defeat caused
political unrest and calls for the Prime
Minister’s resignation, plunging the country
into a political crisis. Twelve opposition
figures were arrested on 12 November for
their role in violent unrest that saw the Prime
Minister’s residence raided and the
parliamentary speaker hospitalized after he
was severely beaten by an angry mob.
According to the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights, at the height of the
conflict, some 90,000 ethnic Armenians fled
the fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh for
Armenia, a displacement which worsened the
already dire effects of the COVID-19
pandemic.
Promised judicial and anti-corruption
reforms stalled, in part due to their
fragmented nature and the inability to sustain
institutional change. Reforms were also
impacted by the conflict and the pandemic,
both of which ravaged the economy and the
health care system. Hospitals and the health
care sector remained overwhelmed. They

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

struggled to provide care to a rising number
of patients during the pandemic and warfare.
The government provided limited financial
aid to those who lost jobs and to families with
young children.

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
Both sides of the conflict over NagornoKarabakh used heavy explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in densely populated
civilian areas, including ballistic missiles and
notoriously inaccurate rocket artillery salvos,
causing civilian deaths, injuries and
widespread damage to civilian areas. Verified
evidence indicated that both sides used
cluster munitions, which is banned under
international humanitarian law, including in
the attack on Stepanakert/Khankendi in
Nagorno-Karabakh region on 4 October, and
on the city of Barda in an area under
Azerbaijan government control, on 28
October (see Azerbaijan entry).1

WAR CRIMES
War crimes were committed by Armenian
forces in Nagorno-Karabakh. Several verified
videos depicted the mistreatment of prisoners
of war and other captives, and desecration of
the dead bodies of enemy soldiers by the
Armenian side. This included a video
showing the murder of an Azerbaijani border
guard who had his throat cut.2

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were restricted throughout
the year, firstly as a result of a state
emergency imposed from March to
September in response to COVID-19, and
then on account of martial law imposed from
September until the end of the year in
response to hostilities with Azerbaijan.
Under the state of emergency the
government, among other things, prohibited
public gatherings of more than 20 people
and the publishing of “unofficial information”
about pandemic-related issues. The
authorities forced 20 media outlets to amend
or delete information that officials deemed as

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

“conducive to spreading panic”. The
restrictions on the media were lifted in April,
following harsh criticism by local and
international rights groups.
Martial law placed renewed restrictions on
the rights to freedom of expression and
assembly. On 9 October, Parliament
approved a bill banning dissemination of
“unofficial information” on the conflict and
national security matters, and any public
criticism of military actions and statements by
government officials. Martial law restrictions
on freedom of peaceful assembly were
invoked in November, after the ceasefire was
reached, to ban the anti-government
demonstrations demanding the resignation of
the Prime Minister.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In April, the government proposed legislative
amendments which would allow it to withhold
information that could “negatively affect the
environment.” Environmental NGOs raised
concerns that the government was seeking to
reduce transparency over environmental
issues to benefit mining interests at the
expense of local communities. This was
against the backdrop of ongoing tensions
over the Amulsar gold mine in southern
Armenia.
Local residents had been blocking the
access to the Amulsar mine since 2018,
protesting that it posed a threat to the
environment and their livelihoods. On 4
August, hundreds of activists gathered at the
Amulsar mining site, after the company’s new
security personnel had forcibly removed the
local residents who were blocking the mine’s
access. On 5 August, police arrested 12
people following a violent confrontation with
security personnel. In the capital Yerevan,
police broke up simultaneous protests in
support of environmental activists, detaining
dozens of peaceful protesters. All those
detained in Amulsar and Yerevan were issued
with administrative fines for disobeying police
and released.

71

1. Armenia/Azerbaijan: First confirmed use of cluster munitions by
Armenia ‘cruel and reckless’ (News story, 29 October)
2. Armenia/Azerbaijan: Decapitation and war crimes in gruesome videos
must be urgently investigated (News story, 10 December)

AUSTRALIA
Australia
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by David Hurley
Head of government: Scott Morrison
Violations of the rights of Indigenous
Peoples, refugees and asylum-seekers
continued to cause concern. The
enforcement of government COVID-19
measures lacked accountability and
transparency.

BACKGROUND
The year began with the worst bushfires in
Australia’s living memory. Thirty-four people
died and thousands remained displaced. A
state of emergency was introduced in March.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
government placed vast swathes of the
country into lockdown.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
As the #BlackLivesMatter movement protests
took place around the world, Australia
confronted the fact that since the Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody handed down its recommendations
in 1991, more than 400 Indigenous people
had died in police custody with no charges
ever having been brought against detaining
officers.
The over-representation of Indigenous
people in prisons received heightened
attention in both the media and in
government policy. A report from the
Australian Bureau of Statistics in September
showed Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people made up 29% of the prison
population but only 5% of the total
population.
The movement to raise the age of criminal
responsibility from 10 to 14 gained

72

substantial public support, despite national
lawmakers declining to bring Australia into
line with international standards. Almost
three in five children in detention were
Indigenous. In August, the Australian Capital
Territory (ACT) announced that it would be
the first jurisdiction in Australia to increase
the age to 14.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The harsh offshore detention regime for
refugees and asylum-seekers continued for a
seventh year. At least 241 people were held
offshore, despite repeated offers from the
New Zealand government to resettle up to
150 people per year.
Those who had been evacuated from
immigration detention in Papua New Guinea,
including Manus Island, for medical care in
Australia remained in so-called alternative
places of detention (APODs) with no
indication of when they would be released.
The re-opening of the Christmas Island
immigration detention centre in August raised
alarm among refugees and asylum-seekers
as they feared that they would still remain in
indefinite detention.
Australia suspended its humanitarian
resettlement programme due to the
pandemic in March, but the government
began a review of the Community
Sponsorship Program for refugees in July.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
Overzealous policing of COVID-19
restrictions, a lack of transparency on police
enforcement guidelines, the disproportionate
application of new regulations on
marginalized communities and the extension
of the state of emergency caused significant
concern.
During the lockdown, police issued and
then retracted fines for activities such as
mountain biking, putting old holiday photos
on social media and for a teenager taking
driving lessons. People in Aboriginal
communities with overcrowded and
inadequate housing reported being harassed
by police for having too many people in one
dwelling.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In July, in the city of Melbourne, state of
Victoria, 3,000 ethnically diverse people in
seven public housing buildings, many of
whom had experienced war or persecution,
were put into “hard lockdown” without
notice, unable to leave their homes for any
reason and without any indication of when
the lockdown would lift. The Victorian
Ombudsman found the lockdown breached
Victorian human rights law.
The COVID-19 restrictions coincided with
major Indigenous rights protests across the
country. During this time, some politicians
claimed that COVID-19 cases were linked to
the protests, which was strenuously refuted
by health authorities.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Attacks on the rights of the LGBTI community
were made throughout the year through
various attempts to change antidiscrimination laws at a federal and state
level, which would prioritize the right to
freedom of religion over other rights. Some
advances were made by the state of South
Australia and the ACT to end “conversion”
practices for LGBTI people.

AUSTRIA
Republic of Austria
Head of state: Alexander Van der Bellen
Head of government: Sebastian Kurz (replaced Brigitte
Bierlein in January)
There was an increase in calls to helplines
from victims of domestic violence during
the COVID-19 lockdown. Afghan nationals
continued to be deported to Afghanistan.
The Federal Government continued to
refuse child asylum-seekers. There was a
rise in online abuse against Black people,
Muslims and refugees.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT

spaces was generally prohibited. After
restrictions were lifted at the end of April, the
Constitutional Court ruled in July that a
blanket ban regarding public spaces was not
provided by law and was therefore
unconstitutional.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Under lockdown restrictions, all public
gatherings and protests were banned by the
relevant authorities. Public assemblies were
permitted again from May, provided the
necessary COVID-19 precautions were taken.
However, the authorities continued to impose
unnecessary and disproportionate restrictions
on some demonstrations for health reasons
despite precautions being put in place by
organizers. In September, a “Fridays for
Future” march to demand action against
climate change in Linz was restricted to a
rally with a maximum number of 1,000
participants. In October, a regional
administrative court ruled that these
restrictions were illegal.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In July, concerns were expressed at the
multiple bureaucratic hurdles that 24-hour
care workers from other EU countries had to
overcome in order to access benefits
provided by the COVID-19 hardship fund.1

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
Following the March lockdown, domestic
violence helplines reported a 38% increase in
calls from women seeking support and safety.
According to media reports, there were 24
femicides in 2020.
In December, the Constitutional Court
overturned a law prohibiting primary school
children from wearing religious head
coverings, finding that it breached the rights
of Muslim girls who wear the headscarf,
including their right to freedom of religion
and non-discrimination, and could lead to
their marginalization.

In March, a nationwide lockdown due to
COVID-19 was imposed and being in public

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

73

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
In February it was announced that contracts
with civil society organizations providing legal
advice to asylum-seekers were to be
terminated at the end of the year and the
responsibility given to an agency embedded
in the Ministry of Interior. Concerns were
raised by several organizations about the
potential implications for the fairness of the
asylum procedure.2
Between January and March, 37 Afghan
nationals whose asylum claims had been
rejected were deported to Afghanistan, in
violation of the principle of non-refoulement
which prohibits states from returning
individuals to a country where they would be
at real risk of serious human rights violations.
There were no deportations to Afghanistan
from April to November due to the COVID-19
pandemic, but in December, Austria
resumed deportations to Afghanistan and 10
further Afghan nationals were deported.
The Federal Government continued to
refuse to accept asylum-seekers from the
Greek islands, despite a resolution by the
Vienna State Parliament committing to
receive 100 asylum-seeking children for
relocation.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
According to civil society organizations, from
the beginning of the pandemic there was a
significant increase in abuse and attacks
online, especially against Muslims, Black
people and refugees. In December, a
controversial bill regulating hate speech
online was approved by Parliament. Several
organizations raised concerns that the bill
was overly broad.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January, the newly elected government
committed to establishing an independent
investigation and complaints mechanism for
allegations of ill-treatment and excessive use
of force by police. In August, over 40
individuals and civil society organizations, in
a joint letter to the responsible ministries,

74

urged the creation of an independent and
effective mechanism. They also expressed
concern that the lack of identification badges
for law enforcement officials was hindering
access to justice.2

COUNTER-TERRORISM AND SECURITY
Following a terrorist attack in Vienna in
November, authorities dissolved a number of
Muslim associations on the basis of
problematic procedures. In December, the
government proposed several law reforms
related to terrorism which gave rise to
concerns about how some of the new
provisions may impact the human rights of
particular groups of people.
1. Kurzanalyse: Soziale Menschenrechte und COVID-19: Amnesty Fordert
Verfassungsänderung in Österreich (Press release, 1 July, in German
only)
2. Austria: Human rights challenges persist - Amnesty International
submission for the UN Universal Periodic Review, 37th Periodic
Review (EUR 13/2855/2020)

AZERBAIJAN
Republic of Azerbaijan
Head of state: Ilham Aliyev
Head of government: Ali Asadov
The civilian population suffered widespread
human rights abuses as a result of heavy
fighting that erupted between Azerbaijan
and Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh
in September. Conflict-related violence led
to deaths, injuries, destruction of
livelihoods and displacement. Authorities
intensified a clampdown on dissent using
the conflict with Armenia and the
COVID-19 pandemic as a pretext. Dozens of
opposition leaders and activists were
arbitrarily arrested and detained. Freedoms
of assembly and expression were further
restricted in response to growing public
discontent; freedom of association
remained curtailed. Lawyers were harassed
and reports of torture and other illtreatment of government critics in detention
remained widespread.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
On 27 September, heavy fighting erupted
between Azerbaijan and Armenia and
Armenian-supported forces in Azerbaijan’s
break-away region of Nagorno-Karabakh. All
sides of the conflict used heavy explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in densely
populated civilian areas, including ballistic
missiles and notoriously inaccurate rocket
artillery salvos, causing civilian deaths,
injuries and widespread damage to civilian
areas. Verified evidence indicated that both
sides used cluster munitions, which is
banned under international humanitarian law,
including in the attack on Stepanakert/
Khankendi, capital of Nagorno-Karabakh
region, on 4 October, and on the city of
Barda in an area under Azerbaijan
government control, on 28 October (see
Armenia entry).

WAR CRIMES
War crimes were committed by Azerbaijani
forces in Nagorno-Karabakh. Several verified
videos depicted the mistreatment of prisoners
of war and other captives, decapitations, and
desecration of the dead bodies of enemy
soldiers.1

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities intensified their crackdown as
increasing numbers of people voiced their
discontent in the streets, through social
media and other means.
More than a dozen individuals, including
journalists and opposition activists who
criticized the authorities’ handling of the
pandemic, were sentenced to so-called
“administrative detention” of between 10 and
30 days on bogus charges, including
disobeying police orders or breaking the rules
of lockdown.
The authorities intensified arrests on
politically motivated criminal charges. A
string of arrests of government critics
followed the announcement by President
Ilham Aliyev on 19 March on “isolating” and
“clearing” his country’s opposition in the face
of pandemic. On 25 March, prominent

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

opposition activist Tofig Yagublu was arrested
on trumped-up charges of hooliganism. On
18 September, the Court of Appeals in the
capital, Baku, replaced his prison sentence
of four years and three months with house
arrest with immediate effect. Human rights
defender Elchin Mammad was arrested on
30 March on charges of theft, and sentenced
to four years’ imprisonment on 18 October by
a court in Sumgait. Both men had publicly
criticized the authorities. Farkhaddin
Abbasov, an ethnic Talysh activist
incarcerated for criticizing the authorities,
died in prison on 9 November, allegedly as a
result of suicide. By the year’s end there had
been no effective investigation into his death.
Harassment of the political opposition
climaxed when President Ilham Aliyev
blamed mass protests held on 15 July in
Baku on the opposition Popular Front Party
of Azerbaijan (PFPA), accusing it of staging
an insurgency. Forty PFPA party activists,
including four senior leaders, were detained
on politically motivated charges ranging from
violating public order to resisting police.
International concern over the repression
of dissent continued. In January, the Council
of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly
condemned “retaliatory prosecutions” and a
“troubling pattern of arbitrary arrest and
detention of government critics”. In at least
three separate cases during the year, the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
found political motives were behind the
arbitrary detention of government critics; the
cases concerned activists Bayram
Mammadov and Giyas Ibrahimov, prominent
human rights defenders Leyla and Arif
Yunus, and investigative journalist Khadija
Ismayilova.
On 4 September, the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe ended
infringement proceedings against Azerbaijan,
after the Supreme Court of Azerbaijan
acquitted Ilgar Mammadov and Rasul
Jafarov, two of the applicants the ECtHR had
ruled were wrongfully imprisoned for their
criticism of the government. Six other
applicants, including prominent human rights
defenders who were in the Ilgar Mammadov

75

group of cases, were not acquitted despite
the call by the Committee to quash their
convictions. They continued to endure the
consequences of arbitrary criminal
convictions, such as travel bans and the
inability to access bank accounts.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Despite the commitment to simplify NGO
registration requirements and streamline the
receipt of foreign funding, as per an Action
Plan for Open Government adopted by the
Azerbaijani government in February,
obstacles to officially registering independent
NGOs remained in place and the arbitrary
denial of registrations and grant applications
continued. Independent NGOs were unable
to resume their activities, while their leaders
continued to face penalties arising from
unfounded criminal convictions, which also
prevented them from standing in elections.
Human rights lawyers continued to face
harassment for performing their professional
duties, affecting their independence and
willingness to take on human rights cases. In
June, lawyer Javad Javadov was arbitrarily
reprimanded by the Bar Association in
retaliation for publicizing information on
social media about the alleged ill-treatment of
his client Kerim Suleymanli in police custody.
Also in June, the ECtHR ruled that the
suspension and disbarment of prominent
lawyer Khalid Bagirov for questioning the
fairness of the court decision in the case of
his client, had violated his right to private life
and freedom of expression.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of assembly remained
severely restricted while protesters continued
to be penalized simply for participating
peacefully in public gatherings.
On 11 and 16 February, police violently
broke up and dispersed protests against
electoral fraud in parliamentary elections in
front of the Central Election Commission in
Baku, beating and arresting protesters.
On 15 July, police used excessive force to
break up a demonstration begun the previous
day, when thousands had gathered

76

peacefully in front of the Parliament building
in Baku to demand a stronger military
response against Armenian forces following
clashes at the border. The protests turned
violent when a small group of protesters
entered the building without permission.
Police and security forces used excessive
force, including water cannons, to remove
the intruders and disperse the crowd outside.
The clashes that ensued left several
protesters and journalists injured, and police
officers confiscated the equipment of some
journalists covering the rally. Seventy people
were detained immediately after the
demonstration.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other forms of illtreatment remained widespread.
In February, ruling in the case of
Ibrahimov and Mammadov v. Azerbaijan, the
ECtHR found that the two activists “had been
subjected to ill-treatment by police officers
which had been aimed at forcing them to
confess to serious charges”, and that the
authorities had failed to effectively investigate
the torture allegations.
People detained following the 15 July
protests were held in crowded, hot,
unventilated police detention rooms with
limited food and water. They were reportedly
beaten and abused while being denied
access to lawyers and their families.
1. Armenia/Azerbaijan: Decapitation and war crimes in gruesome videos
must be urgently investigated (News story, 10 December)

BAHRAIN
Kingdom of Bahrain
Head of state: Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
Head of government: Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa
(replaced Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa in November)

Unfair trials of protesters, online critics of
the government and relatives of these
individuals continued, as did other
suppression of freedom of expression.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Group trials of excessive numbers of
defendants, in some cases amounting to
mass trials, as well as other unfair trials,
also continued. Detainees were ill-treated
and, in some cases, tortured. The Ministry
of Interior’s Ombudsman, the government’s
National Institution for Human Rights
(NIHR) and the Office of Public
Prosecution’s Special Investigation Unit
(SIU) remained ineffective in safeguarding
human rights and punishing violations.
Women faced discrimination under Bahraini
law. Prison conditions were poor. Dire living
conditions for migrant workers left them
particularly vulnerable to infection during
the COVID-19 pandemic.

BACKGROUND
The Bahraini authorities’ response to the
COVID-19 pandemic included significant
restrictions on movement and social life.
There were reportedly very high levels of
testing, but this lacked basic transparency
and did not include adequate protections for
migrant workers. The authorities rolled out an
invasive contact tracing app, putting the
privacy of millions at risk by tracking users’
locations in real time.1
Bahrain continued to deny access to
independent human rights monitors,
including Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch and UN human rights bodies.
Bahrain remained a member of the coalition
led by Saudi Arabia in the armed conflict in
Yemen.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Bahrain has no independent media. All
locally based newspapers and broadcasters
support the government and are owned and/
or managed by people close to the
government.
Bahrain used the pretext of COVID-19 to
further repress freedom of expression. In
March, the Office of Public Prosecution
threatened to act against anyone publishing
or circulating “false news” or “biased
rumours” on the grounds that “the current
circumstances” called for “support for the
agencies and institutions of the state”. A few

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

days later, the Ministry of Interior announced
that its Cyber Crime Directorate had assigned
employees to “monitor and track offending
[social media] accounts”. This led to scores
of new investigations and prosecutions under
Article 168 of the Penal Code, which
criminalizes publication of “false news”.
Individuals who spoke out about human
rights violations, and their relatives, faced
reprisals. The authorities brought more than
20 cases against Kameel Juma Hasan, the
17-year-old son of former prisoner Najah
Ahmed Yusuf, after they both refused to be
informants for state security, and after Najah
Ahmed Yusuf had told international human
rights groups and media that she had been
sexually assaulted during interrogation in
2017.2
In June, Nabeel Rajab, head of the
outlawed Bahrain Centre for Human Rights,
was released from prison on probation, after
serving four years for posting on Twitter
criticizing the government’s human rights
record.
Twelve of the country’s most prominent
Shi’a civic, religious and political leaders
remained in prison. Eleven had been in
prison since 2011 for their participation in
mass opposition demonstrations that year.
Sheikh Ali Salman, leader of the largest legal
political bloc in Bahrain between 2006 and
2011, continued serving a life sentence
imposed in 2018 based on falsified charges
of “spying” for Qatar.
The prominent Shi’a cleric Sheikh Isa
Qasim remained in forced exile in Iran, where
he went in 2018 after the Bahraini authorities
had revoked his citizenship.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Prosecutors failed to effectively address
complaints of torture brought before them,
despite widespread reports of it at specific
sites, with detainees often identifying the
agency and sometimes the name and rank of
the alleged torturers. In Bahrain there is no
known record of a successful prosecution for
torture to force a confession in the past four
years.

77

On 13 July, the Court of Cassation,
Bahrain’s highest judicial authority, upheld
for the second time the death sentences
handed down in 2014 on Mohamed
Ramadhan Isa and Husain Ali Moosa. In a
rare investigation into a torture complaint, the
prosecution’s Special Investigation Unit had
found “suspicion of the crime of torture”
behind Husain Ali Moosa’s “confessions.”
However, the appellate court’s verdict once
again relied on Husain Ali Moosa’s
“confession” as evidence, and stated
incorrectly that Mohamed Ramadhan Isa had
also signed a confession.
Also in July, the Ministry of Interior’s
Ombudsman asserted that multiple cases
referred to it relating to detainees who had
been held incommunicado were beyond its
remit. This was despite its clear statutory
mandate to investigate all violations of law by
Ministry of Interior personnel.3
In September, credible reports emerged
that guards in Jaw prison had beaten Ali
AbdulHusain al-Wazeer, breaking many of his
bones. However the Ombudsman, the SIU
and the NIHR all failed to effectively address
the case despite being informed of it.

pandemic and infections among prison staff,
prisoners at Jaw were not given masks,
gloves, hand sanitizer, or regular testing for
the virus.
Ahmed Merza Ismaeel, a prisoner with
sickle cell anaemia – which can cause
extreme pain when left untreated – continued
to receive only sporadic medication from the
prison administration.
In August, just after the Shi’a holy day of
Ashura, guards at Dry Dock Juvenile Reform
and Rehabilitation Centre near al-Hidd
confiscated personal religious items from the
cells of some of the children, including from
17-year-old Kameel Juma Hasan. In
September, his family complained to the
NIHR that he was suffering from dental pain,
but no treatment was given. Another child
held in the same wing reported that he
received no treatment for pain and bleeding
in his ear canal.
There were no statements or reported
prison visits by the Prisoners and Detainees
Rights Commission, a monitoring body
established following the 2011 political
unrest.

Prison conditions

Women continued to face discrimination
under Bahraini law. Article 4 of the
Nationality Law prevents Bahraini women
from passing on their nationality to their
children, and Article 353 of the Penal Code
provides impunity for rape if the rapist
marries his victim.
In a positive step, in August the Ministry of
Labour and Social Development’s Decision
No. 51 annulled the regulation that had
limited professions available to women.
However, the Minister retained the authority
to impose such restrictions under Article 31
of the Domestic Privsate Sector Labour Law
of 2012.
Bahrain maintained its reservation to the
core principle of Article 2 of CEDAW,
maintaining that it would not be bound by
any provisions of the treaty that do not
comply with “Islamic Shari’a”.

Prison conditions, especially in the central
prison at Jaw in south-eastern Bahrain, were
poor, with lack of sanitation and frequent illtreatment, including arbitrary confiscation of
personal items, reprisals for speaking out,
and denial of adequate medical care.
In April, the administration of Jaw prison
put the jailed journalist Mahmood
AbdulRedha al-Jazeeri in several days of
solitary confinement after he had sent out a
recorded message criticizing as a whitewash
a televised COVID-19 safety inspection of the
prison by the NIHR. The NIHR failed to
investigate or condemn this punishment.
In January, following an outbreak of
scabies lasting for several months at Jaw
prison, the NIHR – instead of urging better
conditions for prisoners – reiterated the call
by prison authorities for prisoners with
“allergies” to comply with official “health
instructions”. Despite the COVID-19

78

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The sponsorship (kafala) system for
employing migrant workers in Bahrain put
migrant workers in an even more vulnerable
position and at risk of contracting COVID-19
during the pandemic.4 This was in addition to
unsanitary living conditions in overcrowded
accommodation, scarce legal protection and
limited access to preventive health care and
treatment.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The Court of Cassation continued to uphold
the outcomes of flawed mass trials. In June,
it rejected 48 of 49 appeals from a mass trial
of 169 individuals charged with joining a
terrorist organization. A group trial of 39 Shi’a
defendants, including 14 children, concluded
on 13 September with prison sentences for
all defendants, some of whom were
prevented from attending court for the
verdict. On 3 November another mass trial of
52 alleged members of a “terrorist cell”
concluded with 51 convictions.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences, in some cases following grossly
unfair trials.
The Court of Cassation confirmed the
death sentences against Zuhair Ebrahim
Abdulla and Husain Abdulla Khalil on 15
June, and against Mohamed Ramadhan Isa
and Husain Ali Moosa on 13 July. No
executions were reported.
1. Bahrain, Kuwait and Norway contact tracing apps among most
dangerous for privacy (Press release, 16 June)
2. Bahraini youth targeted in family reprisal (MDE 11/3011/2020))
3. Bahrain: Joint public letter to King calling for commutation of death
sentences ((MDE 11/2861/2020))
4. Bahrain: Ensure protection of migrant workers in COVID-19 response
((MDE 11/2168/2020))

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

BANGLADESH
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Head of state: Abdul Hamid
Head of government: Sheikh Hasina
Journalists were increasingly persecuted for
reporting corruption and criticizing the
government’s COVID-19 policies. The
draconian Digital Security Act (DSA) 2018
was widely enforced to curtail freedom of
expression. Police and other law
enforcement agencies continued to carry
out extrajudicial executions. Violence
against women increased during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Implementation of the
Chittagong Hill Tracts Agreement remained
stalled and a crackdown on Indigenous
activists intensified. People’s right to health
care was not adequately protected or
fulfilled during the pandemic. Bangladesh
continued to shelter nearly 1 million
Rohingya refugees from Myanmar as little
progress was achieved towards their safe,
dignified return.

BACKGROUND
Bangladesh’s health care system and
economy suffered heavily because of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Since the first
confirmed COVID-19 case on 8 March,
infections spread quickly throughout the
country and the health care system was
overwhelmed. The economy took a double hit
due to the slump in domestic demand and a
sharp decline in exports. Millions of workers,
especially those working on low wages, for
example in the garment industries and in the
informal sector, were badly affected by the
economic shock. There was also rampant
mismanagement and corruption in relief
distribution, and the authorities increased
their repression of journalists and media
outlets that reported these scandals. Rallies
and marches could not take place because of
physical distancing rules.

79

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government continued to use the
draconian Digital Security Act (DSA) 2018 to
suppress the right to freedom of expression
and to target and harass journalists and
human rights defenders. Despite repeated
calls from civil society and human rights
organizations to repeal controversial and
punitive provisions of the DSA, the law was
not amended.
According to official statistics, more than
900 cases were filed under the DSA between
January and December; nearly 1,000 people
were charged and 353 detained.1 At least
247 journalists were reportedly subjected to
attacks, harassment and intimidation, by
both state agencies and individuals affiliated
with the government.
In April, Mohiuddin Sarker, the acting
editor of Jagonews24.com, and Toufiq Imroz
Khalidi, editor-in-chief of bdnews24.com,
were charged under the DSA for publishing
reports on embezzlement of relief materials
intended for people economically affected by
the COVID-19 lockdown. Both men were
granted bail from the High Court and were
awaiting trial at the end of the year.
In May,Ramzan Ali Pramanik and Shanta
Banik, news editor and staff reporter
respectively of Dainik Grameen Darpan
newspaper, and Khandaker Shahin,
publisher and editor of the online news portal
Narsingdi Pratidin, were arrested for
reporting on a death in custody at Ghorashal
police station. In June, AMM Bahauddin, the
editor of Bangla national newspaper Inqilab,
was charged for publishing a story about an
adviser to the Prime Minister. The trial was
pending with the court at end of year.
Academics were also persecuted for
peacefully exercising their right to freedom of
expression. In September, the Dhaka
University authorities dismissed Professor
Morshed Hasan Khan for publishing an
opinion piece in a national newspaper, and
the National University authorities dismissed
Professor AKM Wahiduzzaman for posting a
comment on Facebook about the Prime
Minister. In June, two professors at Rajshahi

80

University and Begum Rokeya University
were sacked for Facebook comments they
made about a deceased ruling party Member
of Parliament.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
continued to be severely restricted. The
COVID-19 pandemic limited outdoor political
activities after March, and indoor meetings of
opposition parties were targeted by the
authorities. Between January and December,
the government officially blocked 17 public
gatherings using Section 144 – a legal
provision under the Penal Code 1860 that
permits the authorities to prohibit gatherings
of five or more people and the holding of
public meetings on grounds of public safety.
The government also blocked or dispersed a
number of other political gatherings.
In January, members of the ruling party,
Awami League, physically attacked the
opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party’s
(BNP) mayoral candidate in Dhaka City North
during his campaign, injuring him and
several of his followers.
In February, police baton-charged and
violently dispersed a series of meetings
organized by the BNP and its affiliated
organizations across the country. In July,
police stopped an indoor discussion meeting
of the newly formed Amar Bangladesh Party
in Brahmanbaria district without any
provocation.
In August, police in the southern district of
Barguna violently dispersed a peaceful rally
and human chain organized to demand the
release of a graduate student of Stamford
University in Dhaka. Videos suggest that the
police broke up the human chain violently
without any provocation from the protesters.2

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
At least 222 people were killed by the
security forces in alleged extrajudicial
executions – 149 people were killed without
being arrested, 39 were killed after arrest,
and others died during torture or in other
circumstances. At least 45 Rohingya

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

refugees were allegedly extrajudicially
executed by members of different law
enforcement agencies during the year, mostly
during operations as part of the “war on
drugs”, a government campaign launched in
2018 which has resulted in thousands of
extrajudicial executions.
Nine incidents of enforced disappearance
were reported during the year: a college
teacher, an editor, a businessperson, two
students, and four opposition activists. Three
were later “found” by the police and then
detained, and a student leader was released
by undisclosed captors after 48 hours amid
intensified protests from civil society and
human rights organizations. One political
activist was found dead, and four others
remained missing at the end of the year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the human rights organization
ASK, at least 2,392 cases of violence against
women were reported during the year. These
included 1,623 reported rapes (331 against
girls under 12 years old), 326 attempted
rapes, and 443 cases of physical assault. The
victims included Indigenous women and
girls. At least 440 women and girls were
murdered after physical assault, rape, or
attempted rape.
In October, a video was shared widely on
social media showing a woman being
stripped of her clothes, kicked, punched and
sexually assaulted by a group of five men.
The attack, which is believed to have taken
place on 2 September, triggered a mass
public outcry and nationwide protests.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS –
CHITTAGONG HILL TRACTS
At least 285 human rights violations were
recorded in the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT)
during the year, including three extrajudicial
executions, 99 arbitrary detentions, 54 cases
of physical abuse, 104 house raids and 25
incidents of property damage by state
security agencies. Of those arbitrarily
detained, 50 were sent to prison and the rest
were released.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Indigenous activists accused military and
intelligence agencies of sowing divisions
between Indigenous political groups. These
divisions continued to contribute to
communal violence in the CHT region. At
least 69 Indigenous political activists were
killed in local clashes during the year. At least
50 Indigenous activists were abducted, and
approximately 82 houses belonging to
Indigenous people were set on fire in clashes
between local political groups.
In June, three Indigenous activists were
abducted in Sadar Upazila in Rangamati
district. Their families accused the United
People’s Democratic Front – a breakaway
faction of the main Indigenous political party,
which is allegedly backed by the state
security agencies – of the abduction.
In August, an Indigenous woman and girl
were gang-raped by settler Bengali men in
Lama, Bandarban district. In September,
Indigenous political activist U Thowai Aoi
Marma was subjected to enforced
disappearance in Rowangchhari in
Bandarban district. His family and local
people accused members of the Bangladeshi
military of the abduction. His whereabouts
remained unknown at the end of the year.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Bangladesh continued to host nearly 1
million Rohingya refugees, a persecuted
ethnic minority group whose members fled
Myanmar in August 2017. Despite little
progress in repatriation discussions with
Myanmar, Bangladesh maintained its official
position that only safe, dignified and
voluntary returns of the Rohingya refugees
could put an end to their current situation.
The refugees faced restrictions of their
rights in Bangladesh. The authorities’
construction of barbed wire fences around
the refugee camps curtailed their right to
freedom of movement. Restrictions on the
refugees’ access to high-speed mobile
internet services, in place since September
2019, were partially lifted on 24 August.3
The outbreak of COVID-19 affected an
already overburdened health care system in
the camps, and refugees lacked access to

81

health care. In May, the Bangladeshi
authorities took more than 300 Rohingya
refugees to Bhashan Char, a remote silt
island in the Bay of Bengal. By December the
authorities had relocated a further 1,642
Rohingya refugees to the island. The
authorities planned to relocate about
100,000 refugees to Bhashan Char, a move
which was largely opposed, principally by
human rights organizations, as the island is
prone to regular floods, especially during the
rainy season, and is vulnerable to frequent
cyclones. In interviews with Amnesty
International, at least five Rohingya family
members representing 23 refugees alleged
that the authorities had coerced them to
relocate to the island.4

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic put an enormous
strain on the country’s health care system.
Given the history of low public health care
spending in the country, facilities were found
to be inadequate, ill-prepared and illequipped to tackle the crisis.5 According to
the Bangladesh Medical Association, more
than 8,000 health workers, including 2,887
physicians, 1,979 nurses and 3,245 other
medical staff tested positive for COVID-19.
Among them, at least 123 physicians died,
and the Doctors’ Association stated that the
infections among medical staff could have
been reduced if immediate measures had
been taken.
The lack of available and accessible
critical health care services related to
COVID-19 created a major public health
crisis across the country, as many public and
private hospitals turned away patients with
COVID-19 symptoms due to fear of infection,
even though they had capacity. This practice
led to the deaths of hundreds of people.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
When the COVID-19 pandemic broke out in
early March, the Bangladeshi authorities
introduced nationwide lockdown measures
termed “public holidays”, from late March to
May. During the lockdown, major business
activities were disrupted, and freedom of

82

movement was restricted. The disruption to
economic activity and the closure of
businesses led many workers to either lose
their jobs or experience a significant drop in
income. The workers affected by the crisis
had little or no social protection, so their right
to work and to an adequate standard of living
were significantly undermined. More than five
million workers in the informal sector, and
approximately four million garment workers
(80% of whom were women), were most
affected.
1. Bangladesh: Escalating attacks on the media must stop (Press
release, 8 October)
2. Bangladesh: Rising attacks on freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly must be urgently stopped (Press release, 11 August)
3. Let us speak for our rights: Human rights situation of Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh (ASA 13/2884/2020)
4. Bangladesh: Plan to relocate hundreds of Rohingya to remote island
must be dropped (Press release, 20 November)
5. Bangladesh must put human rights at the centre of its COVID-19
response strategies (ASA 13/2268/2020)

BELARUS
Republic of Belarus
Head of state: Alyaksandr Lukashenka
Head of government: Raman Halouchanka (replaced
Sergei Rumas in June)
The year was characterized by recurrent
peaceful protests, with the presidential
election in August serving as a catalyst for
the most egregious crackdown on freedoms
of expression, peaceful assembly and
association in Belarus’ post-independence
history. Opposition candidates, their
campaign teams and associates were
arrested on false charges or forcibly exiled.
Police used excessive and indiscriminate
force to disperse demonstrations. Tens of
thousands of peaceful protesters and
bystanders were detained, and many of
them tortured or otherwise ill-treated.
Journalists, medics, students, union leaders
and others were also targeted with arrest,
beatings and prosecution. The government’s
initial response to the COVID-19 pandemic

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

was inadequate. Death sentences continued
to be imposed.

BACKGROUND
A worsening economic outlook, poor handling
of the COVID-19 pandemic and numerous
incendiary comments by President
Alyaksandr Lukashenka, amongst other
issues, saw his popularity drop dramatically.
In the run-up to the presidential election on 9
August, he made misogynistic
pronouncements in statements broadcast on
prime time television while arbitrary arrests,
politically motivated prosecutions and other
reprisals escalated against opposition
candidates and their supporters, political and
civil society activists, and independent
media. An opposition coalition around
presidential candidate Svyatlana
Tsikhanouskaya led women to the forefront of
a burgeoning protest movement which
spread across the country and society.
President Alyaksandr Lukashenka claimed a
landslide victory, although the result was
strongly disputed by Svyatlana
Tsikhanouskaya and regarded as fraudulent
by numerous independent election monitors.
The OSCE, which was prevented from
observing the elections, noted credible
reports of widespread irregularities and
serious administrative misconduct. Protests
against the conduct of the election and the
results quickly engulfed Belarus and were
overwhelmingly peaceful despite a brutal
crackdown by the authorities. Individuals
regarded as protest opinion leaders were
swiftly arrested or forcibly exiled. Relations
with much of the international community
deteriorated drastically and targeted
sanctions were introduced against scores of
Belarusian officials implicated in electoral
and human rights violations. Russia
expressed its support for the Belarusian
authorities, providing financial assistance.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was
severely curtailed in an attempt to curb all
opposition and dissent, including through the
targeting of individuals and media outlets,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

legislative changes, administrative pressure
and the use of technical means such as
internet blackouts.
The media remained under tight
government control. Independent journalists
and media organizations were harassed and
prevented from carrying out their legitimate
work. Local monitors documented over 400
such instances, including arrests, torture and
other ill-treatment of media workers, between
May and October alone. International media
outlets had their accreditation denied or
revoked to prevent uncensored reporting.
Domestic newspapers, such as
Komsomolskaya Pravda in Belarus, faced
refusals from state-controlled printing houses
to print issues criticizing authorities. Major
online news outlet TUT.by had its licence
suspended by the authorities. Natallia
Lyubneuskaya, a journalist working for the
independent newspaper Nasha Niva, was
one of at least three journalists shot at by
police with rubber bullets, on 10 August. She
required surgery and was hospitalized for 38
days. Several bloggers and journalists were
targeted with politically motivated criminal
prosecutions, including the co-author of a
popular Telegram channel, Ihar Losik,
arrested on 25 June on trumped-up charges
pending trial.
The authorities co-opted internet providers
and imposed a near-total shutdown of mobile
internet during the first three days of postelection protests − and subsequently during
weekly protests − to prevent the co-ordination
of demonstrations and undermine the
exchange of information. Access restrictions
were routinely imposed on independent
media websites.
Dissenting views that spread across all
sectors of society were brutally and directly
suppressed. Students, academics, athletes,
religious and cultural figures and employees
of state enterprises were expelled or sacked
from their posts and many faced
administrative and even criminal sanctions
for speaking against the authorities,
supporting peaceful protest, or taking part in
strikes.

83

Women
Women with dissenting views faced gendered
reprisals and were targeted via their
perceived vulnerabilities, including through
threats of sexual violence or of their young
children being placed in state care.1

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to freedom of assembly remained
severely and unduly restricted. Penalties
issued to peaceful protesters under
administrative law were often heavier than
sanctions applied for certain criminal
offences.
At the start of the year, dozens of activists
were heavily fined or sentenced to
“administrative arrest”, including lengthy
consecutive multiple terms of 15 days (the
legal maximum) for “administrative
offences”, purportedly committed during
peaceful protests at the end of 2019.
Overall, between the start of the
presidential campaign in May and the
election, hundreds of peaceful protesters,
online activists, independent journalists and
others were arbitrarily detained, including by
men in plain clothes using unlawful force and
unmarked vehicles, and dozens received
fines or “administrative arrest”. Following the
election, hundreds of thousands of
Belarusians regularly and peacefully took to
the streets across Belarus to protest, tens of
thousands were arrested, and hundreds were
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment
and heavily penalized. Amnesty International
directly witnessed the unfounded, arbitrary,
and brutal nature of a number of these
arrests.2
Between 9 and 12 August alone, the
government confirmed the detention of 6,700
protesters. Weekly peaceful protests
continued across the country, both on the
streets and within government-owned
enterprises, theatres, universities and
elsewhere. By mid-November, official and
independent figures estimated that over
25,000 people had been detained including
numerous bystanders and journalists.
Repeatedly, over 1,000 people were detained

84

in a single day.3 Local human rights
organizations documented over 900 criminal
cases with at least 700 individuals facing
charges.
Police (often plain-clothed) used excessive
and indiscriminate force, including rubber
bullets fired at short-range into crowds, stun
grenades, chemical irritants, water cannons,
automatic firearms with blank cartridges,
truncheons and other means to disperse
peaceful crowds and apprehend individuals.
At least four people were killed by
government forces4 and several others died
under suspicious circumstances.
While many protesters and bystanders
were attacked randomly and arbitrarily,
others were targeted for their professional
activity, including media workers
documenting events or medics who
voluntarily attended to the wounded. Others
were singled out because of their sexual
identity. On 26 September, human rights
defender Victoria Biran was detained on her
way to a rally after being identified by police
officers as an LGBTI activist and sentenced
to 15 days’ “administrative detention”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The authorities waged a campaign of brutal
persecution against all forms of independent
association intended to protect human rights
and peaceful opposition to the regime,
including monitoring initiatives, opposition
campaigning teams and independent trade
unions. Scores of people were subjected to
arrest, unfounded criminal prosecution or
“administrative detention”, threats of
imprisonment and forcible exile.
On 6 May popular blogger and presidential
hopeful Syarhei Tsikhanouski was subjected
to 15 days’ unfounded administrative
detention to prevent his candidacy,
prompting his wife, Svyatlana
Tsikhanouskaya, to stand herself. On 29 May,
while he was gathering signatures for her in
Hrodna, an attempt was made to provoke
him and he was immediately arrested
alongside at least seven of his associates.5
They and several other prominent opposition
bloggers were later prosecuted as part of the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

same criminal investigation under Article 342
of the Criminal Code (“organization or active
participation in group actions that grossly
violate public order”).
Another presidential hopeful, Viktar
Babaryka, his son Eduard Babaryka,
members of his team and former colleagues
were also detained on trumped-up economic
charges, to exclude him from the election
and warn other presidential hopefuls.
The opposition Coordination Council,
formed by Svyatlana Tskhanouskaya and led
by a Presidium of seven people, was
condemned as “an attempted seizure of
power” by President Lukashenka, and on 20
August a criminal investigation was opened
under Article 361 of the Criminal Code (“calls
to actions seeking to undermine national
security”). By the end of the year, all
Presidium members were under arrest or
forced into exile, as were many of their
associates.6
On 7 September, the authorities abducted
opposition leader Maryia Kalesnikava and
drove her and two colleagues to the border of
Ukraine, demanding that they leave the
country under threat of imprisonment. The
colleagues crossed into Ukraine but Maryia
Kalesnikava tore up her passport to prevent
expulsion. She remained in unacknowledged,
incommunicado detention for two days, after
which she was remanded as a criminal
suspect on trumped-up charges, as was
another Presidium member, Maksim Znak.
Marfa Rabkova from the NGO Human
Rights Centre “Viasna”, was arrested on 17
September and remanded as a criminal
suspect, charged with “preparation of mass
riots” in connection with her human rights
work.
The leader of the Belarusian Independent
Trade Union, Anatoli Bakun, was repeatedly
arbitrarily detained in connection with
political strikes at the Belaruskali potash
mine in Salihorsk, and consecutively
sentenced to a total of 55 days of
“administrative arrest” for violating the law on
mass gatherings. Three other trade union
activists, Yury Karzun, Syarhei Charkasau
and Pavel Puchenya, served 45 days each

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

for the same “offence”, between September
and November.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The authorities systematically used torture
and other ill-treatment against people
detained during protests, including
participants, journalists and bystanders.
Local and international groups documented
hundreds of cases across the country.
UN human rights experts received 450
testimonies of ill-treatment of detainees
supported by photo, video and medical
evidence, documenting a horrific litany of
abuses. They describe how protesters were
tortured and ill-treated during arrest,
transportation and detention in severely
overcrowded facilities. Protesters were
humiliated, brutally beaten, subjected to
sexual violence, including against women
and minors, and deprived of access to food,
clean water and medical care during lengthy
periods of detention. Detainees were also
denied the right to inform their relatives of
their whereabouts, in some instances for the
entire period of “administrative arrest”, and
denied access to their lawyers. Parcels and
letters were withheld, and warm clothes and
hygiene products were confiscated including
for menstruating women.
The Belarusian authorities admitted
receiving some 900 complaints of abuse by
police in connection with the protests but by
the end of the year not a single criminal
investigation had been opened, nor had any
law enforcement officer been charged with
respective violations.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government’s initial response to the
pandemic was inadequate. President
Alyaksandr Lukashenka dismissed COVID-19
as a “psychosis”, blamed the first confirmed
casualties on their own lifestyle,
recommended tractor driving, vodka and
visits to the sauna as remedies and refused
to impose major restrictions.

85

DEATH PENALTY

RIGHT TO HEALTH

Belarus remained the sole country in Europe
and the former Soviet Union to impose death
sentences. At least four men were on death
row at the end of the year, and at least three
death sentences were handed down; two of
which were to brothers aged 19 and 21. No
executions were reported.

Older people in care homes

1. Crackdown from the top: Gender-based reprisals against women
activists in Belarus (Public statement, 17 July)
2. Belarus: Police unleash appalling violence on peaceful protesters
(News story, 10 August)
3. Belarus: More than 1,000 people arrested in a single day of peaceful
protests amid escalating repression of rights (News story, 9
November)
4. Belarus: Peaceful protester held by police after beating dies in
hospital (News story, 13 November)
5. Belarus: A criminal case involves a growing number of the regime’s
critics (Public statement, 30 July)
6. Belarus: “They are stealing the best of us”. Arbitrary arrests and
forced expulsion of leading opposition activists (Public statement, 10
September)

BELGIUM

Over half of the deaths from COVID-19 were
older people living in care homes. Violations
of the residents’ right to health, life and nondiscrimination resulted from government
failures, including: structural shortcomings;
lack of priority attention at the onset of the
pandemic; failure to ensure access to
hospitals; insufficient provision of personal
protective equipment for staff and lack of
access to testing.1

Prison conditions
Overcrowding in dilapidated prisons
continued, with insufficient access for
inmates to basic services, including health
care and sanitary facilities. COVID-19
measures – including temporary, early and
conditional release – temporarily reduced
overcrowding. But other measures limited
prisoners’ rights, including by reducing their
contact with the outside world.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

The government response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns, including in
relation to health, asylum-seekers, policing
and privacy. The government established
extra care centres for survivors of rape and
sexual violence. The Wallonia region
authorized arms transfers to the Yemen
conflict.

A police chase in April in the capital,
Brussels, resulted in the death of a 19-yearold who fled for fear of being fined for breach
of COVID-19 restrictions. His scooter collided
with a police car.2
In August, media released leaked video
footage from inside a holding cell at Charleroi
Airport, where Slovakian national Jozef
Chovanec was detained in February 2018.
He suffered a cardiac arrest following a
violent altercation with police officers and
later died in hospital. The footage shows
officers joking and one making a Nazi salute
next to the restrained man. A criminal
investigation was ongoing.

BACKGROUND

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

A coalition government was formed in
October, following elections in May 2019.
Almost 20,000 people were estimated to
have died from COVID-19. Lockdown
measures restricted freedom of movement
and other human rights.

In March, a survey on sexual violence in
Belgium was published which had
interviewed 2,300 people aged 15 to 85. In it,
20% of female and 14% of male respondents
said they had been raped.3
In June, the government decided to
establish seven extra care centres for

Kingdom of Belgium
Head of state: Philippe
Head of government: Alexander De Croo (replaced
Sophie Wilmès in October)

86

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

survivors of sexual violence; such centres
already existed in three cities.

including by ensuring the swift erasure of
data allowing identification.4

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS

In March, due to COVID-19, the authorities
closed the office accepting asylum claims.
Hundreds of people were temporarily denied
access to asylum and consequently to food
and housing. The authorities established an
online registration system that was
inadequate. In over 100 individual cases, the
Labour Court ordered the Federal Service for
reception of asylum-seekers to ensure access
to material assistance.
In September, a government commission
tasked with reviewing returns and removal
procedures and practices, presented its
report to Parliament, which called for
increased use of repressive measures,
including pre-removal detention and harsher
penalties for irregular entry. Civil society
organizations criticized the regressive
approach and presented an alternative report
with human rights-compliant proposals.

DISCRIMINATION
“Stop Ethnic Profiling”, a platform launched
in June, expressed concern that ethnic
profiling by police increased during
lockdown.
In July, four local police forces adopted a
framework outlining how police should avoid
ethnic profiling.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In June, 10,000 people protested against
racism and police violence in Brussels. In
response to the pandemic, public gatherings
were banned, but the authorities tolerated the
protest. In several other towns, local
authorities banned smaller protests.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
The state response to COVID-19 included the
increased collection, retention and
aggregation of personal data. Privacy experts
and civil society organizations advocated for
safeguards to protect the right to privacy,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Concerns remained that continued
authorization of arms transfers by the
Wallonia region to the Saudi-led coalition in
Yemen could mean such arms being used to
commit or facilitate serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian
law. Following legal action by NGOs, the
Council of State annulled several such
licences.
1. Les maisons de repos dans l’angle mort: Les droits humains des
personnes âgées pendant la pandémie de COVID-19 en Belgique (in
French only) (Report, November)
2. Policing the pandemic: Human rights violations in the enforcement of
COVID-19 measures in Europe (EUR 01/2511/2020)
3. Sondage sur le viol: Chiffres 2020 (in French only) (Article, 4 March)
4. Global: COVID-19, surveillance and the threat to your rights (Press
release, 3 April)

BENIN
Republic of Benin
Head of state and government: Patrice Athanase
Guillaume Talon
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were unduly restricted;
journalists and health workers were unjustly
prosecuted, harassed and intimidated. The
police used excessive force while policing
demonstrations and enforcing public health
restrictions. Discrimination against women
and minorities persisted and LGBTI people
suffered harassment and violence.

BACKGROUND
Tensions between the government and
opposition parties persisted following
disputed parliamentary elections in 2019.
The African Court on Human and Peoples’
Rights (African Court) requested that Benin
suspend the May local elections, pending its
decision on a case brought by political
opponent, Sébastien Ajavon, concerning the
exclusion of the Social Liberal Union Party

87

from local elections. A few days later, the
government barred individuals and NGOs
from submitting direct complaints to the
African Court, and the May elections went
ahead.
In December, the African Court ordered
Benin to take all measures to repeal the
Amnesty Law for all the criminal offences
relating to the 2019 legislative elections.
The government responded to the
COVID-19 pandemic by implementing certain
restrictions on human rights and releasing
411 prisoners.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to detain and
prosecute journalists under certain provisions
in the 2018 Digital Code that unduly
restricted the right to freedom of expression.
On 3 January, Aristide Fassinou
Hounkpevi, editor of the online L’Autre Figaro
newspaper, was arrested by agents of the
Central Office for the Repression of
Cybercrime. He was charged with
“harassment through electronic
communication” in connection with
comments he made on social media about
the possible appointment of the Foreign
Minister as ambassador to France. He was
released on 9 January but his case was kept
open for further investigation.
Ignace Sossou, a journalist, was released
from Cotonou Prison in June, after the
Cotonou Court of Appeal reduced his
sentence to 12 months, including six months
suspended for “harassment through
electronic communication” after he posted
on Twitter quoting the Public Prosecutor.
In July, the High Authority of Audiovisual
Communication ordered unauthorized online
media outlets to close. The decision was
viewed by some in the media as a way to
silence opposition media.
On 10 November, Loth Houénou, a
political opponent, was sentenced to two
years in prison and a fine of XOF200,000
(US$370) for “harassment through electronic
communication”. He was arrested on 26
June after he published audios on social

88

media criticizing the President and other
institutions.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Restrictions introduced to control the spread
of COVID-19 were used to prevent political
opponents from organizing meetings and
rallies. However, demonstrations by
government supporters went ahead without
interference.
In August, the police prevented a meeting
organized by Frédéric Aïvo, a political
opponent, on the grounds that it was
unauthorized.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In March, the police shot dead Théophile
Dieudonné Djaho, a student, during a
demonstration against the arrests of three
National Student Federation members at the
University of Abomey-Calavi. The Honorary
Chairman of the NGO Voices of Students filed
an appeal with the Constitutional Court
against the President and the Minister of
Interior and Public Security for human rights
violations. The government announced an
investigation.
In April, videos were distributed on social
media showing the police beating people for
not wearing face masks.
In May, Antonin Lokossi was shot dead by
a Forest Service guard in the town of Toffo in
Atlantique department while he was
gathering firewood. He was at the time
accompanied by two members of his
community, who said they were unarmed
when guards fired at them.

HEALTH WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In March, health sector unions raised
concerns with the authorities about their
exclusion from initiatives to manage the
impact of COVID-19 on the health and safety
of their members. In July, they issued a
public statement denouncing the lack of PPE
and poor working conditions.
Police arrested a health worker on 8 June
after he posted a warning on social media
about a COVID-19 outbreak at OuéméPlateau Departmental Hospital Centre. He

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

was charged with breaching confidentiality
and sentenced to six months in prison,
including five months suspended and a fine.
He was released on 8 July.
On 8 July, Adolphe Houssou, a
spokesperson for health sector unions,
publicly criticized the government for not
doing enough to protect health workers from
COVID-19. On 25 July, he fled the country in
fear of reprisals after police officers went to
the Health Ministry asking for his address.

photographed her face and genitals, and held
her in a cell with male detainees. She was
released without charge the next day.

BOLIVIA
Plurinational State of Bolivia
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto Arce
Catacora (replaced Jeanine Áñez Chávez in November)

In March, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights issued its
concluding observations on Benin’s periodic
review. It raised concerns about widespread
attacks against people with albinism; killings
of so-called “witch children”; and local
customs which deprived women of their
inheritance and property rights.
A government civil service recruitment
competition excluded people with disabilities.

The social, economic, political and human
rights crisis in Bolivia which began in the
aftermath of the 20 October 2019 elections
continued in 2020. The crisis was
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic,
which reached very worrying dimensions in
the country, disproportionately affecting
those in vulnerable situations. Those
defending human rights and the rights of
Indigenous Peoples, journalists and political
opponents, or those perceived as such,
continued to be threatened and harassed.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

BACKGROUND

The widespread use of violence and sexual
harassment against women and girls
continued. In May, Angela Kpeidja, a
journalist for a national television station,
publicly denounced sexual harassment and
other abuses in her workplace. The
authorities suspended the station's deputy
editor-in-chief.

On 13 August, after two postponements due
to public health considerations relating to
COVID-19, the Plurinational Legislative
Assembly, the interim government and the
Supreme Electoral Tribunal agreed that a
general election should be held on 18
October 2020. On 23 July, after the second
postponement was announced,
demonstrations, including roadblocks,
intensified amid complaints by the authorities
and the general population that the
blockades were preventing key supplies for
dealing with COVID-19 from reaching various
communities that needed them. There were
also reports of violence by some protesters
and between groups of protesters, with
interventions by the security forces. Early on
14 August, there were reports of an attack
with explosives on the office of the Bolivian
Union of Workers (COB) in La Paz. The COB
had played a key role in the demonstrations.
Bolivia reported its first cases of COVID-19
in March 2020 and on 12 March the acting
President declared the situation a national
emergency. Supreme decrees and

DISCRIMINATION

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In Cotonou in April, unknown assailants beat
a transgender woman unconscious. She
regained consciousness in Godomey police
station, where officers beat, insulted and
threatened her. They stripped her naked,
photographed her and sent her home without
her clothes after five days in detention.
In July, a transgender woman was
attacked by a mob who stripped her and beat
her as they chased her through the streets.
Later that night, police arrested her at her
home for no legitimate reason, took her to the
Sodohomè police station in Zou department,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

89

subsequent laws established additional
quarantine measures and mandatory stay-athome regulations, among other economic
and social measures to deal with the
pandemic. As of 31 December, the Ministry
of Health had reported 160,124 confirmed
cases of COVID-19 and 9,165 deaths related
to the virus.
On 18 October, general elections for the
President, Vice-President and members of
the Legislative Assembly were held. On 8
November, Luis Arce, the Movimiento Al
Socialismo party candidate, took office as
President.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
In the context of the post-election crisis,
human rights violations were perpetrated,
including the use of excessive and
unnecessary force by the National Police and
the Armed Forces to repress demonstrations.
At least 35 people died and 833 were
injured. These human rights violations were
not adequately investigated, tried and
punished, resulting in impunity.1

IMPUNITY
On 23 January the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
announced an agreement with the interim
government of Bolivia for the creation of an
Interdisciplinary Group of Independent
Experts (GIEI) to investigate acts of violence
and human rights violations committed
between 1 September and 31 December
2019. However, the government publicly
questioned the independence of two of the
four members of the GIEI announced by the
IACHR. On 28 April, the IACHR announced
that it would include a fifth member “to
strengthen the GIEI” and that the Group
would be installed soon. On 23 November,
the GIEI was installed and on 22 December it
announced that it had concluded the
“preliminary stage” of its work, which
entailed meetings with groups of victims and
witnesses and with civil society organizations.

90

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders, such as Waldo
Albarracín, continued to be threatened and
harassed while criminal investigations into
attacks on them remained stalled, and the
authorities failed to provide human rights
defenders with appropriate protection so that
they could carry out their legitimate work.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and social communicators
reported that the right to freedom of
expression was being unduly restricted in
Bolivia by means of threats, attacks and
attempts to silence the national and
international media. The interim government
created a climate of fear and censorship
through its public statements and
regulations, and harassed and threatened
political opponents and those perceived as
such. It issued public threats, accusing
political leaders of spreading
“misinformation” and journalists of
“sedition”. The government also accused
people of participating in “destabilization and
disinformation movements” and of
conducting a “virtual war” against it.
In the context of the pandemic, the
government also issued regulations that
raised a number of concerns, such as
Supreme Decrees 4199, 4200 as well as
4231 which modifies the first two. Some
articles of these decrees violated the right to
freedom of expression, for example
establishing a crime against public health for
“spreading wrong information” about
COVID-19 or “generating uncertainty in the
population”. These decrees were later
repealed. Nevertheless, they served to
intensify the harassment against political
opponents and those perceived as such, as
did criminal proceedings and detentions.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples were disproportionately
affected by the pandemic. Their right to
participate in decision-making processes on
issues affecting their rights continued to be
undermined by the granting of licences for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

economic projects on community lands
without their free, prior and informed
consent. According to the Office of the
Ombudsperson, in the context of the
pandemic, there was a lack of a public health
policy to protect Indigenous Peoples and an
increase in the use on social media of racist
rhetoric that stigmatized them.

people and children due to COVID-19 were
disproportionate. State of emergency
measures further limited the rights to
freedom of peaceful assembly and
expression. Unlawful disclosures of personal
data of COVID-19 patients violated the right
to privacy. Prosecution of war crimes was
further delayed.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS

On 3 July the Second Constitutional Chamber
of La Paz Departmental Court of Justice
annulled a decision by the National Civil
Registry to deny registration for a same-sex
civil union. The Chamber ordered the Civil
Registry to issue a new resolution upholding
international human rights standards. The
order was not complied with and the Civil
Registry lodged a request with the
Plurinational Constitutional Tribunal for a
precautionary measure to suspend the
effects of the ruling; this remained pending at
the end of the year. On 9 December, the Civil
Registry complied with the Chamber’s order
and issued a new resolution, allowing two
men to become the first same-sex couple to
register their civil union.
1. Healing the pandemic of impunity: 20 human rights
recommendations for candidates in the 2020 presidential elections in
Bolivia (AMR 18/2871/2020)

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Head of state: Rotating presidency − Milorad Dodik,
Željko Komšić, Šefik Džaferović
Head of government: Zoran Tegeltija
The authorities failed to provide support to
thousands of refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants stranded in the country. The
Constitutional Court declared that
movement restrictions imposed on older

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) failed to
provide effective access to asylum and
adequate reception conditions for thousands
of migrants and asylum-seekers travelling
through the country on their way to the EU.
Despite reduced numbers in March and April
due to COVID-19 movement restrictions,
close to 10,000 people were stranded in BiH
at the end of the year, the majority in UnaSana Canton on the border with Croatia.
The asylum system remained largely
ineffective due to persisting institutional gaps,
including limited capacity in the Ministry of
Security, resulting in a significant backlog of
pending cases and people awaiting
registration.
Political inaction from the Council of
Ministers, and the reluctance of authorities at
all levels to co-operate, led to failures in
identifying additional suitable
accommodation and prevented the transfer
of existing reception centres from the
International Organization for Migration (IOM)
to BiH authorities.
In August, citing the lack of support from
the national government, Una-Sana Canton
authorities prohibited new arrivals on their
territory and imposed strict measures
targeting migrants and asylum-seekers living
outside official accommodation centres. The
measures included severe restrictions on
freedom of movement, prohibition on
gatherings in public places and using public
transport, and a ban on letting
accommodation to migrants.1
In September, the Una-Sana Canton
authorities forcibly evicted residents from the
official reception centre operated by the IOM
in Bihac, leaving close to 400 people without

91

shelter and assistance in deteriorating
weather conditions.2 In the last days of
December, around 900 migrants and asylumseekers were stranded in inhumane
conditions and without access to food, water
or electricity in the temporary camp Lipa after
the authorities failed to agree to their
relocation to more suitable facilities in other
parts of the country. The European
Commission strongly condemned the actions
saying they “undermined the rule of law and
put lives at risk”.
At the end of the year, around 3,000
asylum-seekers and migrants were living in
squats, abandoned houses and forests
across Una-Sana Canton.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
As a part of the COVID-19 emergency
measures in March, the authorities imposed
a blanket 24-hour curfew on children and
people aged 65 and older. The curfew was
eased after several weeks but over 300
people found in violation of the order
received fines that could exceed the average
monthly pension. In April, the Constitutional
Court ruled the measures were
disproportionate and breached the right to
freedom of movement enshrined in the
Constitution and the European Convention on
Human Rights.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The BiH Association of Journalists recorded
nearly 30 cases of serious violations of media
freedom, including physical assault and
death threats against journalists and other
media workers.
Journalists and others criticizing the
government’s COVID-19 response faced
backlash and censorship. In several cantons,
independent journalists were denied access
to government briefings on the COVID-19
crisis. In March, the Republika Srpska
government issued a decree prohibiting the
“incitement of panic and disorder” and
imposed heavy fines for violations. At least 18
people were charged under the decree
before it was repealed in late April, including
a medical doctor who expressed concern on

92

social media about the lack of equipment
and capacities in local hospitals. Federation
BiH authorities actively monitored private
social media accounts and criminally
charged at least five people for “spreading
false information and panic” in March. At the
end of the year, there was no credible
information on whether any of the charges
were dropped. The Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights warned that
the measures limited the right to freedom of
expression.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
According to the European Commission, laws
regulating assemblies were contrary to
international law as they severely restricted
public places for protests and placed a
disproportionate burden on organizers, who
had to cover the costs for additional security
and emergency measures during events.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In March, authorities in several parts of the
country cited public health grounds in
disclosing personal data of individuals,
including minors, who were diagnosed with
COVID-19 and of those with orders to selfisolate. The BiH Data Protection Agency
warned that it breached national data
protection legislation and prohibited further
public disclosure of personal data by the
authorities.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In September, the BiH Council of Ministers
adopted the long-delayed revised War Crimes
Strategy, which set new deadlines for
completion of backlog cases. By the end of
2020, over 600 cases were pending before
various courts in BiH.
Prosecution of war crimes continued to be
delayed due to systemic deficiencies in the
Prosecutor’s Office.
In March, a survivor of wartime rape in
Novi Travnik received financial
compensation, the first such award in
criminal proceedings.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In August, the UN Committee for
Elimination of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW) ruled in a wartime rape case that
BiH failed to ensure an impartial and
effective investigation and adequate
reparation to the victim. The Committee
called on BiH to provide immediate and
comprehensive support to survivors of
wartime sexual violence.
In July, the country marked the 25th
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide when
more than 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and
boys were killed; survivors continued to face
insurmountable obstacles to obtaining truth,
justice and remedy.3
Over 7,200 people remained missing as a
result of the armed conflict. Political pressure
and lack of resources continued to impede
the work of the BiH Missing Persons Institute.
1. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Reckless restrictions of movement leave
refugees and migrants stranded without protection (News story, 25
August)
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Authorities create gratuitous suffering for
hundreds left without shelter (News story, 1 October)
3. Bosnia and Herzegovina: 25th anniversary of Srebrenica massacre is
a sombre warning from history (News story, 9 July)

BOTSWANA
Republic of Botswana
Head of state and government: Mokgweetsi Masisi
Food insecurity remained widespread. State
of emergency legislation was introduced in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic which
further restricted the right to freedom of
expression. Police subjected political
activists to torture and other ill-treatment.
Death by hanging was maintained as a
punishment for crimes including murder.

BACKGROUND
On 2 April, the President declared a state of
public emergency and also introduced
legislation under the Emergency Powers Act.
He ordered a 28-day national lockdown
subject to parliamentary oversight, which was
extended for another week on 28 April.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Later that month, the President pardoned
149 prisoners to ease prison overcrowding
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Twenty of
those released were reportedly foreign
nationals. It was not clear which crimes were
pardoned or how long the prisoners had left
on their sentences.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
According to the NGO Ditshwanelo (the
Botswana Centre for Human Rights), a 16year-old boy was flogged at a traditional court
in Mahetlwe village in Kweneng District by
the village’s Deputy Chief, and on instructions
from the police, for not wearing a face mask.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Food insecurity remained widespread, mainly
as a result of recurring drought. It was
compounded by an African Migratory Locust
outbreak in February which affected staple
crops. These factors, combined with
COVID-19 pandemic mitigation measures like
border closures, adversely affected food
supplies and further exacerbated food
insecurity levels.
The impact of lockdown and movement
restrictions was particularly harsh for people
working in the informal economy, among the
most vulnerable to a socio-economic shock,
who represented the majority of workers
across the country, and particularly those
who mainly worked in the agricultural sector
as well as street vendors.
In May, the government enforced the
wearing of face masks in public and imposed
a maximum fine of BWP5,000 (approximately
US$432) or up to five years’ imprisonment
for anyone who failed to comply.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Emergency Powers Act prohibited
journalists from using “source(s) other than
the Director of Health Services or the World
Health Organization” when reporting on
COVID-19. Journalists failing to obey faced a
fine of up to BWP100,000 (approximately
US$8,100) or a five-year jail term. The Act
outlawed publishing information with “the

93

intention to deceive” the public about
COVID-19, or information about the
government’s measures to control the spread
of the virus.
Several people were believed to have been
charged either under the Emergency Powers
Act or the Penal Code for expressing their
opinions. For example, Justice Motlhabane,
the spokesperson for the Botswana Patriotic
Front, an opposition party, was arrested by
police on 16 April for “degrading and
maligning the leadership” after he was
accused of suggesting on Facebook that the
President would prolong the state of
emergency to “deal with his political rivals
and business competitors”. Justice
Motlhabane told journalists that he was
tortured by being electrocuted while in police
custody on this and several other occasions.

Journalists
On 18 June, journalists David Baaitse and
Kenneth Mosekiemang were arrested by
intelligence agents after they photographed a
building linked to the Directorate of
Intelligence and Security, the domestic and
international intelligence agency. After
spending a night in custody, they were
released and charged with “common
nuisance”, which, under the Penal Code,
carries a fine of up to BWP5,000 (US$432)
or up to two years’ imprisonment.

DEATH PENALTY
Botswana continued to impose death
sentences and carried out executions by
hanging for crimes including murder. It was
the only state in Southern Africa to carry out
executions.

BRAZIL
Federative Republic of Brazil
Head of state and government: Jair Messias Bolsonaro

Anti-human rights rhetoric continued to
escalate, increasing the risks to human
rights defenders. The shrinking of civic

94

space fomented by an official narrative that
stigmatized NGOs, journalists, activists,
human rights defenders and social
movements continued. Obstacles to
freedom of expression and attempts to
restrict this right impacted the work of
journalists and media workers. Attacks and
killings of human rights defenders,
members of Indigenous Peoples,
Quilombola communities and environmental
defenders remained chronic problems.
Protection of natural resources and
traditional territories was neglected as
government structures to protect Indigenous
Peoples and the environment were further
dismantled and weakened. Violence against
women increased in the context of
measures introduced to curb the spread of
COVID-19. The pandemic exposed deepseated inequalities in Brazilian society,
impacting communities that face
discrimination disproportionately. The
President’s ongoing denial of the gravity of
the COVID-19 pandemic only exacerbated
the situation.

BACKGROUND
On 31 March a group of people gathered in
front of the army´s headquarters in Brasília,
the capital, to commemorate the 1964 coup,
which led to a 21-year-long military
government. The demonstration was
attended by President Bolsonaro, who
referred to the date as “the day of liberty”.
According to Brazil’s National Truth
Commission, under the military regime
hundreds of people were systematically
tortured, disappeared and extrajudicially
executed. Mainly due to the interpretation
given to the 1979 Amnesty Law, impunity
continued to prevail for crimes under
international law and human rights violations
committed during the military government
(1964-1985).

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic hit Brazil
powerfully, deepening existing historic,
structural and persistent inequalities and
exacerbating the economic, political, and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

public health and sanitation crisis in the
country. The government failed to ensure the
right to health, including access to health
care, and social protection for all peoples. By
the end of the year, the number of people
who had died of COVID-19 was around
195,000, the second highest total of any
country in the world. Brazil was an epicentre
of the pandemic, with more than 7 million
cases of infection.
Although dealing with the COVID-19
pandemic was a challenge worldwide, the
outbreak in Brazil was exacerbated by
ongoing tensions between the federal and
state authorities, the absence of a clear plan
of action based on the best available
scientific information and the lack of
transparency in public policies, among other
failings.

Economic and social rights
The government failed to mitigate the social
and economic consequences of COVID-19 on
groups in vulnerable situations, such as lowincome communities, women, LGBTI people,
residents of favelas, Indigenous Peoples and
Quilombola communities. Economic relief
programmes for low-income individuals were
insufficient and flawed. Many people faced
difficulties registering for these benefits and
the process was mired with allegations of lack
of transparency.
In November 2020, there was a massive
21-day blackout in the State of Amapá.
According to the National Coordination of
Articulation of Black Rural Quilombola
Communities (CONAQ), the lack of electricity
worsened the humanitarian crisis faced by
Quilombola and Indigenous communities in
the state.

Health workers
The state failed to provide health workers
with adequate assistance during the
COVID-19 pandemic. According to the
Brazilian Association of Collective Health and
the Brazilian Society of Family and
Community Medicine, health care
professionals faced challenging working
conditions, including insufficient personal

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

protective equipment, a lack of clear
protocols to manage infections, the absence
of mental health support, lack of social
protection for workers’ families and
precarious employment contracts.

Prisoners
Prisoners were denied their right to health by
inadequate state measures to deal with and
curb the pandemic. Systemic overcrowding,
inadequate health services, and poor living
and sanitary conditions posed grave
concerns for the right to health of prisoners
and juvenile detainees. According to the
National Council of Justice, as of October,
more than 39,000 COVID-19 cases in the
adult prison system and 4,190 cases in the
juvenile detention system were registered. In
terms of testing, from October to December
2020, at least five states (Amazonas, Espirito
Santo, Paraiba, Rondônia and Roraima) had
not conducted one single additional test in
their prisons. The State of Roraima, for
instance, did not report testing of any
prisoners or workers in the system to date.
The administrative area with the highest
prison population rate was the Distrito
Federal, with 15% of the detainees tested
from the beginning of the outbreak in March
to December.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Attacks on journalists and media workers
restricted and stifled freedom of expression.
According to a report by the NGO Article 19,
between January 2019 and September 2020,
members of the federal government made
aggressive and stigmatizing statements
towards journalists and their work 449 times.
These attacks included intimidation, smear
campaigns, defamation, gender
discrimination and questioning the legitimacy
of journalistic activity.
Restrictions on civil society participation in
public debate about government policies
intensified as a result of the hostile
government approach to social movements
and NGOs. The authorities constantly and
consistently used rhetoric that stigmatized
activism and groups in vulnerable situations.

95

An emblematic example of this was the
President’s speech at the UN General
Assembly in September. Jair Bolsonaro
alleged that there was a “disinformation
campaign” about wildfires and deforestation
in the Amazon led by international
institutions. He also claimed the wildfires
were a consequence of the traditional
practices of Indigenous Peoples and other
traditional communities. Days later, General
Augusto Heleno, Chief of the Institutional
Security Cabinet, accused the Articulation of
Indigenous Peoples of Brazil (APIB)
movement of endangering national security
due to its work on Indigenous Peoples’ rights,
citing the same legislation that the military
dictatorship used in previous decades to
accuse the opposition of treason.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
A report by the NGO Global Witness
highlighted the dangerous situation faced by
territory, land and environmental defenders in
Brazil, which was third in its list of the most
lethal countries for environmental and human
rights activists.
On 18 April, Ari Uru-Eu-Wau-Wau was
killed in the city of Jaru, in the State of
Rondônia, after several threats in 2019.
The notorious killing in 2018 of Marielle
Franco, a defender of LGBTI, Black and
women’s rights, and her driver, Anderson
Gomes, highlighted the obstacles faced in
obtaining justice and reparations for attacks
on human rights defenders. Two men were
charged with carrying out the killings.
However, two years after the death,
investigations had yet to establish who was
behind the killings.

example, in the State of Acre, the rate of
femicides increased by 400%. Other states
also saw significant increases in the number
of femicides from March to May: 157.1% in
Mato Grosso, 81.8% in Maranhão and 75%
in Pará.
In the first six months of 2020, 1,861
women were murdered, and an additional
648 were victims of femicide, according to
data from 12 states compiled by the Brazilian
Public Security Forum. Emergency phone
calls to the police related to domestic
violence rose by 3.8% in the first six months
of 2020 compared to the same period in
2019. In the State of Ceará, according to the
Popular Public Security Forum, the number
of women killed increased by 66% in the first
seven months of the year compared to the
same period in 2019, during which 216
women were killed. The number of girls
murdered increased by 124% in the same
state.
There were over 119,546 cases of
domestic violence resulting in physical
injuries to women in the first six months of
the year, equivalent to an average of 664
cases per day. This represented an overall
reduction of 11% compared to the same
period in 2019, likely due to under-reporting
during the pandemic. However, six states
registered an increase in cases of physical
injuries during the same period. The State of
Pará saw the highest rise in such cases:
2,674 cases were recorded, an increase of
46.4% compared to the same period of the
previous year. On average 126 girls and
women were raped every day in the country
during 2020.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS

RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND
OTHER TRADITIONAL COMMUNITIES

One of the indirect consequences of
movement restriction measures to curb the
spread of COVID-19 was an increase in cases
of domestic violence against women. Data
consolidated by the Brazilian Public Security
Forum revealed that the rate of femicide
increased in 14 out of the 26 states in the
period between March and May 2020 as
compared to the same period in 2019. For

Despite Brazil’s international commitments
and national laws for the protection of
Indigenous peoples and other traditional
communities, the historical lack of respect for
the rights of these communities intensified in
2020.
Illegal mining, wildfires and the seizure of
land for illegal cattle farming and
agribusiness continued to threaten

96

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Indigenous peoples and other traditional
communities, impacting the right to land of
these communities and affecting the natural
environment.1
Data collected by the National Institute for
Space Research registered an increase of
9.5% in the destruction of forests between
August 2019 and July 2020, compared to the
same period a year earlier. More than
11,000km² of forest were devastated in that
period. The progressive dismantling of
national institutions responsible for
monitoring and protecting these areas
reflected the failure of the state to fulfil its
obligation to guarantee the rights of affected
communities to a healthy environment,
livelihoods, and to be protected from forced
evictions.
Wildfires in the Amazon were, in many
cases, started by farmers who illegally
invaded the territories of Indigenous peoples
in order to prepare the land for cattle. Cattle
illegally grazed in the Amazon has entered
the supply chain of JBS, the biggest meatpacking corporation in the world.2
In a public hearing before the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights in
October, Indigenous representatives
condemned invasions into Yanomami
territories and threats to Indigenous leaders
by those seeking to carry out illegal mining
activities. They also condemned the invasion
of the lands of the Uru-Eu-Wau-Wau,
Karipunas, Guajajaras and Tembés
communities for economic exploitation. Many
members of Indigenous communities have
lost their lives in the context of these
invasions, including Edilson Tembé dos
Santos killed in September and Ari-Uru-EuWau-Wau, killed in April.

(ADPF) number 709, which seeks health
protection measures for these communities,
due to the pandemic. According to the
lawsuit, the fatality rate among Indigenous
peoples was 9.6%, while the national average
was 5.6%. The Supreme Court had
determined that the state should implement a
specific emergency plan and public health
sanitation measures in Indigenous areas.
However, in December a third version of the
plan presented by the government was
rejected by the Supreme Court for not
providing answers to basic topics such as
access to water and sanitation and for not
setting detailed measures to provide personal
protective equipment (PPE), testing material
and human resources. APIB claimed that a
proper response to the pandemic was
coming from within the community, since the
federal government had failed to comply with
the Supreme Court's determination to protect
the communities in the context of a
pandemic. The articulation had to create an
emergency plan to equip the special units
across the country by delivering tests,
breathing tubes, hygiene kits, PPE and
cylinders of oxygen.
The CONAQ took ADPF 742 to the Federal
Court in September, demanding a national
plan in response to the pandemic in
Quilombola communities, inspired by ADPF
709. The plan was filed, but there was still no
positive action. The organization launched its
own initiative to monitor the spread of
COVID-19 among communities and kept
alerting to high fatality rates and underreporting. Communities also denounced
other difficulties – and even denial – in
accessing tests.

Right to health

In favelas and other marginalized
neighbourhoods, police violence escalated
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Between
January and June, at least 3,181 people were
killed by the police across the country, an
average of 17 deaths per day and 7.1% more
than in 2019. While people were following
recommendations to stay home, police
officers continued to conduct incursions in

Ineffective public policies and measures to
mitigate the impact of COVID-19 among
traditional communities highlighted the
failure of the state to ensure the right to
health of these groups.
In July, along with six political parties,
APIB took to the Supreme Court the Action of
Noncompliance with Fundamental Precept

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

97

favelas for arrests which ended in killings.
Federal and state governments and
representatives publicly supported the idea
that “good criminals are dead criminals” and
the use of force by the police in favelas and
city outskirts.
According to the Brazilian Public Security
Forum, 79.1% of the people killed by the
police were Black and 74.3% were under 30
years of age. Brazil´s population comprises
54% Black people, according to the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics.
Residents of marginalized neighbourhoods
were the most affected.
During the year, Rio de Janeiro’s police
forces continued to carry out militarized
police operations in favelas, frequently using
helicopters and armoured vehicles. Police
killings in the state reached a level
unprecedented since they began recording
fatalities in 1998; between January and May,
741 people were killed, the highest number
in the country.
In May, 13 men were killed in Complexo
do Alemão, a group of favelas in Rio de
Janeiro, during a violent police operation
carried out by the Special Operations
Battalion (BOPE) and the police.
A few days later, 14-year-old João Pedro
Mattos died in an operation in the Salgueiro
favela, São Gonçalo, Rio de Janeiro. He was
at home with friends when members of the
Special Resources Unit (CORE) entered his
home and fired over 70 rounds. João Pedro
Mattos was shot in the back.
The worsening situation in Rio de Janeiro
led civil society organizations, local activists,
the Rio Public Defender’s Office, the
Brazilian Socialist Party and relatives of
victims to file a petition with the Supreme
Court to stop police incursions in the favelas.
In June, the Court issued a preliminary
decision to suspend police operations in
favelas during the pandemic. Following the
decision, killings by the police fell by 74%.
In São Paulo, police officers killed 514
civilians between January and June, a 20%
increase compared to the same period in
2019 and the highest number since records
started to be collected in 2001. A recent law

98

known as the Anti-Crime Package has
determined that an investigated policeman
should have a lawyer during investigations
and if he does not have one, the police
corporation should provide him one. In
addition, the State of São Paulo determined
that military policemen should have access to
lawyers for free. Since public defenders do
not act during investigations and no private
lawyers have been nominated for the cases,
the internal ordinance of the Military Police
says investigations should be suspended.
These conditions resulted in at least 300
police killings not being investigated.
In the state of Bahia, police killings rose
from 361 in the first six months of 2019 to
512 in the same period in 2020, an increase
of 42%. In the state of Ceará, 96 people were
killed in the first six months of the year, a
12.5% increase compared with the same
period in 2019. In July, 13-year-old Mizael
Fernandes da Silva was killed by the police
while he was at home asleep. Two parallel
procedures were initiated to conduct
investigations. The military investigation
concluded that the police officers who killed
the boy were acting in self-defence. The
parallel investigation by the Civil Police
concluded that a police officer should be
charged with the crime of homicide and
violating legal procedures. The prosecution
had not pressed charges by the end of the
year.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Enforced disappearances remained a serious
concern nationwide given the involvement of
paramilitary groups, including police officers
and former state agents, in these crimes in
the past decades.
Despite families’ struggle for justice,
impunity persisted and there was no
significant progress in clarifying past cases of
enforced disappearance.
Domestic law was not brought into line
with international treaties and did not include
a specific crime of enforced disappearance,
which continued to be dealt with under other
provisions, such as kidnapping. This gap in
the law continued to pose a barrier to the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

prosecution of those responsible for enforced
disappearances, as well as to the
implementation of reparation policies for
victims. The justice system also lacked
effective and independent systems for the
investigations into these crimes.
There was no progress in the case of Davi
Fiuza, a 16-year-old Black youth who,
according to witnesses, was forcibly
disappeared in October 2014. He was last
seen in the city of Salvador de Bahia with his
hands and feet bound being put into the
trunk of a car that was escorted by the Bahia
State Military Police. In 2018, the Public
Prosecutor´s Office indicted seven military
police officers for kidnapping and false
imprisonment. In 2019 the case was
transferred to a military court, contrary to
international human rights law standards.
Hearings scheduled to take place in April and
June were postponed, ostensibly due to
COVID-19. At the end of the year no date had
been set for the rescheduled hearings to take
place.
1. Brazil: Alarming number of new forest fires detected ahead of
Amazon Day (News, 3 September)
2. Brazil: Cattle illegally grazed in the Amazon found in supply chain of
leading meat-packer JBS (News, 15 July)

BULGARIA
Republic of Bulgaria
Head of state: Rumen Radev
Head of government: Boyko Borisov

Media freedom and freedom of association
further deteriorated as authorities targeted
journalists and critics and cracked down on
anti-government protests. Authorities
placed some Roma communities under
mandatory COVID-19 quarantines and
severely restricted their movement; officials
engaged in openly racist rhetoric towards
Roma. Domestic violence remained
widespread and resources to support
victims were insufficient. Lesbian, gay,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

bisexual, transgender and intersex people
faced discrimination and social exclusion.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
As a part of COVID-19 emergency measures
in March, the government proposed
amendments to the Criminal Code that would
impose heavy fines and prison sentences for
dissemination of false information. However,
the President vetoed the proposal before it
became law, citing its negative impact on
freedom of expression.
Media freedom continued to deteriorate,
with journalists investigating organized crime
and corruption facing intense political and
prosecutorial pressure in the form of threats
and intimidation.
In July, investigative reporter Nikolay
Staykov was questioned by the Prosecutor’s
Office and threatened with prosecution after
he released a documentary which implicated
the Prosecutor’s Office in a financial crime.
Several journalists covering the antigovernment protests in the capital, Sofia, in
September were physically assaulted by
police; one was detained for hours. The
Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human
Rights called the actions “unacceptable” and
urged the authorities to investigate the
attacks.
In its Rule of Law Report in September, the
European Commission expressed serious
concerns about the lack of transparency of
media ownership and noted that media
remained subject to systematic political
control. Ranking 111th out of 180 countries
on the World Press Freedom Index, Bulgaria
remained the EU member state with the
lowest standard of media freedom.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In July, United Patriots, a junior partner in the
governing coalition, proposed amendments to
the Non-profit Legal Entities Act that would
impose disproportionate scrutiny and strict
reporting requirements for organizations
receiving foreign funding. A coalition of NGOs
warned that the amendments were
inconsistent with the European Convention
on Human Rights and EU law and would

99

create a hostile environment for civil society
organizations.
In September, dozens of people, including
journalists and police, were injured and
hundreds were arrested when months-long
anti-government protests in Sofia were
forcefully dispersed by anti-riot forces. Police
used pepper spray, tear gas and water
cannons against protesters who demanded
the resignation of the Prime Minister and
Chief Prosecutor, combined with an overhaul
of state governance. The European
Parliament strongly criticized the “violent and
disproportionate intervention” by the police
and urged the authorities to investigate
reports of excessive use of force.
Authorities targeted businesses and
individuals associated with the protests,
allegedly subjecting them to politically
motivated prosecutions and financial audits.
Anti-government protests continued into
December.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence remained widespread and
significantly under-reported. According to
women’s rights organizations, the COVID-19
pandemic exacerbated the situation, in which
at least eight women were killed by their
partners during the two months’ nationwide
lockdown between March and May.
For domestic violence to be considered as
a grave punishable offence, the Criminal
Code required it to be committed in the
context of “systemic violence” or be
preceded by three separate acts of violence
by the same perpetrator. This exposed
victims to prolonged risks and limited their
access to justice. Victims of violence faced
barriers in accessing support services and
legal assistance, while capacity in the existing
shelters remained insufficient. In May, the
government adopted a national domestic
violence prevention programme aimed at
improving co-ordination among relevant
institutions and organizations.
The definition of rape in the Criminal Code
did not include marital rape and required
evidence of physical resistance by the victim,
which was contrary to international

100

standards. The UN Special Rapporteur on
violence against women urged Bulgaria to
amend the Criminal Code to include a rape
provision based on lack of consent and
explicitly covering marital rape. A 2018
Constitutional Court ruling declaring the
Istanbul Convention incompatible with the
Bulgarian Constitution continued to prevent
the Convention’s ratification.

DISCRIMINATION
The COVID-19 pandemic and nationwide
lockdown exacerbated the already
widespread discrimination against Roma.
Between March and May, local authorities
in Sofia, Nova Zagora, Kazanlak, Yambol and
Sliven imposed a special regime, including
mandatory quarantine for all residents, which
disproportionately applied only to majorityRoma neighbourhoods.1 The quarantines
were enforced by armed police who set up
roadblocks and prevented people from
leaving the settlements. At the same time, the
authorities failed to provide sufficient and
safe access to water and sanitation, medical
supplies and food during the quarantines,
putting many families at further risk of
COVID-19 infection and poverty.
In Burga municipality, the authorities used
drones with thermal sensors to take the
temperature of residents in Roma settlements
remotely and monitor their movements. In
the town of Yambol, the authorities used
planes to “disinfect” the Roma
neighbourhood, which had registered
COVID-19 infections. Such measures were
only applied to Roma communities.2
Hostile anti-Roma rhetoric increased
during the ongoing pandemic, with officials
openly engaging in hate speech. The
Bulgarian National Movement (VMRO) party
portrayed Roma as a collective threat to the
general population, while government
ministers threatened stricter COVID-19
measures against Roma, suggesting that they
deliberately flouted physical distancing rules.
In May the UN Special Rapporteurs on
contemporary forms of racism and on
minority issues urged officials to stop hate
speech and end restrictions targeting Roma

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

neighbourhoods, stating that they violated
residents’ rights to equality and freedom of
movement.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In a homophobic attack in Plovdiv in
September, a group of young football fans
physically attacked and injured several
teenagers, some as young as 14, whom they
perceived to be LGBTI. The attackers
reportedly wanted to “cleanse” the city centre
of LGBTI people. The Plovdiv Prosecutor
initiated a criminal investigation which was
ongoing at the end of the year.
According to an EU Fundamental Rights
Agency survey, over 70% of LGBTI people in
Bulgaria felt compelled to hide their sexual
orientation and 40% avoided certain
locations for fear of being assaulted or
threatened.
1. Stigmatizing quarantines of Roma settlements in Slovakia and
Bulgaria (EUR 01/2156/2020)
2. Policing the pandemic: Human rights violations in the enforcement of
COVID-19 measures in Europe (EUR 01/2511/2020)

BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso
Head of state: Roch Marc Christian Kaboré
Head of government: Christophe Joseph Marie Dabiré

Armed groups committed human rights
abuses, including killings and abductions,
in the context of the armed conflict.
Security forces also perpetrated
extrajudicial executions and torture.
Impunity remained pervasive. The right to
education was hindered. Freedoms of
expression and assembly were restricted.

BACKGROUND
The armed conflict continued, particularly in
the northern and eastern regions. In January,
the Volunteers for the Defence of the
Homeland Act was passed which allowed for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the recruitment of local “volunteers” to
support military operations.
Seven of the 13 regions remained under a
state of emergency, giving the authorities
extensive powers to arrest and detain people
and limit their movements.
In March, a national curfew was imposed
to control the spread of COVID-19. The
government also released 1,207 prisoners to
reduce prison overcrowding and mitigate the
risk of infection.
In September, the Electoral Code was
amended ahead of the presidential elections
and stipulated that where polling stations
were closed for exceptional security reasons,
election results would be based on votes cast
in stations which remained open. In
November, President Kaboré was re-elected
for a second term.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
There were regular clashes between armed
groups, and attacks against civilians were
committed, often along ethnic lines, which
could amount to war crimes.
Since the beginning of the year, the Group
for the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM)
had blockaded the city of Djibo, in Soum
province, Centre-North region, restricting
access and peoples’ movement along a
37km stretch.
In March, the Koglweogo, an armed “selfdefence” group, raided three villages in the
Barga department in the Northern region,
killing at least 43 inhabitants and destroying
buildings. In the same month, at least 10
civilians were taken from a mosque in Cissé
village in the Sahel region and killed by
unidentified gunmen, according to media
reports.
In May and August, at least 45 people
were killed when unidentified assailants fired
indiscriminately at cattle markets in
Kompienbiga town and Namoungou village in
the Eastern region.
In July, the Mayor of Pensa and 10 others
were killed following an ambush on their
convoy between the towns of Barsalogho and
Pensa in the Centre-North region, believed to
be carried out by GSIM members. One

101

month later, El Hadj Souhaib Cissé, the
leader of the Islamic community of Soum
province, was abducted by gunmen while
travelling to his home in Djibo. His body was
found four days later on the outskirts of the
city.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The right to education was severely
undermined as a result of armed attacks by
GSIM and Islamic State of Greater Sahara
members against primary and secondary
schools; students and teachers were also
frequently threatened with violence. The
Ministry of Education said that 222 education
workers had been “the victims of terrorist
attacks” between January and April.
According to UNICEF, around 3,000 schools
were closed by April due to the security
situation.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
On 9 April in Djibo, 31 people were arrested
and executed by members of the special unit
force during a raid. Although the government
announced an investigation into the killings,
which could amount to war crimes, no further
information on the investigation was made
public.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 11 May, gendarmes, accompanied by
volunteers, arrested and detained at least 25
people at a market in Kpentchangou town in
the Eastern region. The next morning, 12 of
them were found dead in their cells at the
Tanwalbougou gendarmerie post. The
gendarmerie denied responsibility, but the
survivors, who were released in June, said
that the 12 men had died as a result of
severe beatings by the gendarmes. The
authorities said they would investigate the
incident but no public information was
available at the end of the year on the
investigation.

marriage and prostitution, other sexual abuse
and exploitation, was exacerbated by the
conflict. Victims of such violence faced
difficulty in getting help as sexual and
reproductive health care services were either
in short supply or were disrupted by the
conflict.

REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
By August, according to UNHCR, 1 million
people had been internally displaced by the
conflict. Internally displaced people
(IDP) and refugee camps were the targets of
attacks by all parties to the conflict.
In May, army officers beat 32 refugees in
the Mentao refugee camp in the Sahel
region, while searching for perpetrators of an
attack against them that day in which a
soldier was killed. UNHCR called on the
authorities to investigate the incident, but
they responded by saying the camp hosted
gunmen.
In October, 25 IDPs were killed in an
ambush by an armed group near the town of
Pissila, in the Central North region. Survivors
said the assailants executed the men after
separating them from the women and
children, who they later released.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, El Hadj Boureima Nadbanka,
commander of the Koglweogo in
Namentenga province, Central North region,
was provisionally released by the High Court
of Kaya. He had been arrested in December
2019 in connection with an investigation into
the unlawful killings of 50 people and the
enforced disappearance of 66 others in the
village of Yirgou, in Sanmatenga province, in
January 2019. No significant progress had
been made in the proceedings against him at
the end of the year.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, the incidence of gender-based
violence, including rape, early and forced

In January, a car belonging to Yacouba Ladji
Bama, an investigative journalist and editor of
the Courrier Confidentiel, was set alight

102

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

outside his home. Journalists’ unions said the
attack was intended to intimidate him for his
work uncovering corruption and fraud.
In the same month, the Ouagadougou City
Council arbitrarily banned a sit-in outside the
Ouagadougou Court, organized by the
Collective Against Impunity and
Stigmatization of Communities (CISC). The
CISC were protesting at the authorities’ failure
to secure justice for the 50 people killed by
the Koglweogo in Yirgou in January 2019
(see above, Right to truth, justice and
reparation).
In August, the authorities stopped a
demonstration by supporters of deposed
President Compaoré, refusing them access to
the People’s House venue in Ouagadougou,
without providing an official reason.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Workers’ rights
In March, the National Union of Human and
Animal Health Workers (SYNTSHA) raised
concerns about the country’s preparedness
to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic and called
for greater protection for front-line health
workers. SYNTSHA regularly denounced the
lack of infrastructure investment and the
government’s failure to respect the 2017
agreement which had aimed to improve
health workers’ employment conditions.

BURUNDI
Republic of Burundi
Head of state: Evariste Ndayishimiye (replaced Pierre
Nkurunziza in June)
Head of government: Alain Guillaume Bunyoni
(assumed office in June)
Unlawful killings, arbitrary arrests, enforced
disappearances and sexual violence were
carried out, mainly against perceived
political opponents. Freedoms of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly remained restricted; journalists
and human rights defenders faced reprisals
for their work. Hate speech along ethnic

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

lines continued, and the President made
homophobic remarks in his speeches.

BACKGROUND
The human rights situation did not improve
following the May general elections. The
presidential candidate for the ruling party, the
National Council for the Defence of
Democracy – Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD), was elected. He
was inaugurated in June following the
sudden death of President Nkurunziza on 8
June. In late June, the Council of Ministers
were sworn in. This included the role of
Prime Minister, newly created under the
2018 Constitution. Communal and legislative
elections took place in May, followed by
Senate and local level or colline (hill)
elections in July and August, respectively.
There was no international election
observation mission, partly due to restrictions
imposed in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. The Conference of Catholic
Bishops of Burundi raised concerns about
“numerous irregularities” reported by its
observers. On 4 June, the Constitutional
Court ruled that the election had been held
“in a regular fashion”.
In October, the UN Human Rights Council
voted to renew the mandate of the
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Government representatives initially claimed
that the country’s “special pact with God”
had spared it from being impacted by
COVID-19. In late March, a government
spokesperson threatened sanctions against
schools and other institutions for taking
proactive containment measures ahead of
the government, and for seeking “to
manipulate or disorientate public opinion”.
Initial measures taken by government
included quarantine for travellers, and advice
on hand washing and avoiding physical
greetings. The international airport was
closed from late March to early November.
Mass gatherings continued during and after
the election campaigns. In May, some
doctors told the media that testing was

103

insufficient and that official COVID-19 figures
underestimated the actual death rate. The
Minister of Foreign Affairs expelled the WHO
representative and three medical experts in
mid-May. Former President Nkurunziza’s
death proved a turning point in the
authorities’ approach to the pandemic. On 30
June, the incoming President declared
COVID-19 “public enemy number one”, and
the government launched mass testing.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The government continued to encourage
refugees to return to Burundi. Refugee
returns, facilitated by the governments and
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, continued
from Tanzania and began in August from
Rwanda. Tanzanian authorities arrested,
forcibly disappeared, tortured and arbitrarily
detained several refugees, some of whom
were later forcibly returned to Burundi.
Returnees continued to face difficulties
reintegrating and received insufficient
support. Some were accused of supporting
the opposition and were threatened or
physically attacked by the Imbonerakure, the
ruling party’s youth wing.
Restrictions due to COVID-19 made it
harder for people to seek asylum outside
Burundi. Between January and mid-March,
3,242 people sought refuge in neighbouring
countries in the run-up to the May elections.
Between mid-March, when border
restrictions were imposed, and the end of
November, only 24 new arrivals from Burundi
were registered in the region.

DISCRIMINATION
In the run-up to the elections, CNDD-FDD
members increasingly used rhetoric which
incited violence against the political
opposition, and justified attacks against
opposition members. The government failed
to hold to account those suspected of being
responsible for hate speech along ethnic
lines. Such rhetoric continued after the
elections.
Women’s groups criticized First Lady
Angeline Ndayishimiye Ndayubaha’s speech
to the Women’s Leaders Forum in

104

September, in which she stated that the
country would never see gender equality, and
quoted from scripture to support her
argument. The Family Code recognizes
husbands as the head of the “conjugal
community”.
President Ndayishimiye made several
homophobic remarks in his speeches. In his
inauguration speech, he described same-sex
marriage as “social deviation”; in August, he
suggested a correlation between countries
which accepted homosexuality and high
COVID-19 rates.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In January, Agnès Ndirubusa, Christine
Kamikazi, Egide Harerimana and Térence
Mpozenzi, journalists at Iwacu Press Group,
arrested in October 2019 on their way to
report on clashes in Bubanza province, were
convicted of an “impossible attempt” to
threaten internal state security. They were
sentenced to two-and-a-half years in prison
and fined BIF1 million (US$525). Their driver
Adolphe Masabarakiza was acquitted. In
June, the Ntahangwa Court of Appeal upheld
their conviction on appeal, but in December
they received a presidential pardon and were
released.1
In October, Fabien Banciryanino, a former
opposition parliamentarian, was arrested on
charges of rebellion, defamation, and
threatening state security. He was questioned
about speeches he had made in the National
Assembly in which he criticized the
government, which would normally be
covered by parliamentary immunity.2

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In June, Burundi’s Supreme Court ruled that
the 2019 Ntahangwa Court of Appeal’s
decision to uphold human rights defender
Germain Rukuki’s conviction, and 32-year
prison sentence, was invalid. The case was
sent back to the Court of Appeal to be heard
again with a newly composed bench.
The trial of 12 exiled human rights
defenders and journalists for “insurrection”
continued before the Supreme Court. They
were accused of involvement in the failed

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

coup attempt of May 2015, in connection
with their role in protests against the then
President’s third term. Their lawyers were not
present at a hearing in February.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Members of the main opposition party, the
National Congress for Freedom (CNL), faced
numerous obstacles to their political
activities. In some places, permission to open
party offices was denied, whereas in other
locations their offices were vandalized and
destroyed. During the electoral campaign
period, local administration officials
prevented them from holding some campaign
rallies.3
The authorities continued to press for
stricter control over the operations of
international NGOs, including by demanding
that organizations provide individualized data
on the ethnicities of their national staff. In
May, a presidential decree was issued to
establish international NGO recruitment
committees, including government
committees in each province to oversee and
approve all national staff hires.4

before the elections. Reports of arrests and
disappearances of party members continued
throughout the year.
Two days before the election, the
Prosecutor General wrote to the President of
the National Election Commission asking for
the disqualification of 59 CNL candidates in
the legislative and communal elections on
grounds that they were the subject of ongoing
investigations. The Constitutional Court later
overturned the decision to disqualify three
candidates for the National Assembly.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS

Enforced disappearances continued to be
regularly reported, and previous cases
remained unresolved. The UN Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances raised 81 new cases
(primarily from 2015 and 2016) with the
authorities. By the end of the year, the
government had provided no response to any
of the 156 cases raised by the Working
Group since 2016. Despite having signed the
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance in
2007, Burundi was yet to ratify and
implement it.

Extrajudicial executions and other unlawful
killings continued throughout the year. After
fighting in February between an unidentified
armed group and the police and army in
Bujumbura Rural province, photographs and
videos circulated on social media showing at
least 12 young men who had been captured
and tied up, as well as photographs of the
bodies of several of the men. The UN
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi analysed
the evidence and concluded that the men
were killed after being captured and while
under the responsibility of police, military and
the Imbonerakure, who also featured in the
images.
The Imbonerakure killed several members
of opposition parties during the election
period. CNL and CNDD-FDD members also
died as a result of violent clashes between
the parties. Richard Havyarimana, a CNL
member, was abducted in May in Mwaro
province and his body was found three days
later. In a rare example of accountability, two
members of the Imbonerakure were found
guilty of his murder. They were sentenced in
August to 15 years in prison and ordered to
pay his family compensation of BIF10 million
(US$5,200).

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

The CNL reported that more than 600 of its
members, including candidates, were
arrested before and during election day.
Some were arrested after clashes with
Imbonerakure members. Several CNL
members were convicted in expedited trials

Sexual violence was used by the
Imbonerakure and others as a form of
intimidation and punishment against people
perceived as political opponents. In its 2020
report, the UN Commission of Inquiry
highlighted acts of sexual violence committed

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

105

against men and boys, as well as women and
girls, in detention at the National Intelligence
Service (SNR) since 2015. SNR agents
subjected male detainees to torture and other
ill-treatment that targeted their genitals and
included rape. They also forced them to have
sexual relations with other detainees, male
and female, and subjected them to forced
nudity and other humiliation. Women were
raped and subjected to other forms of sexual
violence.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Throughout the year, the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission conducted highly
publicized exhumations of mass graves
connected to past atrocities. Exhumations
were focused on graves linked to the 1972
massacres that primarily targeted Hutu. This
focus combined with comments made by
public officials was polarizing and seen as an
attempt to impose a single narrative. The
exhumations were carried out in a manner
which jeopardized the preservation of
valuable evidence and failed to ensure
respectful storage of human remains.5

which severely impinges upon human
rights. Human rights defenders, peaceful
demonstrators and members of the banned
opposition party continued to face
harassment and intimidation through
misuse of the justice system. Women’s
rights came under sustained attack, as
Prime Minister Hun Sen led a public
campaign that used arbitrary interpretations
of “tradition” and “culture” to curtail the
rights of women. The ongoing anti-drug
campaign led to widespread violations of
fair trial rights. People arbitrarily detained
in drug detention centres faced torture and
other ill-treatment including inhumane
living conditions. The economic impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic left tens of
thousands of garment workers and others at
risk of destitution, particularly those
holding microfinance debts.

BACKGROUND

2. Burundi: Release outspoken opposition politician (AFR
16/3230/2020)

The government crackdown targeting
independent media, outspoken civil society
organizations and the political opposition that
began in 2017 continued throughout 2020.
The EU partially revoked Cambodia’s
preferential free-trade status under the
Everything But Arms (EBA) trade agreement,
citing violations of labour rights and human
rights. Per capita, Cambodia was the most
microfinance-indebted country in the world.

3. Burundi: Prioritise human rights in election season (AFR
16/2214/2020)

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

1. Burundi: Upholding journalists’ conviction further undermines media
freedom (Press release, 5 June)

4. Burundi: Drop demand on international NGOs to disclose ethnic
identity of employees (Press release, 27 February)
5. Burundi: Human rights priorities for new government (AFR
16/2777/2020)

CAMBODIA
Kingdom of Cambodia
Head of state: Norodom Sihamoni
Head of government: Hun Sen
The extreme restrictions on civil and
political rights implemented since 2017
intensified, with the new State of
Emergency Law adding to a legal framework

106

The authorities used the COVID-19 pandemic
as a pretext to further repress freedom of
expression, with journalists, human rights
defenders and government critics targeted for
the expression of their views. Between
January and March, Amnesty International
documented 22 arrests, with seven people
charged for allegedly sharing “false
information” about the pandemic, of whom
six were affiliated with the banned opposition
party Cambodia National Rescue Party
(CNRP).1 Journalist Sovann Rithy was
arrested on 9 April and later convicted on 5
October of “incitement to commit a felony”
for quoting the Prime Minister Hun Sen
verbatim about the economic impact of the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

pandemic in the country.2 In April, the Law
on the Management of the Nation in a State
of Emergency was promulgated in response
to COVID-19, providing the government with
a range of arbitrary and excessive powers in
times of emergency.3
On 31 July, police arrested prominent
trade unionist Rong Chhun for comments he
made about the Cambodia-Viet Nam border.
He was charged with “incitement to commit a
felony” and remained in pre-trial detention.
His arrest sparked protests which were met
with a series of further arrests and charges
targeting young people and environmental
activists. Between 13 August and 7
September, at least 12 young activists,
including a Buddhist monk and two rap
artists, were arrested and charged with
“incitement to commit a felony”, and placed
in pre-trial detention.4 Both rap artists were
later convicted. Other human rights
defenders fled Cambodia in order to escape
prosecution. Luon Sovath, a Martin Ennals
Award winner and renowned activist monk,
was forced to flee into exile after authorities in
the city of Siem Reap sought to defrock and
charge him on the basis of spurious
allegations of sexual misconduct.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Members of the banned CNRP faced
continued arbitrary criminalization and
increasing levels of physical violence. CNRP
president Kem Sokha faced trial on trumpedup treason charges in January, and his trial
remained ongoing. CNRP co-founder Sam
Rainsy and over 100 CNRP politicians
remained banned from participating in
politics following the party’s dissolution in
2017. Judicial harassment against former
CNRP politicians and activists intensified in
November as at least 126 CNRP-affiliated
individuals were summoned in a series of
politically-motivated mass trials on treason
and incitement-related charges. Severe
physical assaults of individuals affiliated with
the CNRP continued, with no one arrested or
investigated for any of the attacks.
The repressive Law on Associations and
NGOs (LANGO) continued to be used to stifle

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

freedom of association. Environmental
activists working to expose rampant illegal
logging in the Prey Lang rainforest faced
arbitrary detention and physical assaults by
both state authorities and corporate actors.5
In September, the Ministry of Interior
characterized grassroots groups Mother
Nature Cambodia and Khmer Thavrak as
illegal organizations because they had not
registered under LANGO.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Hun Sen led a public attack on women’s
rights, invoking arbitrary notions of “tradition”
and “culture” to justify the policing of
women’s bodies and choices. In a speech in
January, he ordered the authorities to take
action against women who allegedly wore
“revealing” clothing while selling products on
Facebook. Days later, authorities arrested
and arbitrarily charged Facebook seller Ven
Rachna with producing “pornography” on the
basis of her clothing.6 In June, attacks on
women’s rights intensified when the
government released a draft of Cambodia’s
proposed Law on Public Order. The draft
prohibited women from wearing clothes that
were “too short” or “too see-through”.
Despite this oppressive environment, many
women and girls engaged in online protest
against the draft law, which was still pending
at year end.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Detention conditions characterized by
overcrowding and ill-treatment continued to
systematically violate detainees’ right to
health. The government’s anti-drug
campaign, which was rife with torture, other
ill-treatment and fair trial rights violations,
entered its fourth year, exacerbating the
overcrowding crisis in prisons and drug
detention centres. The campaign, which
emphasized criminalization rather than
measures protecting the right to health,
disproportionately impacted women and poor
and at-risk populations, including children,
sex workers and people living with HIV.7
Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, in May
Cambodia’s ministers of justice and interior

107

revealed plans to reduce prison
overcrowding.8 However, progress was limited
and the practice of arbitrarily detaining
people who used drugs, without charge,
continued.

3. Cambodia: Proposed emergency powers would obliterate human
rights (News story, 2 April)

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS

6. Cambodia: Drop discriminatory ‘pornography’ charges against
Facebook seller (News story, 21 February)

The economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, combined with the partial
revocation of EBA trade preferences,
adversely affected the country’s crucial
garment sector, leaving tens of thousands of
workers, the majority of whom were women,
out of work. Workers’ socio-economic
insecurity was exacerbated by ballooning
levels of microfinance debt, which many were
unable to repay as a result of the loss of
income. NGOs and unions criticized the
government for a failure to protect those at
risk of homelessness and destitution because
of the widespread practice of microfinance
institutions using land titles as collateral for
loans. These developments put at risk the
right to an adequate standard of living for
millions of workers and their dependents.
People dependent on fishing and small-scale
agriculture also saw their livelihoods seriously
threatened by the increasing impacts of
climate change combined with development
projects, including hydroelectric dams.

4. Cambodia: Youth targeted in ‘shocking’ wave of arrests (News story,
10 September)
5. Cambodia: Harassment of forest defenders undermines struggle
against climate change (ASA 23/2004/2020)

7. Cambodia: Substance abuses: the human cost of Cambodia’s antidrug campaign (ASA 23/2220/2020)
8. Cambodian authorities must follow through with release of prisoners
amid COVID-19 (ASA 23/2768/2020)
9. Cambodia: Probe into Thai exile's enforced disappearance moving at
snail’s pace, has glaring gaps (News story, 8 December)

CAMEROON
Republic of Cameroon
Head of state: Paul Biya
Head of government: Joseph Dion Ngute

Security forces and armed groups continued
to commit human rights violations and
abuses. Hundreds of thousands of people
were displaced due to violence; and genderbased violence against women was
widespread. The government continued to
crack down on peaceful dissent and on
critics. There were reports of torture and
other ill-treatment in detention.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

BACKGROUND

On 4 June, Wanchalearm Satsaksit, a 37year-old Thai opposition activist living in exile
in Cambodia, was abducted by unidentified
persons in the capital, Phnom Penh. His
whereabouts remained unknown. On 15 July,
a group of UN experts wrote to the
Cambodian authorities expressing deep
concerns about the “lack of progress in the
investigation into the alleged abduction and
enforced disappearance”. As of December,
the authorities had made negligible progress
in the investigation.9

In February, the ruling Cameroon People’s
Democratic Movement party won the
legislative and local elections. Prior to this,
the Cameroon Renaissance Movement, led
by Maurice Kamto, called for a boycott of the
elections, and for electoral reform. President
Paul Biya has been in power since 1982.
On 17 March, the authorities adopted
measures to control the spread of COVID-19,
including by closing borders. On 31 March,
the President made a plea for public
solidarity to help fund the health sector. Many
critics raised concerns about the lack of
transparency surrounding the management
of the funds, and about public policies which
failed to address hardship resulting from loss
of earnings. In April, hundreds of prisoners

1. Cambodia: Overcrowded detention centres a ticking time bomb for
COVID-19 amid raft of ‘fake news’ arrests (News story, 27 March)
2. Cambodia’s Government Should Stop Silencing Journalists, Media
Outlets (ASA 23/3294/2020)

108

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

were released, but severe overcrowding
continued to put detainees at increased risk
of COVID-19.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Anglophone separatist armed groups
continued to commit serious human rights
abuses, and targeted people perceived as
government supporters in the North-West
and South-West regions.
In the North-West, a man was killed and
his father injured on 15 January, near
Bamenda city, when they tried to avoid a
checkpoint held by armed separatists. On 30
January, four humanitarian workers were
abducted by a separatist group which
accused them of working for the government.
They were released the next day. The
organization for which they worked said that
three of them were beaten and subjected to
psychological torture. On 7 August a
humanitarian worker was abducted from his
home in the Batibo subdivision by
unidentified assailants and later killed. Three
days later, armed men killed a teacher in
Nkwen district in Bamenda and threw his
body into a river.
On 11 August, the body of Confort
Tumassang, a 35-year-old woman, was found
on a road in Muyuka, a town in the SouthWest region. She had been beheaded by her
attackers who were believed to be
separatists. They posted a video of her
execution on social media in which they
accused her of complicity with security
forces.
At least eight students were killed and
others injured in an attack on a school on 24
October in the town of Kumba in Mémé
division, South-West region. The authorities
accused armed separatists.
Meanwhile, in the conflict in the Far North
region, armed groups related to Boko Haram
carried out hundreds of attacks, committing
serious human rights abuses. Some of these
amounted to war crimes. Between January
and December, at least 312 civilians,
including children as young as 10, were
killed in at least 412 attacks, according to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

data compiled from UN bodies, media and
other organizations.
Internally displaced people (IDPs) were
victims of attacks. In August, at least 18
people were killed and 11 injured when
assailants threw an explosive device into a
makeshift camp in which they were sleeping,
near Nguetchewe village. Eight hundred IDPs
had taken shelter in the area. In September,
according to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, a suicide bomb attack killed seven
people and wounded 14 others at Koyapé, a
village which hosted IDPs.
Also in the Far North region, as of
December, at least 124 people, mainly
women and children, were victims of
abductions by armed groups related to Boko
Haram.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In the armed conflict with separatist armed
groups, the military carried out attacks
against villages in which people were
unlawfully killed and their homes destroyed.
There was a spike in such violence in the
run-up to the elections in January and
February.
In January, soldiers shot at people in a
market in Ndoh village in the South-West
region, in a reprisal attack following reports of
a soldier being killed in the area. At least 16
people were killed and five injured, including
two boys aged 14 and 17.
On 14 February, at least 21 people were
killed, including children and two pregnant
women, in the Ngarbuh neighbourhood in
the North-West region. After NGOs
investigated the incident, the government
established a Joint Commission of Inquiry
which, on 21 April, concluded that 10
children and three women had died during
“gunfire exchange” between the army,
supported by members of a “vigilante group”,
and an armed group. The authorities said
that disciplinary procedures would be taken
against all soldiers who participated in the
operation, while others would face arrest. No
official information was available on this at
the end of the year.

109

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
As of November, according to the UN Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), more than 700,000 Cameroonians
were internally displaced within or outside the
North-West and South-West regions, as a
result of violence. A further 60,000 people
sought refuge in neighbouring Nigeria. More
than 320,000 people were internally
displaced in the Far North region.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The OCHA recorded 676 incidents of genderbased violence in the North-West and SouthWest regions in September (compared to 567
cases in August). The organization said that
their records may not have reflected the total
number of cases due to their limited access
to affected communities. Of all reported
cases, sexual violence represented 39%.
Survivors of gender-based violence crimes
were mostly women (64%).

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to crack down on
peaceful dissent, banning demonstrations
and arbitrarily arresting those who exercised
their rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. On 18 September, four
members of the Stand Up For Cameroon
movement, a coalition of political parties,
NGOs and others, were arrested by the
gendarmerie in Douala city after attending a
meeting at the Cameroon People’s Party
headquarters. They were brought before a
military court on false charges of attempted
conspiracy, revolution and insurrection. The
judge ordered their pre-trial detention in New
Bell prison where they remained at the end of
the year.
Maurice Kamto called for peaceful
demonstrations to take place on 22
September to demand the President’s
resignation. Governors of the West and
Centre regions responded by banning all
demonstrations for an indefinite period. The
security forces surrounded Maurice Kamto’s
house between 22 September and 8

110

December. At least 500 demonstrators were
arrested on 22 September, the majority of
whom were members or supporters of the
Cameroon Renaissance Movement.
According to lawyers, 160 of them remained
in detention in the towns of Douala, Yaoundé,
Bafoussam and Nkongsamba and, as of 9
December, 13 had been given prison
sentences by civilian courts, and 14 had
appeared before a military court.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The death in custody of journalist Samuel
Ebuwe Ajiekia was finally revealed by
independent media on 2 June, and then by
the National Union of Cameroonian
Journalists. His whereabouts had been
unknown for nearly a year, and his death had
been kept secret by the authorities. On 5
June, the Defence Ministry confirmed his
death and said that he had died of sepsis on
17 August 2019 at the Cameroon Military
Hospital in Yaoundé, although photographs of
his body showed signs of physical torture and
other ill-treatment. Samuel Ebuwe Ajiekia was
arrested in Buea, the capital of the SouthWest region, on 2 August 2019, after he had
criticized the government’s handling of the
Anglophone crisis. He was initially detained
at the Buea police station before being taken
to an undisclosed location.

CANADA
Canada
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Governor
General Julie Payette
Head of government: Justin Trudeau
There were concerns about governmental
responses to the COVID-19 pandemic,
Indigenous land defenders, climate change
and past cases of forced and coerced
sterilization of Indigenous women and girls.

BACKGROUND
Governments at all levels instituted public
health measures in response to COVID-19.
There were concerns about inadequate

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

responses for groups experiencing
disproportionate impact, including
Indigenous Peoples, Black and racialized
communities, women, older persons, sex
workers, people seeking asylum, and migrant
workers. Governments did not act on a
proposal from more than 300 organizations
and experts for human rights oversight of
responses to the pandemic.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Throughout the year, Indigenous land
defenders were subjected to threats and
violence throughout their territories.
In January and February, Indigenous
Peoples organized actions in solidarity with
land defenders in Wet’suwet’en territory
facing rights violations from the federal and
British Columbia governments and the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police.
In April, the federal government and
Asubpeeschoseewagong First Nation reached
an agreement to fund a health care facility to
treat decades of mercury poisoning.
In May, First Nations in northern Manitoba
successfully advocated to be consulted by
Manitoba Hydro on measures to prevent the
spread of COVID-19 from the Keeyask
Hydroelectric Dam construction site.
In July, the government of British
Columbia ordered an independent review of
ongoing construction of the Site C dam,
which does not have the consent of directly
affected First Nations and faces mounting
geotechnical risks.
In September, Joyce Echaquan, an
Atikamekw woman, live-streamed racist
taunts from health care workers before her
death at a Quebec hospital. Her death
prompted calls to address racism in health
care.
In October, government and police failed
to respond adequately to violence and
property damage experienced by Mi’kmaq
fishers in Nova Scotia exercising their right to
fish lobster.
In December, the federal government
tabled a bill to implement the UN Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The
same month, Canada contested and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

appealed the Canadian Human Rights
Tribunal ruling determining eligibility for
compensation for Canada’s discrimination
against First Nations children.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
In February, the Federal Court of Appeal
dismissed an appeal by Indigenous groups
challenging construction of the Trans
Mountain Pipeline, which is to transport
bitumen from oilsands in Alberta.
In September, the Supreme Court of
Canada heard an appeal by three provinces
challenging the federal government’s
constitutional authority to enact a nationwide
carbon-pricing scheme.
In November, the government proposed
climate legislation that will enshrine a
commitment to net-zero carbon emissions by
2050 but was criticized by civil society as
being insufficient given Canada’s
responsibilities as a wealthy nation.
In December, the government released a
new plan for meeting Canada’s climate
targets that includes significant increases in
carbon pricing in coming years.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In February, in its response to 2018 UN
Committee against Torture recommendations
regarding forced and coerced sterilization of
Indigenous women and girls, the government
failed to commit to investigate cases, halt the
practice or ensure justice for survivors.
In September, the government committed
to invest in a Canada-wide early learning and
child care system that will be “accessible,
affordable, inclusive, and high quality”.
In September, the government promised to
“accelerate” development of a National
Action Plan in response to the 2019 report by
the National Inquiry into Missing and
Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls, and
re-committed to developing a National Action
Plan on gender-based violence, but gave no
details of the process.
In November, the Quebec Superior Court
heard a legal challenge to the province’s
“secularism” law, which bans certain public
servants from wearing religious symbols at

111

work, raising concerns about gender equality,
discrimination, religious freedom and
freedom of expression.

other essential services impacted by
COVID-19.

DISCRIMINATION

In February, the Supreme Court ruled that a
lawsuit by Eritrean nationals against
Vancouver-based Nevsun Resources,
regarding human rights abuses associated
with the company’s mine in Eritrea, could
proceed in Canadian courts. The plaintiffs
reached a confidential settlement with the
company in October.
In June, Alberta province passed the
Critical Infrastructure Defence Act,
prohibiting protests and similar actions
targeting infrastructure deemed “essential”.
A challenge to the law’s infringement of
freedoms of speech, assembly and
association was pending.
In September, the Special Rapporteur on
toxics and human rights called on Canada to
grant the Canadian Ombudsperson for
Responsible Enterprise (CORE) promised
powers to independently investigate alleged
human rights abuses associated with
Canadian companies operating abroad.
Export Development Canada failed to act
on civil society calls to reform its due
diligence screenings of loans to controversial
projects such as the Hidroituango dam in
Colombia. Prosecutors did not act on a 2019
recommendation from investigators to lay
criminal charges against those responsible
for the 2014 Mount Polley mine disaster. An
appeal by affected communities of the
company’s permit to discharge untreated
mine waste into Quesnel Lake was pending.

A disproportionate number of Indigenous,
Black and other racialized individuals died
following interactions with police during the
year.
In September, the federal government
“pledged to address systemic racism”,
including in policing and the justice system,
but did not ban police practices of identity
card checks and street checks.
In October, an Ottawa police officer was
acquitted of charges related to the 2016
death of Abdirahman Abdi, a Black man,
during a violent arrest.
Also in October, the government facilitated
the return to Canada of a five-year-old
Canadian orphan from northeast Syria but
refused to act on cases of at least 46 other
citizens, including 25 children, arbitrarily
detained in camps controlled by Kurdish
forces.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
In March, as part of COVID-19 border control
measures, the government prohibited most
people seeking asylum from entering Canada
from the USA.
In July, the Quebec government
announced it would stop refusing public
health services to children who are Canadian
citizens but whose non-citizen parents are
not covered by provincial health insurance.
The change had not been implemented by
the end of the year.
In July, the Federal Court struck down the
Canada/US Safe Third Country Agreement,
which bars most asylum claims at official
land border posts. The ruling was suspended
in October pending the outcome of an
appeal.
In August, the federal government
announced a programme to provide
permanent resident status to asylum-seekers
who worked in health care facilities between
March and August. The programme was not
available to refugee claimants who worked in

112

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In October, the government tabled proposed
legislation to ban conversion therapy that
seeks to change people’s sexual orientation
or suppress a person’s gender identity or
expression.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In April, the federal government ended a
moratorium on new arms export permits to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Saudi Arabia, despite ongoing concerns that
Saudi forces are responsible for war crimes in
Yemen.
In October, the federal government
suspended arms exports to Turkey while
investigating reports that Canadian dronesensor technology was improperly used in the
conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia.

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Central African Republic
Head of state: Faustin-Archange Touadéra
Head of government: Firmin Ngrébada
Armed groups continued to commit war
crimes and other human rights abuses.
Sexual violence remained widespread. The
justice system made important but limited
progress towards combating impunity for
crimes under international law. The right to
health was severely restricted. Foreign
companies were responsible for the
environmental degradation of local people’s
land and water.

BACKGROUND
Following the Khartoum Peace Agreement,
signed by the government and 14 armed
groups in February 2019, the security
situation remained precarious. Armed
groups, including the Ex-Seleka and AntiBalaka, continued to control most of the
country’s territory. In July, the UN Security
Council renewed its arms embargo on the
country for one year. In November, the
mandate of the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) was also
renewed for a year.
On 3 December, the Constitutional Court
rejected several candidacies for the
presidential election of 27 December,
including of former President Francois
Bozizé. On 17 December, several armed
groups formed the Coalition of Patriots for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Change to oppose the presidential election
and launched several attacks in the west and
south of the country.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups were responsible for war
crimes and other human rights abuses,
including killings, sexual violence against
civilians and attacks against humanitarian
workers. The Popular Front for the Rebirth of
Central African Republic; the Central African
Patriotic Movement; Return, Reclamation
and Rehabilitation (known as 3R); the Union
for Peace in the Central African Republic;
and Anti-Balaka were among the main
perpetrators.
According to the UN Security Council, 18
civilians were killed in Ndélé city, in the
north-east, in an attack by armed groups in
March. Between June and October, the UN
Secretary-General reported 271 cases of
human rights abuses including homicides,
rapes and lootings. Over the same period, the
UN recorded 60 cases of conflict-related
sexual violence including 55 rapes or
attempted rapes resulting in the death of one
victim, four forced marriages and one case of
sexual slavery. The country continued to be
one of the most dangerous places for the
staff of humanitarian organizations. The UN
Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) recorded 424 incidents
targeting aid workers and their facilities –
mainly robberies, thefts and threats –
including 59 cases in December. Three
humanitarian workers were killed and 29
injured.
According to the June report of the UN
Panel of Experts on the Central African
Republic, armed groups continued to benefit
from the increase in gold production. For
instance, in Nana-Mambéré and MambéréKadéï prefectures, the 3R imposed taxes on
miners. The Experts also expressed concerns
about reports of illegal international trafficking
networks which funded and supplied armed
groups.

113

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Impunity for crimes under international law
remained widespread. Several armed group
leaders held roles in government while their
members committed human rights abuses.
In February, the criminal court of Bangui
convicted five Anti-Balaka leaders for war
crimes and crimes against humanity in
relation to the 2017 attack in Bangassou, in
which at least 62 civilians and 10 UN
peacekeepers were killed. It was the first
conviction for crimes under international law
since the conflict started. However, serious
concerns arose during the trial over the rights
of the defendants and protection of victims
and witnesses. The work of the criminal
courts was hindered in March when the
COVID-19 pandemic brought hearings to a
halt for the rest of the year.
The Special Criminal Court, a UN-backed
hybrid court mandated to investigate and
prosecute crimes under international law,
and other serious human rights violations
committed in the country since 2003,
confirmed in September that 10 cases were
under investigation. At least 21 people were
arrested as a result of investigations in 2019
and 2020 and were in pre-trial detention at
the end of the year. However, proceedings
lacked transparency and the identities of
those arrested were not publicly disclosed.
There were also delays in the recruitment of
international judges and the establishment of
the Court’s legal aid system.
Alfred Yekatom and Patrice-Edouard
Ngaïssona, Anti-Balaka leaders, remained
waiting to face trial before the ICC, which was
scheduled to start in February 2021. They
were arrested for war crimes and crimes
against humanity and were transferred to The
Hague in 2018 and 2019 respectively.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The Gender-Based Violence Information
Management System recorded 2,904
incidents of gender-based violence, including
668 cases of sexual violence, between April
and June, compared to 1,299 incidents

114

between January and March. In 92% of
cases the violence was perpetrated against
women and girls; 52% of cases happened in
the victim’s home; and 63% of attacks were
carried out by perpetrators who were known
to their victims. However, some victims did
not report crimes for fear of reprisals or
stigma.
In April, the UN Human Rights Committee
issued its concluding observations on the
country’s third periodic report in which it
expressed concerns about various legal
provisions in the Criminal Code, including
Article 105 “which allows the perpetrator of
an abduction to marry the victim, thereby
depriving the latter of the right to take
proceedings against the former”. The
Committee recommended that the
government repeal Article 105 and also that it
adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination
legislation.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to the WHO, humanitarian
organizations provided 70% of all health
services, and the country was among those
least prepared to deal with the COVID-19
pandemic. In October, the organization
reported that PPE for health care personnel
met less than one third of estimated needs,
and there were only two ventilators available
nationwide. There were just four COVID-19
treatment centres which were based in
Bangui, the capital. Outside the capital, there
were seven centres for the treatment of mild
and moderate cases which provided
quarantine facilities.
According to OCHA, over half the
population – 2.6 million people – were in
need of humanitarian assistance and
protection, including 660,000 people who
were, by 31 July, internally displaced by
violence. Children were particularly affected
by the dire humanitarian situation. One child
in 18 was at a high risk of dying from severe
acute malnutrition, and only one in 10 had
access to hygiene facilities, while one third of
the population had access to safe drinking
water.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION

BACKGROUND

In April, seven people died in one week in the
Bozoum region, reportedly as a result of
extensive environmental damage caused by
four gold mining companies who abandoned
their mines in late April.
In 2018, the companies had cut down
trees, diverted an area of the Ouham river
and excavated the riverbed, leaving it in
ruins. Analysis of water samples showed
evidence of mercury contamination far in
excess of international safety standards.
Local people reported that the river water was
filthy, and fish stocks had declined.
Residents of Boyele village had to travel
10km to find safe drinking water. People
living in the area reported that some people
had developed skin rashes; there were also
reports of the rate of miscarriages being
disproportionately high, and several babies
were born with physical deformities.
According to the local population, they
were not consulted about the mining project,
nor were any environmental and social
impact studies conducted prior to the
excavation process, as required under Article
34 of the Environmental Code. There was no
established system to allow residents to make
compensation claims against land
appropriation.

The security situation remained precarious,
particularly in the Lake Chad area where
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West
Africa Province (ISWAP) operated. Deadly
inter-communal violence continued including
in Batha and Sila provinces.
Legislative elections were postponed for
the fifth year and scheduled for 2021
because, according to the Electoral
Commission President, the census was
delayed by the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. At the end of October, for several
days, police units surrounded offices of
political parties and civil society organizations
who had refused or not been invited to
participate in a governmental national forum
on institutional and political reforms.
The government adopted measures to
control the spread of the pandemic, including
a ban on gatherings, a curfew, and heavy
fines and prison sentences for not wearing
face masks; they also took steps to address
hardship.

CHAD
Republic of Chad
Head of state and government: Idriss Déby Itno

Freedom of expression was restricted.
Measures to control the spread of COVID-19
limited many people’s access to food.
Access to health care was restricted. Early
marriage and female genital mutilation
(FGM) continued in violation of the law.
Armed groups committed human rights
abuses against the population.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In January, Baradine Berdei Targuio, a
human rights defender, was taken from his
home in N’Djamena, the capital, by armed
men wearing balaclavas. He was believed to
be held incommunicado at the National
Security Agency in N’Djamena. In February,
the Justice Minister confirmed he had been
arrested for “subversive activities on social
media”. In violation of the law, he was not
presented to a prosecutor and an
investigative judge until August. He was
charged with breaching national security,
illegal possession of weapons, and assault
and battery. He remained in arbitrary
detention pending trial.
On 27 November, police arrested and
detained Alain Kemba Didah of The Time, a
citizen movement, at the FM Liberté radio
station in N’Djamena, apparently in
connection with the authorities’ ban on an
alternative forum on reforms, initiated by
political parties and civil society
organizations. He was charged with

115

“disturbing public order” and “acts of
rebellion”. He was released on 11 December
after a tribunal acquitted him.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The rights to freedom of expression and
access to information continued to be
violated. In March, the Union of Chadian
Journalists said two national television
journalists and their driver were beaten by
the police in N’Djamena while they were
reporting on COVID-19 restrictions on
gatherings. They were interrogated for three
hours before being released without charge.
Since 22 July, social media platforms were
partially blocked after a video was circulated
showing an army colonel in a fight with some
men in N’Djamena. The Minister of
Communication said that the measure, which
remained in place at the end of the year, was
taken to prevent people from sending hate
messages.
In September, the High Authority for
Broadcast Media suspended 12 perceived
opposition newspapers for three months on
grounds they did not comply with the press
law which required them to employ a director
of publications and editor-in-chief who were
trained journalists and university graduates.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 14 April, during a military operation
against armed groups in the Lake Chad area,
known as “Bohoma Anger”, 58 suspected
members of Boko Haram were arrested and
detained at the N’Djamena Gendarmerie
Legion 10. By 16 April, 44 of them had died
in their cell. The Public Prosecutor said
autopsies concluded that they had died after
consuming a poisonous substance. The
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
investigated the case and said poor detention
conditions could have contributed to their
deaths, and rejected claims that they had
committed suicide. The men were held in
cramped cells, forced to sleep on the floor
without bedding and were denied water and
food.
The Chadian League for Human Rights
(LTDH) reported that more than 200 people,

116

including dozens of women, were arrested in
the streets and workplaces in May. Many
were beaten with batons in detention, for
violating the curfew in the Mayo-Kebbi West
and Oriental Logone provinces.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Right to food
In July, the Famine Early Warning Systems
Network (FEWS-NET) said that COVID-19
measures had led to increased economic
hardship among those living in poverty,
rendering many food insecure. In the north
and east, the cost of staple foods increased
by 21%. The armed conflict in the Lake Chad
area also caused widespread hunger. FEWSNET said that 39 of the 107 departments
were affected, among which 15 were in
crisis, and nearly 4 million people were in
need of humanitarian assistance.

Right to health
Access to health care was limited. According
to government data people travelled around
an average of 45km to access health centres.
There was a ratio of one doctor to 28,531
people and one midwife to 5,902 women.
Medical equipment and facilities were
inadequate to deal with the influx of
COVID-19 patients. In May, the WHO said
that the COVID-19-related death rate was 6%
higher than the average in the continent.
In June, the LTDH said that 68 health
workers were reported to have been infected
due to lack of PPE. The government’s
quarantine facilities for patients or others at
risk of having contracted COVID-19 did not
provide for necessary isolation to prevent the
spread of infection. According to the LTDH,
hygiene standards were poor, water was
scarce and medical care insufficient.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Media continued to report cases of early
marriage, a practice which violated a 2015
law prohibiting child marriage. According to
UNICEF, the child marriage rate was one of
the highest in the world.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Women’s rights organizations said that
more than 200 girls were subjected to FGM
in July and August in the Mandoul and
Logone Oriental provinces. In September, the
NHRC expressed concern about the increase
in FGM which was illegal under national law.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Boko Haram and ISWAP committed serious
human rights abuses against the population
in the Lake Chad area which resulted in
dozens of deaths. According to the
International Organization for Migration,
298,803 people were internally displaced in
April in the region, rising to 363,807 in
September; 64% of them had left their
villages to escape the violence.
In one case, reported by the UN SecretaryGeneral, 10 people were killed in August
when Boko Haram attacked their village,
Tinana, in the Kaya department. According to
local authorities, during the night armed men
surrounded the village, fired on civilians and
looted houses.

CHILE
Republic of Chile
Head of state and government: Sebastián Piñera
Echenique
Although mass protests against persistent
inequalities decreased due to the COVID-19
pandemic, those that did take place were
usually met with excessive use of force by
state agents, often resulting in serious
injuries. The government misused the law to
criminalize protesters, invoking the State
Security Law and introducing new criminal
laws. The pandemic had a disproportionate
impact on those living in poverty and those
dependent on public health services, as
well as on public health workers.

BACKGROUND
Mass demonstrations continued in the first
months of the year but largely stopped in
compliance with measures to curb the
spread of COVID-19. The government

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

declared a “state of catastrophe” due to the
pandemic in March, which was extended
until December. This imposed restrictions on
movement and a night-time curfew. Chile was
one of the 10 countries worldwide with the
highest number of deaths per million
inhabitants due to COVID-19, affecting mostly
poorer communities and those in vulnerable
situations.
Chile failed to adhere to the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(the Escazú Agreement).
In October, Chile held a referendum and
approved a process to draft a new
Constitution.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Mass protests continued from January until
mid-March, with multiple new incidents of
excessive use of force. At least two new
criminal lawsuits for alleged crimes against
humanity were filed against President Piñera
and other officials. At the end of the year, the
Regional Prosecutor of Valparaíso was jointly
investigating these and other lawsuits filed in
2019.
The National Human Rights Institute
expressed concern at the slow pace of
investigations into human rights violations
that occurred during the mass protests in
2019. In August, the Prosecutor’s Office filed
formal charges against policemen accused in
cases such as the blinding of Gustavo Gatica
and Fabiola Campillai, almost a year after the
incidents to which the charges related.
Administrative investigations and sanctions
by the Carabineros (Chilean National Police)
were slow and ineffective, often based on less
serious administrative offences rather than
human rights violations.
Organizers of “soup kitchens” set up to
address widespread hunger said police
resorted to excessive use of force to try to
shut them down.
In March, during the curfew, police shot
Jonathan Reyes in the chest, killing him. The
police alleged they acted in self-defence, but

117

video footage showed there was no evident
threat when the shot was fired.
As measures to curb COVID-19 were
relaxed, protests increased. In October, a 16year-old protester sustained serious injuries
after a policeman pushed him and he fell off
a bridge onto the concrete channel of the
Mapocho River in the city of Santiago. A
policeman was charged and the prosecution
produced evidence that police officers did
not attempt to help the injured youth.
Recommendations by commissions on
police reform set up since November 2019
by government and Congress had yet to be
implemented. A bill to “modernize” the
police, with a narrow focus on stricter
oversight procedures, was before Congress at
the end of the year.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The government filed lawsuits against over
1,000 protesters using the State Security
Law, which is not in line with international
human rights law and carries a risk of
political harassment.
An “anti-barricade” law came into force in
January, increasing penalties for people who
impede free movement by placing objects on
streets. The broad and vague definition used
in the law risks criminalizing legitimate acts of
protest.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers told Amnesty International
that, during the peak of the pandemic, they
worked in unsafe conditions, with insufficient
personal protection equipment and high
levels of stress, placing their physical and
mental health at risk. They also said that they
risked sanctions if they spoke out publicly.
This affected mostly public hospitals that
provide services to poorer communities.
Private clinics did not report these problems
and had significantly lower mortality rates.
To reduce overcrowding in prisons,
Congress passed a law that enabled over
1,700 prisoners at high risk from COVID-19
to be released and placed under house
arrest.

118

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
In June, Mapuche women who sell
vegetables on the streets in the city of
Temuco in the south of the country filed a
criminal lawsuit against the Chilean National
Police for torture in detention, including
forced nudity. The women had been
harassed for several years due to a municipal
ban on selling goods on the street.
In August, Mapuche protesters occupied
the premises of the Municipality of
Curacautín in southern Chile. Private
individuals came to the building to “support
the police” who were ejecting the Mapuche.
The individuals shouted racist slurs and
allegedly burned a protester’s vehicle. All the
Mapuche were detained, but neither the
government nor the police took action against
the individuals who had engaged in acts
against the Mapuche.
The trial of the policemen accused of
killing Camilo Catrillanca, a Mapuche, in
November 2018 began in March but was
suspended due to the pandemic. It restarted
in a partly in-person and partly virtual format
on 27 October.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The government failed to prioritize sexual and
reproductive health care as essential services
during the pandemic or issue protocols to
provide abortion services for the limited
reasons allowed for in law.
In October, Congress rejected a bill to
regulate comprehensive sexuality education
for young people.

RIGHTS OF LGBTI PEOPLE
Changes to the anti-discrimination law to
expand its scope and include prevention
measures as well as reparation to victims was
before Congress at the end of the year.
In June, for the first time, a judicial
decision recognized in law two women as the
mothers of a child and ordered the Civil
Registry to register them as a family, which
the Civil Registry had refused to do. The
child, a two-year-old boy, was registered with
two mothers in July.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF MIGRANTS
In December, Congress approved a new bill
on migration that could reduce the
opportunities for migrants to regularize their
legal status once in Chile and undermine the
principle of non-refoulement. A group of
Congresspeople filed a requirement before
the Constitutional Court, asking to declare
parts of the law unconstitutional. A decision
was pending.
Due to the pandemic, the government
initiated a “humanitarian plan of orderly
return” for foreign nationals who wanted to
return to their countries. People who
accessed the plan were required to accept
being banned from returning to Chile for nine
years. In July, the Supreme Court ruled that
this requirement was unlawful.

CHINA
People’s Republic of China
Head of state: Xi Jinping
Head of government: Li Keqiang
The year was marked by harsh crackdowns
on human rights defenders and people
perceived to be dissidents, as well as the
systematic repression of ethnic minorities.
The beginning of the year saw the start of
the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, which
killed more than 4,600 people in China.
People demanded freedom of expression
and transparency after authorities
reprimanded health professionals for
warning about the virus. At the UN, China
was strongly criticized and urged to allow
immediate, meaningful and unfettered
access to Xinjiang. Stringent restrictions on
freedom of expression continued unabated.
Foreign journalists faced detention and
expulsion, as well as systematic delays to
and refusals of visa renewals. Chinese and
other tech firms operating outside China
blocked what the government deemed
politically sensitive content, extending its
censorship standards internationally. China
enacted its first Civil Code, which received

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

thousands of submissions by the public
calling for legalization of same-sex
marriage. Hong Kong’s National Security
Law led to a clampdown on freedom of
expression.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Despite constitutional provisions and its
international commitments and obligations,
China continued its unrelenting persecution
of human rights defenders (HRDs) and
activists. Throughout the year, they were
systematically subjected to harassment,
intimidation, enforced disappearance and
arbitrary and incommunicado detention, as
well as lengthy terms of imprisonment. The
absence of an independent judiciary and
effective fair trial guarantees compounded
such recurrent violations. Many human rights
lawyers were denied their right to freedom of
movement, as well as to meet and represent
defendants and have access to case
materials. HRDs and activists were targeted
and charged with broadly defined and
vaguely worded offences such as “subverting
state power”, “inciting subversion of state
power” and “picking quarrels and provoking
trouble”.
Dozens of prominent HRDs and activists
continued to be arbitrarily detained after
attending a private gathering in Xiamen,
Fujian province, in December 2019. On 23
March, UN human rights experts expressed
grave concerns for former human rights
lawyer Ding Jiaxi and other HRDs whom they
said had been subjected to enforced
disappearance. On 19 June, after six months’
incommunicado detention, legal scholars Xu
Zhiyong and Ding Jiaxi were formally arrested
for “inciting subversion of state power” and
placed under “residential surveillance at a
designated location” without access to their
family and lawyers of their choice.1,2 On 24
February, Hong Kong bookseller Gui Minhai
was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment on
charges of “illegally providing intelligence to
foreign entities” following his secret trial.3
Anti-discrimination activists Cheng Yuan, Liu
Yongze and Wu Gejianxiong were tried in
secret between 31 August and 4 September

119

on the charge of “subversion of state power”
after more than a year of incommunicado
detention. The three men were arbitrarily
detained solely for advocating for the rights of
marginalized groups and at-risk people.
Huang Qi, founder and director of the
Sichuan-based human rights website “64
Tianwang”, was finally allowed to talk to his
mother on 17 September, the first time since
being detained more than four years
previously. Huang’s health had reportedly
deteriorated since being sentenced to 12
years’ imprisonment in January 2019 and he
appeared to show symptoms of malnutrition.
Australian writer and blogger Yang Hengjun,
held incommunicado since 30 December
2019 and charged with espionage, was finally
able to meet with an Australian consular
representative and his lawyer on 31 August.
Yang reportedly endured over 300
interrogations and continued to deny all
allegations against him.
Five years after the unprecedented
crackdown targeting human rights activists
and lawyers known as the “709 crackdown”,
many lawyers remained in prison or under
strict surveillance. On 17 June, human rights
lawyer Yu Wensheng was tried in secret and
sentenced to four years’ imprisonment for
allegedly “inciting subversion of state power”
after being held incommunicado for 18
months.4 Yu was tortured in detention and his
health deteriorated drastically, according to
his lawyer. Human rights lawyer Jiang
Tianyong, released in 2019 after serving a
two-year sentence for “inciting subversion of
state power”, remained under strict
surveillance along with his parents. Human
rights lawyer Wang Quanzhang was released
from prison on 4 April after more than four
years’ imprisonment for “subverting state
power” and reunited with his family in late
April. According to his lawyer, Wang had
been subjected to torture.

AUTONOMOUS REGIONS: XINJIANG,
TIBET AND INNER MONGOLIA
Severe and wide-ranging repression of ethnic
minorities continued unabated under the
pretence of “anti-separatism”, “anti-

120

extremism” and “counter-terrorism” in the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region
(Xinjiang) and the Tibet Autonomous Region
(Tibet). Access to and from Tibet remained
highly restricted, particularly for journalists,
academics and human rights organizations,
making it extremely difficult to investigate and
document the human rights situation in the
region. In Xinjiang, since 2017 an estimated
one million or more Uyghurs, Kazakhs and
other predominantly Muslim peoples were
arbitrarily detained without trial and
subjected to political indoctrination and
forced cultural assimilation in
“transformation-through-education” centres.
Documenting the full scope of violations
remained impossible due to a lack of publicly
available data and restrictions on access to
the region. Despite having initially denied the
existence of camps, authorities later
described them as “vocational training”
centres. Nevertheless, satellite imagery
indicated that an increasing number of
camps continued to be built throughout the
year.
Missing since 2017, prominent Uyghur
historian and publisher Iminjan Seydin
suddenly reappeared and praised the
Chinese government in a video published by
a state-run English language newspaper in
early May. His comments in the video
appeared to have been scripted in an attempt
to discredit his daughter’s public testimony
about his arbitrary detention. Ekpar Asat, a
Uyghur entrepreneur and philanthropist,
went missing in 2016, after returning to
Xinjiang from attending a US State
Department leadership training programme.
In January, his sister discovered that Asat
had been convicted in secret on charges of
“inciting ethnic hatred and ethnic
discrimination” and sentenced to 15 years in
prison. Detained since January, Uyghur
model Mardan Ghappar had not been seen
or heard from since March when his
messages and images describing his poor
detention conditions were shared on social
media. Mahira Yakub, a Uyghur who worked
in an insurance company, was indicted for
“giving material support to terrorist activity” in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

January for transferring money to her parents
in Australia. According to her sister, the
money was transferred in 2013 to help her
parents buy a house. Kazakh writer Nagyz
Muhammed was sentenced to life
imprisonment in September on charges of
“separatism” in connection with a dinner he
had with friends on Kazakhstan
Independence Day around 10 years ago.
An increasing number of Uyghurs living
overseas requested proof of life from
authorities for their missing relatives in
Xinjiang. Uyghurs living overseas were
reportedly told by Chinese diplomatic offices
in their countries of residence that they could
only renew their Chinese passports if they
returned to Xinjiang. Chinese embassies and
agents harassed and intimidated members of
the Uyghur and other diaspora minority
communities across the globe.5 To silence
and suppress the activities of Uyghurs living
abroad, local authorities in Xinjiang reportedly
targeted their relatives there. Numerous
Uyghurs residing overseas were contacted by
Chinese security agents via messaging apps
and asked to provide information, such as ID
numbers, locations of residence, passport
photos and ID information of their spouses.
Others reportedly received repeated calls
from security police asking them to gather
information about and spy on others in
overseas Uyghur communities.
In June, 50 independent UN human rights
experts strongly criticized China for the
repression of religious and ethnic minorities
in Xinjiang and Tibet, among others. On 6
October, 39 UN member states issued a joint
statement expressing grave concerns about
the human rights situation in Xinjiang, Hong
Kong and other regions, urging China to allow
immediate, meaningful and unfettered
access to Xinjiang for independent observers,
including the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights and relevant UN special
procedure mandate holders. Capitalizing on
its rising political and economic influence
and expanding role within the UN, China
continued to seek ways to challenge
established human rights mechanisms.6

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In Inner Mongolia, there were region-wide
protests over a new “bilingual education”
policy that would gradually change the
teaching medium of several classes from
Mongolian to Mandarin Chinese throughout
the nine years of compulsory schooling.
According to media reports, hundreds of
people, including students, parents,
teachers, pregnant women and children,
were arrested for “picking quarrels and
provoking trouble” solely because they
participated in peaceful protests or shared
information about protests on the internet.
Human rights lawyer Hu Baolong was
reportedly formally arrested on charges of
“leaking state secrets overseas”.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Government censorship obstructed the flow
of vital information during the earliest weeks
of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan. In the
early stage of the epidemic, professional and
citizen journalists, as well as health workers,
were prevented from reporting on the
outbreak. The local authorities later admitted
that they had withheld information, thus
impeding the public’s timely access to
necessary information about the virus. By 21
February, there were already more than
5,511 criminal investigation cases against
individuals who published information in
relation to the COVID-19 outbreak for
“fabricating and deliberately disseminating
false and harmful information”, according to
the Ministry of Public Security. Although
health professionals had raised alarms about
the virus in late December 2019, the
government’s failure to promptly respond and
its targeting of those who spoke out delayed a
co-ordinated response.7
Extensive application of personal and
technological surveillance in the name of
public health and safety further tightened the
state’s grip on society.8 Each provincial
government assigned hundreds of thousands
of community workers to watch over their
neighbourhoods under a “grid management
system” deployed to enforce lockdowns.
Many residents unable to produce relevant
documents or who had recently been out of

121

town were denied entry to their own homes.
In April, African residents of Guangzhou and
other locations were evicted from their homes
and hotels and barred from restaurants,
facing discrimination in relation to the
COVID-19 pandemic.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Internet censorship continued, driven partly
by efforts to suppress information about
COVID-19 and extreme lockdown measures.
Medical professionals and activists were
harassed by authorities for “making false
comments” and “severely disturbing the
social order” in Wuhan, the epicentre of the
pandemic. Doctor Li Wenliang, one of eight
individuals who tried to sound the alarm
before the outbreak had been announced,
was reprimanded by local police four days
after he sent a warning message in a chat
group asking fellow doctors to wear personal
protective equipment to avoid infection. His
subsequent death from COVID-19 unleashed
nationwide outrage and grief on the internet,
with demands for freedom of expression and
an end to censorship. The authorities
blocked hundreds of keyword combinations
on social media and messaging apps. Online
posts of dissent, sensitive hashtags related to
the outbreak and demands for free speech
were quickly deleted. Leaked notices
indicated that authorities ordered people
accused of “spreading rumours” to delete
their social media accounts and posts.
Authorities detained or otherwise punished
people for revealing details about the
COVID-19 outbreak. Numerous journalists
and activists were reportedly harassed and
subjected to prolonged incommunicado
detention solely for sharing information about
COVID-19 on social media. Human rights
defender Chen Mei, along with two other
contributors to a crowd-sourced project
known as Terminus2049, were detained by
police in Beijing on 19 April and remained
out of contact with their families, solely for
collecting and archiving public information
about the pandemic. Outspoken lawyer and
citizen journalist Chen Qiushi and Wuhan
resident Fang Bin went missing in early

122

February after reporting on the outbreak and
posting footage from hospitals in Wuhan.
Their exact whereabouts remained unknown.
On 28 December, citizen journalist Zhang
Zhan was sentenced to four years’
imprisonment for reporting on COVID-19 in
Wuhan. Shackled 24 hours a day for more
than three months, Zhang was reportedly
tortured and forcibly fed by officials after she
began a hunger strike.
During the year, some foreign journalists
faced expulsion while others experienced
delays to and refusal of visa renewals. The
Chinese foreign ministry revoked credentials
for and expelled American journalists from
multiple US media groups. In August,
Australian journalist Cheng Lei was placed in
“residential surveillance at a designated
location” on suspicion of “endangering
national security”. Two other Australian
journalists left the country after initially being
barred from exiting and interrogated by
security officials.
In April, authorities placed new stringent
restrictions on academic papers about
tracing the origins of COVID-19, requiring
them to be submitted to a task force
appointed by the State Council for approval.
On 13 July, law professor Xu Zhangrun, who
published criticism of the government’s
response to the COVID-19 outbreak, was
released after six days’ detention. Xu was
reportedly fired from his job at Tsinghua
University one day after his release. On 19
August, Peking University announced a new
set of rules for attending online webinars and
conferences organized by foreign entities, as
well as those in Hong Kong and Macau. The
notice demanded that participants apply for
and seek approval 15 days before an event.
China’s censorship and surveillance
extended beyond its borders during the year.
Complying with strict domestic censorship
standards, Chinese tech firms operating
outside China blocked and censored content
deemed to be “politically sensitive”, including
topics relating to ethnic minorities, political
unrest and criticism of the Chinese
government. On 12 June, teleconferencing
company Zoom revealed that it had

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

suspended the accounts of human rights
activists outside China at the request of the
Chinese government and suggested it would
block any further meetings that the
government considered “illegal”.9 TikTok, a
video-sharing app, deleted numerous videos
shared by Uyghurs living abroad to draw
attention to their missing relatives. Leaked
internal documents showed that the platform
had instructed moderators to censor videos
featuring “politically sensitive” topics, such as
Falun Gong or the 1989 crackdown in
Tiananmen Square.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Regulations, effective as of 1 February,
stipulated that religious groups must “follow
the leadership of the Communist Party of
China… persist in the direction of sinicization
of religion, and practise core socialist values”.
The government sought to bring religious
teachings and practices in line with state
ideology and to comprehensively strengthen
control over both state-approved and
unregistered religious groups. Reports
documented the destruction of thousands of
cultural and religious sites, particularly in the
north-west of China. The state’s repression of
religion in Xinjiang and Tibet remained
severe. People were arbitrarily detained for
ordinary religious practices that authorities
deemed “signs of extremism” under the “Deextremification Regulations”.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
On 13 August, Shanghai Pride, China’s
largest and longest-running LGBTI festival,
announced the cancellation of all future
activities amid shrinking space for the LGBTI
community. Activists faced harassment for
speaking out against discrimination and
homophobia. Online platforms, including
microblogs and magazines, blocked and
removed LGBTI-related content and
hashtags. Despite various challenges and
mounting pressure, members of LGBTI
communities continued to fight for their
rights. A university student reportedly filed an

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

official complaint about references to gay and
lesbian people as suffering from a “common
psychosexual disorder” in a governmentapproved textbook. The court rejected the
lawsuit in August, even though China had
stopped classifying “homosexuality” as a
mental disorder in 2001. On 28 May, the
National People’s Congress (NPC) adopted its
first ever Civil Code, a draft of which had
received 213,634 comments from the public
regarding the marriage chapter. Although an
NPC spokesperson acknowledged a large
volume of calls for same-sex marriage, it was
still not legalized under the Civil Code, which
took effect on 1 January 2021.

HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
REGION
China’s top legislature adopted the broadlyworded Law of the People’s Republic of
China on Safeguarding National Security in
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
(the National Security Law). The local
government escalated its crackdown on prodemocracy activists and opposition leaders
and used national security as a pretext to
interfere in the media and education sectors.
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was further curtailed by seemingly arbitrary
enforcement of physical distancing
regulations in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic.

Freedoms of assembly and association
Repression of the right to peaceful assembly
persisted following the protests in 2019.10
Just three hours into a protest on New Year’s
Day, police declared an approved
demonstration “unlawful” and gave the
organizers and tens of thousands of largely
peaceful protesters 30 minutes to disperse.
The police then started firing tear gas and
water cannons at protesters and arrested 287
people, including three human rights
monitors.
On 18 April, the authorities arrested 15
prominent pro-democracy leaders and
activists for violating the Public Order
Ordinance, a law frequently used to prohibit
and end largely peaceful protests. They were

123

accused of organizing and joining
“unauthorized assemblies” that took place
more than six months before their arrests.
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was further curtailed after the authorities
imposed physical distancing regulations in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In
March, the government introduced the
Prevention and Control of Disease
(Prohibition on Group Gathering) Regulation,
banning public gatherings of more than four
people. The ban was revised several times
and at year’s end applied to gatherings of
more than two people.
The authorities subsequently banned at
least 14 protests, citing the COVID-19
pandemic. These included totally banning
the annual June Fourth Tiananmen
commemoration vigil and 1 July protest
march, despite pledges to observe physical
distancing by organizers of both assemblies,
who provided the authorities with detailed
plans for preventive measures. It was the first
time the government had prohibited either of
these two annual protests. Despite the ban,
thousands convened to commemorate June
Fourth at the historical protest site, and 26
activists were charged with “unauthorized
assembly” for joining the vigil.
As of 4 December, the Hong Kong police
had issued at least 7,164 fixed-penalty
tickets under the public gathering ban.
Peaceful protesters were often targeted under
the new ban despite having observed
physical distancing measures. Journalists
covering protests were also fined, despite an
exemption under the regulation covering
those who were attending as part of their
work.
Around 9,000 hospital health workers went
on strike in February against the
government’s delay in implementing border
controls in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. The Hospital Authority later
demanded that the individuals involved
explain their “absence at work” and
threatened to retaliate, adding to a chilling
message to doctors not to organize and go on
strike.

124

Freedom of expression
National security was used as a pretext to
restrict freedom of expression. Virtually
anything could be deemed a threat to
“national security" under the extremely vague
provisions of the National Security Law
adopted on 30 June without any meaningful
consultation and coming into effect the next
day. Giving the authorities new grounds to
prosecute peaceful activities, the law created
a chilling effect on free expression.11 By the
year’s end, the authorities had arrested 34
individuals for displaying political slogans,
establishing overseas organizations to call for
Hong Kong independence or supporting
various political groups. The authorities also
invoked the law’s extraterritorial provision and
issued arrest warrants against eight activists
residing outside Hong Kong.
On 10 August, Jimmy Lai, owner of the
pro-democracy newspaper Apple Daily, was
arrested for “collusion with a foreign country
or external elements”. Police raided the
newspaper’s offices and searched through
documents, in apparent disregard for
journalistic privilege. Lai remained in
detention after prosecutors appealed against
an earlier grant of bail.
On 6 October the authorities stripped a
primary school teacher of his teaching
registration for “spreading the idea of Hong
Kong independence”, reportedly for giving
pupils a worksheet containing questions such
as “What is freedom of speech?” and “What
is the reason for advocating Hong Kong
independence?”

LGBTI rights
On 4 March, the High Court ruled in the first
instance that same-sex couples who had
married overseas could enjoy equal rights to
apply for public rental housing. On 18
September, the High Court granted married
same-sex couples equal rights to inheritance
and succession if one spouse died without a
will. However, in a separate judgment handed
down the same day, the court ruled that to
deny same-sex couples the right to marry in
Hong Kong was constitutional.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

1. China: Prominent legal scholar held incommunicado: Xu Zhiyong
(ASA 17/2738/2020)
2. China: Further information: Lawyer charged for inciting subversion:
Ding Jiaxi (ASA 17/2645/2020)
3. China: Bookseller handed outrageous 10-year sentence must be
released (News story, 25 February)
4. China: Wife of detained lawyer Yu Wensheng tells of ongoing fight for
justice (Campaign, 9 July)
5. China: Nowhere feels safe: Uyghurs tell of China-led intimidation
campaign abroad (Research, February)
6. China: Joint NGO statement on Item 10 and Draft Resolution on
"Mutually Beneficial Cooperation" delivered during Item 10 General
Debate at HRC43 (IOR 40/2563/2020)
7. Explainer: Seven ways the coronavirus affects human rights (News
story, 5 February)
8. How China used technology to combat COVID-19 – and tighten its
grip on citizens (News story, 17 April)
9. China: Zoom must not become a tool in state-sponsored censorship
(News story, 12 June)
10. Hong Kong: Missing truth, missing justice (ASA 17/1868/2020)
11. Hong Kong’s national security law: 10 things you need to know (News
story, 17 July)

COLOMBIA
Republic of Colombia
Head of state and government: Iván Duque Márquez
Crimes under international law and human
rights violations and abuses in the context
of the continuing internal armed conflict
increased in rural areas where control of
territories formerly dominated by the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC-EP) was disputed. The primary
victims continued to be members of rural
communities. Sexual violence against
women and girls persisted, as did impunity
for these crimes. Colombia was widely
recognized as the most dangerous country
in the world for those who defend human
rights. Protection measures for defenders of
the territory, land and environment
remained limited and ineffective, and
impunity for crimes against them
continued. In 2020, killings of social
leaders reached shocking levels. There were
concerns about the withdrawal of protection
schemes for human rights defenders, the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

authorities’ excessive use of force when
enforcing mandatory quarantines and the
failure to guarantee the right to health of
Amazonian Indigenous Peoples in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
police responded to nationwide protests in
September with excessive use of lethal
force, killing 10 people, and torture. The
Supreme Court of Justice issued a landmark
ruling in September, ordering measures to
guarantee the exercise of the right to
peaceful protest and acknowledging the
excessive use of force by state security
officials.

BACKGROUND
The government declared a state of
economic, social and environmental
emergency on 17 March to curb the spread
of COVID-19. The executive approved an
unprecedented 164 legislative decrees, some
of which the Constitutional Court declared
unconstitutional.
In August, the Supreme Court of Justice
ordered that former President Álvaro Uribe
Vélez be placed under preventive house
arrest in the context of judicial proceedings
for alleged bribery, fraud and witness
tampering. This was lifted in October, but
judicial proceedings continued.
The UN Security Council extended the
mandate of the UN Verification Mission until
2021.
In October, FARC-EP dissidents
intercepted a humanitarian mission of the
OHCHR Office in Colombia and the Office of
the Ombudsperson in Caquetá department,
and then set fire to their vehicle.
According to the Kroc Institute, which
monitors compliance with the 2016 Peace
Agreement between the FARC-EP and the
Colombian state, implementation of the
Agreement was slow. The National
Commission on Security Guarantees (CNGS)
did not make progress in dismantling
criminal organizations or ensuring a state
presence in the territories hardest hit by the
armed conflict, despite pressure from civil
society to step up its efforts.

125

There was no significant progress during
the year in implementing comprehensive
rural reform and solving the illicit drug
problem through programmes for voluntary
crop substitution, central parts of the Peace
Agreement. Instead, the government set a
goal of forcibly eradicating coca production
on over 130,000 hectares, led by the military.
Despite the health, economic, social and
ecological state of emergency, these
operations continued in at least seven
departments.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Government measures to curb COVID-19
failed to adequately guarantee the
fundamental rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Communities have historically lacked
adequate access to health, water or food and
lacked the sanitary and social conditions to
deal with the virus. In addition, isolation
measures meant they were unable to access
their means of subsistence.1

HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES IN THE
CONTEXT OF INTERNAL ARMED
CONFLICT
Crimes under international law and human
rights violations and abuses in the context of
internal armed conflict continued to claim
victims, particularly in rural areas which were
the focus of territorial disputes between
various armed groups. The violence resulted
in thousands of people being forcibly
displaced, confined, subjected to sexual
violence or becoming victims of targeted
killings.
Guerrilla groups – the National Liberation
Army (ELN) and Popular Liberation Army
(EPL) – and state security forces and
paramilitary groups, such as the Gaitanista
Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AGC), all
committed acts of violence.
A report by over 500 civil society
organizations recorded a notable expansion
of rearmed paramilitary groups and estimated
that the AGC had a presence in 22 of the
country's 32 departments, approximately
90% of Colombian territory. In the south of
Córdoba and Antioquia departments, there

126

were clashes between two subgroups of the
AGC sparked by a territorial dispute over drug
trafficking and mining areas.
In the Catatumbo region, the armed
territorial conflict between the ELN and EPL
continued. In Cauca, Nariño and Meta
departments, FARC-EP dissidents clashed
with other armed actors. In Chocó
department, the conflict between the ELN
and paramilitary groups over control of illegal
mining continued.
As a result of armed clashes, 23,128
people belonging to Indigenous and Afrodescendent communities in Chocó
department were confined throughout 2020.
At least 69 people, mostly civilians,
sustained injuries from landmines. According
to some communities, some armed groups
laid new anti-personnel mines. The most
affected areas were the departments of
Nariño, Antioquia, Norte de Santander,
Arauca, Guaviare, Cauca, Chocó and
Córdoba.

Internally displaced people
According to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
as of June, 16,190 people were the victims of
mass forced displacement. The department
most affected was Nariño, followed by Chocó,
Antioquia, Cauca, Caquetá and Norte de
Santander. The leading causes were
confrontation between armed groups and
threats against civilians. Some 100 former
FARC combatants were displaced from the
Territorial Training and Reincorporation Area
(ETCR) of Ituango to Mutatá in Antioquia
department. Two massive displacements of
more than 1,590 members of the Emberá
Dobida Indigenous Peoples were reported.

Unlawful killings
By 15 December, the OHCHR had verified 66
massacres, defined as incidents in which
three or more people are killed at the same
time and place by the same alleged
perpetrator. The civil society organization
Indepaz reported 51 massacres of people
protected by international humanitarian law
between January and September.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 16 July, the Emberá Indigenous People
in Geandó community reported that a nineyear-old girl died after being shot during an
armed confrontation between the ELN and
the AGC.
The UN Verification Mission reported that
41 former FARC-EP members in the process
of reintegration under the terms of the Peace
Agreement were killed in the first six months
of the year.
There was some progress on justice and
victims' rights. The Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights reported that
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP) had
informed the organization it had issued over
29,000 judicial decisions by July 2020.
Seven macro-cases were opened, including
into unlawful killings presented as combat
casualties by state agents.

RIGHTS TO HEALTH, WATER AND FOOD
There were concerns that spraying operations
to eradicate coca production in some areas
could also destroy legal crops on which
campesino communities depend for food. In
addition, these operations expose a
population with little access to health services
to COVID-19 virus. There were repeated calls
for the Colombian authorities to urgently take
appropriate measures to guarantee the rights
of rural communities, including their rights to
health, water and food, and to stop forced
eradication operations.2

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
In the subregions of Bajo Cauca, northeast of
Antioquia and Catatumbo, and the south of
Bolívar department, state forces used
excessive force when enforcing isolation
measures to curb COVID-19.
The Awá Indigenous People of the Pialapí
reserve in Nariño condemned the killing of an
Indigenous man during a protest against
forced eradication of coca in the area.
On 19 May, Anderson Arboleda, a young
Afro-descendent man, died in Puerto Tejada,
Cauca department, allegedly as a result of
being beaten by a member of the National
Police.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The Association of Traditional Authorities
and U'was Councils (ASOU’WAS) reported
that the National Army killed an Indigenous
leader in military operations in Chitagá
municipality, Norte de Santander
department. The community refuted the
National Army's claim that he was killed in
combat.
In May, the Catatumbo Campesino
Association (ASCAMCAT) reported two violent
incidents in Catatumbo in which security
force officials enforcing the forced eradication
of coca indiscriminately fired on campesinos,
as result of which two people died in Teorama
municipality.
On 9 September, lawyer Javier Ordóñez
died as a result of torture and excessive use
of lethal force by National Police in Bogotá.3
On 10 September, the Minister of Defence,
who is in charge of the National Police,
reported that 403 people were injured,
among them 194 members of the security
forces, and 10 people were killed (seven in
Bogotá and three in Soacha) in the context of
protests on 9 and 10 September in response
to Javier Ordoñez’s killing. An internal
investigation into Javier Ordóñez’s death was
ongoing.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Colombia was the most dangerous country in
the world to defend environmental rights,
according to the NGO Global Witness. On 17
August, the OHCHR stated that it had
documented 97 killings of human rights
defenders and verified 45 homicides. Those
targeted were members of Indigenous
Peoples and Afro-descendent communities,
people defending the right to land and the
environment, and those involved in
implementing the Peace Agreement. The
Somos Defensores programme reported that
between January and December 135 human
rights defenders had been killed because of
their work and a further 65 homicides were
awaiting verification.
In March, the Attorney General's Office
reported that there had been progress in 173
of the 317 cases of killings of human rights
defenders. These efforts were not sufficient to

127

combat impunity for attacks against
defenders.
The Ríos Vivos Movement reported that
collective protection measures for human
rights defenders were inadequate and did not
guarantee its members’ right to life and
physical integrity because they failed to
address the structural causes of the violence
and the authorities did not fulfil their
commitments.
The Black Communities’ Process (PCN) in
Buenaventura reiterated that impunity for
threats encourages new attacks. The
Catatumbo Social Integration Committee
(CISCA) reported that campesinos defending
land-related rights experienced high levels of
violence and lack of state protection.
The Kubeo-Sikuani Ancestral Indigenous
Settlement in Meta department condemned
the failure to recognize the territorial rights of
Indigenous Peoples and underscored that
this was a key cause of the violence affecting
them.
The Association for the Comprehensive
Sustainable Development of La Perla
Amazónica (ADISPA) highlighted the threat
posed by new armed groups since the Peace
Agreement.4
State security forces continued illegal
surveillance and smear campaigns against
social leaders, journalists and government
opponents. The Inter-Church Commission for
Justice and Peace reported in May that the
National Army was conducting illegal
surveillance of two women human rights
defenders, Luz Marina Cuchumbe and Jani
Rita Silva. In May, several media outlets and
human rights organizations reported that the
military was carrying out illegal surveillance of
more than 130 people, including national
and international journalists, human rights
defenders and politicians.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
During the isolation measures imposed to
curb COVID-19, reports of gender-based
violence increased. According to the
Observatory on Feminicides in Colombia,
between January and November, 568
femicides were reported, including cases in

128

which women were impaled, set on fire,
sexually abused, tortured and dismembered.
Venezuelan women in an irregular
migratory situation faced barriers in
accessing health services.
Organizations that work to defend women's
rights reported that the barriers to accessing
legal abortion services increased during the
year. On 16 September, 91 civil society
organizations and 134 activists presented a
petition to the Constitutional Court for the
crime of abortion to be removed from the
Penal Code; this remained pending at the
end of the year.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
The organization Colombia Diversa reported
that in 2020, 71 LGBTI people were killed.
Organizations that defend LGBTI people's
rights condemned the killing of Juliana
Giraldo, a trans woman shot by a soldier in
Miranda, Cauca department, in September.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
The R4V Coordination Platform for Refugees
and Migrants from Venezuela reported in
May that 1,764,883 migrants and refugees
from Venezuela were living in Colombia, of
whom 8,824 applied for refugee status.
Refugees and migrants were subjected to
forced evictions during periods in which
isolation measures were in place, even
though these were prohibited by the
government during the state of emergency.
Thousands of people returned to Venezuela
due to the lack of opportunities in Colombia,
despite the risks this posed to their lives.
There were also cases of arbitrary detention.
The NGO Dejusticia reported that illegal
armed groups in La Guajira, Norte de
Santander and Arauca departments on the
border with Venezuela put at risk the lives
and physical integrity of people who had fled
from Venezuela to Colombia.
1. Colombia: Indigenous Peoples will die from COVID-19 or from hunger
if the state does not act immediately (Press release, 17 April)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

2. Colombia: Decision to forcibly eradicate illicit crops could result in
human rights violations (Press release, 22 July)
3. Colombia: Amnesty International condemns torture and excessive use
of force by police (Press release, 11 September)
4. Why do they want to kill us?: Lack of safe space to defend human
rights in Colombia (AMR 23/3009/2020)

CONGO
Congo (Republic of the)
Head of state: Denis Sassou Nguesso
Head of government: Clément Mouamba
Political activists and civil society members
including human rights defenders
continued to face intimidation, harassment
and arbitrary detention. Rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly were
restricted particularly in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The right to health
was hindered due to lack of adequate
equipment in health care facilities.
Indigenous Peoples still faced
discrimination while women in those
communities also experienced high levels of
gender-based violence.

BACKGROUND
The ruling party nominated President Sassou
Nguesso to stand again in the 2021
presidential elections. He had served as
President since 1997 and, prior to that,
between 1979 and 1992.
On 30 March, the government declared a
state of emergency which established
measures to respond to the COVID-19
pandemic including curfews, border closures
and mandatory wearing of face masks. At the
end of the year, curfews remained in place in
the capital, Brazzaville, and in Pointe-Noire
between 11pm and 5am and 8pm and 5am
during working days and weekends,
respectively. The decline in oil revenue
during the pandemic led the authorities to
ask the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
for urgent economic aid despite their having
failed to implement the conditions to secure
an IMF loan of over US$400 million in 2019.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Political opponents, human rights defenders
and activists faced intimidation, harassment
and arbitrary detention.
In March, Hallel Bouesse, a member of
Ras-le-bol, a pro-democracy movement, was
arrested at Maya-Maya International Airport
in Brazzaville, as he was about to board a
flight to Senegal to participate in a training
event. After being questioned by airport
security officers about the reasons for his trip,
he was taken to the General Directorate of
Territorial Surveillance where he was again
questioned about his trip, his links with Rasle-Bol and the Congolese Human Rights
Observatory. He was released without charge
the same day. His passport was confiscated
for two days.
In June, the Prosecutor appealed against
the Brazzaville High Court’s decision in
March to provisionally release Parfait Mabiala
Hojeij, Franck Donald Saboukoulou, Guil
Ossebi Miangué and Rolf Meldry
Dissavouloud, all supporters of Incarner
l’Espoir, an opposition movement whose
leader announced in June 2019 that he
would run in the 2021 elections. According to
Article 171 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
the Prosecutor’s appeal was out of time – the
law stipulates that appeals must be made
within 24 hours of a ruling. The four were
arrested between November and December
2019 and charged with breaching state
security. They remained in arbitrary detention
in Brazzaville until the 4 December decision
by the Brazzaville Court of Appeal which
declared the Prosecutor’s appeal
inadmissible and freed the four detainees
pending trial.
In July, Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, aged
73, was evacuated to Turkey for one month
for medical treatment after his health
deteriorated in Brazzaville prison. He had
been detained since June 2016 after
standing as a presidential candidate in the
same year. He was sentenced to 20 years’
imprisonment in 2018 after being convicted
of an “attack on internal state security, and
illegal possession of weapons of war and

129

munitions”. In the same year, the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention said it
considered his detention to be arbitrary.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were undermined in the
context of the authorities’ response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Rocil Otouna, a news anchor for Télé
Congo, a state-owned national TV channel,
learned from his boss that he had been
suspended after he presented a debate on
the President’s speech about the COVID-19
pandemic on 30 April. During the debate he
questioned the Minister of Justice and a
doctor who was a member of the experts’
panel on the National Committee for the Fight
against COVID-19 about the lack of available
information on the number of people who
were infected with, or had recovered from
COVID-19; and on the social consequences
of the government’s restrictive measures.
According to Reporters Without Borders, on 3
May the Ministry of Communications
dismissed claims of his suspension.
Meanwhile, Rocil Otouna was sacked from
his post as Press Secretary at the
Communications Ministry. On 12 May, the
Higher Council for Freedom of
Communication, the media regulator,
confirmed Rocil Otouna’s suspension from
Télé Congo and called for his reinstatement.
In July, the Secretary-General of
Brazzaville Department banned a
demonstration organized in support of JeanMarie Michel Mokoko’s evacuation to receive
medical treatment. He said the ban was
issued to limit the risks posed by COVID-19.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Crucial health care facilities lacked adequate
equipment. This prevented the population
from fully enjoying their right to health.

Health workers
Health workers complained about the lack of
personal protective equipment (PPE) to
protect them from COVID-19.

130

In January, unions denounced conditions
at the Brazzaville University Hospital,
including water cuts, closure of some of the
specialized services, non-sterile wards, an
empty pharmacy, and broken radiography
equipment.
On 3 April, at the beginning of the
COVID-19 outbreak, a trade union branch
representing workers at the Edith Lucie
Bongo Ondimba Hospital in Oyo city sent a
list of complaints to the sub-prefect of Oyo
raising concerns mainly about the
inoperability of the emergency operating
theatre and radiography equipment, and the
lack of pharmaceutical supplies and oxygen
tanks. They also demanded partial payment
of their unpaid salaries.
On 30 July, health workers met in an
extraordinary General Assembly at the
Adolphe Sicé Hospital in Pointe-Noire and
denounced the Hospital’s outdated and
inadequate technical equipment and raised
concerns about shortages of PPE which
further exposed them and their patients to
the risk of COVID-19 infection. They also
issued an alert about the rise in numbers of
hospital workers infected with COVID-19 –
more than a dozen at the time of the General
Assembly – and the reduced capacity to
provide care for patients. The workers
denounced the fact that they had not been
paid for eight months and demanded three
months' back payment.
In September, health workers treating
COVID-19 patients at the Albert Leyono
municipal clinic in Brazzaville asked the
President to take responsibility for the health
of front-line workers. According to the media,
the clinic had been without a laundry for six
months, which meant that it was not possible
to ensure sufficient hygiene standards.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
According to the report of the UN Special
Rapporteur on the rights of Indigenous
Peoples published in July, despite
progressive legislation adopted in recent
years, particularly a 2011 law to promote
Indigenous Peoples’ rights, communities
continued to face high levels of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

discrimination in both urban and rural
settings, and no progress had been made on
the demarcation and titling of land. Illiteracy
remained widespread and access to justice
and employment with decent wages
remained particularly inadequate. Indigenous
women said their access to sexual and
reproductive health care was limited; they
faced gender-based violence including rape
and early marriage; maternal and infant
mortality rates were high; and they were food
insecure.

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire
Head of state: Alassane Dramane Ouattara
Head of government: Hamed Bakayoko (replaced
Amadou Gon Coulibaly in July)
Political activists, civil society
representatives, journalists and others who
expressed dissent were arbitrarily arrested.
The government imposed a ban on public
protests. Dozens of people were killed and
hundreds injured during protests and
clashes in the context of contested
presidential elections. Impunity for past
human rights violations continued.

BACKGROUND
On 6 August, President Ouattara announced
that he would run for re-election. In
September, the Constitutional Council
accepted his candidacy and rejected 40
other contenders, including former President
Laurent Gbagbo and former Prime Minister
Guillaume Soro, in part because they were
not on the electoral list. The latter was
sentenced in April in his absence to 20 years’
imprisonment on fraud-related charges.
Opposition parties boycotted the 31
October presidential elections and called for
civil disobedience, arguing that the 2016
Constitution did not allow the incumbent to
run for a third term. However, the President
was re-elected. On 2 November, the
opposition announced the creation of its
Transitional National Council, with the aim of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

establishing a transitional government.
Dozens of opposition members were
arrested, including the presidential contender
Pascal Affi N’Guessan, who was charged with
conspiracy against state authority among
other things. He was released under judicial
supervision on 30 December.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Political activists, journalists and others who
expressed dissent were harassed and
arbitrarily arrested.
According to Reporters Without Borders,
on 4 March Yacouba Gbané and Barthélémy
Téhin of Le Temps newspaper were fined
XOF5 million (US$9,200) for publishing an
article which criticized the authorities’
handling of public affairs. On 31 March,
Vamara Coulibaly and Paul Koffi, of Soir Info
and Nouveau Réveil newspapers respectively,
were fined XOF2.5 million (US$4,600) for
“disseminating false information”, after they
published a letter from MP Alain Lobognon’s
lawyers about their client’s harsh detention
conditions.
In August, political activists, civil society
representatives and others who had called for
demonstrations or attended peaceful protests
against the President’s candidacy were
arbitrarily arrested. Pulchérie Edith Gbalet,
co-ordinator for the pro-democracy NGO
Alternatives Citoyennes, was arrested at a
hotel in Abidjan with two associates. The
charges pending against them included
disruption of public order and participation in
an insurrectionary movement. Five women
from the opposition party GPS (Générations
et peuples solidaires) were also arrested
while on their way to a peaceful protest. They
all remained in detention in MACA prison
in Abidjan at the end of the year.
Several opposition figures were put under
de facto house arrest in November after they
created the Transitional National Council.
On 3 December, two singers, known as
Yode and Siro, were found guilty of
propagation of false information with tribalist
and racist overtones with the intention of
rising a community against another,
contempt of court and discrediting the

131

judicial institution and its functioning, after a
concert during which they questioned the
impartiality of the General Prosecutor in the
investigation of electoral violence and called
for the return of political opponents to the
country. They were fined XOF5 million
(US$9,200) and given a one-year suspended
sentence.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In August, several demonstrations organized
by the opposition were repressed.
On 13 August in Yopougon district of
Abidjan, police officers apparently had
allowed groups of men, some armed with
machetes and sticks, to attack protesters.
The Minister of Security and Civil
Protection said that between 10 and 14
August, demonstrations had led to five
deaths, 104 injuries and 68 arrests of people
accused of “disrupting public order,
incitement to revolt, violence against law
enforcement agents and destroying
property”.
On 19 August, the Council of Ministers
suspended all public protests. The ban was
renewed several times until 15 December.
However, electoral campaign meetings were
permitted.
Despite the ban, women’s marches went
ahead on 21 August and were violently
dispersed by youth counter-demonstrators in
the cities of Divo in the south, and Bonoua in
the south-east of the country.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Violent clashes erupted in August between
supporters of the ruling party and opposition
supporters. According to official figures, 85
people died and 484 were injured during
these clashes before, during and after the
elections at the end of October.
Between 21 and 22 August in Divo and
Bonoua, violence between supporters of
President Ouattara and supporters of
opposing parties raged after the women’s
marches were dispersed (see above,
Freedom of assembly). Seven people were
killed and property was destroyed. Between
19 and 21 October, according to the Minister

132

of Security and Civil Protection, at least 16
people were killed and dozens injured in
Dabou. During the 10 days following the 31
October election, the National Human Rights
Council said there were 55 deaths and 282
injuries and that thousands of people were
internally displaced due to violence in areas
including the towns of Yamoussoukro, Tehiri,
Tiebissou, Bougouanou, Daoukro and
Toumodi.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
François Ebiba Yapo, a cyber activist, also
known as Serge Koffi Le Drone, said that
between 7 and 11 May he was tortured in the
custody of the Unit to Combat Organized
Crime. He said that officers beat him with a
machete on the soles of his feet and his
back and punched and stamped on his face
and stomach. He was charged, in relation to
his social media posts, with undermining
national defence, disturbing public order,
defamation and contempt on social media,
among other things. The torture allegations
were not investigated.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
On 29 March, the Platform of Health Unions
called on the government to take urgent
measures to protect health workers from
COVID-19 infection. It said that medical
equipment was inadequate and urged the
authorities to supply workers with PPE and
sterilization tools. From April, the government
received medical equipment donations from
private and public bodies, including the
WHO. On 8 April, the authorities released
over 2,000 prisoners to ease congestion and
thereby reduce the spread of COVID-19 in
prisons.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In April, the government withdrew the rights
of individuals and NGOs to bring cases to the
African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights.
One week earlier, the Court had ruled that an
Ivorian arrest warrant against Guillaume Soro
be suspended and asked the authorities to
provisionally release 19 of his relatives and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

supporters who had been detained since
December 2019.
The appeal against the ICC’s 2019
acquittal of Laurent Gbagbo and former
Minister Charles Blé Goudé remained
pending.
The Supreme Court was yet to rule on a
2019 petition from human rights
organizations to cancel a 2018 law granting
an amnesty to hundreds of people accused
or convicted of crimes committed in 2010
and 2011.

CROATIA
Republic of Croatia
Head of state: Zoran Milanović (replaced Kolinda
Grabar-Kitarović in February)
Head of government: Andrej Plenković
Asylum-seekers were denied access to
asylum; the police pushed back and abused
people entering irregularly. The legal
framework on gender-based violence was
improved, but cases continued to attract
minor penalties. Access to abortion
remained severely constrained. Same-sex
couples were granted the right to foster
children. The government withdrew
amendments to allow all phones to be
tracked in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Journalists continued to be
threatened for their work.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
Many asylum-seekers entering the country
irregularly continued to be denied access to
asylum. Aid organizations documented over
15,000 cases of pushbacks and collective
expulsions, frequently accompanied by
violence and abuse. In May, in one of the
most serious incidents, 16 migrants reported
being handcuffed and restrained, tied to a
tree, and then severely beaten and tortured
by police in black uniforms and balaclavas.1
Several men suffered serious injuries and
trauma. The UN refugee agency, UNHCR,
and the Special Rapporteurs on the human

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

rights of migrants and on torture urged
Croatia to immediately investigate the reports,
while the European Commission announced
a monitoring mission to look into Croatia’s
border activities. In August, the Council of
Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of
Torture conducted a rapid reaction visit to
Croatia to examine the treatment of migrants
and asylum-seekers by the Croatian police.
The report was not published by the end of
the year.
Due to COVID-19 restrictions, access to
asylum-seekers’ accommodation centres was
restricted, forcing NGOs providing free legal
aid and psycho-social support to stop their
work. Refugees who had received
international protection as well as those
whose applications had been rejected were
not allowed to stay in the centres during
lockdown. They received no government
support, and some were left homeless.
In November, Parliament adopted changes
to the Law on Foreigners that, according to
NGOs, could restrict the rights of asylumseekers and migrants and potentially
criminalize legitimate acts of solidarity.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, legal amendments harmonizing
the definition of rape in criminal legislation
with international standards and increasing
penalties for crimes of gender-based violence
entered into force. According to government
statistics, the number of reported rape cases
more than doubled as a result of the changes
as they significantly expanded the scope of
the offence. Proceedings continued to be
lengthy, lasting between three and five years.
Due to the reclassification of domestic
violence offences, the number of criminal
prosecutions for such offences rose sharply.
Nevertheless, in the majority of cases,
domestic violence continued to be treated as
a minor offence attracting minor penalties.
Police and courts remained reluctant to
enforce protective measures.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Women continued to face significant barriers
in accessing sexual and reproductive health

133

services and information. The widespread
refusal of individual doctors and some clinics
to perform abortions on grounds of
conscience, as well as prohibitively high costs
of services and poor regional coverage of
authorized providers, presented an
insurmountable obstacle to women of lower
social economic status. According to a survey
conducted by women’s rights organizations,
many clinics suspended abortion services
during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.
A new law on abortion was not adopted by
the end of the year. The deadline to replace
an outdated law set by the 2017
Constitutional Court ruling expired in
February 2019. Ahead of the July
parliamentary elections, some candidates
from conservative parties, including the ruling
Croatian Democratic Union (Hrvatska
demokratska zajednica), condemned
abortions and advocated for stronger
restrictions on accessing the care, including
for rape victims.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, the government withdrew
amendments to the Law on Electronic
Communications which would have allowed
the location of all mobile phones to be
tracked as a part of COVID-19 contact
tracing. Civil society and constitutional
experts were highly critical, warning that such
powers extended beyond protecting public
health and included no safeguards against
potential abuse.

DISCRIMINATION
Roma continued to face discrimination in all
walks of life, including education, health,
housing and employment. For many Roma
communities living in informal settlements,
access to food and hygiene products was
particularly constrained because of COVID-19
as the local authorities failed to provide the
necessary support.
Due to a continued lack of access to
electricity, the internet and family capacity,
many Roma children were unable to access
any remote learning during school closures,

134

thereby further deepening educational gaps
between Roma and non-Roma pupils.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In a landmark ruling in January, the
Constitutional Court decided that same-sex
couples have the right to be foster parents on
the same terms as anyone else who meets
the legal requirements. Same-sex couples
continued to be barred from adopting
children.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists investigating corruption and
organized crime continued to face threats
and intimidation.
According to the Croatian Journalists’
Association (Hrvatsko novinarsko društvo),
over 900 lawsuits were filed against
journalists and media outlets for “violation of
honour and reputation”. The European
Federation of Journalists warned that such
lawsuits had a chilling effect on journalists
and the media.
1. Croatia: Fresh evidence of police abuse and torture of migrants and
asylum-seekers (News story, 11 June)

CUBA
Republic of Cuba
Head of state and government: Miguel Mario DíazCanel Bermúdez
Amid reports of food scarcity, the
authorities continued to repress all forms of
dissent, including by imprisoning
independent artists, journalists and
members of the political opposition.

RIGHT TO FOOD
Throughout the year there were reports of
scarcity of food and other basic goods,
leading senior government officials to call on
Cubans to grow more of their own food. In
September, artist “Yulier P” graffitied a

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

haunting image of someone eating their own
bones on the streets of the capital, Havana.
Despite the UN’s recommendation that
sanctions be waived to ensure access to food
and essential medical supplies to adequately
respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the USA
continued to impose its economic embargo
on the country.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Authorities continued to clamp down on all
forms of dissent, imprisoning political
leaders, independent journalists and artists.
In April, the authorities released José
Daniel Ferrer García, leader of the unofficial
political opposition group Patriotic Union of
Cuba (UNPACU) and former prisoner of
conscience, who had been imprisoned in
October 2019 and tried on 26 February in a
trial tainted by irregularities.1 The Cuban
authorities had prevented the press, the EU
and Amnesty International from monitoring
his trial.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Reports of independent journalists fined for
reporting on COVID-19 and its impact on the
country prompted calls for President Miguel
Díaz-Canel to take immediate measures to
guarantee press freedom.2 Civil society and
journalists also expressed concern during the
year that Decree-Law 370, a law related to
online expression, appeared to tighten the
Cuban government’s network of control and
censorship online, especially during the
pandemic.
In March, Cubanet journalist Camila
Acosta was arrested for hours and given a
fine for sharing information on Facebook. In
September, she was arrested again and
threatened with further prosecution for
protesting Decree 370. On 4 September, the
authorities released independent journalist
with Cubanet, Roberto Quiñones Haces, aged
63. He had been tried in 2019 and
sentenced to one year’s imprisonment for
“resistance” and “disobedience” because of
his work as a journalist. Amnesty
international, Article 19, the Institute for War
and Peace Reporting and the Committee to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Protect Journalists called consistently for his
release, especially in the context of his
heighted risk from COVID-19 as a person
with underlying medical conditions and over
the age of 60. Roberto Quiñones had
published articles about his prison
conditions, including overcrowding, poor food
and water quality, and lack of adequate
medical care.3
Throughout the year, authorities harassed
and intimidated members of the San Isidro
Movement – composed of artists, poets,
LGBTI activists, academics and independent
journalists. Its members were at the forefront
of challenging Decree 349 that stands to
censor artists. The authorities’ actions
symbolized Cuba’s ongoing repression of the
right to freedom of expression in the country.4
Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara, a key leader
in the movement, was jailed for two weeks in
March, having reportedly been charged with
“insults to symbols of the homeland” (Article
203 of the Penal Code), an offence
inconsistent with international human rights
law and standards, and “damage” to property
(Article 339).5
In November, the San Isidro Movement
garnered international attention when
members went on hunger strike to demand
the release of rapper Denis Solís González,
who had been sentenced to eight months’
imprisonment for “contempt”, a crime also
inconsistent with international human rights
standards.
Following a police raid on the
headquarters of the movement in Old Havana
– which according to Cuba’s official
newspaper was carried out due to alleged
violations of COVID-19 related health
protocols – authorities took Luis Manuel
Otero Alcántara into custody again for several
days, and detained academic Anamely
Ramos González for approximately 12 hours.6
In response to the raid, on 27 November,
hundreds of artists and intellectuals staged a
rare protest outside the Ministry of Culture
and secured an equally unusual audience
with the Vice Minister of Culture.
For approximately two weeks after the
meeting, members of the movement,

135

including Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara and
Anamely Ramos González, and
approximately 10 or more activists and
independent journalists were subjected to
constant surveillance and faced arrest by
police and state security officials if they left
their houses, essentially amounting to house
arrest, in violation of international law.7
1. Cuba: Opposition leader sentenced to house arrest after trial tainted
by irregularities (Press release, 3 April)
2. Cuba: Authorities must guarantee press freedom in the COVID-19 era
(Press release, 2 May)
3. Cuba: Prisoner of Conscience at risk of COVID-19: Roberto Quiñones
Haces (AMR 25/2210/2020)
4. Cuba: Harassment of San Isidro movement exemplifies ongoing
assault on freedom of expression (Press release, 20 November)
5. Cuba: Artist opposing censorship at risk: Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara
(AMR 25/2028/2020)
6. Cuba: Amnesty International calls for release of two San Isidro
prisoners of conscience (Press release, 27 November 2020)
7. Cuba: San Isidro movement and allies under frightening levels of
surveillance (Press release, 15 December 2020)

CYPRUS
Republic of Cyprus
Head of state and government: Nicos Anastasiades
Asylum-seekers were detained in
substandard conditions in Pournara refugee
camp. Several incidents of pushbacks of
refugees and migrants were reported.

BACKGROUND
In October, the UN Security Council called on
Turkey to reverse the decision to open parts
of the military controlled area of Varosha. In
November, the UN hosted an informal
meeting between the Greek-Cypriot and
Turkish-Cypriot leaders where the topic of
fresh talks about the island was discussed.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In April, NGOs denounced the detention in
overcrowded and unhygienic conditions of
nearly 700 asylum-seekers in Pournara
refugee camp in Kokkinotrimithia. They were
initially detained without legal basis between

136

mid-March and 8 April and then prohibited
from leaving the camp following a Ministerial
Decision citing COVID-19 concerns.
In May, the NGO KISA reported that
excessive force was used against asylumseekers protesting against poor living
conditions and detention in Pournara.
From 20 May, the authorities prohibited
residents from leaving the camp citing a
scabies outbreak. This sparked new protests
by residents. While the measures were lifted
on 15 June, UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, described Pournara as a closed
facility as of 28 September. In November,
new COVID-19 measures reintroduced the
ban on movements outside the camp. In
December, the Ombudswoman
recommended the camp’s decongestion.
On 20 March, reports emerged that the
Cyprus Coast Guard pushed back to sea a
boat carrying 175 Syrian refugees. Further
incidents were reported in September
concerning the Coast Guard forcibly returning
to Lebanon more than 200 refugees and
migrants who had reached or tried to reach
Cyprus by boat.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, a British teenager appealed
against a Cyprus district court ruling finding
her guilty of making false claims in her report
of being gang-raped in July 2019. Serious
concerns remained about the reported
shortcomings of the police investigation and
the fairness of her trial.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In June, the Observatory of Human Rights
Defenders and the International Federation
for Human Rights expressed concerns over a
Supreme Court ruling convicting the NGO
KISA of “defamation” and imposing a penalty
of €10,000. The case related to action taken
by KISA in 2010 against online hate speech.
The ruling was appealed.

IMPUNITY
In January, the European Court of Human
Rights found Cyprus in breach of the
Convention for failing to effectively investigate

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the death of Athanasios Nicolaou, an army
conscript, found dead under a bridge in
2005.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between 2006 and 30 November 2020, the
remains of 993 missing individuals (711
Greek Cypriots and 282 Turkish Cypriots)
were identified by the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus in its mission to establish
the fate and whereabouts of individuals who
were forcibly disappeared during the intercommunal fighting of 1963 to 1964 and the
events of 1974.

CZECH REPUBLIC
Czech Republic
Head of state: Miloš Zeman
Head of government: Andrej Babiš
Discrimination against Roma persisted.
Parliament again failed to ratify an
international convention on violence against
women and take forward a bill on same-sex
marriage. The European Court of Justice
ruled against the government for failure to
accept mandatory refugee quotas. Up to
16% of primary school children were
reportedly unable to access education
online during the lockdown related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Concerns remained
over continuing arms transfers to parties in
the Yemen conflict.

BACKGROUND
Both the Czech authorities and the EU
continued to investigate alleged conflicts of
interest by Prime Minister Andrej Babiš
relating to EU subsidies received by his
business interests. Prior to the first lockdown
as a result of the pandemic, in March
thousands of people held a demonstration in
the capital, Prague, against the Prime
Minister and what they perceived as his
corrosive effect on the country’s institutions.
The tenure of the new Public Defender of
Human Rights, appointed in February,
provoked controversy. Over 300 academics

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and lawyers signed an open letter in April,
concerned that he appeared to demonstrate
insufficient commitment to certain issues
including minority rights.

DISCRIMINATION
Roma
Discrimination against Roma remained
widespread, although the new Public
Defender of Rights claimed that it was only a
marginal problem.
Some steps were taken towards
implementing a mechanism for providing
compensation to Roma women who were
victims of forced sterilization. In September
the Council of Europe’s Human Rights
Commissioner called on the lower house of
parliament to adopt a draft law providing oneoff compensation for victims. The bill was
awaiting its first reading at year’s end.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe held a regular review in December
of the measures taken to address the
discriminatory segregation of Roma in
schools and classes for pupils with mental
disabilities (following the continued failure to
implement the judgment in D.H. and Others
v Czech Republic). The Committee noted
some positive trends but remained
concerned that the majority of Roma pupils
assessed as needing individual educational
plans were still educated outside the
mainstream.

Women
Parliament failed to ratify the Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women (Istanbul
Convention) although it was scheduled to be
submitted for ratification in 2018. According
to a group of Czech NGOs, the Coalition
Against Violence, annually some 168,000
victims of domestic violence have sought
medical help in recent years. Service
providers noted an increase in the number of
domestic violence incidents during the
restrictions imposed as a result of the
pandemic.
In June the European Committee of Social
Rights made public its decision (in the case

137

of University Women of Europe v. Czech
Republic) that there had been insufficient
progress on the right to equal pay and the
balanced representation of women in
decision-making bodies in private
companies. In response the Czech
Government Commissioner for Human Rights
submitted a new draft strategy on gender
equality 2020-2030 to the government.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people

the Court in 2017, for refusing to participate
in the EU’s Emergency Relocation Scheme
which sets mandatory relocation quotas.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
Concerns remained that continued arms
transfers to the Saudi Arabia/United Arab
Emirates-led coalition could be used to
commit or facilitate serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian
law in the Yemen conflict.

Parliament again failed to table a vote on a
bill, originally approved by government in
2018, which would fully recognize equal
marriage for same-sex couples. Such couples
had been able to register their partnerships
since 2006, but this did not permit joint
adoption.

DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO

RIGHT TO EDUCATION

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Félix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo
Head of government: Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba

According to the Czech School Inspectorate,
approximately 11-16% of primary school
children were unable to access education
online during the first lockdown as they
lacked access to an internet connection and/
or appropriate devices, with under 1% of
pupils not involved in education in any form.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The government continued to refuse to
participate in any relocation efforts within the
EU, including to accept unaccompanied
child refugees. Despite calls from Greece to
accept 40 unaccompanied child migrants,
the Interior Minister claimed that the only
refugees in Greece were young men who he
did not consider as children as they were
around 17 years old. He also said that
accepting young male refugees aged 12-17
would pose serious security risks for the
public.
The European Court of Justice ruled in
April that the Czech Republic (together with
Poland and Hungary) had broken European
law by failing in its obligations and
commitments to relocate asylum-seekers and
refugees. The European Commission had
brought a case against the three countries to

138

Poor households suffered increased food
insecurity as a result of COVID-19
restrictions while prisons were chronically
overcrowded. Armed conflicts and intercommunal violence continued in some
provinces, resulting in hundreds of deaths
and the displacement of hundreds of
thousands of people. Government forces
and armed groups continued to enjoy
impunity for grave human rights violations,
including extrajudicial killings and summary
executions. Conflict-related sexual violence
against women increased. The authorities
continued to restrict the right to freedom of
expression and media freedom. Journalists
were imprisoned and human rights
defenders were subjected to death threats
and prosecution.

BACKGROUND
The human rights situation remained dire
and tensions within the ruling coalition
persisted. The increase in violence,
particularly in the east and the central parts
of the country involving armed groups,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

including those from neighbouring countries,
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis.
Thousands of armed group combatants,
who surrendered their weapons early in the
year in North Kivu, Ituri, South Kivu and
Tanganyika provinces, were left without
shelter, food or medical care and many
rejoined their groups. The government’s
focus on controlling COVID-19 and other
diseases diverted its attention from
disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts.
On 18 March, the President announced
measures to control the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic, including movement
restrictions, border closures and a ban on
gatherings of more than 20 people. On 24
March, the President announced a 30-day
state of emergency which was extended on
23 April and confirmed by the Constitutional
Court and Parliament. On 22 July, it was
lifted following a slowdown in late June in
COVID-19 cases and deaths, and restrictions
were lifted in phases.
New appointments were made to the army
and the judiciary but there was no significant
change in the conduct of those institutions,
which remained a major impediment to the
protection of human rights.
On 23 November, the North-Kivu
operational military court sentenced warlord
Ntabo Ntaberi alias Sheka, leader of the
Nduma Defense of Congo, to life
imprisonment for serious crimes committed
against civilians in North Kivu between 2007
and 2017. Charges included the rape of
some 400 women, men and children in
2010. A member of the Democratic Forces
for the Liberation of Rwanda was also
sentenced to life imprisonment. Two Sheka
collaborators were sentenced to 15 years in
prison after a trial that lasted two years and in
which 178 victims took part.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic put immense
pressure on an already underfunded and
overstretched health system, and on poorly
paid health workers who were also

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

responding to Ebola, measles and cholera
epidemics.
In September, the US government, via
USAID, donated 50 new ventilators to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
government to boost the country’s fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic. Confirmed
COVID-19 cases and related deaths reached
18,153 and 599 respectively by the end of
the year.
By June, the COVID-19 infection rate had
decreased but the 10th Ebola outbreak,
which began in 2018, had affected at least
3,470 people and left some 2,287 dead,
while the measles outbreak had killed around
6,000 people.

Prison conditions
Overcrowding continued to be one of the
biggest concerns in prisons and was
worsened by the COVID-19 pandemic. DRC
prisons were among the most overcrowded in
the world, with some facilities holding more
than 300% over their intended capacity.
Some prisoners went for days without food
and others did not receive necessary medical
attention, resulting in dozens of deaths.
Twenty-five inmates died in Makala prison in
the capital, Kinshasa, from starvation and
lack of medicine at the beginning of the year.
In April, the government addressed the risk
of COVID-19 infection in prisons by releasing
at least 2,000 inmates. At the end of that
month, 43 prisoners tested positive for
COVID-19 at the Ndolo military prison in
Kinshasa.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The government closed schools, universities
and other educational institutions on 19
March as part of its COVID-19 measures,
affecting around 27 million students. The
closure of schools increased the risk for
many children of recruitment into armed
groups, as well as to sexual exploitation, early
marriage and child labour in mines. Schools
were re-opened on 10 August.
Armed conflicts also disrupted the
education of thousands of children,
especially in the east.

139

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
COVID-19-related lockdowns and other
restrictions had an adverse impact on low
income households although the government
took measures to alleviate hardship by, for
instance, providing some essential services
like water and electricity for a two-month
period. Such households in urban and rural
areas, and in the border regions, lost key
sources of income due to the decline in
demand for informal economy workers and
those involved in cross-border trading.
The government continued in its failure to
enforce environmental and labour protection
regulations in the mining industry where
many workers were exposed to toxic pollution
which caused birth defects in the children of
cobalt and copper miners.1 Men, women and
children worked in some mines without basic
protective equipment like gloves and face
masks. They also complained of respiratory
diseases and urinary tract infections, among
other health problems. The use of child
labour, forced evictions to make way for
mining projects, a lack of transparency over
how mining rights were awarded, corruption,
tax evasion and abusive transfer pricing were
widespread.2

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Following a ban on large public gatherings
under COVID-19 restrictions, security forces
used excessive force to disperse peaceful
protests. On 9 July, mass protests took place
in several cities against the appointment of
the new Electoral Commission President. The
police responded to the largely peaceful
demonstrations with excessive force, killing at
least one protester in Kinshasa and two
others in Lubumbashi city. Many more were
injured.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Armed conflict and inter-communal violence
continued in areas of South Kivu, North Kivu
and Ituri provinces in the east and led to the
deaths of hundreds of people. Attacks by
armed groups forced hundreds of thousands

140

of people to flee their homes. According to
the UN Joint Human Rights Office
(UNJHRO), in the first half of the year,
combatants from all armed groups carried
out summary executions in which around
1,315 people, including 267 women and 165
children, were killed.
Violence attributed to the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), an armed group
operating in DRC and Uganda, soared during
the year after the authorities launched
preventive attacks on the group. Between 25
and 26 May, the ADF killed 40 civilians in
Irumu territory, Ituri province, and was
believed to be responsible for killing seven
civilians on 15 August and for the deaths of
58 people in two September attacks in the
same area. The UNJHRO accused the ADF
of committing war crimes.
Meanwhile, government forces were
accused of killing 14 civilians and injuring 49
others in the first half of the year. They also
arbitrarily arrested and detained 297
civilians.
Between March and June, ethnically
motivated attacks by militias resulted in
around 444 civilian deaths in Ituri and the
displacement of more than 200,000 people.
Most killings were carried out by fighters from
the Lendu community, and the majority of
victims were ethnic Hema and Alur residents.
There were reports of inter-communal
clashes in May and June between Alur and
Hema communities in Ituri. Clashes between
the Twa and Bantu communities in
Tanganyika province left at least 100 people
dead.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
There was an increase in sexual violence
against women and girls, particularly in the
context of the conflict in the east. In May, the
UNJHRO reported 79 such cases, up from
53 in April, against women who were
attacked by armed groups. While armed
groups were the main perpetrators, state
security forces were also accused of
responsibility for at least 26 cases of sexual
violence against women between April and
May.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Extrajudicial executions remained prevalent
across the country. While armed groups were
responsible in the majority of cases, state
agents also carried out such killings,
particularly in conflict-affected areas. The
UNJHRO reported that state agents were
responsible for extrajudicially executing at
least 225 people, including 33 women and
18 children, in the first half of the year.
In July alone, there were at least 55
extrajudicial executions at the hands of the
security forces, around 11 of whom were
women and two children. In the same period,
armed groups summarily executed 248
people, including 34 women and 11 children.
State agents and armed group combatants
were rarely prosecuted for these and other
human rights violations and abuses. A lack of
funding and judicial independence continued
to pose major barriers to the achievement of
accountability.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders and human rights
organizations continued to be targeted by the
authorities as a means to prevent them from
carrying out their work. In July, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Denis Mukwege received death
threats via social media, phone calls and in
direct messages after he made demands for
accountability and justice for human rights
crimes committed in the DRC.3 Also in July,
the Senate President threatened to have
Jean-Claude Katende, a lawyer and President
of the African Association for the Defence of
Human Rights, disciplined by the Kinshasa
Bar Association and brought to court. The
threats were connected to the lawyer’s social
media posts in which he called for the Senate
President to be brought to justice on various
charges.
In September, Dismas Kitenge, head of the
Lotus Group, an NGO which documented
human rights violations in Kisangani, and his
family members received death threats from
unidentified sources. The threats came soon
after he met the Minister of Human Rights,
with whom he discussed his NGO’s plans to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

denounce the impunity enjoyed by a senior
military officer who was alleged to have
committed serious human rights violations in
Kisangani between 1998 and 2002.
Five community human rights defenders
faced charges in connection with their
criticism of a palm oil company operating in
Tshopo province. Iswetele Eswetele Mokili,
Dominique Kamatinanga Zuzi, Antoine
Swimbole Lingele, Robert Esumbahele and
Franck Lwange Etiota had peacefully
protested against the company after it
violated an agreement with the community to
build a school, health centre and a water
supply before exploiting land used by the
local community. They were held in poor
conditions at Kisangani Central Prison,
300kms from their homes, for more than six
months before being released on bail on 27
March. Their trial was pending at the end of
the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities subjected media workers to
threats, intimidation, harassment, violence,
arbitrary arrests and detention, and
prosecution. They accused journalists and
media houses of disturbing public order or
breaching professional ethics. Numerous
journalists were detained on trumped-up
charges.
On 7 February, Dek'son Assani Kamango,
a journalist with Radio Omega, was arrested
on allegations of “insulting the Maniema
provincial authority”. On 9 May, Christine
Tshibuyi, a Kinshasa-based reporter, received
threatening phone calls after she published
an article about attacks on journalists in
Mbuji-Mayi town in Kasai Oriental province.
The same day, a four-wheel drive vehicle of
the type commonly used by the Republican
Guard, rammed the front of her car, forcing
her to crash into a wall. A man who was
accompanied by four security force officers
slapped her around the face, causing her to
bleed. She said she reported the incident to
the authorities but no investigation was
carried out.
On 17 June, the Mongala provincial
authorities revoked the credentials of 13

141

journalists, ordered the temporary closure of
five radio stations, and suspended the
broadcasting of several television and radio
programmes deemed to be of a political
nature.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
The authorities failed to honour commitments
made to the Indigenous Twa people in
connection with their forced eviction from the
Kahuzi Biega National Park in the east. Since
1975 the community had been evicted in
waves and had received promises that they
would be provided with alternative land of
equal quality, education and employment
opportunities, health services and the release
of members of their community who had
been arrested for entering the National Park.
Meanwhile, negotiations between the Park
authorities and Twa representatives,
concerning alternative land for the
community, remained stalled.
In February, six Twa men, including key
negotiator Chief Jean-Marie Kasula, and two
Twa women, were found guilty of illegal
activities in the Park. Their one-day trial
before a military tribunal fell far short of
international standards for fair trial and they
were sentenced to between one and 15 years
in prison. Four of the eight were released on
bail from Bukavu prison in August. An appeal
against their convictions had not been heard
at the end of the year.
1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Alarming research shows long
lasting harm from cobalt mine abuses (Press release, 6 May)
2. South Africa: Mining gathering must confront human rights
violations (Press release, 3 February)
3. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Concrete actions must be taken to
protect Denis Mukwege after death threats (Press release, 4
September)

DENMARK
Kingdom of Denmark
Head of state: Margrethe II
Head of government: Mette Frederiksen

142

A new law was passed recognizing sex
without consent as rape. Abuse of
minorities increased during the national
COVID-19 lockdown. A discriminatory law
on social housing remained in place. The
authorities failed to protect the rights of
children born with variations in sex
characteristics.

DISCRIMINATION
In June, the Danish Institute for Human
Rights published a survey which showed that
members of minorities experienced increased
verbal and physical abuse during the
COVID-19 lockdown between March-June.

Housing
The 2018 Regulation L38 on social housing
continued to be in force despite
recommendations from 2019 by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (CESCR) to reform the law. The
CESCR raised concerns about stigmatizing
categories such as “ghettos” and “hard
ghettos” for neighbourhoods comprising
more than 50% of residents with “nonwestern backgrounds”. The police had the
power to temporarily designate these
neighbourhoods as “increased punishment
zones” in which residents and visitors could
face double the criminal penalties for certain
offences, including vandalism, assault, public
order offences, arson, threats and extortion.
At the end of the year, the law had yet to be
reformed.1
In May tenants of one of these
neighbourhoods, the housing project
Mjølnerparken in the capital,
Copenhagen, filed a lawsuit for discrimination
against the Ministry of Transport and Housing
in the Eastern High Court. In October, UN
experts called on the government to suspend
the sale of apartment houses in the area until
courts determined whether laws permitting
the sale violated residents’ human rights,
including the high risk of forced eviction in
violation of their right to adequate housing.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In September, the government and coalition
parties put forward a cross-party agreement
to introduce consent-based rape legislation.
Parliament passed the proposed bill into law
on 17 December.2
In March, the national hotline “Live without
violence” saw a doubling of requests for safe
spaces after the COVID-19 lockdown. In
April, the Ministry of Social Affairs and the
Interior responded by creating 55 emergency
shelter places.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Despite specific recommendations from the
CESCR in 2019, the authorities failed to
protect the rights of children with variations in
sex characteristics. Infants and children
continued to be at risk of non-emergency,
invasive and irreversible genital surgery or
hormone treatment.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In January, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture called on the
government to take steps to improve the
conditions at Ellebæk, a detention centre
where migrants, asylum-seekers and rejected
asylum-seekers are held based on Denmark’s
immigration laws. At the end of the year, no
substantial improvements had been made.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In January, the government committed to
respond to the CESCR 2019
recommendation that Denmark adopt a legal
framework requiring business entities to
exercise human rights due diligence in their
operations. The CESCR also recommended
that businesses be held liable for human
rights violations and that victims be enabled
to seek remedies. By year’s end, the
government had yet to take steps to
introduce the required legal framework.
1. Denmark: Human rights must be ensured for all (EUR 18/3229/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

2. Denmark: First reading of “sex without consent is rape” bill brings
historic moment for women’s rights closer (Press release, 20
November)

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
Dominican Republic
Head of state and government: Luis Rodolfo Abinader
Corona (replaced Danilo Medina in August)
The authorities carried out an estimated
85,000 detentions between 20 March and
30 June, for alleged non-compliance with
the evening curfew. Abortion remained
criminalized in all circumstances. The
authorities failed to pass the comprehensive
anti-discrimination legislation demanded by
civil society for years.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
In March, the authorities declared a state of
emergency and imposed a curfew to try to
contain the spread of COVID-19. According
to data published daily on Twitter by the
National Police, law enforcement carried out
an estimated 85,000 detentions between 20
March and 30 June for alleged noncompliance with the evening curfew. The
authorities did not respond to requests for
information about the conditions in which
people were held, including whether people
were physically distanced in detention or had
access to a lawyer and other due process
guarantees.
Video evidence suggested that the police
used detention as a first rather than last
resort to enforce lockdowns and routinely
rounded up groups of people in the back of
police vans, without taking any COVID-19
preventive measures like physical distancing
or mask wearing.
Videos also showed the authorities
stopping or detaining people on their way to
get food or other basic items, despite
evidence from previous public health
emergencies that coercive enforcement,
including criminalization, can be

143

counterproductive and have a
disproportionate impact on marginalized
groups.
The authorities often used tactics designed
to humiliate people for allegedly breaking
curfews, such as forced group exercise, and
employed unnecessary force during
detentions, a trend documented in previous
years in reports on the arbitrary detention of
women sex workers and young people.1

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In the first weeks of the curfew there was a
significant drop in the number of reports of
gender-based violence, according to news
reports. This raised concerns that women
were suffering violence in silence in a country
with one of the highest rates of gender-based
killings of women in the world, according to
the UN Gender Equality Observatory for Latin
America and the Caribbean. Between
January and December, 130 women were
killed, 66 of which were femicides, according
to preliminary statistics published by the
Prosecutor General’s Office.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women facing discrimination on multiple and
intersecting grounds, such as transgender
women and low-income cisgender women,
continued to experience discrimination in
accessing formal employment and many
continued to sell sex as their primary method
of income.
Following the implementation of the
evening curfew in March, many transgender
sex worker women were unable to work,
which left many of them struggling to pay
rent and without access to key social
protections such as a range of health
services, according to the NGO Transsa.
Although the authorities put in place financial
assistance programmes for workers, sex
workers faced barriers when trying to access
them, according to Transsa, which, working
with other NGOs, was able eventually to get
assistance for some transgender women.
The authorities also failed to implement a
national protocol for the investigation of
torture, despite evidence presented to the

144

authorities by Amnesty International in 2019
that the police routinely raped, beat and
humiliated women engaged in sex work in
acts that may amount to torture or other illtreatment.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The country failed to decriminalize abortion,
including in instances where the pregnancy
poses a risk to the life of a pregnant woman
or girl, in cases of foetal impairments or
where the pregnancy is the result of rape or
incest.
In February, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights admitted for
review the case of “Esperancita”, a 16-yearold girl who died in 2012 after being denied
life-saving treatment for leukaemia because
she was pregnant.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
Thousands of people born to foreign parents
who were registered as Dominicans at birth
but later unrecognized as nationals, most
recently through a 2013 ruling that left tens
of thousands without nationality, remained
unable to obtain Dominican identity
documents, leaving them stateless and at risk
of expulsion.
In his last week in office, former President
Danilo Medina ordered the naturalization of
750 Dominicans of Haitian descent who had
been stripped of their nationality, a symbolic
gesture, but insufficient to resolve the
country’s long-standing statelessness crisis.
In August, civil society organizations called
on President Abinader to embrace dialogue
with Dominicans of Haitian descent and the
organizations that accompany them to put an
end to the conditions that drive statelessness
and the barriers that it poses for access to
health care, education and other rights. At
the end of the year the President had not
responded publicly.

DISCRIMINATION
Despite accepting the recommendations
made by the UN Human Rights Council, the
authorities failed to pass the comprehensive

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

anti-discrimination legislation demanded by
civil society organizations for years.
1. Americas: Authorities must protect people from COVID-19 instead of
resorting to repressive measures (Press release, 15 May)

ECUADOR
Republic of Ecuador
Head of state and government: Lenín Boltaire Moreno
Garcés
Human rights defenders lacked appropriate
protection mechanisms to safeguard their
lives and physical safety. The authorities
failed to ensure effective investigations into
threats and attacks against human rights
defenders, particularly those working to
defend Indigenous Peoples’ rights, their
territory and the environment. Ongoing
exclusion and discrimination exacerbated
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the rights of Indigenous peoples.

BACKGROUND
Ecuador reported its first case of COVID-19 in
February and on 11 March the Minister of
Health declared the national health system to
be in a state of emergency. Supreme decrees
and subsequent laws established quarantine
measures, mandatory stay-at-home
regulations, among other economic and
social measures to deal with the pandemic.
On 7 April Ecuadorian human rights
organizations drew attention to the grave
humanitarian situation in the city of
Guayaquil after images emerged of corpses
abandoned in the streets, hospitals in a state
of collapse and morgues overwhelmed with
bodies. As of 31 December, the Ministry of
Public Health had reported 212,512
confirmed COVID-19 cases and 9,473 deaths
and a further 4,561 deaths “probably”
related to the virus.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities had yet to design and
implement a national policy for the protection

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

of human rights defenders, including a
protocol for the investigation of crimes
committed against them. By the end of the
year, no one had been brought to justice in
connection with threats and attacks against
Amazonian Women collective members
Patricia Gualinga, Nema Grefa, Salomé
Aranda and Margoth Escobar. There were
concerns that the criminal investigations into
these attacks might be archived.1
In May, Ecuador ratified the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(Escazú Agreement).
On 16 December, a judge ruled that
criminal proceedings against digital human
rights defender Ola Bini for “unauthorized
access to a computer system” should
proceed to the pre-trial stage.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous Peoples in the Ecuadorian
Amazon continued to be at high risk in the
context of the pandemic due to lack of
access to drinking water, food, medical
supplies, health services and COVID-19 tests,
resulting from long-term inequality, exclusion
and discrimination.
On 7 December, Indigenous and human
rights organizations reported 3,257
confirmed cases, 50 confirmed deaths and
54 deaths with symptoms of COVID-19
among the Indigenous nationalities
(ethnicities) in the Ecuadorian Amazon.
In August, the government published a
protocol for the prevention and care of
COVID-19 in Indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian
and Montubio Peoples. Indigenous and
human rights organizations in the Amazon
stated that Indigenous Peoples had not been
adequately consulted on the protocol and it
did not reflect their demands. They also
noted that Indigenous Peoples had been
excluded from the Emergency Operations
Committees in charge of implementing the
protocol.2
On 7 April an oil spill in the Amazon
polluted the Coca and Napo rivers, affecting
the environment, water, food and livelihoods

145

of nearly 120,000 people, of whom 27,000
were Indigenous. On 29 April, a group of
Indigenous and human rights organizations
filed constitutional protection proceedings
and requested precautionary measures on
behalf of the people affected by the oil spill.
On 1 September, a judge rejected the petition
and refused precautionary measures, stating
that the petitioners had not proved a violation
of rights. The petitioners claimed that there
had been procedural irregularities in the case
and that the judge had not respected due
process guarantees.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In August, the National Assembly approved a
new Health Code which improved access to
sexual and reproductive health care. In
September, the President vetoed the Health
Code, which was to be reviewed by the
National Assembly in September 2021, in its
entirety. Abortion remained criminalized in
most cases, creating a barrier to accessing
health care.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
By the end of the year, investigations into
allegations of human rights violations and
abuses committed in Ecuador during the
October 2019 protests had not concluded. In
June, the Ministry of Defence issued
Agreement 179, which allows the Armed
Forces to use lethal force against protesters,
in violation of international human rights law
and standards. In July, the Constitutional
Court suspended the application of the
Agreement pending its decision on its
constitutionality.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Some 25% of the Ecuadorian population was
living below the national poverty line in 2020.
In May, the government announced a series
of measures to reduce public spending,
raising concerns about the possible negative
impact this could have on economic and
social rights, especially for disadvantaged
individuals and groups who could be
disproportionately affected. There were

146

concerns that these measures could deepen
existing inequalities and lack of access to
rights.
1. Ecuador: State must urgently adopt public policy to protect human
rights defenders facing grave risks (News, 12 March)
2. Ecuador: COVID-19 threatens Indigenous peoples’ lives (AMR
28/2643/2020)

EGYPT
Arab Republic of Egypt
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Sisi
Head of government: Moustafa Madbouly

The authorities continued to punish any
public or perceived dissent, and severely
repressed the rights to peaceful assembly
and freedom of expression and association.
Tens of journalists were detained arbitrarily
solely in relation to their work or critical
views. The authorities clamped down on
reporting that deviated from the official
narrative on COVID-19 and detained health
care workers who expressed safety
concerns. The authorities continued to
severely restrict human rights organizations’
and political parties’ freedom of
association. Security forces used unlawful
force to disperse rare protests, and
arbitrarily detained hundreds of protesters
and bystanders pending investigations into
“terrorism” and protest-related charges.
Thousands of people remained in prolonged
pre-trial detention, including human rights
defenders, journalists, politicians, lawyers
and social media influencers. Conditions of
detention remained cruel and inhuman and
prisoners were denied adequate health care,
which led or contributed to at least 35
deaths in prisons or shortly after release.
Fair trial guarantees were routinely flouted.
Death sentences were handed down and
executions were carried out. Women were
prosecuted on “morality” charges for the
way they dressed, acted or earned money
online. Dozens of workers were arbitrarily
arrested and prosecuted for exercising their

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

right to strike. Residents of informal
settlements were forcibly evicted. The
authorities arrested and prosecuted
Christians, Shi’a Muslims and others for
blasphemy. Security forces dispersed
protests by refugees over the killing of a
Sudanese child with force and subjected
them to racial slurs and beatings.

BACKGROUND
Between August and December, elections
were held for both chambers of parliament
amid low voter turnout.
Every three months, the authorities
extended the state of emergency, in force
since April 2017, thereby circumventing the
constitutional six-month limit. In May, the
emergency law was amended giving the
President additional sweeping powers to
restrict public and private gatherings and
further expanding the jurisdiction of military
courts over civilians.
In June, the International Monetary Fund
approved a US$5.2 billion package to help
Egypt respond to the economic impact of
COVID-19. In August, the government
reduced the size of subsidized bread. In
September, small and scattered protests took
place in several poor urban and rural
communities, triggered mainly by the
deteriorating economic situation and
government threats to demolish unregistered
buildings unless residents paid a fine based
on the law on reconciliation.
Attacks by armed groups in North Sinai
continued sporadically. The military
announced fatalities in its ranks in May, July
and October, and the killing of dozens of
militants. According to media reports, armed
groups overran several villages in the Bir alAbd area in July, forcing residents to flee.
Some were killed by improvised explosive
devices in October upon their return home.
Egypt remained a member of the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition in the conflict in Yemen,
and in the coalition imposing sanctions on
Qatar arising from the ongoing diplomatic
crisis in the Gulf. Egypt supported the selfdeclared Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF),
a party to the armed conflict in Libya,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

including by allowing transhipments of arms
from the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The
UAE launched drone strikes in Libya on
LAAF’s behalf from the Sidi Barrani airbase in
Egypt.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities responded to small and rare
protests in September and October with
unlawful use of force, mass arrests,
censorship and random security checks.
Security forces used tear gas, batons,
birdshot and on at least one occasion live
ammunition to disperse protests. They also
raided homes in a violent manner to arrest
suspected protesters, killing at least two men
and injuring others.1 Hundreds of protesters
and bystanders were arrested and detained
pending investigations into "terrorism" and
protest-related charges.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities clamped down on free
speech offline and online.
Security forces arbitrarily arrested and
detained tens of media workers pending
investigations into charges related to “misuse
of social media”, “spreading false news” or
"terrorism”.
On 24 June, security forces raided the
office in the capital, Cairo, of the al-Manassa
independent news site and briefly detained
its editor-in-chief Noura Younes.
Hundreds of news, human rights and
other websites remained blocked, according
to rights groups. In April, the authorities
blocked the Darb news site after it reported
on human rights concerns.
The authorities clamped down on
independent reporting on COVID-19 and
warned against “spreading false news” on
the pandemic. The authorities arbitrarily
arrested at least nine health care workers
who expressed safety concerns or criticized
the government’s handling of the pandemic
on their social media platforms and detained
them pending investigations into "terrorism"related charges and "spreading false news".
Others were subjected to threats, harassment
and punitive administrative measures.

147

On 25 August, a terrorism circuit court
sentenced the director of the Cairo Institute
for Human Rights Studies, Bahey el-Din
Hassan, in his absence, to 15 years’
imprisonment on charges of “insulting the
judiciary” and “disseminating false news” for
tweeting about human rights violations in
Egypt.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The politically motivated criminal
investigation into the activities and funding of
human rights organizations, known as Case
173, remained active. At least 31 staff
members of civil society organizations
continued to be banned from travelling
abroad. In July, a Cairo court rejected an
appeal by 14 of them against their travel
bans.
In February, security forces arbitrarily
arrested Patrick Zaki George, a human rights
researcher at the Egyptian Initiative for
Personal Rights (EIPR), a human rights NGO,
upon his arrival in Cairo from abroad. His
lawyers said that the police subjected him to
electric shocks and beatings. He remained in
pre-trial detention pending investigations into
unfounded “terrorism”-related charges. In
November, security forces arrested EIPR
directors Gasser Abdel Razek, Karim
Ennarah and Mohamed Besheer and
detained them pending investigations on
terrorism-related charges following a meeting
with several western diplomats that took
place at EIPR offices. They were released
after a global campaign, but the authorities
froze their assets in December.
Opposition politicians faced arbitrary
detention and other harassment. In March, a
court sentenced Zyad el-Elaimy, a former
parliamentarian and leader of an opposition
party, to one year in prison for conducting a
media interview on the human rights
situation. In June, a higher court upheld the
verdict. He remained imprisoned. Following
amendments to counter-terrorism legislation
in February allowing the judicial authorities to
designate entities and individuals as
“terrorists” on the sole basis of police
investigations and without the occurrence of

148

“terrorist acts”, terrorism circuit judges
added politicians Zyad el-Elaimy and
Abdelmoniem Abouelfotoh, as well as
activists Ramy Shaath and Alaa Abdelfattah
and human rights defender Mohamed elBaqer, to Egypt’s "terrorists list" for five years
without any hearing or due process.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Thousands of people were detained arbitrarily
solely for exercising their human rights or on
the basis of grossly unfair trials, including
mass and military trials. The authorities also
threatened, questioned and arbitrarily
detained family members of exiled dissidents.
In August, activist Sanaa Seif, unjustly
detained since June, was referred to trial for
"spreading false news," "insulting an official”
and other charges relating to her speaking
out against a police officer’s complicity in an
assault she suffered with her mother and
sister outside the Tora Prison Complex in full
view of security forces.
Prosecutors and judges routinely renewed
the pre-trial detention of thousands of
suspects held pending investigations into
unfounded “terrorism”-related charges, in
some cases in the defendants’ absence and
without allowing lawyers to challenge the
legality of their detention. Many were held in
pre-trial detention for periods exceeding the
maximum limit under Egyptian law of two
years.
The Supreme State Security Prosecution
(SSSP), a special branch of the Public
Prosecution responsible for investigating
security threats, bypassed court or
prosecution release decisions after prolonged
pre-trial detention by issuing new detention
orders covering similar charges. The SSSP
employed similar tactics to arbitrarily detain
convicted prisoners after they had served
their sentences.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES,
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Authorities subjected hundreds of detainees,
including prisoners of conscience, to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

enforced disappearance in undisclosed
locations.
Among them was trade unionist Ahmad
Amasha, who was forcibly disappeared for 25
days following his arrest on 17 June. On 12
July, the SSSP questioned him and ordered
his detention pending investigations into
"terrorism"-related charges.
Torture remained rife in formal and
informal places of detention. Defendants
arrested in connection with the September
protests told prosecutors that they were
beaten and given electric shocks by security
forces.
Prosecutors routinely failed to order
investigations into claims of torture and
enforced disappearance against National
Security Agency (NSA) officers. Only in rare
cases of deaths in custody did the authorities
open criminal investigations. On 7 September
Islam al-Australy, a poultry shop owner, died
at Monib police station in Giza governorate
two days after his arrest. The Ministry of
Interior denied claims that he had died as a
result of torture. Security forces arrested his
relatives, neighbours and local residents
protesting against his death, releasing them
after his family dropped their complaint. The
Public Prosecution ordered the detention of
four low-ranking policemen pending
investigations and released a police officer on
bail.
In December, Italian prosecutors named
four NSA officers as suspects in the
abduction, torture and killing of Italian
student Giulio Regeni in 2016.

RIGHT TO HEALTH – PRISON
CONDITIONS
Conditions in prisons and other detention
facilities remained cruel and inhuman, with
prisoners complaining of overcrowding, poor
ventilation, lack of hygiene and access to
sanitation facilities, and inadequate food and
drinking water. Authorities tortured some
detainees by holding them in dire conditions
in prolonged and indefinite solitary
confinement.
Authorities denied prisoners access to
adequate health care, in some cases

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

deliberately to punish dissidents which may
have amounted to torture. At least 35
detainees died in prison or shortly after their
release, following medical complications and
in some cases denial of adequate health
care; the authorities failed to conduct
independent or effective investigations into
the causes and circumstances of their
deaths.
On 13 August, senior Muslim Brotherhood
figure Essam El-Erian, who had been
detained since 2013, died in prison. He had
previously complained in court about illtreatment in solitary confinement and denial
of health care.
The authorities failed to take measures to
reduce the impact of the outbreak of
COVID-19 in prisons and other detention
facilities, including by failing to provide
prisoners with sanitizing products or
systematically testing and quarantining those
suspected of infection or attempting to
address overcrowding. The authorities failed
to release thousands held in prolonged pretrial detention, proceeding only with regular
annual pardons to release thousands of
prisoners in non-political cases. Authorities
also arbitrarily arrested and harassed
relatives and supporters of prisoners for
expressing concerns over their health.
The authorities banned prison visits
between March and August citing COVID-19
fears, and for the whole year for scores of
detainees in political cases. Prison officials
failed to provide regular alternative means of
communication between prisoners and their
families and lawyers.

DEATH PENALTY
Egyptian courts, including military courts and
terrorism circuits of criminal courts, handed
down death sentences after unfair mass
trials. Higher courts upheld the verdicts on
appeal. Executions were carried out.
In March, a criminal court handed down
death sentences against 37 men after an
unfair mass trial.2 Many of them had been
forcibly disappeared for months, beaten,
subjected to electric shocks or suspended for
prolonged periods before their trials. In July,

149

the Court of Cassation upheld the death
sentence against Wael Tawadros, known as
Father Isaiah, after a trial marred by torture
and enforced disappearance.
Executions were carried out, including of
individuals convicted in grossly unfair trials,
marred by allegations of enforced
disappearance and the acceptance of
“confessions” extracted under torture as
evidence. In October and November alone,
Egypt executed almost double the number of
those executed in all of 2019.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Women and girls continued to face
discrimination in law and practice.
In response to public campaigning against
impunity for sexual violence, the authorities
arrested several men suspected of rape.
However, they failed to guarantee the
protection of survivors and witnesses, and
neither prevented nor adequately investigated
widespread violence against women and
girls. Authorities also carried out reprisals
against a rape survivor and others who
reported sexual violence.
In August, authorities arbitrarily detained
and opened criminal investigations against
four people who came forward as witnesses
in a case concerning a gang rape at a Cairo
hotel in 2014, over charges related to
“morality” and “misuse of social media”,
among others. Two men also arrested in
connection with the case, other than the rape
suspects, faced “debauchery” charges,
frequently used in Egypt to prosecute samesex sexual relations. Authorities subjected the
two to forced anal examinations, an act
amounting to torture. The case against the six
people was primarily based on private videos
and photographs of an intimate nature.
On 5 September, the Code of Criminal
Procedures was amended to prohibit
prosecutors and law enforcement officials
from revealing the identities of survivors of
sexual violence; it did not stipulate penalties
for breaches of confidentiality or contain
provisions to protect witnesses and others
reporting sexual violence.

150

From April, the authorities intensified their
crackdown on women social media
influencers for the way they dressed, acted
and earned money on apps such as TikTok,
prosecuting at least nine women on charges
of “indecency” and "violating family
principles and values". At least six women
were sentenced to prison terms ranging from
two to six years.3

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Following the COVID-19 outbreak, tens of
thousands of private sector workers were
dismissed, forced to accept reduced wages,
work without protective equipment or take
open-ended unpaid leave. The authorities
failed to provide workers who lost their
livelihoods as a result of the economic impact
of COVID-19 with sufficient social protection
measures, including unemployment benefits.
The authorities arbitrarily detained tens of
workers and trade unionists solely for
exercising their right to strike and protest
peacefully.
In September, security forces arrested at
least 41 workers at a state-owned textile
company in Shebin al-Kom city who were
protesting for their outstanding dues. All were
released 10 days later.
A June verdict by the Court of Cassation
sanctioned the dismissal of workers at stateowned companies who had been convicted
of protest-related charges, even if acquitted
by higher courts.

RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED
EVICTIONS
The authorities carried out forced evictions in
informal settlements and arbitrarily arrested
dozens of people for protesting against
threatened house demolitions.
On 18 July, security forces used force to
disperse a protest by residents of Ma'awa elSayadeen in Alexandria against the
demolitions of their homes, and arrested
about 65 protesters. At least 42 men were
detained pending investigations into charges
of “participating in unauthorized protests”
and “attacking public employees” for up to
five months. All were released later.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The authorities continued to discriminate
against Christians in law and practice. Their
right to build or repair churches remained
restricted by a 2016 law requiring approval
from security agencies and other state
bodies. According to the EIPR, such bodies
had granted full legal registration to fewer
than 200 churches out of a total of 5,540
applications since 2016, while only 1,412
churches received preliminary, conditional
approvals.
Members of Muslim minorities, atheists,
Christians and others were prosecuted and
imprisoned for blasphemy or for "terrorism"related charges. In June, two Shi’a men were
sentenced to one year’s imprisonment for
practising their faith. In August, security
forces arrested Quranist writer and blogger
Reda Abdel-Rahman and forcibly
disappeared him for 22 days, apparently in
retaliation for the religious and political
writings of his exiled relative. He remained in
pre-trial detention.

EL SALVADOR
Republic of El Salvador
Head of state and government: Nayib Armando Bukele
Ortez
Thousands of people were detained in
quarantine centres for alleged violations of
a mandatory quarantine imposed in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. There
were reports of precarious and insanitary
conditions in these centres, as well as
arbitrary detentions and excessive use of
force. The President made public
statements stigmatizing journalists and
human rights organizations. The rights of
the victims of crimes under international
law and of human rights violations during
the internal armed conflict remained under
threat. Restrictions and attacks on freedom
of the press and limited access to official
information were reported throughout the
year. The total ban on abortion remained in
place.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS

BACKGROUND

The authorities continued to arbitrarily arrest
and detain refugees and migrants. Between
January and September, security forces
arrested and detained at least 14 Syrians, 29
Sudanese people and one Guinean person in
police stations in southern Egypt for
irregularly entering or staying in Egypt.
In November, security forces violently
dispersed two peaceful protests by Sudanese
refugees and migrants over the murder of a
Sudanese child. Security forces arrested
dozens of protesters and subjected them to
beatings, racial slurs and other ill-treatment.

In February, the Council of Ministers held an
extraordinary session of the Legislative
Assembly accompanied by a security forces
deployment with reports of snipers stationed
in the vicinity and restrictions on press
freedom.1
In April, the President publicly rejected
rulings of the Constitutional Chamber of the
Supreme Court.2 In August, an investigation
by the media revealed that President
Bukele’s administration might have
negotiated with a local gang to reduce crime
rates.
No detailed information was made public
about the content of the Territorial Control
Plan, which sets out the country’s national
security policy. Local organizations expressed
concern about the continuing repressive and
militarized approach to public security.

1. Egypt: Rare protests met with unlawful force and mass arrests (Press
release, 2 October)
2. Egypt: Death sentences against 37 convicted of terrorism after unfair
trial (Press release, 2 March)
3. Egypt: Survivors of sexual violence and online abuse among
prosecuted women TikTok influencers (Press release, 13 August)

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to official figures, more than 2,000
people were detained in quarantine centres

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

151

for alleged violations of the mandatory
national quarantine imposed in late March,
some for up to 40 days. Conditions in these
centres fell short of minimum standards for
sanitary conditions and physical distancing,
putting those held at unnecessary risk of
COVID-19 infection.3
Between 13 March and 27 May, the
Supreme Court received 330 habeas corpus
petitions and 61 amparos (requests for
judicial protection) in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. In many of these cases,
people alleged that conditions in the
quarantine centres were inadequate, lacked
cleaning materials and drinkable water, and
that people were unable to access
medication for chronic illnesses. El Salvador’s
Ombudsperson Office (PDDH) identified at
least 44 cases of people deprived of their
liberty in the context of the quarantine
between March and May who had underlying
medical conditions.
In April, a human rights defender who has
diabetes was detained when she went out to
buy food and medicine for her three-year-old
child. She spent more than a month in a
quarantine centre with poor conditions,
which could have increased her exposure to
COVID-19.
That same month, while cases of health
workers infected with COVID-19 and a lack of
adequate equipment were being reported,
the President vetoed Decree 620. The
Decree, which aimed to guarantee health
insurance and biosafety equipment to health
workers, was later declared constitutional by
the Constitutional Chamber.
As of late July, at least 104 health workers
had died from COVID-19.4

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Hundreds of people detained for alleged
quarantine violations were taken to
government quarantine centres or police
stations, as if they had committed a crime. In
that context, the Constitutional Chamber of
the Supreme Court ruled that the authorities
had no legal basis for holding people in these
centres as a form of punishment. Some
detainees stated in their appeals before the

152

Chamber that they were detained solely for
leaving their houses to buy food or medicine.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The PDDH received hundreds of complaints
of human rights violations by the security
forces, including reports of excessive use of
force and ill-treatment, in the context of
enforcing the quarantine.
In March, a 17-year-old boy reported that
the police detained him as he was leaving
work on a sugar plantation. He and his family
stated that the police beat him and took him
to a detention centre, where he was held with
adults for almost three days before being
released without charge.
In another case, a young man reported
that when he went out to buy food and fuel
after being paid, a police officer detained
him, beat him and shot him twice in the
legs.5

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Throughout the year, the President issued
public statements vilifying civil society
groups, including journalists and human
rights organizations, and stigmatizing those
seeking greater government transparency
and accountability.
In June, human rights organizations
reported that, following the introduction of the
measures to tackle COVID-19, attacks on
local organizations and women human rights
defenders increased significantly, particularly
through digital media. Organizations also
reported an increase in government
statements that put human rights defenders
at risk.6
The Legislative Assembly failed to approve
the Law for the Recognition and
Comprehensive Protection of Human Rights
Defenders and for the Guarantee of the Right
to Defend Human Rights; the bill had been
presented before the Assembly in 2018.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, the Legislative Assembly
approved a decree containing the Special
Law on Transitional Justice, Reparation and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Reconciliation. This contains provisions that
hinder the investigation and effective
punishment of those responsible for crimes
under international law. The President vetoed
the decree later that month.7 However, the
government failed to make public information
related to military operations during the
internal armed conflict (1980-1992) and
denied judicial access to military operation
files related to the 1981 El Mozote massacre.
In September, a Spanish court convicted a
former Salvadoran colonel and former
defence minister for the murder of five Jesuit
priests in 1989, during the armed conflict.8

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The total ban on abortion remained in place
and until June at least 18 women remained
in jail on charges related to obstetric
emergencies.
1. El Salvador: Deployment of security forces in the Legislative Assembly
raises alarm over the future of human rights (Press release, 9
February)
2. El Salvador: Open letter to President Nayib Bukele regarding
measures taken for COVID-19 (Open letter, 30 April)
3. When protection becomes repression: Mandatory quarantines under
COVID-19 in the Americas (AMR 01/2991/2020)
4. Global: Amnesty analysis reveals over 7,000 health workers have died
from COVID-19 (Press release, 3 September)
5. El Salvador: Repression and broken promises, the new face of the
country after one year of President Bukele's government (Press
release, 1 June)
6. Las medidas del gobierno ante la covid-19 han propiciado un entorno
violento y hostil para las defensoras de derechos humanos (AMR
29/2560/2020, Spanish only)
7. El Salvador: Las autoridades deben garantizar justicia, verdad y
reparación para las víctimas del conflicto armado (AMR
29/1930/2019, Spanish only)
8. El Salvador: Conviction of one of those responsible for the murder of
Jesuit priests must break the chain of impunity (Press release, 11
September)

EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
Republic of Equatorial Guinea
Head of state: Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo
Head of government: Francisco Pascual Obama Asue
The crackdown on human rights defenders
continued and administrative obstacles
prevented NGOs from obtaining legal
registration. The right to a fair trial was
violated. Police used excessive force and
the right to freedom of expression,
including access to information, was
violated in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. Draft legislation threatened to
discriminate against lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people
and sex workers.

BACKGROUND
The government planned to organize
international events to attract foreign
investment and signed new mining contracts
with foreign companies. Corruption and
embezzlement continued to hit the headlines.
In February, the Appeal Court of Paris upheld
a three-year suspended sentence and a €30
million fine against Vice-President Teodoro
Obiang Nguema Mangue, the President’s
son, for embezzlement.
In March, the government responded to
the COVID-19 pandemic by declaring a state
of emergency on health grounds which
included rights-restricting provisions. Some
restrictions were lifted on 15 June.
The government resigned in August,
acknowledging its responsibility for the
economic crisis which was aggravated by the
pandemic. A new government took over.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities violated the right to freedom
of expression, including access to
information, in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. In May, the government stopped
publishing the numbers of COVID-19 cases,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

153

arguing that the information had been used
by its critics to discredit its public health
work.
Later in May, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
asked the World Health Organization to
withdraw its representative and make sure
she left the capital, Malabo, immediately after
the government accused her of “falsifying the
data” on COVID-19 infections.
On 15 April, Nuria Obono Ndong Andeme,
a nurse, was summoned by the Minister of
Health about a WhatsApp message she had
sent to a friend which went viral. She had
complained about the lack of oxygen in
Malabo’s Sampaka Hospital. The day after,
she appeared before a judge who put her in
pretrial detention in Black Beach Prison, in
Malabo. She was released without charge on
21 April.
According to Reporters without Borders,
seven journalists who worked for the TV
channel, Asonga, were suspended in May
after they publicly criticized the use of
violence by the defence and security forces
to impose the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In April, people regularly posted videos on
social media which showed the police using
violence against people while enforcing the
lockdown. Many of those attacked were street
sellers, particularly women, whose stalls were
destroyed.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
In March, a military court in Oveng Asem (a
city on the mainland) convicted 10 men in
connection with membership of the
Movement for the Liberation of Equatorial
Guinea Third Republic (MLGE3R), an
opposition group. They were sentenced
following a trial held behind closed doors to a
total of 734 years’ imprisonment for treason,
verbal abuse/insult against the head of state,
and espionage. Four of them – two Spanish
nationals of Equatorial Guinean origin and
two Equatorial Guineans resident in Spain –
had been abducted in South Sudan and
transferred to Equatorial Guinea in November
2019. Their whereabouts remained unknown

154

for several months until they were reported to
be in Black Beach Prison and then
transferred to Mongomo Prison on the
mainland. The Spanish nationals were denied
access to their embassy representatives.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Freedom of association
The authorities continued to place obstacles
in the way of NGOs seeking to register their
organizations. In 2019, the government had
accepted recommendations during the UN
Universal Periodic Review process to reform
Law 1/1999 which regulates NGO
registration, but failed to modify the law.
In June, Somos+, a civil society platform,
submitted an application for legal registration
to the Ministry of the Interior and Local
Corporations. Several days later, they were
notified by this body that their application
should be validated by the General Direction
of Human Rights, although such validation is
not required by law. In August, Somos+
representatives met with the Interior Minister
who interviewed them about their activities
and reminded them that they needed to
register before they carried out any activities.

Arbitrary arrests and detentions
In February, Joaquín Elo Ayeto, a Somos+
member, was released without explanation
from Black Beach Prison where he had been
held for almost one year following his
arbitrary arrest in February 2019. Although
he was tried in 2019 for defamation and
threats against the President, he was not
given any information about his sentence. He
was released on the President’s orders after
the President met the Secretary General of
the opposition Convergence for Social
Democracy Party.

DISCRIMINATION
Draft legislation regulating sex work and
LGBTI rights remained under consultation at
the ministerial level. Although the draft would
prohibit some forms of discrimination, it
included a provision to safeguard the “moral
integrity of the social majority”, implicitly
perpetuating discrimination against LGBTI

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

people and sex workers, and included a ban
on gay pride events. The draft legislation also
included a provision requiring the
government to establish a “social
reintegration” policy for LGBTI people who
voluntarily abandoned their homosexuality.

ERITREA
State of Eritrea
Head of state and government: Isaias Afwerki

The whereabouts of government critics and
pro-democracy leaders who had been
arbitrarily detained since 2001 remained
unknown. The authorities continued to
violate the rights to freedom of expression,
religion and freedom of movement.
Prisoners were denied their rights to health.
Thousands continued to flee abroad as the
repression and indefinite military
conscription continued, even after Eritrea
restored relations with its former archenemy Ethiopia.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
There continued to be no independent press
since the authorities banned all non-state
media in 2001. In 2020, the Committee to
Protect Journalists found Eritrea was the
most censored country in the world and had
more journalists in prison than any other
country.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
Hundreds of politicians, religious leaders,
journalists and other government critics –
some held for more than a decade without
charge or trial – remained in arbitrary
detention and continued to be denied access
to their families and lawyers. The
whereabouts and fate of 11 high-profile
politicians and 17 journalists who criticized
President Afwerki’s rule in 2001 remained
unknown at the end of the year.
Former Finance Minister Berhane Abrehe
remained in prison since his arrest in the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

capital Asmara in 2018. No charges had
been brought against him by the end of the
year. He was arrested after he had published
a book calling for democratic reform and was
subjected to enforced disappearance.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Prisons and detention centres
Prisons and detention centres remained
chronically overcrowded with unsanitary
living conditions.1 Adi Abeto prison, north of
Asmara, held about 2,500 inmates despite
having capacity for only 800. The Mai Serwa
Asmara Flowers detention camp near
Asmara, where many Jehovah’s Witnesses
were held, had no toilets for an estimated
700 detainees, and men and women inmates
had to relieve themselves in the open. The
Mai Serwa Maximum Security prison, close to
Asmara, had only 20 toilets for 500
detainees.
Prisons and detention facilities did not
provide detainees with adequate water, food
and hygiene products such as soap. Many
detainees in Mai Serwa Maximum Security
prison, Mai Serwa Asmara Flowers detention
facility and the all-male Ala prison, near
Asmara, relied on their families for
supplementing the meagre food that was
provided to them. On 2 April, the authorities
imposed a lockdown on prisons to prevent
the spread of COVID-19 and other diseases.
No visitors were allowed in, cutting off
necessary supplies from relatives, and
putting detainees at even greater risk of
malnutrition and disease.

FORCED LABOUR
Conscripts to the mandatary national service
programme continued to be forced to serve
for indefinite periods extending far beyond
the legal limit of 18 months. There was no
provision for conscientious objection and
thousands remained in open-ended
conscription, many of them having already
served for decades. The government
continued to send final-year high-school
students to Sawa Defence Training Centre
and made no commitment to release them

155

from national service after they had served
18 months.
Conscripts earned ERN800 (approximately
US$53) a month which was not enough to
cover basic needs. The government used
them to work on infrastructure projects such
as irrigation, roads and agriculture. Working
conditions could be degrading and
inhumane, and in some cases amounted to
torture.
At the Mai Serwa Asmara Flowers
detention facility, which in reality is a forced
labour camp, Jehovah’s Witnesses and other
detainees were forced to work on the nearby
flower farms.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The right to leave the country remained
severely restricted and people were
prevented from travelling abroad without
government permission.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Thousands of Eritreans continued to flee the
country, primarily to avoid indefinite national
service, and sought asylum in other
countries. According to UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, 9,463 asylum-seekers from
Eritrea crossed the border into Ethiopia
during the first quarter of the year. After April,
there was a marked reduction in the number
of new arrivals in Ethiopia, due to COVID-19
restrictions on the movement of people.
Eritrean refugees and asylum-seekers
continued to face serious human rights
abuses as they made their way to Europe,
including in transit countries, particularly
Libya, where many were subjected to
detention, abduction, sexual abuse, and
torture and other ill-treatment.
1. Eritrea: Detainees in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions
defenceless against COVID-19 (Press release, 21 May)

156

ESTONIA
Republic of Estonia
Head of state: Kersti Kaljulaid
Head of government: Jüri Ratas
The number of stateless individuals
remained high; ethnic minorities continued
to face discrimination. Legislative
developments to improve LGBTI rights
slowed. A government minister attempted to
limit funding to NGOs working on equality
and gender issues.

BACKGROUND
In March, the government invoked Article 15
of the European Convention on Human
Rights, enabling partial restriction of several
freedoms, including freedom of assembly, for
the two-month emergency period in
connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
In May, amendments to the Aliens Act
gave police and border guards the right to
annul the visa or visa-free period of all nonEstonian nationals if they had lost
employment, including as a result of
COVID-19.
Five of the 15 ministerial posts in
government continued to be held by the
Conservative People’s Party of Estonia (EKRE)
who spoke out against immigration and
LGBTI rights.

DISCRIMINATION
In January, Parliament amended the
Citizenship Act, easing children’s access to
citizenship in cases where at least one of
their parents was effectively stateless and the
other a citizen of another country.
Consequently, 1,500 minors were granted
citizenship. However, some 71,000 people,
approximately 5.3% of the population,
remained stateless. The European
Commission noted that Estonia’s citizenship
policy “continued to be conservative”.
Non-Estonian speaking minorities, albeit
with residency rights, continued to face
discrimination in a range of areas, including
employment, housing, education and health

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

care. Studies found they experienced greater
financial hardship as a consequence of the
COVID-19 lockdown than the Estonianspeaking majority.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, the Minister of Trade, a post held by
the EKRE, attempted to halt grants to three
human rights organizations working on
gender and equality issues: the Estonian
Women's Associations Roundtable, the
Estonian Women's Studies and Resource
Centre, and the Estonian Human Rights
Centre.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Parliament failed to pass legislation to
implement the 2016 Registered Partnership
Act. A regulation to legitimize gender
recognition of transgender people was
removed from the new Public Health Act
draft. LGBTI organizations continued to face
explicit threats from far-right groups.

ESWATINI
Kingdom of Eswatini
Head of state: Mswati III
Head of government: Ambrose Mandvulo Dlamini
Hundreds of families were threatened with
forced eviction. LGBTI people were
subjected to discrimination and
harassment. A man was charged with
marital rape for the first time. Repressive
legislation was used to silence peaceful
dissent and journalists faced arbitrary
detention, torture and other ill-treatment,
and prosecution.

BACKGROUND
In March, the Prime Minister declared a twomonth state of emergency to control the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. There
were reports that security forces harassed
people when they went out for food or to seek
medical attention.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FORCED EVICTIONS
The lack of land policy or land act continued
to disadvantage people who faced forced
evictions. Hundreds of families in the Manzini
region were threatened with eviction when
landowners took steps to regain their
farmland. The Human Rights Commission
had intervened and was negotiating with the
landowner in the case of over 100 people
facing evictions in Sigombeni. If due process
requirements are not followed and adequate
compensation is not provided, this could
result in a forced eviction. In July, an appeal
by the Council of Eswatini Churches to the
Ministry of Resources and Energy
successfully averted the eviction of 45
families, including 38 children, from their
land in Mbondzela, Shiselweni.
Local authorities in the Mangwaneni
township of the capital, Mbabane,
demolished one homestead in February and
three in August, resulting in the forced
eviction of 17 people in households headed
by older people. After a resident was injured
by a rubber bullet fired by police during
clashes in the August demolition, the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development halted
the demolitions while the local traditional
authorities worked to resolve the matter.
However, most of the affected residents were
too poor to rebuild or repair their structures
and the municipality banned them from
doing so.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI people were discriminated against,
harassed and stigmatized. Consensual samesex relations remained a criminal offence.
In July, the Eswatini Sexual and Gender
Minorities advocacy group challenged the
Minister of Commerce and Industries’
decision to reject its application for
registration. The case was adjourned twice
before being heard in October at the High
Court in Mbabane, although a judgment was
not issued by the year’s end.

157

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, Nhlanhla Dlamini became the
first person to be charged with marital rape
under the 2018 Sexual Offences and
Domestic Violence Act. In the same month,
his case went before the High Court which
granted him bail.
Under COVID-19 measures, the work of
civil society groups was classified as nonessential, thereby denying survivors of
violence access to vital support services. In
April, the government allowed such
organizations to continue their work following
pressure from the Swaziland Action Group
Against Abuse and other NGOs.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
In May, Goodwill Sibiya was released and all
charges against him dropped after he spent
one year in prison for saying the King should
be charged with embezzlement and human
rights violations. He had also been charged
with terrorism and sedition in connection with
his association with the People’s United
Democratic Movement Party.

Journalists
The government used draconian legislation,
including the Suppression of Terrorism Act
and the Sedition and Subversive Activities
Act, to silence media. Journalists were
subjected to arbitrary arrest, and torture and
other ill-treatment.
In February, Zweli Martin Dlamini, editor of
the Swaziland News, was arrested at his
home in Mbabane for publishing articles
which criticized the King. He said he was
tortured in the Mbabane police headquarters,
including by having a plastic bag put over his
head. He was released without charge six
hours later and fled to South Africa the
following day. In April, police raided his home
and arrested his wife, Nompendulo
Nokuthula Mkhonta. While in police custody
in Mbabane, she was tortured under
interrogation and released three hours later
without charge.

158

The Eswatini Communications Commission
rejected applications for short-term
community broadcasting licences from the
Swaziland Community Multimedia Network
on behalf of Shiselweni Community Radio
and Lubombo Community Radio. It had
applied for licences to allow the radio stations
to broadcast information which would raise
public awareness about COVID-19. The
applications were rejected in line with the
Broadcasting Guidelines, which stated that
two licences could not be issued to one
entity, and because there was reduced staff
capacity to process applications during the
partial lockdown.
The Computer Crime and Cybercrime Bill,
which was yet to be brought before
Parliament, contained provisions to impose
10-year prison sentences and hefty fines on
online news sites journalists deemed to have
published “fake news”.

ETHIOPIA
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Head of state: Sahle-Work Zewde
Head of government: Abiy Ahmed Ali
Security forces used excessive, and
sometimes lethal, force and carried out
extrajudicial executions. Hundreds of
people were killed and property destroyed in
ethnically motivated violence by armed
groups and militias. Opposition members
and journalists were subjected to arbitrary
arrests and detention.

BACKGROUND
Recurrent unrest and violence led to
increased political polarization along ethnic
lines, and largely prevented the realization of
political and human rights reforms initiated in
2018.
The conflict in the Tigray Region, which
began on 4 November, pitted the Ethiopian
federal government against the Tigray
regional government. From the beginning of
the conflict, there were armed confrontations
between the federal army, supported by the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Amhara Region’s special (paramilitary) police
units and local militias on one side, and the
Tigray special (paramilitary) police units and
local militias on the other.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Security forces responded to protests and
civil unrest with excessive and, at times,
lethal force. Between 9 and 11 August, they
killed at least 16 people, including two
bystanders, during protests in Wolaita zone in
the Southern Nations, Nationalities and
People’s Region (SNNPR). Demonstrators,
who had taken to the streets to protest at the
arrests of over 20 Wolaita zone administration
officials, community leaders and activists in
the area, were shot at and beaten by security
forces.1

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In January, the government adopted a new
anti-terrorism law. Although it contained
some provisions which could better protect
the rights of those detained or prosecuted for
alleged terrorism offences, other provisions
restricted the right to freedom of expression.
The Hate Speech and Disinformation
Proclamation, adopted by the Federal
Parliament in March, criminalized people for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression.
Security forces used violence to repress
the right to freedom of assembly.
On 15 February, Liyu police raided an
inauguration event by the Oromo Liberation
Front (OLF) opposition party at its office in
Welenchiti town in Oromia region. They fired
live ammunition and tear gas at participants,
killed one OLF supporter and beat others.
They shot holes into the tyres of the Oromia
News Network crew’s van, later confiscating
their equipment.
Later that day, Liyu police violently
dispersed OLF supporters from a launch
party at a hotel in Burayu town, killing one
person and injuring scores more. They forced
around 30 of them into a police van and
drove them to the Burayu stadium, where

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

they beat them again and forced them to do
laps around the stadium on their knees.2

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities subjected opposition
politicians and journalists to prolonged pretrial detention without charge, many of them
for several months. Although courts
increasingly asserted their independence in
granting bail to some opposition politicians,
police frequently defied these orders.
In January, police arrested at least 75 OLF
supporters in Oromia Region. Most of them
were held without charge and not brought
before a judge for several months. They
included Chaltu Takele, a prominent political
activist, who was released in February but rearrested in early July and accused of
organizing the violence which followed the
killing of Oromo musician Hachalu Hundessa
(see below, Unlawful killings). She was
released on bail in August on charges of
organizing violence.
In February, security officers arrested five
senior OLF members and four supporters in
the capital, Addis Ababa. Eight of them were
released within 24 hours.
Two Oromia News Network journalists and
three OLF officials were arrested by police in
March and charged in connection with
photographing the Burayu police station, and
traffic offences. Although the Prosecutor later
dropped the charges on grounds that the
allegations did not relate to criminal acts, the
police continued to detain them, claiming
that their identity documents were irregular.
Four of them were released in May without
charge, but one of them, Batir Fille, remained
in detention in Yabelo without charge at the
end of the year.

UNFAIR TRIALS
In October, the government tabled the draft
Criminal Procedure and Evidence Code to
replace the 1962 Criminal Procedure Code. It
was intended to address long-standing fair
trial concerns, but contained some provisions
which did not meet international fair trial
standards.

159

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Hundreds of people were killed in
widespread ethnic violence and attacks by
armed groups.
Between 30 June and 1 July, 166 people
were killed in violence which erupted in the
Oromia Region after the killing of Hachalu
Hundessa, a popular Oromo musician, on 29
June. His killing sparked mass protests and
violence in Addis Ababa and various areas of
Oromia, Harar and Dire Dawa. Organized
youth targeted ethnic and religious minorities,
including Orthodox Christians, at least 40 of
whom were killed in various towns in the
region and their properties set alight. In
several Oromia cities, protesters clashed with
security forces, who used live ammunition to
disperse them, resulting in over 100 deaths.
Federal Police officials said that at least 10
people, including two police officers, were
also killed in grenade attacks and shootings
in Addis Ababa on 30 June. Around 5,000
people, including opposition party leaders
suspected of involvement in the unlawful
killings and destruction of property, were
arrested. In September, the Attorney General
Office brought terrorism charges against
opposition party leaders Jawar Mohammed,
Bekele Gerba and Eskinder Nega. In October,
four people suspected of being responsible
for Hachalu Hundessa’s killing were arrested
and charged with terrorism and homicide.
In September, armed groups which,
according to regional police, belonged to the
Benishangul People’s Liberation Front,
carried out a series of attacks on ethnic
Amhara and Agew residents in Metekel zone
in the Benishangul-Gumuz Region, killing at
least 45 people and displacing thousands.
Between 18 and 21 October, at least 31
ethnic Amhara residents from the Guraferda
district in the SNNPR were killed by armed
assailants, and around 1,500 of them were
displaced.3
On 9 November, local militias and youth
stabbed and hacked to death scores, and
likely hundreds, of ethnic Amhara residents
in Mai-Kadra in the western part of the Tigray
Region.4 Witnesses reported that they saw

160

dead bodies with gaping wounds that
appeared to have been inflicted by weapons
such as knives and machetes. Survivors of
the attack also reported that local youth and
security officers loyal to the Tigray regional
government had carried out the attack.

FORCED EVICTIONS
In mid-February, the Addis Ababa municipal
authorities demolished dozens of homes,
making at least 1,000 people homeless,
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
inhabitants said they had built their homes
on land they bought in 2007, but the
authorities insisted the families were
squatters who had not purchased the land
from the Addis Ababa municipality. The
families were not given prior notice of, or
consulted about, the evictions. Most of them
relied on the informal economy to make a
living and had lost their livelihoods due to
COVID-19 measures which limited
employment opportunities.
Following the demolitions, the residents
tried to build temporary shelters from canvas
and tarpaulin, but on 14 April these were also
pulled down by the authorities and the
materials confiscated by the police. As a
result, the families were forced to sleep in the
open during periods of heavy rain.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The authorities provided no information as to
what measures they had taken to locate and
rescue 17 Amhara students abducted in
November 2019 from Dembi Dolo University
in western Oromia by unidentified people.
Their whereabouts remained unknown at the
end of the year.5
The government took some steps towards
ensuring accountability for atrocities and
grave human rights violations carried out
since 1991, including extrajudicial
executions, torture and other ill-treatment,
and mass and arbitrary arrests. These
measures offered little hope that victims
would see justice for crimes, including
killings, torture and other ill-treatment, and
excessive use of force, carried out by security

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

forces, including the Ethiopian National
Defence Force, the Federal Police and
regional police special force units.
1. Ethiopia: Stop the use of deadly force on protesters (Press release, 14
August)
2. Ethiopia: Vendor killed, musician injured after police attack
opposition supporters in Oromia (Press release, 17 February)
3. Ethiopia: Authorities ban protests as “illegal and
unnecessary” (Press release, 27 October)
4. Ethiopia: Investigation reveals evidence that scores of civilians were
killed in massacre in Tigray state (Press release, 12 November)
5. Ethiopia: Parents fear for missing Amhara students as universities
close over COVID-19 (Press release, 25 March)

FIJI
Republic of Fiji
Head of state: Jioji Konrote
Head of government: Josaia Vorenqe ‘Frank’
Bainimarama
The authorities continued to stifle criticism
and restrict the right to freedom of
expression. New allegations of torture and
other ill-treatment by the security forces
surfaced throughout the year. Some cases
resulted in disciplinary actions and charges
against officers involved. Women and girls
continued to experience high rates of
gender-based violence. Fiji's response to the
COVID-19 pandemic failed to protect or
offer targeted financial support to women
and those working in informal sectors,
increasing the risks of poverty and financial
hardship for already marginalized
individuals.

BACKGROUND
The adoption of Fiji’s UPR outcome in March
exposed gaps in human rights protection,
including the need to pass a comprehensive
anti-discrimination law, protect the right to
freedom of expression, and take further
action to address gender inequality.1 Fiji
continued to be particularly vulnerable to
adverse impacts of climate change, including
rising sea-levels.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
Fiji reported its first COVID-19 cases in late
March and suppressed the spread of the
virus by relying on restrictions on free
movement and public gatherings, enforced
by arrests and hefty fines.2
Authorities threatened to charge protesters
at the University of the South Pacific after the
Vice Chancellor was suspended for exposing
corruption and misuse of funds.3 He was
later reinstated by the regional university’s
executive council.
In June, trade union leader Felix Anthony
was charged and appeared in court under
the Public Order Act for statements made in
support of workers’ rights.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In January, Fiji notified the UN of its decision
to withdraw the reservation made upon
ratification of the Convention Against Torture
in respect to the definition of torture.
Reservations remained in place in relation to
recognizing the right to compensation and
the Committee Against Torture receiving
complaints. Widespread immunities
continued to exist under national laws.
In June, four police officers were charged
with causing grievous bodily harm for
allegedly throwing a man off a bridge in
Tailevu in April, with a fifth officer charged for
interference with witnesses.
Four former prison officers claimed in May
that the Prisons Commissioner directed or
ordered the torture and other ill-treatment of
prisoners, including beatings, sleep
deprivation and isolation. There was no
investigation into these allegations by year’s
end.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women and girls continue to experience high
rates of gender-based violence. The
authorities failed to take such crimes
seriously.
A former national team rugby player
convicted for rape and sentenced to eight
years in prison in October 2019 was granted

161

permission to participate in rugby training in
July while serving his sentence. Women’s
rights organizations condemned the lack of
accountability and transparency and called
for an independent investigation.
1. Fiji: Address gaps in human rights protection before next review (ASA
18/1993/2020)
2. Pacific countries must not use COVID-19 to regress on human rights
(ASA 05/2144/2020)
3. Fiji: Stop harassing peaceful protesters at the University of the South
Pacific (ASA 18/2551/2020)

FINLAND
Republic of Finland
Head of state: Sauli Niinistö
Head of government: Sanna Marin
Refugee family reunification remained
difficult due to legislative and practical
obstacles. Intimate partner violence against
women increased during the COVID-19
pandemic. Many social security benefits
remained inadequate.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In March, the Non-Discrimination
Ombudsman published a family reunification
study on children who were granted
international protection. In almost half of the
66 cases, the justifications for denying
reunification were severely restrictive and the
process, and outcomes, put children’s rights
at risk. Legislative and practical obstacles,
including high income requirements,
continued to impede family reunification.
Finland continued to detain some
unaccompanied children, and families with
children, based on their immigration status.
Legal changes introduced in 2016 and 2019
continued to place asylum-seekers at risk of
refoulement (return to a country where there
is real risk of persecution).

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In February, the Supreme Court upheld the
conviction of a police officer for excessive use
of force. The officer had used a Taser

162

unannounced on a man who refused to lie
down in 2015. Also in February, a district
court convicted a police officer for the
violation of official duties in 2018 when using
a Taser on an intoxicated woman. In
September, a police officer was convicted of
aggravated assault and breaching official
duties for using excessive force on a
handcuffed man, who had to be resuscitated,
in police detention in 2019.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In February, a working group published its
proposal to reform legislation to increase the
protection of the rights of those seeking legal
gender recognition.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In February, June and December, new Sexual
Assault Support Centres opened in Oulu, Pori
and Rovaniemi.
In July, a working group published its
recommendations aimed at aligning rape
legislation with international standards.
Between January and June, under
COVID-19 restrictions, reports of intimate
partner violence against women and the
number of individuals seeking support
increased significantly.
In October, a government programme
combatting violence against women was
launched.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In June, the Intelligence Ombudsman
submitted its first annual report. It noted that
public oversight of the use of surveillance
was complicated due to the lack of detail in
the applications presented to the court as
well as in the surveillance decisions made by
the authorities.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
By the end of the year, 33 conscientious
objectors who had been acquitted by the
courts had refused non-military service for
the second time. At least 19 of them were
subsequently convicted and given custodial

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

sentences of up to nearly six months which,
in most cases, meant electronic monitoring.
The length of the civilian alternative to
military service remained punitive and
discriminatory, at more than double the
shortest period of military service.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
Many social security benefits remained below
that required by the European Social Charter,
despite minor improvements to some
provision levels. In March and September,
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, some further
improvements to social security coverage and
benefit levels were made, but only on a
temporary basis.

INDIGENOUS SÁMI PEOPLE
Finland still failed to ratify International
Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 169,
which would improve the monitoring of the
rights of the Indigenous Sámi people.

FRANCE
French Republic
Head of state: Emmanuel Macron
Head of government: Jean Castex (replaced Edouard
Philippe in July)
The government’s response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns, including in
relation to excessive use of force by police,
the right to peaceful assembly and the
rights of migrants and asylum-seekers.
Human rights defenders continued to face
harassment and prosecutions. Following the
murder of Samuel Paty, the government
introduced counter-terror measures that
violated human rights. Thousands of people
continued to be prosecuted for the vague
offence of contempt of public officials.
Racist comments by law-enforcement
officials were reported. Arms sales to Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
continued. There remained no measures to
monitor compliance with corporate
accountability legislation. The government’s

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

response to tackling climate change was
inadequate.

BACKGROUND
To combat the pandemic, on 17 March, the
authorities introduced measures severely
restricting human rights, including the rights
to freedom of movement and to peaceful
assembly. Some were eased on 11 May, but
on 29 October new lockdown measures were
passed in view of the steep increase in
COVID-19 cases. On 15 December the
authorities imposed a national curfew
between 8pm and 6am.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Cases of excessive use of force were reported
throughout the year. In January, Cédric
Chouviat died after a police road stop when
officers subjected him to a chokehold. After
his death, the Minister of Interior announced
a ban on chokeholds but reversed his
decision a few days later.
Enforcement of COVID-19 measures
further revealed the recurrent unlawful use of
force by police, particularly in deprived urban
areas with a high proportion of ethnic
minority residents. Amnesty International
verified at least 15 such incidents between
March and April in 15 cities. In some cases,
police officers also made racist and
homophobic remarks.1
In September, the Ministry of Interior made
public a new strategy for policing assemblies.
Rather than prioritizing dialogue and deescalation practices, the strategy remained
focused on the use of force, including the
use of dangerous weapons and techniques.
There remained no independent
mechanism to investigate cases of unlawful
use of force. Very few law enforcement
officials were prosecuted in relation to
allegations of unlawful use of force during
protests in 2018 and 2019. In one such case
in June, a police officer was fined for firing a
rubber bullet in the face of a protester during
a demonstration in 2018.
In November, the National Assembly
adopted a law that criminalizes the
circulation of images of law enforcement

163

officials that are deemed to threaten their
“physical and psychological integrity”,
thereby hampering accountability for
excessive use of force. The law was pending
before the Senate at the end of the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In June, the authorities decided to prosecute
three police officers, one of whom had
assaulted a British human rights defender,
Tom Ciotkowski, while he was documenting
police abuse against refugees in Calais in
2018.2 Courts also eventually acquitted three
defenders − Pierre Alain Mannoni, Cédric
Herrou and Martine Landry − who had been
prosecuted for helping and hosting asylumseekers.3
The government reiterated its intention to
make the protection of human rights
defenders abroad one of its foreign policy
priorities, particularly ahead of the election of
France to the UN Human Rights Council.
However, no concrete measures were taken
during the year and in France during
lockdown, human rights defenders providing
humanitarian aid to refugees and migrants
continued to face harassment and
intimidation in Calais and Grande-Synthe. In
September, the Prefect of Pas-de-Calais,
prompted by the Interior Minister, issued an
order prohibiting the distribution of food and
beverages to migrants and asylum-seekers in
a large area of Calais.

STATE OVERREACH
In June, the government introduced a bill to
extend the administrative control measures
set out in the law on internal security and
counter-terrorism, set to expire at the end of
the year. In December, Parliament approved
the extension of the measures until 31 July
2021.
In October, Kamel Daoudi, a man who had
been subject to control measures since
2008, was sentenced to one year’s
imprisonment because he had missed a
curfew.
In October and November, following the
murder of Samuel Paty, a teacher who
showed cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed

164

to his pupils, the government adopted
counter-terror measures that raised human
rights concerns. In particular, the government
dissolved several organizations and expelled
at least 66 foreign nationals without duly
assessing the real risk of torture that they
would face in their countries of origin.4

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In June, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled that the conviction of 11 activists
for their involvement in a campaign calling for
a boycott of Israeli products (the Boycott,
Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) campaign)
violated their right to freedom of expression.
Since 2010, the authorities have specifically
instructed prosecutors to use antidiscrimination laws to silence peaceful BDS
campaigners.
Thousands of people continued to be
prosecuted and convicted for the vague
criminal offence of contempt of public
officials. In October, following the murder of
Samuel Paty, the authorities launched dozens
of investigations for the similarly vague
offence of “apology for terrorism”.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 11 May, the government imposed a
blanket ban on demonstrations to protect
public health. On 13 June, the Council of
State overturned the ban. Nevertheless,
hundreds of protesters were fined for
participating in public assemblies between
11 May and the end of August.5 Protesters
also continued to be arrested and prosecuted
on the basis of vaguely formulated criminal
offences such as contempt of public officials,
failure to comply with notification
requirements and participating in a group
with a view to preparing violent acts.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in further
barriers for people on the move in accessing
social and economic rights, particularly for
those living in informal settlements in Paris
and northern France. The government

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

suspended the processing of all asylum
applications during lockdown.
In the capital, Paris and northern France,
migrants and refugees living in informal
settlements continued to be regularly forcibly
evicted, including during lockdown, without
alternative shelters and access to health care.
In Calais, law enforcement officials regularly
subjected migrants and refugees to
harassment and excessive use of force.
Border police continued to push back
migrants and asylum-seekers to Italy; and
migrants continued to face administrative
detention, without consideration for the
protection of their health during the
pandemic. Unaccompanied minors
continued to suffer barriers in accessing
welfare provisions and to be pushed back to
Italy.
In July, the Council of State ruled that the
returning of a woman and her child to Italy
without registering and examining their
asylum applications violated her right to seek
and enjoy asylum.
France and the UK failed to put in place
mechanisms for sharing the responsibility for
providing a place of safety for thousands of
people who tried to cross the English Channel
in small boats.

social media. The then Minister of Interior
condemned such behaviour and called for
zero-tolerance concerning racism inside the
police.

DISCRIMINATION

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE

Sexual and reproductive rights

The government failed to meet its obligation
to adequately tackle the climate emergency.
In April, the government’s revised national
strategy raised the permitted level of
greenhouse gas emissions compared to the
previous year. In July, the High Council for
the Climate, an independent authority,
considered that the government’s action to
tackle the climate emergency was
inadequate. Moreover, the government
granted financial aid to the most polluting
sectors of the economy as part of a COVID-19
business recovery plan.

At year’s end, the Senate was still debating
the bill on bioethics that the government had
introduced to Parliament in 2019. If passed,
the law would provide access to medically
assisted procreation to all women, regardless
of their sexual orientation or marital status.

Hate crimes
NGOs reported that Roma living in two
informal settlements near Paris suffered at
least five arson attacks in May. One informal
settlement was targeted four times with
Molotov cocktails that burned down most of
the makeshift houses.

Racism
Media reported racist comments and
behaviours by law enforcement officials on

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The government continued to sell arms to
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
despite the high likelihood that these arms
would be used to commit human rights
violations in the conflict in Yemen. The
government failed to provide detailed,
comprehensive and up-to-date information
on arms transfers authorized by the Prime
Minister. On 8 August, Lebanese security
forces used weapons acquired from France
to police protests that left more than 230
people injured (see Lebanon entry).

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Many companies still failed to comply with
the 2017 French duty of vigilance law
requiring companies to conduct human
rights due diligence, with only 72 companies
of nearly 200 publishing plans on how they
intended to respect human rights in their
value chains. The authorities again failed to
propose measures to ensure a system to
monitor compliance with this legislation.

1. Europe: Policing the pandemic: Human rights violations in the
enforcement of COVID-19 measures in Europe (EUR 01/2511/2020)
2. France: Prosecution of police who assaulted Calais camp volunteer
sends message against impunity (Press release, 11 June)

165

3. France: Acquittal of farmer who helped asylum-seekers shows that
solidarity is not a crime (News story, 13 May)
4. France: Counter-terror measures following the murder of Samuel Paty
raise human rights concerns (EUR 21/3281/2020)
5. France: Thousands of protesters wrongly punished under draconian
laws in pre and post COVID-19 crackdown (News story, 28
September)

GEORGIA
Georgia
Head of state: Salome Zurabishvili
Head of government: Giorgi Gakharia
Labour safety standards were not effectively
enforced causing high levels of injuries and
fatalities at work and prompting
strengthening of labour rights legislation.
Electoral rules were changed to ensure
greater representation of women in
Parliament. Authorities continued to use
disproportionate and indiscriminate force
against largely peaceful protesters.
Concerns remained over politically
motivated prosecutions. Russia and the
breakaway territories of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region continued to
restrict freedom of movement with the rest
of Georgia. New torture allegations and a
related death sparked widespread protests
in South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region.

BACKGROUND
A state of emergency was declared in March
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
including partial lockdown measures and
restrictions among other things on
international and domestic travel. A
nationwide ban on public gatherings was in
force until late April. The restrictive measures
were lifted in June, although physical
distancing rules remained in place.
Thousands were affected by COVID-19
restrictive measures which negatively
impacted the economy, leading to increased
unemployment and the closure of many
businesses. The government’s COVID-19
anti-crisis plan, announced in April,
introduced measures to support the most

166

economically vulnerable groups, including
the unemployed, less well-off families, people
with disabilities and pensioners. It also
covered water, gas and electricity bills for
some domestic consumers. Despite these
measures the negative effects of the
pandemic remained vast, placing increasing
numbers of people at risk of poverty.
Following political battles and protests in
2019, in March a compromise was reached
on electoral system reform, which introduced
a change to the mixed (proportionalmajoritarian) system and a lower electoral
threshold for parties. Parliamentary elections
in October gave the ruling party – Georgian
Dream – a new majority required to form the
government. The opposition political parties
did not recognize the election result and
claimed election fraud, with the majority
refusing to take up their parliamentary
mandates.
The breakaway regions of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region remained
under Russian occupation and overall
control, with their de facto authorities
continuing to deny access to international
monitors.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Against a backdrop of inadequate monitoring
and enforcement of health and safety
standards in the workplace, dozens of fatal
accidents were reported throughout the year,
particularly among miners and construction
workers.
In October, despite persistent opposition
from some business groups, Parliament
passed amendments to the Labour Code
which strengthened labour rights and
brought national legislation more in line with
international human rights law and
standards. The amendments strengthened
the institutional independence of the Labour
Department and extended its mandate to
inspect labour standards beyond
occupational safety. The amendments also
regulated work hours, overtime, night work,
mandatory weekly rest, internships and
breaks during shifts.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

DISCRIMINATION

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT

Gender discrimination persisted. The World
Economic Forum’s 2020 Global Gender Gap
Index placed Georgia 74th out of 153
countries, noting women were close to parity
with men on educational attainment and
health and survival, but there was a
significant gap in economic participation and
opportunity, and deep disparity in political
empowerment.
After years of campaigning by women’s
rights groups, in July, Parliament introduced
electoral gender quotas to increase women’s
representation in the legislative body. These
require all political parties to ensure that at
least a quarter of their parliamentarians
elected under the proportional system are
women, which in the October parliamentary
elections led to the election of at least 30
women out of a total of 150.

In November, the de facto authorities in
Abkhazia opened a crossing point with the
rest of Georgia for pensioners from Abkhazia
who have Georgian citizenship and receive
their pensions in Georgian-controlled territory.
However, Russian forces and the de facto
authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia/
Tskhinvali Region continued to install
physical barriers and restrict movement
across the division line with the rest of
Georgia and detain and fine residents for
“illegal border crossings”.
In July, local resident Zaza Gakheldze was
detained near an unmarked stretch of the
division line with South Ossetia/Tskhinvali
Region and accused of “illegally crossing the
border” and allegedly firing on “border
guards”, which are crimes punishable by up
to 20 years in prison. By the end of the year
he remained in Tskhinvali detention centre
pending trial.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 8 November, police used water cannons
disproportionately and indiscriminately
against largely peaceful pro-opposition
demonstrators after several individuals tried
to enter the building of the Central Election
Commission. The demonstrators were
protesting against alleged fraud during the
parliamentary elections.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Local civil society organizations continued to
raise concerns over politically motivated
prosecutions.
In October, two cartographers who had
been working on delimiting the border
between Georgia and Azerbaijan were
detained and charged with violating the
country's territorial integrity. Prosecutors
claimed they used the wrong map and put
Georgia at risk of surrendering parts of its
territory to Azerbaijan. Local civil society
groups claimed the case was trumped-up
and aimed to inflict political damage on the
present-day opposition which was in power
during the delimitation negotiations.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Right to health
Crossing points shut in 2019 in the South
Ossetia/Tskhinvali region remained closed.
Georgian authorities and independent
sources inside South Ossetia/Tskhinvali
Region reported that at least 10 residents of
Akhalgori died after they were refused
permission for medical transfer to the rest of
Georgia.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread in the breakaway South Ossetia/
Tskhinvali Region, with three cases including
one death reported in August. Inal Dzhabiev
and Nikolai Tskhovrebov were allegedly
severely beaten following detention on 23
August. Inal Dzhabiev died of his injuries
while Nikolai Tskhovrebov was paralyzed with
a spinal injury. Photos of their injuries
circulated on social media, together with
those of a third man, Gennady Kulaev,
detained on 24 August. The cases caused a
major public outcry, resulting in the dismissal
of the entire de facto government and the
arrest of eight police officers. By the end of

167

the year the cases against the police officers
were pending trial.

GERMANY
Federal Republic of Germany
Head of state: Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Head of government: Angela Merkel
Revelations of right-wing extremist activities
among police and security forces raised
concerns about the protection of minorities’
human rights. The authorities were urged by
the European Commission against Racism
and Intolerance to investigate police racial
profiling. The authorities failed to develop a
comprehensive strategy against hate crimes.
Calls to the nationwide “Violence against
women” helpline rose sharply during the
restrictions to prevent the spread of
COVID-19. In a landmark court ruling it was
stated that the Federal Intelligence
Service’s obligation to comply with the
human rights enshrined in the Constitution
includes extraterritorial activity. Germany
remained one of the few EU countries to
accept asylum-seekers for relocation.

BACKGROUND
In February, a man in Hanau shot and killed
nine people of foreign descent in two shisha
bars before killing his mother and himself at
home. Before the attack, the man published
a racist and anti-Semitic manifesto online.
The Federal Prosecutor General took up the
case and treated it as a terrorist attack.

DISCRIMINATION
In March, following the Hanau attack, the
government set up a Cabinet Committee
against Racism and Right-wing Extremism. In
September, the Committee carried out expert
hearings, attended by representatives of
migrant organizations and academics.
Civil society organizations continued to
report discriminatory identity checks by
police of members of ethnic and religious
minorities. In March, the European
Commission against Racism and Intolerance

168

called for a study on racial profiling by the
police. In July, the Federal Minister of the
Interior rejected the need for a study, arguing
that “discriminatory identity checks were
illegal”.
Authorities at both federal and state level
failed to establish an independent complaints
mechanism to investigate discriminatory and
unlawful behaviour by police. At the end of
the year, police in six federal states were still
not required to wear individual identification
badges.
In May, the Federal Ministry of the Interior
reported that the number of hate crimes
committed in 2019 had risen by over 5% to
8,585; anti-Semitic hate crimes had risen by
13%. The authorities at both federal and
state level failed to develop a comprehensive
strategy against hate crimes which would
include obligatory anti-racism training for law
enforcement officers.
Throughout the year, investigations were
ongoing into a series of more than 100
threatening letters, including death threats,
sent between August 2018 and the end of
2020 and addressed to mostly female
politicians, lawyers and anti-racism activists.
They were mostly signed “National Socialist
Underground 2.0”, referring to the racist
murders committed by the Nationalist Social
Underground (NSU) between 2000 and
2007. The addresses were obtained from
police databases, raising concern over data
breaches and infiltration of the security
forces. The Military Counterintelligence
Service also investigated more than 500
soldiers suspected of using banned National
Socialist symbols and of connections to “farright” networks that have advocated violence,
focusing on the Special Commando Forces.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In April, the first trial addressing torture by
Syrian officials started before the Higher
Regional Court in Koblenz. Two members of
the Syrian General Intelligence Directorate
were charged with crimes against humanity,
including 58 counts of murder and at least
4,000 cases of torture.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In May, the Federal Parliament passed a law
banning so-called “conversion therapies” that
aim at changing or suppressing a person's
sexual orientation or gender identity.
Although the law was considered to enhance
the rights of LGBTI people, it was criticized
by NGOs and experts for falling short in some
areas, including limiting the ban to people
under the age of 18. Concerns were raised
that the law allows exemptions for parents
who try to “cure” their children if they do not
“grossly violate their duty of care”.
In September, the federal government
presented a draft law to protect infants and
children born with variations of sex
characteristics from so-called “normalizing
treatments”. Although the draft addressed
human rights violations of intersex people
concerning medical procedures, it failed to
address compensation for people who
underwent unnecessary and irreversible
treatment. The draft also failed to introduce
further measures to end the pathologization
of intersex bodies.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to preliminary figures by the
Federal Ministry of Family Affairs, Senior
Citizens, Women and Youth, requests to the
nationwide helpline Violence against women
rose by 20% in April when restrictions to
prevent the spread of COVID-19 were first
implemented and remained at that higher
level compared to the first quarter of the year.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In May, the Federal Constitutional Court held
that monitoring by the Federal Intelligence
Service of worldwide internet traffic was a
violation of constitutional law. In a landmark
decision, the Court decided that state
authorities, including the Intelligence Service,
are bound by the rights enshrined in the
Constitution, such as the privacy of
communications, regardless of whether the
target is a German or a foreign national, and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

regardless of where the target was based.
The provisions for untargeted surveillance in
the Act on the Federal Intelligence Service
were found to be too vague. Germany's
intelligence oversight regime was judged to
be inadequate. The Court noted the lack of
safeguards for the protection of groups such
as journalists and lawyers. The law was due
to be revised by the end of 2021.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In April, the Federal Constitutional Court
ruled that the COVID-19 regulation
prohibiting public gatherings of more than
two people from different households could
not be interpreted as a blanket ban on
protests. Instead, local authorities had to
weigh the health restrictions against the right
to freedom of peaceful assembly.
Demonstrations could be held if they met
public health requirements, including
physical distancing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April and June, amendments to the
Network Enforcement Act were passed. The
law regulates the handling of certain content
punishable under the German criminal code
by large internet platforms. Although some
revisions were largely welcomed as
improvements for the protection of users’
freedom of expression, some experts raised
concerns that users could be reported to the
Office of the Federal Criminal Police for
creating legitimate content which was
wrongly assessed by the platform provider.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
In December, Amnesty International and
other civil society organizations criticized a
decision taken by the Interior Ministers of the
federal states to allow individuals convicted of
crimes or considered so-called “potential
attackers” to be deported to Syria, despite
the risks to their right to physical integrity if
returned to Syria.
By the end of the year, 1,293 refugees and
asylum-seekers from the Greek islands were
admitted to Germany. Under the EU

169

voluntary humanitarian admission scheme of
the EU-Turkey statement, 1,178 Syrian
refugees arrived, and 216 refugees were
resettled under the UNHCR resettlement
programme.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
The government launched a two-phased
monitoring process in 2019 to examine the
level of implementation by large German
companies of human rights due diligence
policies and procedures. In August 2020 the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs published the
results of the second phase of the monitoring
process. The findings indicated that only
13-17% of companies conducted a sufficient
level of human rights due diligence. In
Germany’s National Action Plan on Business
and Human Rights adopted in 2016, the
government announced that it would
consider implementing legislative measures if
fewer than 50% of companies conducted
sufficient due diligence.
Access to judicial remedies for victims of
human rights abuses by or involving German
companies abroad remained difficult to
obtain.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
An arms export moratorium on Saudi Arabia
was prolonged in March to the end of the
year. The moratorium did not cover any other
countries involved in the Yemen conflict. The
export of German parts and components for
joint European arms projects destined to
Saudi Arabia remained permitted.

GHANA
Republic of Ghana
Head of state and government: Nana Addo Dankwa
Akufo-Addo
Over 1,000 prisoners were pardoned and
others had their death sentences commuted
to life imprisonment. Prisons remained
severely overcrowded and conditions were
deplorable. Women suffered discrimination
and gender-based violence. Lesbian, gay,

170

bisexual, transgender and intersex people
continued to face discrimination. Health
workers were particularly at risk from
COVID-19 infection.

BACKGROUND
In December, the President was re-elected
for a second term.
The year was marked by the authorities’
restriction of human rights and punitive
measures in their response to the COVID-19
pandemic. As a step to control the spread of
COVID-19, the government introduced the
Imposition of Restrictions Bill, which became
law on 21 March and imposed measures
notably restricting the rights to freedom of
movement and peaceful assembly. Under an
Executive Instrument (known as EI 164),
adopted in June, anyone not wearing a face
mask in public places faced a maximum fine
of GHS60,000 (about US$10,000) and/or a
prison sentence of between four and 10
years.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Discrimination
The President’s promise to ensure that the
Affirmative Action Bill became law was not
realized. The Bill sought to increase women’s
political participation.

Violence against women
Akua Denteh, a 90-year-old woman, was
beaten to death in a mob attack on 23 July in
Kafaba, a town in the East Gonja District in
the Savannah Region, for alleged witchcraft.
Between July and August, the police arrested
several suspects alleged to have played a role
in the killing. In August, the Minister for
Gender, Children and Social Protection
pledged to assist women in “witch” camps
including by enrolling them onto Livelihood
Empowerment Against Poverty programmes.
The media reported that another woman, also
accused of witchcraft, was attacked and
seriously injured on 29 August in the
Savannah Region.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. Consensual same-sex sexual
relations between men remained
criminalized. Religious and political leaders,
and the media used hate speech against
LGBTI people. This contributed to a climate
of fear, hostility and intolerance towards the
LGBTI community.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
The limited availability of PPE to health
workers and inadequate health care facilities
due to insufficient investment in the health
sector hindered efforts to combat the
COVID-19 pandemic. In April, the Greater
Accra Regional Hospital in the capital, which
was designated as the main care facility for
treating COVID-19 patients, had only four
dedicated beds. In August, the privately
funded Infectious Disease Isolation and
Treatment Centre, which had 100 beds, was
established at the Ga East Hospital in Accra.
According to the Director General of the
Ghana Health Service, as of July, about
2,065 health workers had been infected with
coronavirus and six had died due to
COVID-19 related complications.

Prison conditions
The President pardoned hundreds of
prisoners in March and June in a bid to
mitigate the dangers to health caused by
overcrowding, particularly in light of the risks
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Those
who benefited were 1,555 first-time offenders
who had already served half their sentences,
as well as 15 seriously ill prisoners and 19
elderly prisoners. Nine death row prisoners
had their sentences commuted to life
imprisonment, while four prisoners had their
life sentences commuted to 20-year terms.
Nevertheless, prisons remained chronically
overcrowded and conditions were poor.
According to the World Prison Brief database,
there were 13,333 inmates as of November.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Prison Administration statistics showed that
inmates were held in 44 prisons with a
combined capacity of only 9,945. They were
given insufficient, poor quality food and
standards of medical care and hygiene were
grossly inadequate.

FORCED EVICTIONS
In April, during the lockdown period when
the COVID-19 pandemic was at its peak, the
Accra Metropolitan Assembly supervised
home demolitions in Old Fadama, a slum in
Accra. An estimated 1,000 residents were
made homeless and therefore also more
vulnerable to contracting COVID-19 as the
government made no arrangements to
provide alternative housing.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In January, environmental NGOs and activists
filed a notice of civil action against the
government for violating the constitutional
right to life and dignity - which they argued
includes the right to a safe and healthy
environment - as a result of a proposed
mining project in the Atewa Range Forest in
the Eastern Region. This followed the
government’s signing a Memorandum of
Understanding with China which would allow
the latter access to bauxite in exchange for
their financing infrastructure projects such as
roads and bridges. According to the
complainants, the mining project would have
a negative impact on water supply,
biodiversity and climate change adaptation.
In November, the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature passed a resolution
urging the government to stop all mining
related activities and other destructive
activities in the Atewa forest and to establish
the forest as a national park to ensure its
preservation.

171

GREECE
Hellenic Republic
Head of state: Katerina Sakellaropoulou (replaced
Prokopis Pavlopoulos in March)
Head of government: Kyriakos Mitsotakis
Austerity measures adopted over the past
decade continued to erode the accessibility
and affordability of health care. Allegations
of torture and other ill-treatment and
excessive use of force by police persisted.
More pushbacks of refugees and migrants
at land and sea were reported. In a historic
ruling in October, an Athens court found the
extreme far-right Golden Dawn party guilty
of running a criminal organization. Moria
refugee camp on the island of Lesvos was
destroyed by fires.

BACKGROUND
In October, the International Monetary Fund
highlighted that the COVID-19 pandemic had
interrupted Greece’s modest economic
recovery, with the GDP contracting by 7.9%
in the first six months of the year.

reported. Those targeted included people
protesting in solidarity with refugees, those
who gathered in public squares as the
authorities started easing COVID-19
restrictions, and refugees and migrants.
In May, a court in the capital, Athens,
awarded compensation to journalist Manolis
Kypreos after it found the Greek state
responsible for his serious injury by a police
officer who threw a stun grenade at him in
2011. Concerns were raised following the
authorities’ decision to appeal against the
ruling in October and the impact this would
have on Manolis Kypreos’ right to an effective
remedy.
In October, a Mixed Jury Court in Athens
started hearing the case against two civilians
and four police officers indicted for the death
of LGBTI activist Zak Kostopoulos in Athens
in September 2018.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS

Research published in April found that
austerity measures adopted in the previous
10 years had continued to erode the
accessibility and affordability of health care in
Greece.1 As a result, many people found it
harder to afford health care and to access the
public health system. The retrogressive
impact of these measures, which
disproportionately impacted the poorest and
most marginalized, combined with how they
were implemented, violated the right to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard
of health. Many of the challenges faced by
health workers, including difficulties due to
low numbers of staff, were exacerbated by
COVID-19.

Land and sea arrivals declined sharply during
the year, with 15,669 arrivals recorded as of
31 December, compared to 74,613 in 2019.
While the government claimed the
reduced arrivals as the result of their policies,
population numbers were also impacted by
COVID-19 and the tougher approach to
border control, in numerous instances
accompanied by reports of pushbacks and
violence.
In May, amendments to the asylum and
migration laws further reduced procedural
and substantive safeguards for individuals.
The changes expanded the use of detention
in asylum and return procedures and
provided for the creation of new facilities,
with a controlled entry/exit system intended
to replace open camps.
Despite the formal implementation in April
of a new system to ensure asylum-seekers’
access to public health care, individuals
continued to face difficulties.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

Pushbacks

Incidents of ill-treatment and excessive and
otherwise unlawful use of force by law
enforcement officials continued to be

Following Turkey’s announcement on 27
February that it would no longer prevent
asylum-seekers and migrants from crossing

RIGHT TO HEALTH

172

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

into the EU, tens of thousands of people tried
to cross Greece’s land borders in the Evros
region. Greece reacted by sending in border
forces that used tear gas, water cannons and
plastic bullets against those attempting to
cross. Testimonies described a series of
abuses by Greek border forces, including
excessive use of force, beatings, use of live
ammunition, unlawful detention and
systematic pushbacks into Turkey, leading to
the deaths of at least two men and the
disappearance of one woman. These
practices were consistently denied by Greek
authorities.
Among the measures taken to address the
situation at its borders, on 2 March, Greece
suspended asylum applications for one
month and most refugees and migrants
arriving by sea were held arbitrarily. 2
In the same month, the EU Commission
praised Greece as Europe’s “shield” and
mobilized additional funds to support its
migration system; additional assets were
deployed by the EU Border and Coast Guard
(FRONTEX).
Numerous incidents of pushbacks and
dangerous practices at sea against refugees
and migrants, allegedly by Greek security
forces, were also reported by NGOs and other
actors.
Following allegations, internal inquiries
were launched into FRONTEX’s involvement
in pushbacks in the Aegean Sea.

Situation on the Aegean islands
Despite reduced arrivals, overcrowding levels
in the five EU-sponsored hotspots on the
Aegean islands reached a peak around
March. At that time, Moria refugee camp on
Lesvos, with capacity for 3,000 people,
hosted almost 20,000. Camp residents
continued to suffer unsanitary conditions,
inadequate medical care, insecurity and
violence, including gender-based violence.
Between 8 and 10 September, consecutive
fires destroyed Moria camp, leaving its
12,000 or more residents to sleep rough for
days on a road cordoned by police, without
adequate access to shelter, sanitation and
food. By 17 December, 553 unaccompanied

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

minors were relocated to European countries
from Greece, including 406 who were
removed from Lesvos. Other Moria residents
were moved to a new temporary tent camp,
where they faced conditions that were
criticized by UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, and NGOs. The EU Commission
formed a taskforce to manage the situation in
Lesvos in co-operation with the Greek
authorities.

COVID-19 response in asylum facilities
Responding to COVID-19, Greece restricted
the movements of asylum-seekers inside and
outside camps. In many facilities, these
measures were repeatedly and
discriminatorily renewed throughout the year.
The overcrowded camps in Lesvos and
Samos, among other locations, registered
COVID-19 outbreaks and individuals were
placed under quarantines. The inadequate
living conditions prevented the
implementation of quarantines with full
respect of people’s basic rights.

Situation on mainland
Transfers of asylum-seekers and recognized
refugees to the mainland increased, reaching
13,500 as of 30 November.
From June, thousands of people who
obtained international protection status were
required to leave reception facilities around
Greece, following a legislative amendment
which reduced accommodation support.
Media and NGOs documented that many
faced difficulties in accessing basic services
on the mainland and were sleeping rough in
Athens.

Criminalization of solidarity
In April and September, new rules severely
limited NGOs’ ability to work on migration
and asylum issues. While the criminal
proceedings against rescuers Sarah Mardini
and Séan Binder remained pending, in
October, criminal charges were announced
against 33 NGO members and the
independent refugee shelter PIKPA was
closed and its residents moved to a different
facility on Lesvos.

173

DISCRIMINATION

RIGHT TO EDUCATION

In a landmark verdict in October, an Athens
court found the political leadership of far-right
party Golden Dawn guilty of running a
criminal organization. Golden Dawn members
committed a series of violent crimes,
including attacks against refugees, migrants,
trade unionists and human rights defenders.
Forty-three party members, including 11
former Members of Parliament, were
convicted for participating in a criminal
organization. Golden Dawn member Giorgos
Roupakias was convicted of the murder of
anti-fascist singer Pavlos Fyssas in 2013, and
15 other defendants were convicted as
accessories. The court convicted five people
of the attempted murder of an Egyptian
fisherman and four defendants for the attack
against trade unionists from the Greek
Communist Party

Prison inmate and university student Vasilis
Dimakis went on hunger and thirst strike in
April and May, protesting that his transfer to
Grevena prison and then to an isolation cell
in the female ward of Korydallos prison
prevented him from continuing his university
education. Vasilis Dimakis ended his strike at
the end of May. Following pressure from civil
society, he was returned to his original cell in
Korydallos prison, where he was able to
continue his studies.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In July, NGOs, trade unions and political
parties expressed serious concerns over a
controversial bill regulating public
assemblies. The bill became law on 11 July
and included a provision establishing liability
for the organizers of an assembly.3

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
Serious violations of the rights of
conscientious objectors continued, including
repeated prosecutions, fines and trials in
military courts. In October, a 45-year-old
conscientious objector whose application for
conscientious objector’s status had been
rejected in 2004 by the Minister of National
Defence, was acquitted on procedural
grounds by a military court.
Procedures for the examination of
applications on conscientious objectors'
status were suspended for nearly 15 months
before a reformed Committee, tasked to
examine such applications, started operating
in July. An appeal against a 2019 increase to
the length of alternative service before the
Supreme Administrative Court was pending
at the end of the year.

174

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
PUNISHMENT
In a report published on 9 April, the
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture highlighted systemic failures in
Greece’s prisons. On the same day, a female
prisoner died in Eleonas prison; fellow
inmates reported that she had not received
adequate medical attention. Prisoners around
the country told the Initiative for Detainees’
Rights that they were not provided with
personal protective equipment against
COVID-19.
1. Greece: COVID-19 crisis exposes urgent need to bolster austerityravaged health system (News story 27 April)
2. Europe: Caught in a political game: asylum-seekers and migrants on
the Greece/Turkey border pay the price for Europe’s failures (EUR
01/2077/2020)
3. Greece: Blanket ban on public assemblies must be urgently revoked
(EUR 25/3346/2020)

GUATEMALA
Republic of Guatemala
Head of state and government: Alejandro Giammattei
Falla (replaced Jimmy Morales Cabrera in January)
Thousands of people were detained for
breaching the curfew ordered in March by
the government to contain the spread of
COVID-19. Health workers faced difficult
working conditions during the pandemic,
often lacking personal protective equipment
and in some cases work contracts or wages.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Attacks on human rights defenders
increased and Congress passed a law that
threatens the right to defend human rights.

led to fears of a worsening of the food and
sanitary crises.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT

As of November, more than 41,000
Guatemalans who had fled violence, poverty
and inequality were returned to Guatemala
from Mexico and the USA. The first
temporary shelters set up to receive
returnees and test them for COVID-19 did not
always meet the minimum requirements for
housing people.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, on 4
March the government declared a “state of
calamity”, followed on 16 March by border
closures and a mandatory curfew. According
to the authorities, more than 40,000 people
were detained for curfew violations during the
first six months this was in force. The media
reported that people with no choice but to
keep working in the informal economy were
detained. A possible extrajudicial execution at
the hands of the police in the capital,
Guatemala City, was also reported during
curfew on 17 June.

RIGHT TO HEALTH – HEALTH WORKERS
Health workers worked under precarious
conditions during the pandemic, and
repeatedly reported the lack of personal
protective equipment in hospitals. In early
May, a group of doctors from the temporary
hospital set up in Guatemala City's Parque de
la Industria to care for patients with
COVID-19 reported that they had been
working without a contract or pay since the
beginning of the pandemic.

RIGHT TO FOOD AND WATER
The lockdown measures exacerbated the
precarious economic situation of many
households in Guatemala, which already had
one of the highest rates of chronic child
malnutrition in the region. White flags were
placed in windows of people’s homes as a
sign that they had no food and people stood
in long lines to receive food from solidarity
initiatives such as the Community Pot in
Guatemala City. The Ombudsperson and the
media reported that several neighbourhoods
and communities did not have access to
water, preventing people from adopting
adequate hygiene practices during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The devastating impact
of hurricanes Iota and Eta, which affected
more than two million people in November,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
According to the Unit for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders in Guatemala
(UDEFEGUA), a local human rights
organization, attacks against human rights
defenders increased in 2020 compared to
previous years, with a total of 1,004 attacks
recorded as of 15 December. Those who
defend land, territory and the environment
were particularly at risk.
This group, women defending sexual and
reproductive rights and those fighting
impunity and corruption were also the targets
of unfounded criminal complaints and
proceedings, as part of the misuse of the
criminal justice system to harass and punish
them for their activities. The Ombudsperson
faced several criminal complaints and
requests for his removal in reprisal for his
activities.
In September, an appeals court increased
the prison sentence against prisoner of
conscience Bernardo Caal Xol, who had been
deprived of his liberty since January 2018 for
defending the rights of Indigenous Peoples
affected by the construction of the OXEC
hydroelectric dam project.
In general, the vast majority of attacks on
human rights defenders remained
unpunished. By the end of the year,
Guatemala had yet to adopt the public policy
for the protection of human rights defenders
ordered by the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights in 2014.
Despite multiple concerns expressed by
UN human rights bodies and international
and local organizations, in February Congress

175

amended the law on NGOs. Decree 4-2020
added conditions for the functioning of NGOs
and could lead to their arbitrary closure.
However, implementation was halted due to
an appeal pending before the Constitutional
Court.

suspected of responsibility had been
convicted by the end of the year.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

Republic of Guinea
Head of state: Alpha Condé
Head of government: Ibrahima Kassory Fofana

On 21 November, the National Civil Police
used excessive force to repress protests in
Guatemala City. They made unnecessary and
indiscriminate use of tear gas and water
canon against protesters and passers-by and
violently arrested dozens of people, including
journalists.

IMPUNITY
The future of the fight against impunity in
cases of corruption and human rights
violations remained at risk. On several
occasions, prosecutors, judges and
magistrates who had worked on emblematic
cases of the fight against impunity were
targeted with criminal complaints and intense
media smear campaigns also aimed at
discrediting them.
This fight against impunity was also at the
heart of struggles to select new magistrates
for the Supreme Court of Justice and the
Courts of Appeals. The process, which had
been pending since 2019, was again delayed
because of a new corruption scandal and
delays in the vote by Congress.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Despite high levels of gender-based violence
against women and girls, organizations
denounced the lack of funding to temporary
shelters known as Comprehensive Support
Centres for Women Survivors of Violence
(CAIMUS) and mobilized against the
government's intention to close the
Presidential Secretariat for Women
(SEPREM) and replace it with a lower-ranking
commission.
The investigation into the death of 41 girls
during a fire at the state-run shelter Virgin of
the Assumption Safe House in March 2017
remained pending. None of those accused or

176

GUINEA
Human rights violations were carried out in
the context of controversial constitutional
change and disputed presidential election
results. Dozens of people were killed by
members of defence and security forces
during demonstrations, while alleged
perpetrators enjoyed impunity. Members of
opposition political parties and prodemocracy activists were arbitrarily arrested
and detained. The rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly were
restricted. Prisoners’ rights to health were
undermined by chronic overcrowding and
poor detention conditions.

BACKGROUND
From March, a state of emergency was
imposed in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, and measures introduced
restricting movement and the right to
assembly, among other things.
In March, the National Front for the
Defence of the Constitution (FNDC), a
coalition of political parties and civil society
organizations, organized mass protests
against a constitutional reform project that
would allow the President to run for a third
term, and called for a boycott of the
legislative elections and constitutional
referendum, both of which were held on 22
March. In April, the Constitutional Court
announced that almost 90% had voted for
the constitutional reform.
On 24 October, the Independent National
Electoral Commission announced that Alpha
Condé had won the presidential elections,
despite one contender, Cellou Dalein Diallo,
having already claimed victory.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The defence and security forces used
excessive force against demonstrators.
Dozens of people were shot dead and many
others suffered bullet wounds or were injured
when hit by tear gas canisters.
Between 21 and 22 March, at least 12
people were killed during protests organized
by the FNDC.
On 12 May, seven people were killed
during demonstrations, some of them violent,
in the towns of Manéah, Coyah and Dubréka,
in the Kindia region, and in the city of
Kamsar in the Boké region. They were
demonstrating against the security forces’
management of COVID-19 movement
restrictions.
In the days following the October
presidential election at least 16 people were
killed by security forces while protesting at
the results. Defence and security forces also
committed acts of violence against residents
of neighbourhoods perceived as favouring the
opposition in Conakry, the capital, killing at
least one resident of Wanindara, on 1
December, without reason.
According to the authorities, two
policemen were killed in Conakry on 21
October and 30 November respectively, while
three gendarmes and a soldier were killed in
an attack on a train belonging to the mining
company Rusal on 23 October, also in
Conakry.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Between January and September, dozens of
representatives of civil society organizations
and political activists were arbitrarily arrested
for having opposed the referendum, called
for demonstrations and/or denounced human
rights violations in the country.
On 6 March, police arrested Ibrahima
Diallo, an FNDC leader and co-ordinator of
the Tournons la Page/Guinea (TLP/Guinea)
pro-democracy movement and Sékou
Koundouno, co-ordinator of Le Balai Citoyen,
a citizens’ movement which promotes
democracy, in Conakry. Earlier that day, they
had held a press conference, notably to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

denounce the use, by members of the
security forces, of arbitrary arrests. Charges
against the two men included “contempt of
officers, assault with violence and threat to
public order and the safety, integrity and
dignity of individuals, through the use of
electronic communication.” On 15 July, the
Conakry Court of Appeal dismissed the case
against them on grounds of legal and
procedural flaws.
Another FNDC leader and TLP/Guinea
member, Oumar Sylla, was arrested on 17
April in Conakry by Research and
Intervention Brigade agents. The arrest
followed his participation in a radio show in
which FNDC members called for
demonstrations against constitutional reform.
He had also denounced the killings, torture,
arbitrary detention and harassment of FNDC
members in the city of Nzérékoré. He was
charged with the “communication and
dissemination of false information”, “violence
and making death threats”. He was released
on 27 August, after a judge dismissed all
charges against him. However, on 29
September, he was arbitrarily detained again
after plain-clothes police officers arrested him
at a banned demonstration in Matoto, a
municipality in Conakry. He remained in
Conakry Central Prison on charges of
“participation in a mob that may disturb
public order”.
On 7 May, Saïkou Yaya Diallo, an FNDC
legal officer, was arrested in Conakry, after he
participated in a press conference during
which he and others isolated in an office
someone they believed to be working for the
intelligence services allegedly to protect her
from other participants. He was charged with
“assault, violence, threats and public insults”
and detained in Conakry Central Prison
despite two court rulings for his release under
judicial supervision. He was convicted on
November 16 and released on 11 December
after he completed his sentence.
On 10 November, the Dixinn District
Prosecutor announced that 78 people,
including political opposition figures, were
brought before a judge in the context of postelection demonstrations and violence and

177

charged with, among other things,
“possession and manufacturing of small
arms, criminal conspiracy, and statements
inciting violence”.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL TREATMENT
Ibrahima Sow, aged 62, was arrested on 24
October after the attack on a Rusal train (see
above, Unlawful killings). According to the
authorities, while under arrest, he tested
positive for COVID-19 from which he
recovered but after “complaining of diabetes”
he was taken to hospital where he died.
Photographs of his injuries sustained during
his detention strongly suggested that he had
suffered burns from a hot iron rod or similar
object.

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY AND
EXPRESSION
National and local authorities undermined
the right to freedom of assembly, banning –
without giving legitimate reasons – at least
seven demonstrations against the
constitutional referendum and the President’s
candidacy for a third term of office. Protests
planned for January in the cities of
Kissidougou and Nzérékoré were banned to
“keep the peace”; in March, demonstrations
in Matoto and Matam were prevented
because of a forthcoming ECOWAS visit and
preparations for International Women’s Day.
Demonstrations in Matoto during the electoral
campaign between September and October
were also outlawed.
The right to freedom of expression was
also restricted. According to the NGO Access
Now, social media transmission was
disrupted for a total of 36 hours between 21
and 23 March. On 18 October, the High
Authority for Communication suspended the
news site Guineematin.com for one month
after it broadcast live from polling stations
during ballot counts.

IMPUNITY
Despite pledges from the authorities that the
killing of any protester would be investigated,
there was no official information by the end of
the year about developments.

178

The Justice Minister’s 2019 pledge that,
following the completion of a judicial
investigation in 2017, the trial of alleged
perpetrators in the September 2009
massacre in the Conakry Stadium would start
by June 2020, remained unrealized. Defence
and security forces had killed 157 peaceful
demonstrators in the stadium and raped at
least 100 women.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Prison conditions
The health of prisoners was particularly at
risk during the COVID-19 pandemic due to
chronic overcrowding, and inadequate
sanitation and medical care in detention
facilities.
The authorities reported that in May, out of
713 prisoners tested at Conakry Central
Prison, 68 had positive results for COVID-19.
The Ministry of Justice said they were treated
in health facilities deployed in the prison. In
Kindia Prison there were 30 positive test
results among the total population of 352
inmates and 25 prison guards, and the
Ministry of Justice reported that the 28
inmates who tested positive were sent to
Conakry Central Prison to receive treatment.
Conakry Central Prison was the most
overcrowded facility in the country, holding
1,500 detainees, but with a capacity for only
300.

HONDURAS
Republic of Honduras
Head of state and government: Juan Orlando
Hernández
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the
security forces used excessive force to
implement lockdowns and to police
protests. Health workers highlighted the
health risks posed by the lack of personal
protection equipment (PPE) in hospitals.
Honduras remained one of the most lethal
countries for human rights defenders.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The pandemic worsened the already
precarious working conditions of health
workers, amid allegations of corruption and
complaints about the inadequate
management of emergency funds for the
purchase of medicines and materials. Health
workers repeatedly highlighted the lack of
PPE.
In several hospitals, health workers were
asked to sign confidentiality agreements
prohibiting them from speaking publicly
about their concerns.

access to land, continued to face high levels
of violence. Most of these attacks remained
unpunished.
By the end of the year, the trial of a
businessman detained in 2018 and accused
of being behind the killing of Indigenous
leader Berta Cáceres had not started. The
National Council of Popular and Indigenous
Organizations of Honduras (COPINH)
repeatedly highlighted delays and
irregularities in proceedings. There was no
progress in the investigation into others
believed to be responsible for planning and
ordering her killing.
Five men from the Garifuna Triunfo de la
Cruz community, including four Black
Fraternal Organization of Honduras
(OFRANEH) activists, were allegedly forcibly
disappeared on 18 July by unidentified
individuals wearing police-type clothing. The
men’s fate and whereabouts remained
unknown at the end of the year.
Human rights defenders also continued to
face unfounded judicial proceedings to
intimidate and harass them and to hinder
their human rights work. Among those
targeted were members of the Municipal
Committee for the Defence of Common and
Public Assets (CMDBCP).
In June, a new Penal Code entered into
force that contains provisions that are
sometimes ambiguous or contrary to the
principle of legality and could be arbitrarily
interpreted to restrict the exercise of freedom
of assembly and association and to reinforce
the criminalization of human rights
defenders.

RIGHTS OF MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

In January and October, thousands of
Hondurans joined the so-called caravans to
leave the country and flee violence and
poverty. The vast majority were returned or
deported to Honduras from Mexico, the USA
and Guatemala, often without their rights
being guaranteed.

Women and girls faced high levels of genderbased violence. The National University of
Honduras’ observatory on violence reported
224 femicides between January and
December. According to the NGO Women's
Peace Movement "Visitación Padilla", more
than 65,000 calls about domestic and intrafamily violence were registered through the
National Emergency System 911 between
January and October.

BACKGROUND
Levels of violence and impunity remained
high, as well as poverty and inequality. In
November, devastating landslides and floods
caused by hurricanes Eta and Lota resulted
in at least 94 deaths and affected almost 4
million people, raising serious concerns
about the rights to food, water and livelihood
of already marginalized groups.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The police and the military used excessive
force to implement national and local curfews
and lockdowns introduced in response to the
pandemic and to suppress protests sparked
by the lack of state food aid and
unemployment. Civil society organizations
documented injuries and arbitrary detentions
(including of journalists covering protests),
and at least one possible extrajudicial
execution.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders, particularly those
defending the territory, environment and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

179

The organization Cattrachas reported at
least 19 violent deaths of LGBTI people, as
well as high levels of impunity for such
crimes.

HUNGARY
Hungary
Head of state: János Áder
Head of government: Viktor Orbán
Women and transgender people were
discriminated against in law and in
practice. Asylum-seekers were refused safe
entry at borders and were expelled. Changes
to laws to contain COVID-19 restricted
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. The government continued to
undermine judicial independence and
public confidence in the judiciary.

BACKGROUND
In March, Parliament adopted the Bill on
Protection against the COVID-19 pandemic. It
extended the government’s power to rule by
decree by absolving it from parliamentary
scrutiny, without providing a clear cut-off
date. While the bill was replaced in mid-June,
the government continued to uphold a set of
transitional powers allowing the restrictions of
human rights, such as the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly, and curtailing access to
asylum.
In September, the European Commission
published its first rule of law report, noting
serious concerns regarding Hungary.
Judicial independence remained at risk of
attacks from senior members of the
government who contested final judgments in
official government communication and in
the media, delaying their execution. A
gradual erosion of the internal organizational
independence of the judiciary was not
addressed, continuing to cause fear of
retaliation by the executive among judges.1

180

DISCRIMINATION
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people
In May, Parliament prohibited the legal
gender recognition of transgender and
intersex people, requiring the registration of
sex by birth based on biological markers and
chromosomes, which cannot be changed at a
later stage. This means transgender people
can no longer change their sex on official
documents and certificates to reflect their
gender identity.2
In July, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled that Hungary had violated the
right to respect for private and family life of a
transgender man from Iran. He had been
recognized as a refugee in Hungary based on
persecution for his gender identity, yet the
authorities refused to legally recognize his
gender and name.
In December, Parliament passed a law
denying LGBTI people adoption rights, along
with discriminatory amendments to the
Constitution specifying that “mother is a
female and father is a male”, and that
Hungary “protects self-identity of the
children’s sex by birth”.3

Women
In May, the Curia (the highest court in
Hungary) confirmed that the maternity ward
in a hospital in the city of Miskolc had
discriminated against pregnant Roma women
from disadvantaged and low-income
backgrounds whose birth companions were
required to purchase and wear a “maternity
garment” for hygiene reasons. This often
resulted in Roma women being forced to give
birth without the support of their
companions. The court ordered the
termination of the practice.
Gender-based discrimination in the
workplace and labour market particularly
affected pregnant women and women with
young children wanting to return to work.4
The authorities failed to ensure access to
effective remedies for unlawful termination of
employment.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In May, Parliament adopted a political
declaration calling on the government not to
ratify the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (the Istanbul
Convention), despite initially signing it in
2014.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In January, the government launched a coordinated communication and media
campaign to discredit 63 Roma former
elementary school students in the town of
Gyöngyöspata who had successfully taken a
case to court about segregated and lower
quality education. Despite the government’s
campaign, the Curia confirmed in May that
the compensation they had been awarded
had to be paid in full without delay.
In March, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child expressed serious concern about
the continuing segregation of Roma children
in special education, the increased gap in
attainment between Roma and non-Roma
children, and the lack of data on Roma
children in education.
In September, a new national curriculum,
which had been adopted without broad
public consultation and despite widespread
protests by educational professionals, was
rolled out in elementary and secondary
schools.
Between September and November,
students at the University of Theatre and Film
Arts in the capital, Budapest, occupied their
school to protest against a governmentcontrolled restructure of ownership and
management which they claimed curtailed
academic freedom. Several prominent
lecturers resigned.
In October, the Court of Justice of the
European Union (CJEU) ruled that Hungary
had breached EU rules relating to academic
freedom, through the 2017 amendments to
the Law on higher education, which forced
the Central European University out of the
country.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
A bill adopted in March increased penalties
for the crime of “imparting or conveying false
information” related to the COVID-19
pandemic and to the government’s
responses. It instituted the crime of
obstructing the enforcement of a quarantine
or isolation order.5
In mid-June, transitional provisions were
adopted, amending applicable rules during a
“state of medical emergency”, and giving the
possibility to government to arbitrarily restrict
the rights to freedom of movement and
peaceful assembly.
Also in June, the CJEU ruled that
restrictions in the Law on the Transparency of
Organizations Supported from Abroad,
imposed on the financing of civil society
organizations by foreign funders, breached
EU law.
In July, the editorial team and nearly 100
staff journalists resigned from Index, the
country’s largest independent online news
portal, in response to the dismissal of its
editor-in-chief. The editors had publicly
announced that their independence was in
danger following the takeover of the portal’s
advertising branch by a media executive with
close ties with the government.

RIGHT TO SEEK ASYLUM
The government lost three court cases
regarding breaches of international
obligations. In April, the CJEU ruled that
Hungary had failed to fulfil EU law obligations
by refusing to relocate asylum-seekers within
the mandatory scheme set up in solidarity
with Italy and Greece.
In May, the Court ruled that Hungary’s
automatic detention of asylum-seekers in
border detention centres known as “transit
zones” breached EU legislation as the
detention measures were disproportionate,
exceeded the maximum time limit, and could
not be challenged in court. While initially
protesting the judgment, the government
vacated the transit zones the same month.

181

In June, new rules introduced severely
limited access to asylum. Transitional
measures, denounced by UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, removed the possibility for
asylum-seekers to submit applications inside
Hungary, instead requiring them to first
submit a “declaration of intent” at selected
embassies outside the country. By the end of
the year, only a handful declarations were
registered, and one family was granted
permission to enter Hungary to submit an
application. In October, the European
Commission launched an infringement
procedure, arguing that the restrictions were
unlawful.
Those entering irregularly, mostly from
Serbia, were expelled, often collectively. By
the end of the year, police pushbacks across
the border fence exceeded 30,000, in breach
of the obligation to individually assess the risk
of refoulement, the forcible return of
individuals to countries where they risk
serious human rights violations. In
December, the CJEU ruled that such returns
breached EU law
1. Hungary: Fearing the unknown – How rising control is undermining
judicial independence in Hungary (EUR 27/2051/2020)
2. Hungary: Government must revoke prohibition of gender legal
recognition (EUR 27/2085/2020)
3. Hungary: Hungarian Parliament must reject amendments further
undermining the rights of LGBTI people (EUR 27/3353/2020)
4. Hungary: No working around it: Gender-based discrimination in
Hungarian workplaces (EUR 27/2378/2020)
5. Hungary: Government must not use extraordinary power to roll back
human rights amid COVID-19 emergency (EUR 27/2046/2020)

INDIA
Republic of India
Head of state: Ram Nath Kovind
Head of government: Narendra Modi
Freedom of expression was guaranteed
selectively, and dissent was repressed
through unlawful restrictions on peaceful
protests and by silencing critics. Human
rights defenders, including students,
academics, journalists and artists, were

182

arbitrarily arrested, often without charge or
trial. Despite a Supreme Court ruling to
reduce prison overcrowding to curb the
spread of COVID-19, the authorities
continued to incarcerate many who were
critical of the government. The authorities
failed to adequately investigate or punish
perpetrators of violence based on caste, sex
and gender, and carried out reprisals
against those who reported rape and castebased crimes. There was widespread
impunity and lack of accountability for
murders and attacks carried out by vigilante
mobs and police officers against religious
minorities. Swift and extreme restrictions
were placed on freedom of movement in
response to the pandemic, leaving
thousands of migrant workers stranded
without adequate food and protection.
Some restrictions to curb the pandemic also
threatened the right to privacy.

BACKGROUND
In December 2019, the government passed
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA)
enabling irregular migrants from Afghanistan,
Bangladesh and Pakistan to obtain Indian
citizenship, excluding Muslims. The
discriminatory nature of the CAA sparked
peaceful protests across the country, which
were met with arbitrary arrests and detention
and widespread demonization of those
protesting.
The government’s strategy to curb
COVID-19 included a punitive lockdown at
very short notice, lack of transparency in
disbursing relief funds, threats to privacy, and
demonization of religious minorities.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Seven human rights activists – Father Stan
Swamy, Jyoti Raghoba Jagtap, Sagar
Tatyaram Gorkhe, Ramesh Murlidhar
Gaichor, Hany Babu, Gautam Navlakha and
Anand Teltumbde, were arrested by the
National Investigation Agency (NIA), India’s
main counter-terrorism agency, for their
alleged involvement in violence during the
Bhima Koregaon celebrations near the city of
Pune in 2018. Those arrested worked with

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

marginalized groups, including Adivasi
(Indigenous) communities, and had criticized
government policies. The government
accused them of breaching the Penal Code
by “waging war against the country” and
having links with the banned Communist
Party of India (Maoist).
Many arrested activists were elderly and in
poor health. However, they were held in
overcrowded prisons where several inmates
had either tested positive or died from
COVID-19. Varavara Rao, an 80-year-old poet
arrested in the Bhima Koregaon case in
2018, tested positive for COVID-19 in July
while in prison. Nevertheless, the courts
continued to reject the bail pleas of the
activists.
At least nine students peacefully protesting
against the CAA were arrested and jailed
under counter-terrorism and sedition laws.
Many other anti-CAA protesters were
subjected to intense intimidation and
harassment from the police. Meanwhile, the
authorities ignored violence and hate speech
by the supporters of the CAA against those
protesting draconian counter-terrorism laws,
including the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act and National Security Act. Safoora
Zargar, a research scholar who was three
months’ pregnant at the time, and Umar
Khalid, a former student union leader, were
among those arrested. Safoora Zargar was
later released on bail.
On 26 June, the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights called on India to
immediately release human rights defenders
who had been arrested for protesting against
the CAA. However, the majority remained in
detention at the end of the year.
In December, Uttar Pradesh police
arbitrarily arrested 10 Muslim men under a
law introduced by the Uttar Pradesh
Government that targets consensual interfaith
marriages, and allegedly tortured them. The
legislation, which has been termed the “love
jihad” law by right-wing nationalists and
leading politicians, had not been approved by
the Indian Parliament or the state legislature.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
New restrictions were imposed on freedoms
of expression and assembly in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic. On 24 March,
Prime Minister Modi imposed a nationwide
lockdown, comprising mandatory ‘stay-athome’ quarantine under the Disaster
Management Act, a draconian law which
gives the government sweeping powers in
disaster situations. Breaches of the lockdown
resulted in arrests and detentions.
Even before the pandemic, freedom of
assembly was restricted, including by
burdening civilians with recovering the cost of
damages to public property after peaceful
protests turned violent.
A year after the government revoked the
special status of Jammu and Kashmir and
split the state into two union territories, the
clampdown on civil liberties and restrictions
on communications services continued.
Political leaders such as Farooq Abdullah,
Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, who
were administratively detained in 2019, were
released in 2020. However, the union
government continued to silence those who
demanded accountability and imposed a
harsh media blackout.
At least 18 journalists in Kashmir were
physically attacked by police or summoned to
police stations. Dissent was further
suppressed when a new media policy was
introduced by the Jammu and Kashmir
government to create “a sustained narrative
on the functioning of the government in
media” by checking “anti-national activities”.
On 20 October, the Jammu and Kashmir
government closed the office of the Kashmir
Times, without prior notice, after its editor,
Anuradha Bhasin, had challenged the
communications blockade in the Supreme
Court. The NIA also raided the offices and
residences of civil society activists including
Khurram Parvez and three of his associates,
and Parveena Ahanger, who had reported
extensively on human rights abuses in
Kashmir. The NIA alleged that the activists
had raised funds for “carrying out

183

secessionist and separatist activities” in
Jammu and Kashmir.
During the nationwide lockdown imposed
after the COVID-19 outbreak, more than 50
journalists were arrested or charged under
emergency laws for spreading
“misinformation” or “fake news”. On 7 April,
Uttar Pradesh police lodged a First
Information Report (FIR) against journalist
Prashant Kanojia for allegedly making
“objectionable remarks” about Prime
Minister Modi and Chief Minister Yogi
Adityanath on social media. Shortly
afterwards, the Uttar Pradesh police
registered another FIR against The Wire, a
daily news website, and its editor Siddharth
Varadarajan for reporting that Yogi Adityanath
had attended a public religious event after
the nationwide lockdown was announced.
On 28 September the government
amended the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act (FCRA), banning large
NGOs from passing to grassroots NGOs funds
received from foreign donors. The new
amendments also required all FCRAregistered non-profit organizations to limit
their administrative expenses to 20% of
donations (from the earlier 50%). This
amendment was likely to force NGOs to
reduce staff, potentially reducing human
rights work.
On 30 September, Amnesty International
India was forced to halt its operations after
the government froze its bank accounts
without notice. The organization was forced
to lay off all its staff and pause all its
campaign and research work. This occurred
shortly after Amnesty International India had
published briefings demanding accountability
for grave human rights violations carried out
by the Delhi police and the government
during the Delhi riots and in the Jammu and
Kashmir region.
More than 160 farmers died after three
laws on farming were passed by Parliament
in August with minimal consultation. The
causes of death included suicides, as well as
heart attacks and road accidents during
protests. In November, as the farmers
marched towards Delhi to protest the laws,

184

the Delhi police indiscriminately used water
cannons and fired tear gas shells, injuring
protesters.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The courts, particularly the Supreme Court,
failed to monitor the government’s response
to the COVID-19 crisis in a timely manner.
On 13 March, even before the national
lockdown was imposed, the Supreme Court
declared that the courts – for public health
reasons – would function at reduced
capacity. Between 23 March and 4 July, the
Supreme Court only took up cases of
“extreme urgency”, barring physical hearings
and relying on video conferencing facilities.
No qualifying criteria or definitions were
laid down for cases of “extreme urgency”,
leaving judges with wide discretion, resulting
in many significant cases involving grave
human rights violations either not being
heard or being seriously delayed. On 3 April,
the Bombay High Court, while hearing a bail
application, maintained that the meaning of
the term “urgent” was subjective and did not,
for example, apply to those seeking bail while
awaiting the outcome of their trial.
The Supreme Court routinely undermined
its own impartiality and independence. In
August it convicted Prashant Bhushan, a
lawyer and human rights defender, under the
outdated provisions of criminal contempt
laws. Prashant Bhushan had criticized on
Twitter the court’s functioning since 2014.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
In February, communal violence broke out in
the capital, New Delhi. According to
government data, 53 people – mostly
Muslims – died in the riots, and more than
500 were injured.
In the build-up to the Legislative Assembly
elections in Delhi, held on 8 February, several
political leaders made hate speeches against
the anti-CAA protesters. On 27 January,
referring to the protesters at Shaheen Bagh,
the Delhi epicentre of peaceful sits-ins
against the CAA, the Union Minister of State
for Finance, Anurag Thakur, encouraged the
crowd to chant “shoot the traitors of the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

nation”. On 28 January, Parvesh Verma,
member of parliament for the ruling
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) claimed that the
protesters from Shaheen Bagh would enter
citizens’ homes and “rape your sisters and
daughters and kill them”. In another speech
on the same day, he promised to “not leave
even one of [the mosques] standing” after
the BJP’s election win in Delhi.
These speeches were followed by violence
on university campuses against those
protesting against the CAA. Hate speeches by
political leaders continued after the Delhi
elections, followed by widespread violence in
the North East district of Delhi.
On 23 February, BJP leader Kapil Mishra
called on Twitter for people to rally against a
women-led protest in Jaffrabad in North East
district of Delhi, urging people to “prevent
another Shaheen Bagh”. At the rally, he
warned the police of dire consequences if the
protesters did not vacate the site. Communal
violence erupted shortly after his speech.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The police used unlawful force and
committed various other human rights
violations, abusing laws to intimidate people
and silence dissent on behalf of the union
government.
During the February communal violence in
Delhi, members of the Delhi police pelted
stones alongside rioters, tortured people in
custody, dismantled sites of peaceful protest
and stood by as rioters attacked peaceful
protesters and destroyed public and private
property. No independent investigation was
launched into these acts.
As the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded, the
discriminatory enforcement of the lockdown
restrictions by the police heightened human
rights concerns. The majority of those
arrested for violating the lockdown guidelines
belonged to marginalized communities such
as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Denotified Tribes, Muslims or low-income
workers. In March, migrant workers who were
travelling back home were forced by the Uttar
Pradesh police to crawl on the road carrying
their belongings, as punishment for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

breaching the lockdown guidelines. On 18
April in Uttar Pradesh, a Muslim man,
Mohammed Rizwan, died in hospital two
days after being beaten by police with batons
when he went out to buy essential supplies.
On 19 June, low-income workers P. Jayaraj
and his son J. Bennicks were picked up for
questioning by the Thoothukudi police in
Tamil Nadu for keeping their small shop open
during lockdown. The two men were allegedly
tortured to death in police custody.

IMPUNITY
The police continued to carry out unlawful
killings – some amounting to extrajudicial
executions – with impunity. In July in
Kashimr, three young labourers in an apple
orchard were unlawfully killed by members of
the Indian army. The Armed Forces (Special
Powers) Act, which governs the use of force
by security personnel in Kashmir, grants
virtual immunity to members of the security
forces from prosecution for alleged human
rights violations. In another extrajudicial
execution in July, Vikas Dubey was allegedly
killed while being escorted to the city of
Kanpur after his arrest by Uttar Pradesh
police. Four of his associates were also killed
unlawfully by the Uttar Pradesh police. Uttar
Pradesh police had earlier claimed in a
tweet that since 2017 it had killed 103
“criminals” and injured 1,859 others in
5,178 “police engagements” – a common
euphemism used by state actors for alleged
extrajudicial executions.
Hate crimes including violence against
Dalits, Adivasi (Indigenous) communities and
religious minorities were also committed with
impunity. In September, a Dalit woman was
allegedly raped and murdered by a group of
dominant-caste men in Hathras district in
Uttar Pradesh, and cremated by the Uttar
Pradesh police without her family's consent.
The accused men were arrested only after
nationwide protests. Later, several FIRs were
registered by the Uttar Pradesh police against
protesters for criminal conspiracy and
sedition.

185

RIGHT TO HEALTH AND LIVELIHOOD
The handling of the COVID-19 pandemic
exposed weaknesses in the public health
care system. It also resulted in unsafe and
poor working conditions for those who lack
adequate social and economic protection,
such as community health care workers and
religious minorities.
The government accused members of the
Muslim Tablighi Jamaat minority of spreading
COVID-19, and as a result, health care
facilities denied access to Muslims. Instances
of hospitals refusing Muslim pregnant women
and cancer patients surfaced in April 2020.
In the months following the nationwide
lockdown of March, social media and
WhatsApp groups were flooded with calls
for social and economic boycotts of Muslims,
alongside fake news stories and other
misinformation.
The COVID-19 pandemic overburdened
the public health care system, but little
protection was provided to front-line health
workers in terms of safety equipment and
social security such as medical and life
insurance. These included people working in
the community, such as Accredited Social
Health Activist workers and sanitation
workers.
The Supreme Court delayed a hearing in a
public interest case urgently seeking
transport, food and shelter for migrant
workers who were left stranded for over a
month by the sudden imposition of the
lockdown. On 7 April, as many migrant
workers were walking to their distant homes
in the absence of government-sponsored or
public transport, India’s Chief Justice, S.A.
Bobde, stated while hearing the petition that
the Supreme Court “did not want to interfere
with the government decisions for the next
10-15 days”. At least 200 migrant workers
were killed in road accidents while walking
long distances home in other districts or
states during the lockdown. In May, after
intense public pressure, the government
began running special trains for stranded
migrant workers. However, many died from a
lack of food and water on these trains,

186

including a four-year-old child who died of
hunger.
During the lockdown, workers in the
informal sector – who constitute more than
three-quarters of India’s workforce – faced
enormous difficulties due to rampant job
losses. However, many states suspended the
legal protections otherwise afforded to
workers, such as regulation of working hours,
the right to form trade unions, and safe
working conditions.
The COVID-19 lockdown resulted in an
increase in violence against women,
particularly domestic violence. Pregnant
women and girls faced further barriers
accessing health care, and there was an
increased risk of maternal mortality and
morbidity.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, the government launched the mobile
app Aarogya Setu, purportedly to speed up
contact tracing and ensure timely access to
essential health services and public health
information. No information was provided on
which government bodies would have access
to the data collected through the app.
Aarogya Setu’s code was not open to the
public, in violation of the government’s own
policy. Although the Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology maintained that
downloading the app was not mandatory,
many government departments and private
companies, including the Airport Authority of
India, made it mandatory for their staff to
install it.

INDONESIA
Republic of Indonesia
Head of state and government: President Joko Widodo

Many health workers did not have access to
adequate personal protective equipment or
COVID-19 tests. The right to freedom of
expression was curtailed with the issuance
of a directive by the National Police
criminalizing criticism of the government’s

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

response to the pandemic. An increasing
number of people were imprisoned solely
for expressing their opinions or organizing
peaceful protests. Unidentified parties
digitally intimidated academics, students,
activists, human rights defenders, social
justice leaders and journalists, trying to
silence their critical voices. Several
journalists filed police complaints in
August; investigations remained pending at
year’s end. At least 35 prisoners of
conscience remained imprisoned. Security
forces committed human rights violations
against people in Papua and West Papua,
largely with impunity. The House of
Representatives dropped the Sexual
Violence Eradication Bill from its priority
list. The LGBTI community remained under
threat following misleading statements
made by several public officials on grounds
of “morality”.

BACKGROUND
Indonesia officially recorded 22,138
COVID-19 deaths nationwide (82 per
100,000 population) at year’s end, making it
the country with the third-highest fatalities
rate in Asia. The pandemic and the
government’s response had significant
human rights consequences, particularly with
regard to the rights of health workers, the
right to information, labour rights and the
right to freedom of expression. Indonesia
failed to place the protection of human rights
at the centre of its prevention, preparedness,
containment and health care policies and
activities.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
At year’s end, at least 504 health workers
had died either because of COVID-19 or
sometimes exhaustion due to long working
hours. In March the chairperson of the
Indonesian Doctors Association stated that
health workers treating COVID-19 patients
did not have adequate personal protective
equipment (PPE). The slow distribution of
PPE, especially in outlying regions, did not
keep pace with the continued increase of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

COVID-19 cases. A doctor from Flores
reported in April that doctors needed to wash
and iron disposable surgical masks and reuse them since they had run out of stock.1
Health workers and their families had
difficulties accessing COVID-19 swab tests
and had to pay for them.2 They also
experienced discrimination because of their
occupation. The chairperson of the
Indonesian Nurses Association said people
feared that medical workers could transmit
the virus. At least 19 health care workers
were evicted from and refused entry to their
boarding houses in the period from 22 March
to 16 April. Unable to find alternative
accommodation, some medical workers were
forced to stay at the hospital where they
worked.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION
In March, following the government’s
confirmation of the first two COVID-19 cases
in the country, the Health Ministry decided
against disclosing important data on
COVID-19 transmission chains, such as
contact tracing and the travel history of
suspected cases, claiming that doing so was
likely to create widespread panic and an
impact on law and order.
Officials acknowledged that government
reporting on the virus outbreak was
inadequate. In April, the spokesperson for
Indonesia’s National Disaster Mitigation
Agency stated that it was unable to provide
accurate data as the Health Ministry’s
statistics did not match the figures as
reported by provincial administrations and
that the Ministry’s data was incomplete.
The government was not transparent in
releasing data relating to the number of
health workers infected by COVID-19 and
where they worked. The Indonesian Medical
Association criticized the government and
requested that data regarding COVID-19
patients be made available to the relevant
medical authorities in order to facilitate
contact tracing and treatment.

187

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The COVID-19 pandemic had a negative
impact on workers’ rights, through:
termination of employment; threats of wage
cuts and holiday allowance cuts by
employers in sectors badly affected by the
pandemic; and problematic physical
distancing and work-from-home policies.
The President announced the need for
physical distancing and work-from-home
policies on 14 March, but employers in some
sectors not classified as essential
nevertheless required the physical presence
of workers. In some cases, employers
threatened to cut workers’ wages and/or their
annual leave if they did not attend work.
Informal workers in delivery services,
garment factories and restaurants continued
to work during the pandemic. The
government failed to hold employers in these
sectors accountable when they did not
provide handwashing facilities or masks, or
impose a physical distancing policy.
In October, the Parliament adopted a new
jobs law (Omnibus law) that weakened
protection of workers’ rights including by
removing provisions relating to the maximum
time limit of temporary work contracts,
amending the minimum wage formula, and
increasing the limit on overtime work.3

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities cracked down on public
criticism of the government’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. On 4 April, National
Police Headquarters issued Telegram Letter
No. ST/1100/IV/HUK.7.1/2020, instructing
the police to monitor cyberspace and to take
action against “hoax spreaders” and those
who insulted the President and his
administration. At least 57 people were
arrested on charges of spreading “false
news” and insulting the President and his
administration.
Unknown parties digitally intimidated
academics, students, activists and journalists
in attempts to instil fear and silence critical
voices. The intimidation took many forms,
including threats of physical violence via text

188

messages and, in the case of students
holding discussions on politically sensitive
topics, intervention by university leadership.
Digital attacks also targeted alternative
media groups, including the online feminist
newsgroups Magdalene and Konde. The
personal information of one of Magdalene’s
journalists was hacked online and she was
harassed by unidentified people who sent her
pornographic pictures and demeaning
statements about women.4 Several of those
attacked and harassed filed police
complaints; investigations remained pending
at year’s end.

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
Prisoners of conscience
The authorities continued to prosecute
people participating in peaceful political
activities, particularly in regions with a history
of pro-independence movements such as
Papua and Maluku, using the Criminal Code
and its makar (rebellion) provisions. At year’s
end, at least 48 Papuan prisoners of
conscience and 10 from Maluku were still
imprisoned. They were charged with rebellion
even though they had held peaceful protests
and did not commit any internationally
recognized criminal offence.
On 25 April, the authorities arrested seven
activists from the Republic of South Maluku
movement for conducting a peaceful
“Benang Raja” flag-raising ceremony on the
70th anniversary of its founding. On 23
March, the military instructed every
household in Maluku to raise Indonesia’s
national flag.
In September 2019, seven Papuans who
had been arrested in Jayapura for joining
peaceful anti-racism protests in support of
Papuan university students in Surabaya, East
Java, were eventually released from jail in
Balikpapan, where they had been moved for
security reasons. On 17 June, judges at the
Balikpapan District Court, East Kalimantan,
convicted and sentenced them to between
10 and 11 months’ imprisonment for their
involvement in anti-racism protests. When
they had completed their sentences including

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

time served, they were refused normal
financial assistance from the authorities as
the Attorney General’s Office claimed it had
no money to pay for their return to Papua.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders and social justice
leaders (mostly community leaders working
on forced evictions and other land rights
issues) continued to face threats, attacks,
intimidation and arbitrary prosecution for
their legitimate activities. Authorities
frequently arrested critics as a tactic to
silence them.
Between February 2019 and 21
September 2020, Amnesty International
recorded that at least 201 human rights
defenders and social justice leaders were
victims of human rights abuses, both offline
and online. They were harassed and
intimidated simply for criticizing the
government or discussing politically sensitive
issues such as human rights violations and
abuses in Papua. The online intimidation
took many forms, including credential theft of
WhatsApp accounts, spam calls from
unidentified international numbers, and
digital harassment such as intrusions during
online discussions, particularly on the issue
of Papua.
On 5 June, a webinar held by Amnesty
International to discuss racism in Papua was
disrupted by spam calls and intrusions.
Robocalls from three unidentified foreign
numbers bombarded three speakers during
the discussion.
In August, the Endowment Fund for
Education, a government-funded scholarship
programme under the coordination of the
Indonesian Finance Ministry, asked Veronica
Koman, a human rights lawyer who was
documenting human rights violations in
Papua, to return scholarship money for her
master’s degree studies.5 Over the previous
two years she had faced harassment,
intimidation and threats, including of death
and rape, and was living in exile in Australia.
Land disputes involving local communities
and corporations were characterized by
human rights violations. In August, police in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Central Kalimantan arrested six Indigenous
villagers, including the social justice leader of
the Laman Kinipan community, Effendi
Buhing, for defending a customary forest
against the expansion of PT Sawit Mandiri
Lestari, a palm oil company. The police
arrested them for theft but observers agreed
the arrests were linked to the growing
resistance against forced evictions by palm
oil companies. Between January and August,
at least 29 Indigenous rights defenders and
social justice leaders were subjected to
detention, physical violence and intimidation.
There was still no accountability for past
violations against human rights defenders,
including the cases of Fuad Muhammad
Syafruddin (Udin), Wiji Thukul , Marsinah
and the prominent human rights activist
Munir Said Thalib (Munir).

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN PAPUA
AND WEST PAPUA
Human rights groups reported unlawful
killings and other serious human rights
violations by security forces, primarily
excessive use of force. Between February
2018 and August 2020, 47 cases of
suspected unlawful killings by security forces
were recorded, involving 96 victims. In 15
cases, the alleged perpetrators were police
officers ; in 13 cases, they were members of
the Indonesian military; and in 12 cases,
members of both the police and the military
were allegedly involved.
On 19 September, Yeremia Zanambani ,
the chief of the Indonesian Evangelical
Christian Church in the district of Hitadipa,
Intan Jaya, Papua, was killed. The police and
military stated that an armed group was
behind his death. Local activists in Papua,
who were in close communication with the
priest’s family, rejected this claim and alleged
the military shot Yeremia during a search for
members of the armed group suspected of
killing two military officers.6 During the
military operation, numerous local people fled
their homes to nearby forests or sought
refuge in the surrounding area.
Successive governments have limited
international human rights observers’ access

189

to Papua. Investigations into reports of
unlawful killings by security forces in Papua
were rare.7

2. Indonesia: Unprotected, overworked, ailing Indonesian health workers
face avalanche of COVID-19 cases (Press release, 11 September)

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

4. Indonesia: End wave of digital attacks on students, journalists and
activists (ASA 21/2536/2020)

Data from the National Commission on
Violence against Women indicated that, as of
July, there was a 75% increase in reports of
sexual violence against women during the
pandemic.
There was no comprehensive legal
umbrella covering all forms of sexual
violence. The Indonesian Criminal Code
narrowly defines sexual violence as including
rape and “adultery” (in contravention of
international law), and provides for limited
protection of survivors. On 2 July, the House
of Representatives officially dropped the
Sexual Violence Eradication Bill from the
priority list of the national legislation
programme. This undermined the adoption of
a comprehensive legal framework that can
guarantee prosecution of perpetrators and
offer appropriate protection to survivors of
sexual violence.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Harassment, intimidation, attacks and
discrimination against LGBTI people
continued. The media reported inflammatory,
inaccurate and misleading statements made
by public officials on the grounds of
defending the country’s public morality. Both
state and non-state actors were responsible
for acts of violence as well as issuing threats,
intimidation and other types of harassment of
LGBTI individuals.
On 1 September, police in the capital,
Jakarta, raided a private gathering of men in
an apartment in South Jakarta. Nine people
were arrested and charged with “facilitating
obscene acts” under the pornography law,
which carries a sentence of up to 15 years’
imprisonment.8
1. Indonesia: COVID-19 and its human rights impact in Indonesia (ASA
21/2238/2020)

190

3. Indonesia: ‘Catastrophic’ Omnibus Bill on job creation passed into
law (Press release, 5 October)

5. Indonesia: Financial punishment against human rights defender
shows no respect for freedom of expression (Press release, 14
August)
6. Indonesia: Investigate killing of priest in Papua (Press release, 23
September)
7. Indonesia: Civil and political rights violations in Papua and West
Papua (ASA 21/2445/2020)
8. Indonesia: Men accused of holding ‘gay party’ face 15 years in jail
(Press release, 3 September)

IRAN
Islamic Republic of Iran
Head of state: Ali Khamenei (Supreme Leader)
Head of government: Hassan Rouhani (President)
The authorities heavily suppressed the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and assembly. Security forces used unlawful
force to crush protests. The authorities
continued to arbitrarily detain hundreds of
protesters, dissidents and human rights
defenders, and sentenced many to
imprisonment and flogging. Women, as well
as ethnic and religious minorities, faced
entrenched discrimination as well as
violence. Enforced disappearances, torture
and other ill-treatment were committed with
impunity on a widespread and systematic
basis. Judicial corporal punishments
amounting to torture, including floggings
and amputations, were imposed. Fair trial
rights were systematically violated. The
death penalty was used as a weapon of
political repression. Executions were carried
out, one in public and some others in
secret. Those executed included people
aged under 18 at the time of the crime. The
authorities continued to commit crimes
against humanity by systematically
concealing the fate and whereabouts of
several thousand political dissidents
forcibly disappeared and extrajudicially
executed in secret in 1988. Mass graves

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

believed to contain their remains were
subject to ongoing destruction.

BACKGROUND
On 8 January, amidst heightened tensions
following a US drone strike in Iraq that killed
Revolutionary Guards Commander Ghasem
Soleimani, the Revolutionary Guards fired
missiles at a Ukrainian passenger plane in
Iranian air space, killing all 176 people on
board. After an initial cover-up, the Iranian
authorities blamed “human error”.
Iran continued to provide military support
to government forces in the armed conflict in
Syria.
The health care system was overwhelmed
by the COVID-19 pandemic; at least 300
health care workers reportedly died of the
disease.
US-imposed sanctions continued to
negatively impact the economy, with
detrimental consequences for the enjoyment
of economic, social and cultural rights.
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Iran. The authorities did not grant him and
other UN experts or independent human
rights observers entry to the country.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities heavily suppressed the rights
to freedom of expression, association and
assembly.
The Ministry of Interior as well as security
and intelligence bodies continued to ban
independent political parties, and human
rights and civil society groups. Censorship of
media and jamming of foreign satellite
television channels continued. Facebook,
Telegram, Twitter and YouTube remained
blocked.
Hundreds of people remained arbitrarily
detained for peacefully exercising their
human rights. Among them were protesters,
journalists, media workers, political
dissidents, artists, writers and human rights
defenders, including lawyers, women’s rights
defenders, labour rights activists, minority

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

rights activists, conservationists, anti-death
penalty campaigners and those demanding
truth, justice and reparation for the mass
extrajudicial executions in the 1980s.
Hundreds of prisoners of conscience were
excluded from pardons and temporary
releases. Political dissidents Mehdi Karroubi,
Mir Hossein Mousavi and Zahra Rahnavard
remained under arbitrary house arrest
without charge or trial.
Throughout the year, the authorities
unlawfully closed the businesses or froze the
bank accounts or assets of numerous
journalists working with independent media
outlets outside Iran, and of human rights
defenders and their families. They also
subjected the children, older parents and
other family members of protesters,
journalists and human rights defenders to
intimidation, interrogation or arbitrary arrest
and detention in reprisal for their relatives’
journalistic or human rights work or their
participation in protests.
In January, security forces used unlawful
force, including firing pointed pellets from
airguns, rubber bullets and tear gas, and
using pepper spray, to disperse peaceful
protesters demanding justice for the
Ukrainian plane crash victims. They also
kicked, punched and beat protesters and
carried out scores of arbitrary arrests.1
In January and February, to quash
independent reporting in the run-up to
parliamentary elections, the authorities
targeted journalists for arbitrary arrest and
detention, house searches and interrogations.
The authorities took measures to stop
independent reporting on COVID-19 and
silence criticism about their handling of the
pandemic. The Ministry of Culture and
Islamic Guidance ordered media and
journalists to use only official sources and
statistics in their reporting. Cyber police
established a special task force to tackle
“cyber rumours” and “fake news” related to
COVID-19 on social media; and scores of
journalists, social media users, health care
workers and others were arrested,
summoned for questioning or given warnings.
In April, Rahim Yousefpour, a doctor from

191

Saqqez, Kurdistan province, was charged
with “spreading propaganda against the
system” and “disturbing public opinion” for
his Instagram posts about COVID-19.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread and systematic, especially during
interrogation.
Iran’s police, intelligence and security
forces, and prison officials subjected
detainees to prolonged solitary confinement,
beatings, floggings, stress positions, forced
administration of chemical substances and
electric shocks.2 Prison and prosecution
authorities also deliberately denied prisoners
of conscience and other prisoners held for
politically motivated reasons adequate health
care.3
The Penal Code continued to provide for
corporal judicial punishments amounting to
torture, including flogging, blinding,
amputation, crucifixion and stoning.
At least 160 people were sentenced to
flogging, according to the Abdorrahman
Boroumand Center, for theft and assault as
well as for acts that are protected under
international human rights law, such as
participating in peaceful protests, engaging in
extramarital or consensual same-sex
relationships and attending mixed-gender
parties. In many cases, flogging sentences
were carried out.
In one prison alone in Urumieh, West
Azerbaijan province, at least six people were
at risk of amputation.
Several men died in custody in suspicious
circumstances, with photo and video
evidence indicating that at least two of them
were tortured before their deaths, including a
juvenile offender who died in April.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Prisoners
Conditions in many prisons and detention
facilities remained cruel and inhuman.
Prisoners suffered from overcrowding, limited
hot water, unsanitary conditions, inadequate
food and drinking water, insufficient beds
and bathrooms, poor ventilation and insect

192

infestations, placing them at greater risk of
COVID-19.
Between February and May, the authorities
temporarily released around 128,000
prisoners and pardoned another 10,000 in
response to COVID-19. Official letters leaked
in July revealed that the Ministry of Health
ignored repeated requests from the Prisons
Organization for additional resources,
including disinfectant products and medical
and protective equipment. Some prisoners
complained about the authorities’ improper
use of bleach to disinfect surfaces,
exacerbating poor air quality and leading to
severe coughs, chest tightness and asthma
attacks.
In March and April, prisoners across the
country waged hunger strikes, protests and
riots to protest the authorities’ failure to
protect them from COVID-19. Authorities
responded with unlawful force, resorting to
beatings and firing live ammunition, metal
pellets and tear gas to suppress protests. As
a result, on 31 March, in Sheiban prison in
Ahvaz, Khuzestan province, several Ahwazi
Arab prisoners were killed and many others
were injured.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Authorities subjected many detainees,
including prisoners of conscience, to
enforced disappearance, holding them in
undisclosed locations and concealing their
fate and whereabouts from their families. The
authorities continued the pattern of executing
members of ethnic minorities on death row in
secret and concealing the whereabouts of
their bodies, thereby subjecting their families
to the ongoing crime of enforced
disappearance.
Several Ahwazi Arab prisonersremained
forcibly disappeared.
The authorities continued to commit the
crime against humanity of enforced
disappearance by systematically concealing
the fate and whereabouts of several thousand
political dissidents who were forcibly
disappeared and extrajudicially executed in
secret in 1988 and destroying unmarked

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

mass gravesites believed to contain their
remains.
Security and intelligence forces threatened
victims’ families with arrest if they sought
information about their loved ones,
conducted commemorations or spoke out.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Fair trial rights were systematically violated in
the criminal justice system.
Authorities continued to systematically
deny individuals facing national securityrelated charges access to a lawyer at the
investigation stage. In some cases, access
was even denied at trial. Some defendants
were tried in their absence because
authorities failed either to notify them of their
trial dates or transfer them from prison to
court.
Many trials took place behind closed
doors. Revolutionary Court judges showed
hostility towards defendants during court
proceedings and treated the accusations of
intelligence and security bodies as preestablished facts.
Forced “confessions” obtained under
torture and other ill-treatment were broadcast
on state television prior to trials and were
consistently used as evidence by courts to
issue convictions, even when defendants
retracted them.
Convictions and sentences were often
upheld on appeal without hearings taking
place.
Courts frequently refused to provide those
convicted of national security charges with a
copy of written judgments.

DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women continued to face entrenched
discrimination in law, including in relation to
marriage, divorce, employment, inheritance
and political office.
The “morality” police and vigilantes,
enforcing the country’s discriminatory and
degrading forced veiling laws, continued to
subject millions of women and girls to daily
harassment and violent attacks amounting to
torture and other ill-treatment. Several

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

women’s rights defendersremained in prison
for campaigning against forced veiling.
The authorities failed to criminalize
domestic violence, marital rape, early and
forced marriage and other gender-based
violence against women and girls, which
remained widespread.
The legal age of marriage for girls stayed at
13, and fathers and grandfathers could
obtain permission from courts for their
daughters to be married at a younger age.
According to official figures, about 30,000
girls under the age of 14 are married every
year.
The authorities failed to take steps to end
impunity for men who kill their wives or
daughters and to ensure accountability
proportionate to the severity of these crimes.
In June, the Guardian Council approved a
new law for the protection of children, but
which did not contain protections against socalled honour killings, child marriage and
marital rape.
The government continued its review of
the long-standing bill aimed at protecting
women against violence. The delay was
attributed to changes made by the judiciary
during its review, which considerably
weakened protections.

DISCRIMINATION
Ethnic minorities
Ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs,
Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen faced entrenched discrimination,
curtailing their access to education,
employment, adequate housing and political
office. Continued under-investment in
minority-populated regions exacerbated
poverty and marginalization. Despite
repeated calls for linguistic diversity, Persian
remained the sole language of instruction in
primary and secondary education.
Members of minorities who spoke out
against violations or demanded a degree of
regional self-government were subjected to
arbitrary detention, torture and other illtreatment. The authorities criminalized
peaceful advocacy of separatism or
federalism and accused minority rights

193

activists of threatening Iran’s territorial
integrity.
Several Azerbaijani Turkic activists were
sentenced to imprisonment and flogging in
connection with the November 2019 protests
and peaceful activism on behalf of the
Azerbaijani Turkic minority, and two had their
flogging sentences carried out.
Ahwazi Arabs reported that the authorities
restricted expressions of Arab culture,
including dress and poetry.
Iran's border guards continued to
unlawfully shoot scores of unarmed Kurdish
kulbars who work, under cruel and inhumane
conditions, as cross-border porters between
the Kurdistan regions of Iran and Iraq, killing
at least 40 men and injuring dozens of
others, according to Kurdish human rights
organizations.
Many Baluchi villagers in the impoverished
province of Sistan and Baluchestan were
denied their right to sufficient, physically
accessible and safe water due to particularly
poor infrastructure. They were forced to rely
on unsafe sources of water such as rivers,
wells, ponds and water pits inhabited by
crocodiles for drinking and domestic use.
Several people, including children, drowned
while fetching water, including an eight-yearold girl from Jakigoor village where the water
supply was cut for a week in August. Some
local officials blamed victims for failing to
take precautions. Many residents in the
province also experienced poor access to
electricity, schools and health facilities due to
under-investment.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Freedom of religion and belief was
systematically violated in law and practice.
The authorities continued to impose on
people of all faiths, as well as atheists, codes
of public conduct rooted in a strict
interpretation of Shi’a Islam. The authorities
refused to recognize the right of those born to
Muslim parents to convert to other religions
or become atheists, with individuals seeking
to exercise this right risking arbitrary
detention, torture and the death penalty for
“apostasy.”

194

Only Shi’a Muslims were allowed to hold
key political positions. Members of religious
minorities, including Baha’is, Christians,
Gonabadi Dervishes, Yaresan (Ahl-e Haq)
and converts from Shi’a Islam to Sunni Islam
or Christianity faced discrimination, including
in education and employment, as well as
arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, torture
and other ill-treatment for practising their
faith.
In October, a Christian man was flogged
80 times in Bushehr province for drinking
Holy Communion wine.
Followers of the Erfan-e Halgheh spiritual
doctrine were arbitrarily detained.
The authorities continued to commit
widespread and systematic human rights
violations against members of the Baha’i
minority, including forcible closure of
businesses, confiscation of property, bans on
employment in the public sector, denial of
access to higher education and hate speech
campaigns on state media.
Raids on house churches persisted.
Sunni Muslims continued to face
restrictions on establishing their own
mosques.

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty was increasingly used as a
weapon of political repression against
protesters, dissidents and members of
minority groups.4
Scores of protesters were charged with
“enmity against God” (moharebeh) and
“spreading corruption on earth” (efsad f’il
arz), which carry the death penalty. Several
protesters were sentenced to death following
unfair trials which relied on torture-tainted
“confessions.”
In December, dissident and journalist
Ruhollah Zam was executed in connection
with his anti-establishment social media news
channel, Amad News.
Executions were carried out after unfair
trials. One victim was executed in public and
others were in secret. Those executed
included people who were under 18 at the
time of the crime.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

A disproportionate number of those
executed were members of Iran’s Kurdish
and Baluchi minorities.
The death penalty was maintained for
consensual same-sex sexual conduct.
Stoning remained a method of execution
for those convicted of adultery.

IMPUNITY
No public official was investigated or held
accountable for crimes of unlawful killings,
torture and enforced disappearance or other
grave human rights violations.
Judicial authorities failed to conduct
independent and transparent investigations
into the use of lethal force by law
enforcement officials against individuals who
posed no imminent threat to life or serious
injury.
Impunity prevailed for past and ongoing
crimes against humanity related to the 1988
prison massacres, with many of those
involved continuing to hold top judicial and
government positions, including the current
Head of the Judiciary and the Minister of
Justice.
In May, Iran’s border guards detained
dozens of Afghan nationals, including
children, who had crossed the border into
Iran to find work, beat them and forced them
at gunpoint into the Hariroud river, which
flows along the border with Afghanistan.
Several drowned as a result. The authorities
denied any responsibility.
The authorities continued to cover-up the
real death toll of people killed during the
November 2019 protests, and publicly
praised security and intelligence forces for
their role in the crackdown. In May, the
authorities announced, for the first time, that
around 230 people were killed during the
protests, including six members of the
security forces. Amnesty International
documented the details of 304 men, women
and children who were killed by security
forces during the protests, but the real
number of deaths is likely to be higher.5

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

1. Iran: Scores injured as security forces use unlawful force to crush
protests (Press release, 15 January)
2. Iran: Trampling humanity – Mass arrests, disappearances and
torture since Iran’s November 2019 protests (MDE 13/2891/2020)
3. Iran: Tortured prisoners in need of medical care (MDE 13/2237/2020)
4. Iran: Two Kurds executed amid increasing use of death penalty as
weapon of repression (Press release, 15 July)
5. Iran: Details of 304 deaths in crackdown on November 2019 protests
(MDE 13/2308/2020)

IRAQ
Republic of Iraq
Head of state: Barham Ahmed Salih
Head of government: Mustafa Al-Khadhimi (replaced
Adil Abdul-Mahdi in May)
Dissent continued to be severely repressed
through excessive use of force against
protesters, arbitrary arrests, torture and
other ill-treatment, unlawful killings,
enforced disappearances and attacks on
freedom of expression. Security forces
killed at least 600 protesters by using live
ammunition and other excessive force
during demonstrations that started in
October 2019. Unidentified gunmen
believed to be militia members targeted
tens of activists, and killed, abducted and
subjected dozens to enforced
disappearance – at least six remained
disappeared. Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) security forces violently
dispersed protests and arrested scores of
protesters. Restrictions of movement and
other measures to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 adversely impacted internally
displaced people (IDPs). The authorities
resumed the closure of camps, closing at
least 10, subjecting thousands of people to
secondary displacement and impeding their
access to humanitarian aid. IDPs with
perceived ties to the armed group calling
itself the Islamic State (IS) continued to be
subjected to collective punishment and
remained at risk of arbitrary detention and
enforced disappearance. Thousands of
others remained missing after being

195

subjected to enforced disappearance by
Iraqi security forces – including the Popular
Mobilization Units (PMU) – while fleeing
IS-held territories. Killings of women were
reported in the media. Yezidi children and
women who survived IS enslavement faced
significant difficulties in accessing rights
and reparations. IS resumed military
operations against civilians and military
targets, carrying out bomb attacks in cities
and assassinating community leaders.

BACKGROUND
In March, to curb the spread of COVID-19,
Iraq banned entry to travellers from several
countries, closed its border with Iran and
imposed a nationwide lockdown for two
weeks. Intermittent nationwide lockdowns
followed throughout the year. Similar
measures were imposed in the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq (KR-I).
Nationwide protests that began in October
2019, calling for better employment
opportunities and public services, and an
end to government corruption, continued in
the first months of 2020 until they were
temporarily halted by the outbreak of
COVID-19. Smaller protests resumed in May,
most notably in the cities of Baghdad, Basra
and Nasriya. Protesters demanded
accountability for violations by security
forces, including killings and enforced
disappearances of protesters.
In the KR-I, protests were held throughout
the year over delayed or unpaid salaries to
civil servants.
By the end of June 2020, over 4.7 million
IDPs had returned to their areas of origin.
However, returns decreased overall through
the second quarter of 2020, partly due to
COVID-19 restrictions, and more than 1.2
million remained displaced, 207,000 of them
in camps, 97,600 in critical shelters and
915,000 in secondary or informal settlements
such as unfinished or abandoned buildings
in several governorates.
On 3 January, a US drone strike in
Baghdad killed Iranian general Ghasem
Soleimani in a targeted attack.

196

On 7 May, a new central government was
formed, headed by Mustafa Al-Kadhimi.
On 15 June, Turkey’s Ministry of National
Defence announced Operations Claw-Eagle
and Claw-Tiger, targeting members of the
Kurdistan Workers Party and Free Life of
Kurdistan (PJAK) in the north of the KR-I. It
subsequently carried out air strikes in the
KR-I, reportedly killing at least five Kurdish
civilians. Intermittent Iranian shelling
targeting PJAK members inside the KR-I
continued throughout the year.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Iraqi security forces continued to use
excessive and unlawful force against largely
peaceful protests that had started in 2019.
Security forces used live ammunition and
military-grade tear gas grenades, killing
dozens of protesters in Baghdad, Basra,
Karbala, Diyala, Najaf and Nasriya. A PMU
faction also used live ammunition against
anti-government protesters in Basra, killing at
least one person and injuring four others.

Arbitrary arrests and detentions, and torture
and other ill-treatment
Federal security forces continued to
arbitrarily arrest activists and protesters,
arresting thousands of protesters in the first
two months of the year alone. By June, most
protesters had been released.
In January in Baghdad, armed members
of Iraq’s Presidential Guard beat protesters,
including children, and arrested others. In
Basra, security forces violently dispersed
protesters, with some children being beaten
until they lost consciousness. Other
protesters were subjected to ill-treatment that
could amount to torture.1 In May, security
forces arrested at least three people, one of
them under the age of 18, as they were
heading to protests in Baghdad’s al-Khilani
square, and beat and sexually assaulted
them, according to medical workers. The
Prime Minister ordered the arrest of
members of the security forces who had
been near where the incident occurred.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY IN THE KR-I

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES

KRG security forces raided and shut down
news outlets in the governorates of Dohuk
and Erbil, confiscating equipment and
beating and arresting journalists who had
been covering protests.
On 7 October, local police and KRG
security forces raided the home of journalist
Sherwan Sherwani in Erbil and arrested him
at gunpoint without explanation. He was held
incommunicado until 26 October and the
next day he was finally able to meet his
lawyer. The KRG authorities later stated that
he was facing charges of “endangering
public safety” under the Iraq Penal Code.
KRG security forces, accompanied by
armed men in civilian clothes, also dispersed
protests. In May, in the city of Dohuk in the
KR-I, they violently dispersed a gathering of
teachers and civil servants protesting against
delayed payment of salaries, arresting at least
167 protesters and media workers. Most
were released the same day or the following
week, but at least five remained in detention
after the local authorities charged them
under Article 2 of KR-I Law No. 6 of 2008 for
“the misuse of electronic devices” for their
role in organizing the protest. The KRG
initially said it had dispersed the protest
because the protesters had failed to obtain a
permit to hold the event, but subsequently
cited COVID-19 measures as the reason. All
those detained were eventually released on
bail. However, in August, one of the protest
organizers was arrested along with his son
from their home.2
In December, protests broke out in
Sulaymaniyah and other areas of the KR-I
against unpaid wages and corruption.
Kurdistan authorities met protesters with
excessive force, leading to the death of tens
of protesters, some as young as 17.
Authorities also arrested and released several
activists and journalists, while also severely
restricting the internet and banning press
coverage of the protests.

Throughout the year, unknown gunmen and
PMU members targeted activists for
assassination or abduction, killing at least 30
in Baghdad, Nasriya and Basra. Attempts
were made on the lives of more than 30
others, who escaped with injuries. By the end
of the year, 56 activists had been subjected
to enforced disappearance. Those subjected
to enforced disappearance during the 2019
protests remained missing, including human
rights lawyer Ali Jaseb Hattab, who was
abducted by PMU members in the southern
city of Amarah on 8 October 2019.
IDPs, including children, with perceived
affiliation to IS were subjected to enforced
disappearance after their arrests at
checkpoints, camps and in their areas of
origin. Thousands of men and boys were still
missing after being arbitrarily detained for
suspected links to IS and subjected to
enforced disappearance by central Iraqi
forces while fleeing IS-held areas between
2014 and 2018. They included hundreds
who had been subjected to enforced
disappearance in Anbar governorate.

IMPUNITY
The newly appointed Prime Minister ordered
investigations into the killing and injuring of
protesters since 1 October 2019, promising
compensation for their families. However, by
the end of the year, no results of these
investigations had been made public, fuelling
intermittent protests across the country.
In May, the Prime Minister ordered the
closure of the headquarters of a PMU faction
in Basra and the arrest of PMU members the
morning after an attack on protesters in the
city.
In September, the Prime Minister ordered
counter-terrorism forces to rescue an
abducted activist in the city of Nasriya, but
the activist remained missing.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
The authorities continued to close and
consolidate IDP camps, subjecting thousands

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

197

of IDPs to secondary displacement. Some
IDPs were forcibly removed from tents, and
electricity supplies were cut, in efforts to
close the camps. These operations were
temporarily halted in March due to
restrictions of movement to prevent the
spread of COVID-19 and resumed in
November.
IDPs – mostly female-headed families –
with perceived affiliation to IS, continued to
face obstruction, evictions and confiscation
and/or destruction of their homes when
returning or attempting to return to their
areas of origin. Security agents continued to
block and hinder their access to civil status
documentation and, in some cases, arrested
lawyers who tried to help families obtain
these documents.3
Access to humanitarian assistance for
IDPs and returnees worsened after
December 2019 when the authorities
suspended the issuing of access letters and
visas to NGO workers.
The KRG continued to prevent Arab IDPs
originating from disputed territories to return
to their areas of origin.

Impact of COVID-19 restrictions
COVID-19 measures that restricted
movement and reduced humanitarian
workers’ presence in IDP camps adversely
affected IDPs, who rely solely on
humanitarian aid to survive, and left them
further isolated. As a result, some IDPs lost
their jobs outside the camps or were forced
to leave the camps in order to keep their
jobs.
Humanitarian aid workers reported that
their programmes that did not support public
health services, particularly the prevention of
the spread of COVID-19, were reduced. This
adversely affected reconciliation efforts
essential to facilitate the safe return to their
areas of origin of IDPs with perceived ties to
IS. The move to virtual schooling meant
education completely stopped for many
displaced children as they did not have
access to the internet and electronic devices.
Lack of access to these devices similarly
affected urban children.

198

Lockdowns reduced the capacity of the
Iraqi and KRG authorities to operate normally,
causing the closure of courts and civil status
directorates. This resulted in further delays in
obtaining justice for many IDPs with
perceived ties to IS, already facing
administrative obstacles due to collective
punishment.

RIGHTS OF YEZIDIS
Iraq’s central government and the KRG fell
short of their obligations to respect and
guarantee the rights to health, education,
legal identity and family unity of Yezidi child
survivors of IS as well as Yezidi women and
girl survivors of IS enslavement.
Hundreds of Yezidi children who had been
abducted by IS, enslaved, forced to fight,
raped and otherwise tortured, and subjected
to other egregious human rights abuses,
continued to face significant challenges after
their return to what remained of their families
and relatives. Many were unable to re-enrol
in school and faced barriers to obtaining new
or replacement civil status documents
essential for accessing basic rights in Iraq.
Psychosocial services and programmes
available to them fell short of meeting these
children’s rights and needs.
Many Yezidi women who had been
abducted by IS and given birth as a result of
rape were forced to separate from their
children because of religious and societal
pressures.4

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The COVID-19 lockdown exacerbated the
vulnerability of women and girls. Media and
civil society organizations reported an
increase in domestic violence, resulting in the
deaths of women, and in one incident, severe
injuries to a young girl.5

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Violent activity by IS, which had ceased since
2018, resumed in 2020 and targeted security
forces and a smaller number of civilians.
Renewed IS military operations in several
areas of Iraq were announced. IS activity
killed at least tens of civilians during 2020.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

At Baghdad airport in September, at least
five children and two women were killed by a
rocket apparently aimed at US personnel.
Other diplomatic personnel, including a UN
convoy, and affiliated institutions in Baghdad
and in the governorates of Najaf and Ninewa,
were also targeted. No groups claimed
responsibility for these attacks.

DEATH PENALTY
Authorities continued to hand down death
sentences and at least 50 men convicted of
terrorism were executed, according to
credible reports.
1. Iraq: Protest death toll surges as security forces resume brutal
repression (Press release, 23 January)
2. Iraq: Police arrests teacher and protest organizer: Badal Abdulbaqi
Aba Bakr Barwari (MDE 14/2396/2020)
3. Iraq: Marked for life – displaced Iraqis in cycle of abuse and
stigmatization (MDE 14/3318/2020)
4. Iraq: Legacy Of terror: The plight of Yezidi child survivors of Isis (MDE
14/2759/2020)
5. Iraq: Open letter to Iraq's new Prime Minister (MDE 14/2290/2020)

IRELAND
Ireland
Head of state: Michael D. Higgins
Head of government: Micheál Martin (replaced Leo
Varadkar in June)
The government response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns, including in
relation to the right to health, the
enactment of emergency legislation without
parliamentary oversight, and police use of
spit hoods. Increased numbers of people
accessed abortion services under the 2018
law, but gaps remained. The European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture was
critical of support available for prisoners
with mental health problems. The
government committed to replacing the
Direct Provision system of shared
accommodation for those seeking
international protection, and to holding a
constitutional referendum on housing.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHT TO HEALTH
A parliamentary committee established to
review the government’s initial handling of the
pandemic − the Special Committee on
COVID-19 Response − found it “totally
disproportionate” that 56% of all deaths from
COVID-19 were in nursing homes for older
people. It recommended a public inquiry and
noted state over-reliance on institutional care
for older people.
It also noted difficulties for those seeking
international protection and living in the
Direct Provision system of shared
accommodation, including challenges of
physically distancing and self-isolating, as
well as for health care workers living in this
system.
It recommended an inquiry into meat
processing factories, the source of several
outbreaks, with concerns about protection of
workers from infection. It noted that workers
in this industry were particularly vulnerable to
poor working conditions which could
exacerbate the risks from COVID-19.

Spit hoods
There were concerns over An Garda
Siochána’s (police) deployment of spit hoods
to protect police from COVID-19 infection via
spitting. This was despite evidence that this
device did not prevent aerosol transmission,
potentially exacerbating the risk to police and
the wider public.1 A particular concern was
their use on children and people with mental
health problems.

STATE OVERREACH
The Special Committee on COVID-19
Response criticized emergency legislation
enabling the government to make regulations
without Oireachtas (Parliament) review or
approval. It also recommended that all
proposed emergency measures be human
rights-proofed.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, the first annual report on the 2018
legislation, which expanded lawful access to
abortion services, showed 6,666 pregnant

199

people accessed abortion care in 2019, up
from 32 in 2018. UK Department of Health
and Social Care statistics published in June
showed 375 women travelled from Ireland to
access abortion services in England and
Wales in 2019. This highlighted remaining
gaps and barriers, such as the lack of lawful
access in cases of severe rather than fatal
foetal impairments.

INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
In November, the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture published the report
of its 2019 periodic visit to Ireland. It
welcomed the recent policy abolishing
solitary confinement, but recommended
measures to ensure de facto solitary
confinement was addressed. Amongst its
concerns was the continued unsuitable
placing of immigration detainees in prison
together with remand and convicted
prisoners, where in some cases they were
subjected to abuse and bullying. While
finding very good access to health care, the
Committee noted poor conditions and
inadequate treatment in high support units
for prisoners with mental health problems.
Another major concern was the rising
number of homeless people with severe
mental health problems ending up in prison.
The Committee also found the complaints
system available to prisoners not fit for
purpose.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
Following longstanding concerns about poor
living conditions, mental health impacts,
isolation, and lack of dignity and privacy in
the Direct Provision system for
accommodating international protection
seekers, the new government in June
committed to replacing it with a more human
rights-compliant housing model. In October,
a government-appointed Advisory Group
made recommendations for a long-term
approach to the provision of housing and
support, as well as improvements in the
international protection process. The

200

government undertook to publish a policy
document outlining its reform plans.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The new government committed to
scheduling a constitutional referendum on
housing. However, it was not clear if this
would propose enshrining a right to housing,
as had been recommended by the
government-established Constitutional
Convention in 2014.

RIGHTS OF SEX WORKERS
A study published by HIV Ireland in
September found that the 2017 law
criminalizing the purchase of sex had a
negative impact on the safety, health and
well-being of sex workers.
In September, the government
commissioned an independent expert to
review the operation of this law. This law had
also retained the criminal offence of ‘‘brothelkeeping’’, which continued to impact sex
workers’ human rights. The report of this
review was expected in 2021.
1. Gardai’s use of spit hoods may increase risk of spread of COVID-19
(Press release, 25 June)

ISRAEL AND THE
OCCUPIED
PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES
State of Israel
Head of state: Reuven Rivlin
Head of government: Benjamin Netanyahu

Israel continued to impose institutionalized
discrimination against Palestinians living
under its rule in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories (OPT). It displaced
hundreds of Palestinians in Israel and the
occupied West Bank, including East

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Jerusalem, as a result of home demolitions
and imposition of other coercive measures.
Israeli forces continued to use excessive
force during law enforcement activities in
Israel and the OPT. Israeli forces killed 31
Palestinians, including nine children, in the
OPT; many were unlawfully killed while
posing no imminent threat to life. Israel
maintained its illegal blockade on the Gaza
Strip, subjecting its residents to collective
punishment and deepening the
humanitarian crisis there. It also continued
to restrict freedom of movement of
Palestinians in the OPT through
checkpoints and roadblocks. The Israeli
authorities arbitrarily detained in Israel
thousands of Palestinians from the OPT,
holding hundreds in administrative
detention without charge or trial. Torture
and other ill-treatment of detainees,
including children, were committed with
impunity. The authorities used a range of
measures to target human rights defenders,
journalists and others who criticized Israel’s
continuing occupation of the West Bank,
Gaza Strip and Syrian Golan Heights.
Violence against women persisted,
especially against Palestinian citizens of
Israel. The authorities denied asylumseekers access to a fair or prompt refugee
status determination process. Conscientious
objectors to military service were
imprisoned.

BACKGROUND
Israel held parliamentary elections in March,
the third in just over a year. In May, the two
largest parties in the Knesset, Likud and the
Blue and White alliance, reached a powersharing agreement that included an
announcement that Israel would further
annex territories in the occupied West Bank
starting in July 2020. This followed US
President Donald Trump’s announcement of
his “deal of the century”, which included a
formal extension of Israel’s sovereignty over
the Jordan Valley and the vast majority of the
illegal settlements in the rest of the occupied
West Bank in exchange for land currently
inside Israel. Israel postponed the annexation

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

plans following diplomatic deals with the
United Arab Emirates and Bahrain in
September. The parliament was again
dissolved in December, triggering another
round of elections in three months’ time.
Israel imposed lockdown measures in
March and in September to contain the
spread of COVID-19, triggering waves of
protests calling on the Prime Minister to step
down. The measures allowed the Israel
Security Agency (ISA) to use surveillance
capabilities usually reserved for Palestinians
to trace COVID-19 infections. The Prime
Minister’s trial on corruption charges began
in May.
In February, the Palestinian armed group
Islamic Jihad fired around 80 rockets and
mortar shells from the Gaza Strip towards
Israel, causing minor injuries to over 20
people, after Israeli forces killed an Islamic
Jihad operative. The Israeli army carried out
multiple airstrikes in Gaza, injuring 12
Palestinians, according to the Palestinian
Ministry of Health in Gaza.
In August and September, Israel launched
artillery and airstrikes against Gaza in
retaliation for incendiary balloons and kites
launched from Gaza into Israel. Palestinian
armed groups launched indiscriminate
rockets into Israel in response.
In August, Israel launched airstrikes
against Hizbullah targets in Lebanon after it
said that shots were fired from Lebanon into
Israel. Israel also launched airstrikes against
Iranian and Hizbullah targets in Syria.
In July, a district court rejected a case to
force the Ministry of Defense to revoke the
export licence of spyware company NSO
Group, dealing a blow to victims of unlawful
and targeted international surveillance.

FORCIBLE TRANSFERS, FORCED
EVICTIONS AND DEMOLITIONS
Israel demolished 848 Palestinian residential
and livelihood structures in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
displacing 996 people, according to the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA). Israeli authorities said many
of the demolished buildings lacked Israeli-

201

issued permits, which are virtually impossible
for Palestinians to obtain, or were in closed
military zones. The law of occupation
prohibits such destruction unless necessary
for military operations.
In other cases, Israel confiscated
residential and livelihood structures,
including some that were donated for
humanitarian purposes. Israeli forces also
punitively demolished at least six Palestinian
homes, leaving 22 people, including seven
children, homeless, according to B'Tselem.
Punitive demolitions constitute collective
punishment and are prohibited under
international law.
On 5 March, Israeli forces demolished the
homes of Walid Hanatsheh, in Ramallah, and
Yazan Mughamis, in Birzeit, displacing six
Palestinians, after an Israeli court rejected a
petition by the families against the punitive
demolition. On 11 March, Israeli forces
punitively demolished the home of Qassam
Barghouti in Kobar village near Ramallah.
The three men are in prison in Israel for
alleged involvement in an attack in August
2019 that killed an Israeli civilian and injured
two others outside Ramallah city in the
occupied West Bank.
Israeli settler organizations initiated, with
the support of the Israeli authorities, forcible
evictions of Palestinians from their homes in
East Jerusalem.
OCHA estimated in December that around
200 Palestinian households in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, had
eviction cases pending against them, placing
800 adults and children at risk of
displacement.
Israeli authorities demolished at least 29
residential and livelihood structures that
belonged to Bedouin citizens living in
“unrecognized” villages in the Negev/Naqab,
according to the Negev Coexistence Forum,
an Israeli NGO.

DISCRIMINATION
Israel continued to discriminate against
Palestinian citizens of Israel in areas of
planning, budget allocation, policing and
political participation. According to the

202

Adalah-The Legal Center for Arab Minority
Rights in Israel, Israel maintains over 65 laws
that discriminate against Palestinians.
Local Palestinian councils in Israel went on
strike to protest against discrimination in the
distribution of the state budget for local
councils. The vast majority of Palestinians in
Israel, comprising over 20% of the total
population, live in around 139 towns and
villages. They received only 1.7% of the state
budget for local councils.
In August, Adalah and the Arab Center for
Alternative Planning filed a petition to the
Israeli Supreme Court on behalf of 10 local
Palestinian councils and dozens of
Palestinian citizens of Israel against
government policy discriminating against
these communities in the distribution of
housing, construction and land development
benefits compared to neighbouring Jewish
communities that enjoy higher socioeconomic status and have access to such
benefits.
Israel continued to deny Palestinians from
the West Bank and Gaza married to
Palestinian citizens of Israel the right to
nationality by enforcing the discriminatory
Entry to Israel Law.
In December, the magistrate court in
Krayot, near Haifa, rejected a petition for
access to education by Palestinian citizens of
Israel living in Karmiel, citing the
discriminatory Nation State Law. The decision
said that establishing an Arabic school in the
town or funding transport for its Palestinian
residents to study in Arabic schools in nearby
communities would undermine the town’s
“Jewish character”.
In December, the Israeli Health Ministry
began the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines
that excluded the nearly 5 million
Palestinians who live under Israeli military
occupation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS AND EXCESSIVE
USE OF FORCE
Israeli military and police used unnecessary
and excessive force during law enforcement
activities, including search and arrest

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

operations, and when policing
demonstrations.
Military and security forces killed at least
31 Palestinians, including nine children, in
the Gaza Strip and West Bank, according to
OCHA. Many were unlawfully killed by live
ammunition or other excessive force when
posing no imminent threat to life. Some of the
unlawful killings appeared to be wilful, which
would constitute war crimes.
Israeli forces frequently used excessive
force against protesters in Kufr Qadum who
continued weekly protests against
settlements and settlement expansion.
According to OCHA, 214 protesters and
bystanders were injured during the year.
On 15 February, Israeli forces shot and
injured in the eye nine-year-old Malek Issa
while he was returning home from school in
the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Issawiya. No clashes were recorded at the
time, according to OCHA. Israeli forces were
maintaining a violent and intense police
operation in Issawiya as a form of collective
punishment.
Israeli forces frequently opened fire on
fishermen and farmers in Gaza. According to
Al Mezan Center for Human Rights, 12
fishermen and five farmers were injured.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
For the 13th consecutive year, Israel
continued its illegal air, land and sea
blockade of the Gaza Strip, restricting the
movement of people and goods in and out of
the area, which continued to have a
devastating impact on the human rights of
Gaza’s 2 million inhabitants. Israel stopped
the entry of construction materials and fuel
into Gaza repeatedly. This shut down the only
power plant in Gaza, leading to a further
reduction in the supply of electricity, which
had already been available for only about four
hours a day. Israel also imposed a full
maritime closure and repeatedly limited entry
of goods to food and medicine only. The
measures amounted to collective punishment
at a time of increasing COVID-19 infections in
Gaza.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 2 February, following an exchange of
attacks between Israeli forces and Palestinian
armed groups, Israel cancelled the permits of
500 traders from Gaza that enable their
holders to travel to Israel and the West Bank
for business. The permits were reactivated on
18 February.
On 18 June, Omar Yaghi, a baby with a
cardiac condition, died in Gaza after Israel
denied the family a permit to enter Israel for a
scheduled operation on 24 May at the Sheba
Medical Center in Ramat Gan city.
In the West Bank, at least 593 Israeli
checkpoints and roadblocks continued to
heavily restrict the movement of Palestinians
and access to rights, including health,
education and work. Holders of Palestinian
identification cards faced an ongoing bar on
using roads built for Israeli settlers.
Israeli restrictions on freedom of
movement continued to impede Palestinians’
access to health care, posing further threats
to vulnerable populations during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Lack of access to
hospitals and specialized clinics during the
pandemic particularly affected Palestinian
residents of the East Jerusalem
neighbourhoods of Kufr Aqab and Shu’fat
Refugee Camp, which are segregated from
the rest of the city by military structures,
including checkpoints, and the fence/wall.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Israeli authorities conducted hundreds of
raids throughout the West Bank to arrest
Palestinians, usually at their homes at night.
Those arrested were detained in prisons in
Israel, along with thousands of other
Palestinians from the OPT arrested in
previous years. This violated international
humanitarian law, which prohibits the
transfer of detainees into the territory of the
occupying power.
Israeli authorities used renewable
administrative detention orders to hold
Palestinians without charge or trial. Some
4,300 Palestinians from the OPT, including
397 administrative detainees, were held in
Israeli prisons as of December, according to
the Israel Prison Service. Many families of

203

Palestinian detainees in Israel, particularly
those living in Gaza, were not permitted entry
to Israel to visit their relatives.
On 16 July, Israeli forces arrested Iyad
Barghouti, an astrophysicist and professor at
Jerusalem’s Al-Quds University, at a
checkpoint near Jerusalem and placed him
in administrative detention. He had
previously been administratively detained in
2014 and 2016.
Israel held 157 Palestinian children in
prison, including two in administrative
detention, as of October. Defense for Children
International Palestine said that children were
interrogated without their parents present
and placed with adults in prison. Under
international law, detention of children should
be a measure of last resort and for the
shortest appropriate time.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Palestinian civilians, including children, from
the OPT were prosecuted in military courts
that did not meet international fair trial
standards.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Israeli soldiers, police and ISA officers
continued to torture and otherwise ill-treat
Palestinian detainees, including children,
with impunity. Reported methods included
beating, slapping, painful shackling, sleep
deprivation, use of stress positions and
threats of violence against family members.
Prolonged solitary confinement, sometimes
lasting months, was commonly used as a
punishment.
Israeli forces occasionally denied medical
help for Palestinians injured during law
enforcement activities.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
The authorities used a range of measures,
including raids, incitement campaigns,
movement restrictions and judicial
harassment, to target human rights
defenders who criticized Israel’s continuing
military occupation of Palestinian and Syrian
territories.

204

Israel continued to deny human rights
bodies entry to the OPT, including the UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the OPT.
On 30 July, Israeli forces arrested
Mahmoud Nawajaa, a human rights defender
and co-ordinator of the Boycott, Divestment
and Sanctions movement in the occupied
West Bank, from his home in Ramallah. A
prisoner of conscience, he was released
without charge on 17 August.
On 13 November, the Jerusalem District
Court rejected a petition by Amnesty
International against the arbitrary and
punitive travel ban imposed on its employee,
human rights defender Laith Abu Zeyad. For
undisclosed reasons, Israeli security forces
continued to bar him from entering occupied
East Jerusalem and from travelling abroad
through Jordan.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Israel continued to deny asylum-seekers
access to a fair and prompt refugee status
determination process, leaving many without
access to basic services. About 31,000
asylum-seekers were living in Israel.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Violence against women persisted in Israel,
especially against Palestinian citizens.
At least 21 women were killed as a result
of gender-based violence.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
At least four Israeli conscientious objectors to
military service were imprisoned. Hillel Rabin
spent 56 days in military prison for refusing
to serve in the Israeli army citing oppressive
policies against Palestinians.

ITALY
Italian Republic
Head of state: Sergio Mattarella
Head of government: Giuseppe Conte

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The authorities took decisions which
increased the risk of COVID-19 infection for
older people in care homes leading to
preventable deaths. Refugees’ and
migrants’ access to Italian territory was
limited and their rights were restricted
during lockdown. Co-operation with Libyan
authorities on migration continued. The
criminalization of rescue NGOs persisted.
There were numerous deaths in custody and
reports of torture. Poor and homeless
people endured lockdown with inadequate
housing. Domestic violence cases rose
during lockdown.

BACKGROUND
COVID-19 cases started early in the year, with
the north of the country worst hit. By the end
of March, the health and burial systems of
the Lombardy region were overwhelmed.
Unprecedented measures were put in place
to isolate some towns and later all northern
regions, before lockdown measures were
extended to the rest of the country on 9
March. Emergency measures by decree were
adopted from February, restricting movement
and limiting gatherings. The government
started lifting national lockdown restrictions
on 3 May, but further national and regional
restrictions were imposed towards the end of
the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the end of the year, over 74,159 people
had died with COVID-19. Older people
accounted for 85.7% of the total.
The impact of COVID-19 varied
significantly among different parts of the
country, with older people in care homes in
the north being particularly affected.
Decisions at the national and local level,
along with the failure to implement adequate
protection mechanisms, increased residents’
risk of exposure to the virus. Some regional
government and health authorities allowed
the discharge of infected or potentially
infected patients from hospitals into care
homes without ensuring adequate
mechanisms were in place to care for them.
The national, regional and local health

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

authorities failed to make public crucial data
and information related to the impact of
COVID-19 in care homes.
Care home workers lacked personal
protective equipment and testing, putting
them at heightened risk of COVID-19
infection.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
By the end of the year, 34,154 people −
including 4,631 unaccompanied minors −
had arrived irregularly by sea.
On 7 April, Italy closed its ports to
disembarkations and declared that due to the
pandemic the country was not a place of
safety for rescues carried out by foreignflagged ships outside its search and rescue
(SAR) region. The measure appeared to
target NGO ships which were often left at sea
for days without instructions after rescues.
When transfer to Italy was authorized,
rescued people were placed in quarantine
generally for two weeks on large ships before
being transferred ashore. Hundreds of
refugees and migrants arrived autonomously,
mostly at the island of Lampedusa, leading to
severe overcrowding of the local reception
centre. Refugees and migrants there faced
difficulties adhering to physical distancing;
their quarantine time was reset at each new
arrival.
A 15-year-old unaccompanied boy from
Côte d’Ivoire died in a hospital in Palermo,
Sicily, in October, after serving quarantine on
a ship where doctors had requested an
earlier disembarkation due to his
deteriorating health. He had reportedly
showed signs of torture suffered in Libya.
In December, Parliament reformed the two
security laws, known as “security decrees”,
passed in 2018 and 2019. The new Law
173/2020 reintroduced humanitarian
protection, which had been abolished in
2018 and had deprived some 37,000 people
of a regular status. It also reduced the
maximum length of stay in detention centres
for repatriation, from 180 to 90 days.
Improved assistance and reception for

205

asylum-seekers were also reintroduced in
smaller structures, facilitating integration.

Criminalization of solidarity
The authorities continued to penalize NGOs
for their rescue activities at sea. Ships were
inspected and seized and fines repeatedly
issued.1
There were some positive developments
for rescue NGOs. In February, the Court of
Cassation in the capital, Rome, ruled that the
arrest of the Sea Watch 3 captain, Carola
Rackete, in June 2019 had been unlawful.
She had entered territorial waters despite the
authorities’ prohibition. The Court noted that
she was fulfilling her duty to rescue people at
sea, and that a rescue operation ends with
disembarkation in a place of safety. In
November, the Tribunal of Ragusa, Sicily,
dismissed smuggling charges against two
crew members of the NGO Proactiva Open
Arms in relation to a rescue in 2018,
recognizing that they acted in a “state of
necessity”.
The 10 crew members of the Iuventa
rescue ship were still awaiting the closure of
an investigation for facilitating irregular entry,
initiated in 2017 by prosecutors in Trapani,
Sicily.
Law 173/2020, passed in December,
abolished the prohibition on entering
territorial waters for rescue ships and the
associated heavy administrative fines,
provided rescues were conducted according
to international law, co-ordinated by the
competent maritime authorities, and the flag
state of the rescue ship was informed.
However, violations remained punishable with
criminal fines of up to €50,000 and
imprisonment of up to two years. The
Minister of Interior could still prohibit entry
into territorial waters for public order and
security reasons and in cases of human
trafficking.

Co-operation with Libya
Co-operation with Libya on border control
continued, leading to over 11,265 people
being intercepted by Libyan authorities and
disembarked in Libya, where refugees and

206

migrants continued to face torture and other
systematic abuse (see Libya entry).
In January, the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights called on
Italy to suspend co-operation activities which
result − directly or indirectly − in the return to
Libya of people intercepted at sea. However,
the 2017 Memorandum of Understanding
with Libya, underpinning the collaboration
between the two countries on border control,
was automatically extended for a further
three years. In February, the Italian
government proposed some light
amendments, emphasizing the need to
improve human rights guarantees for
refugees and migrants, but these were not
accepted by the Libyan Government of
National Accord. Italy nonetheless continued
to support Libyan maritime authorities,
including by extending the deployment of
Italian military personnel in Libya.
In May, the Tribunal of Messina, Sicily,
condemned at first instance three foreign
nationals to 20 years’ imprisonment for
torture of refugees and migrants in a
detention centre in Zawiya, Libya.
In August, five Eritrean asylum-seekers
landed in Rome, carrying visas granted by
the Italian authorities to enable them to seek
asylum in Italy. The issuance of visas had
been ordered by an Italian court in 2019,
ruling that the group had been unlawfully
pushed back to Libya 10 years earlier.
The trial of the former Minister of Interior
for the unlawful deprivation of liberty of over
100 rescued people on the Italian coastguard
ship Gregoretti in July 2019, started in
October before the Tribunal of Catania, Sicily.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Numerous deaths in custody in prisons and
repatriation centres were recorded, against
the background of increased isolation of
detainees from society and a reduction of
services, including of mental health care
provision, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In
March, there were 13 deaths in prisons
following unrest in some establishments.
Several deaths were due to overdose when

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

detainees gained access to the infirmaries’
medical supplies.
Two men, Georgian and Albanian
nationals, died in January and July
respectively in the repatriation centre of
Gradisca d’Isonzo, Friuli-Venezia Giulia.
Investigations were ongoing at the end of the
year.

and with inadequate access to drinking water
and food.
Many homeless people across the country
could not access safe accommodation during
the lockdown and struggled to find food and
assistance due to the closure of public
kitchens and dormitories where COVID-19
cases had been recorded.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

There were numerous reports of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
by prison staff and police officers.
Investigations were ongoing into reports
that prison officers beat detainees, leaving
several gravely injured, at the Santa Maria
Capua Vetere prison, near Naples, on 6 April,
when some 300 prison officers were brought
in for an inspection.
In July, prosecutors in Turin, Piedmont,
accused 25 people, including the prison
director and many officers, of committing or
facilitating torture and other ill-treatment
against detainees between March 2017 and
September 2019.
The trial of five prison officers and a doctor
charged with torture in relation to a 2018
case in the prison of San Gimignano, Siena,
was ongoing at the end of the year. A further
15 prison officers remained under
investigation.

Women’s rights NGOs reported an increase in
domestic violence during lockdown. Official
data recorded over 23,000 calls to a national
help line which in 2019 received
approximately 13,400.
In October, the Council of Europe
Committee of Ministers (the Committee),
supervising the implementation of the ruling
by the European Court of Human Rights in
Talpis v. Italy, expressed concern at the high
rate at which proceedings for domestic
violence were discontinued at pre-trial stage.
The Committee requested that by 31 March
2021, the authorities provide information and
data about protection orders and risk
assessments for victims.
The prevalence of gynaecologists who
objected to abortion for reasons of
conscience remained a significant obstacle to
access the right to abortion. In August, the
Ministry of Health approved new guidance to
extend access to medical abortion.

RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED
EVICTIONS
In March, the government suspended
evictions and subsequently extended the
measure until the end of the year. Despite
this, in August local authorities forcibly
evicted the Roma settlement of Foro Italico in
Rome. Most of the residents had abandoned
their homes in the days preceding. Many
families were left homeless.
Local authorities failed to ensure that
migrant workers employed to pick fruit −
often in exploitative conditions − in the Piana
di Gioia Tauro, Calabria, had access to
adequate protection against COVID-19,
including adequate housing. Hundreds of
migrants endured the pandemic in informal
settlements without electricity and sanitation,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

1. Europe: Punishing compassion: Solidarity on trial in fortress Europe
(EUR 01/1828/2020)

JAPAN
Japan
Head of government: Yoshihide Suga (replaced Shinzo
Abe in September)
The government introduced measures to
prevent harassment of LGBTI people at
work, but no law was passed to protect
them from overall discrimination. Domestic
violence against women increased during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The authorities’

207

responses to the pandemic excluded certain
ethnic minorities.

BACKGROUND
On 28 August, Shinzo Abe announced his
resignation after serving as prime minister for
almost eight consecutive years. The Tokyo
Olympics and the UN Congress for Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, both
scheduled for 2020, were postponed until
2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In June, a law was revised with the goal of
ensuring that companies take measures to
stop employees from being harassed by staff
in positions of relative power. The revision
included provisions to protect LGBTI people
from “outing” or other abuse based on sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression.
Small and medium enterprises had until April
2022 to introduce relevant measures, while
compliance from larger companies was
expected immediately.
The national government took no steps
towards the legal recognition of same-sex
marriage, but an increasing number of local
municipalities introduced ordinances or
guidelines that acknowledged same-sex
unions. There were 69 such municipalities,
covering approximately one third of the
population at year’s end. A bill introduced in
2018 by opposition political parties to outlaw
discrimination against LGBTI people
remained under examination at the national
Diet (parliament) at year’s end.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
The numbers of women reporting domestic
violence, which had been on the rise for 16
consecutive years, increased sharply during
the COVID-19 pandemic.1 There were 13,000
reported cases in April, 29% higher than the
same month in 2019.
Journalist Shiori Ito won a civil lawsuit in
December 2019 against a high-profile male
journalist, who had sexually assaulted her
after inviting her to dinner to discuss a job

208

opportunity in 2015. Although no criminal
charges were brought against him, the
verdict was considered a major step for the
#MeToo movement in the country, where
victims of sexual harassment or other such
abuse rarely speak up. Despite winning the
court case, Shiori Ito faced further attacks on
social media, which led her to file defamation
lawsuits in June against a woman cartoonist
and two men.

DISCRIMINATION
During the COVID-19 pandemic, health
workers and their families faced
discrimination in access to services.
According to media reports, some health
workers were subject to abuse during house
calls, or were denied medical care, taxi or
restaurant services. The family members of
some health workers were suspended from
work. Although the authorities warned that
discrimination against health workers and
their families was unacceptable, there were
media reports that children of health workers
were denied day care services and access to
recreational facilities, or became targets of
bullying.
Authorities responsible for distribution of
COVID-19 assistance discriminated against
ethnic Korean schools. In March, the city
government of Saitama excluded an ethnic
Korean kindergarten from an initiative to
distribute face masks to workers providing
care or education to pre-school children.
Students at the Korea University in Tokyo
were excluded from government payments
designed to help students facing financial
difficulties caused by the pandemic. The
university is attended primarily by ethnic
Koreans, some of whom were Japanese
citizens.2

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
In March, the authorities reported that 44 out
of 10,375 asylum applications in 2019 were
accepted as refugees. Existing laws allowed
the authorities to indefinitely detain
undocumented foreign nationals, including
asylum-seekers and irregular migrants, until

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

such time as their deportation took place.
When considering the detention of two
asylum-seekers in August, the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention stated that such
detention was arbitrary and discriminatory.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, detainees
in immigration facilities complained of
overcrowding, poor ventilation and lack of
adequate distancing measures to protect
them from infection. To reduce the number of
individuals in immigration detention facilities,
the authorities provisionally released more
than half of all detained foreign nationals
scheduled for deportation starting in April,
but did not give them permission to work nor
the means of an adequate standard of living.
Instead, civil society organizations provided
assistance for their survival.

DEATH PENALTY
While no executions took place during the
year, the government took no steps towards
abolishing the death penalty. People with
intellectual and psychosocial disabilities
continued to be at risk of execution. In
February, the Osaka District Court denied
Kenji Matsumoto’s eighth request for a retrial.
He was sentenced to death in 1993 after
police allegedly coerced him into
“confessing” to two robberies and murders.
He was born with a severe intellectual
disability, and developed a delusional
disorder while in detention.
In December, the Supreme Court
overturned a 2018 Tokyo High Court decision
denying a retrial of the case against Iwao
Hakamada, who had spent 46 years on death
row.
1. The rise of 'corona divorce' amid Japan’s domestic violence shadow
pandemic (News story, 17 August)
2. Japan: Submission to the UN Human Rights Committee – 130th
session, 12 October – 6 November 2020 (ASA 22/3065/2020)

JORDAN
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Head of state: Abdullah II bin al-Hussein
Head of government: Bisher al-Khasawneh (replaced
Omar al-Razzaz in October)
The authorities announced a state of
emergency in March to combat COVID-19,
giving the Prime Minister sweeping powers
allowing for the detention of at least 13
journalists critical of the government and
the King, and those accused of “spreading
panic about COVID-19”. The COVID-19
lockdown saw a spike in domestic violence.
Migrant workers were left stranded with
unpaid wages. Child labour increased as the
economic impact of the pandemic pushed
many families into poverty. Children of
Jordanian mothers and non-Jordanian
fathers were left without access to
emergency state funding. Some Syrian
refugees were left without humanitarian aid,
and many others lost their jobs and
returned to government-controlled areas in
Syria.

BACKGROUND
In March, the King enacted Defence Law No.
13 of 1992, declaring a state of emergency
and giving the Prime Minister sweeping
powers to take “all measures necessary” to
combat COVID-19. The Prime Minister
pledged to implement it to the “narrowest
extent” and in a manner that would not
impinge on political rights, freedom of
expression or private property.
Jordan remained a member of the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition in the armed conflict in
Yemen.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to curtail freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly.
The crackdown on journalists and activists
continued, including through harassment of
journalists in relation to the government’s
COVID-19 measures.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

209

On 15 April, following the declaration of
the state of emergency, the Prime Minister
issued a decree stipulating that disseminating
news that could “cause panic” over
COVID-19 would carry a penalty of up to
three years in prison. By the end of the year,
at least 13 journalists had been arrested
under the decree, most of whom were
released soon after. In November, Fares
Sayegh, owner of Roya TV, and its news
director, Mohamad al-Khalidi, were arrested
for airing a segment “criticizing the King”,
after they showed Jordanian residents
complaining about the economic impact of
the COVID-19 lockdown. The two men were
detained for 14 days.
On 1 and 23 July, the Ministry of
Education blocked access to popular social
media apps throughout the country for
several hours, saying, according to the
Jordan Open Source Association, that the
measure was to curb cheating during school
examinations.
On 28 July, Tujan al-Bukhaiti, a 17-yearold Yemeni refugee, was found not guilty of
the charges of “blasphemy” and “insulting
religious feelings” after an eight-month trial.
The Juvenile Police had summoned her for
questioning following a report by the
Cybercrime Unit over social media posts that
included re-posts of Facebook statuses of her
father, Ali al-Bukhaiti, that discussed cultural
and religious topics in December 2019.
In August, journalist and cartoonist Imad
Hajjaj was arrested over a caricature
criticizing the deal to normalize relations
between the United Arab Emirates and Israel.
His case was referred to the State Security
Court for “carrying out acts undermining
Jordanian relationships with a friendly
country”. According to findings by Human
Rights Watch, after the enactment of Defence
Law No. 13, the General Intelligence
Directorate regularly contacted several
journalists, asking them questions about their
work and warning them against covering
certain issues. Journalists said that the
authorities intentionally withheld permits and/
or permission for them to attend and cover
certain events. The authorities also used

210

gagging orders on various human rights
issues, including those involving domestic
violence.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
On 25 July, after a protracted dispute
between the government and the teachers’
union over a pay increase, security forces
raided 13 union branches, arresting 13 board
members. In the following days, the
authorities also arrested dozens of union
members. The Attorney General then issued
a gagging order, which banned any public
discussion of the case, and an order to shut
down the union for two years. Tensions had
resurfaced over the government’s decision to
freeze public sector pay until the end of 2020
due to COVID-19, breaching a commitment
to increase salaries by 50%. The union’s
closure triggered new protests in early
August; two journalists covering the protests
were arrested and held for a few hours, while
two others were beaten.
On 31 December, a court in Amman
ordered the dissolution of the teachers’ union
and the arrest of its board members,
following investigations into accusations of
“corruption” and “incitement over social
media” that began in August. Soon after, four
board members were arrested but then
released on bail after the union’s lawyer filed
an appeal.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Provincial governors continued to use the
Crime Prevention Law to administratively
detain women, often for months and for
discriminatory reasons, such as for being
“absent from home” without a male
guardian’s permission, or for having sex
outside marriage (zina), begging or
homelessness. Dar Amneh, a shelter for
women at risk of being killed by family
members, continued to provide an alternative
to the administrative detention of women at
risk in “protective custody”. However, women
were not allowed to leave the shelter without
the approval of a provincial governor.
Women’s rights groups noted an increase
in domestic violence cases during the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

COVID-19 lockdown, including in Syrian
refugee communities and among migrant
domestic workers. The Family Protection Unit
affiliated to the Public Security Directorate,
which was established to respond to
domestic violence and sexual assaults, had
been overwhelmed. There was also a drop in
cases of people seeking protection from the
authorities or turning to women’s state
shelters. Other measures were introduced,
such as tele-counselling and a hotline, but
women’s groups reported that these could
only offer limited support.
Despite legislative changes in 2017 and
some positive steps reported by women rights
activists towards taking such crimes more
seriously, there were no concrete measures to
address domestic violence and so-called
“honour” killings, both of which were
particularly prevalent in Jordan. On 17 July, a
widely disseminated video of the brutal public
killing by her father of a woman named only
as Ahlam triggered protests. The authorities
failed to take any action to hold the father
accountable or to respond in any other way.

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers continued to be
inadequately protected from abuse by their
employers and agents and remained at risk
of arbitrary detention. Their vulnerable
situation was aggravated by COVID-19, as the
pandemic led to a plethora of abuses,
including arbitrary dismissals and unpaid
wages. Rights groups indicated that many
migrant workers lost their jobs and rarely had
access to social protection or alternative
employment, as only Jordanian daily workers
and those with active social security accounts
benefited from emergency in-kind and cash
assistance. This meant migrant workers lost
their residency status, a consequence of the
kafala (sponsorship) system governing
employment of migrant workers in the region,
leaving them subject to arrest, detention and
deportation. Migrant workers who wished to
leave the country often could not do so
because of travel restrictions imposed to curb
the virus.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Migrant workers peacefully protesting for
their rights were met with tear gas, as
happened when Sri Lankan migrant domestic
workers protested in July about the
authorities continuing to ignore their
demands.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Citizenship laws continued to discriminate
against children of Jordanian mothers and
non-Jordanian fathers who, unlike children of
Jordanian fathers married to non-Jordanians,
were denied Jordanian citizenship. This
effectively deprived those children from
benefiting from the emergency fund set up
by the Ministry of Social Development to
counter the economic fallout of COVID-19,
especially in cases where the mother was not
present to apply for the aid herself. According
to rights groups, the economic impact of
COVID-19 led to an increase in child
labourers.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
Jordan continued to host approximately
655,000 Syrians, 67,000 Iraqis, 15,000
Yemenis, 6,000 Sudanese nationals and
2,500 refugees from 52 other countries
registered with UNHCR, in addition to over 2
million Palestinian refugees registered with
the UN Relief and Works Agency.
At least 10,000 Syrian refugees remained
in the “berm”, a no man’s land in the desert
along the Jordanian-Syrian border. In March,
Jordan announced it would bar aid convoys
from crossing through its territory to deliver
assistance and medical equipment to the
refugees, citing COVID-19 concerns.1 The
authorities’ decision exacerbated an already
dire humanitarian situation, including by
putting pregnant women at risk as no
maternal health care was accessible there.
In August, Jordanian authorities forcibly
transferred at least 16 Syrian refugees,
including eight children, to an informal camp
in the “berm”.2 Many of them chose to go
back to government-controlled areas in Syria
as a result of the dire living conditions in the
“berm”.

211

Syrian refugees were amongst the most
affected by state measures to combat
COVID-19 as a result of their largely informal
employment and a lack of written contracts,
social security and health insurance cover or
valid work permits. According to UNHCR,
one third lost their jobs while others saw a
40% drop in their income. Syrian refugees
were barred from several employment
sectors, including the health, teaching,
engineering and technical professions.
Palestinian refugees from the Gaza Strip
continued to be excluded from basic rights
and services as they do not have Jordanian
citizenship.

were injured and 10 died. Following the first
confirmed COVID-19 cases a state of
emergency was declared from 16 March to
11 May. By 29 October, 2,219 deaths from
COVID-19 had been officially confirmed.
Official excess death statistics, however,
indicated a considerably higher death toll.
The World Bank reported in a mid-year
projection that as a result of the pandemic an
additional 800,000 people were living in
poverty.
In September, Kazakhstan signed the
Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR,
committing not to carry out executions and to
abolish the death penalty.

DEATH PENALTY

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

Authorities continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were carried out.

Peaceful demonstrators were subjected to
administrative detentions and fines. In May,
the President signed a new Law on Public
Assemblies which fell short of international
standards. It effectively requires the
authorities’ permission and only allows
assemblies in designated locations. It openly
discriminates against non-citizens, persons
with mental or “psycho-social” disabilities,
and unregistered organizations.
On 6 June, a peaceful protest in the city of
Almaty was dispersed on the grounds that
the area needed to be disinfected. Hundreds
were briefly detained. Human rights defender
Asya Tulesova remonstrated with police
officers for detaining peaceful protesters and
knocked a police officer’s hat off. She was
remanded for two months in pre-trial
detention despite the risks of COVID-19 and
sentenced on 12 August to 18 months of
“restricted freedom” (a parole-like noncustodial sentence) and a fine for attacking
and insulting a police officer.

1. Jordan: Authorities must allow urgent medical care for displaced
Syrians in Rukban during COVID-19 (Press release, 7 May)
2. Jordan: Stop forcible transfer of Syrian refugees to a no-man’s land in
the desert (Press release, 15 September)

KAZAKHSTAN
Republic of Kazakhstan
Head of state: Kassym-Jomart Tokayev
Head of government: Askar Mamin

The rights to freedom of peaceful assembly
and expression remained severely limited.
Critics of the authorities faced politically
motivated prosecution. Torture and other illtreatment remained widespread. Human
rights defenders faced harassment and civil
prosecution for libel. LGBTI people faced
stigma and abuse. People with disabilities
were deprived of their rights. The worsening
economic situation caused by the pandemic
reduced access to education and increased
child labour.

BACKGROUND
On 10 February during clashes between
ethnic Kazakhs and Dungans, a Muslim
ethnic group of Chinese origin, hundreds

212

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In June, the President signed a law to
decriminalize libel. However, peaceful critics
of the government faced prosecution and
harsh penalties as the authorities exploited
the state of emergency measures envisaged
by Article 274 of the Criminal Code
(“dissemination of knowingly false
information”) to clamp down on dissent.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

From January to August, 81 cases were
started under Article 274 and five reached
the courts.
On 22 June, Alnur Ilyashev was found
guilty under Article 274 for three posts on
social media criticizing the government’s
response to COVID-19 and corruption. He
was sentenced to restricted freedom for three
years and banned from “voluntary political
and social activism” for five years.1

Prisoners of conscience
Maks Bokayev continued to serve his fiveyear prison term, despite his worsening
health condition. He had been convicted for
his involvement in the organization of
peaceful demonstrations and his posts on
social media, including under Article 174 of
the Criminal Code (“incitement of social,
clan, national, racial or religious discord”).

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread in penitentiary institutions. With
few exceptions, authorities failed to carry out
impartial, independent and effective
investigations.
On 6 October, a Committee of National
Security officer was sentenced to
five and a half years’ imprisonment for rape
and torture. Viktoriya Berdkhodzhaeva, a
transgender woman serving a prison
sentence in a women’s colony, reported that
she had been raped by the officer in July
2019. She earlier reported that she had
suffered sexual harassment from male staff
and discriminatory attitudes from other
prisoners since arriving in the colony in 2017.
On 17 October, Azamat Orazaly was
detained on suspicion of stealing livestock
and died in police custody the same day in
Makanchi village in the East Kazakhstan
region. Three police officers were detained on
suspicion of torture. The case was ongoing at
the end of the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders faced harassment
and prosecution. Elena Semionova, from
Pavlodar, in northern Kazakhstan, was the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

subject of eight civil defamation cases lodged
against her by prison officials from six prisons
because of her work exposing alleged cases
of torture. On 3 June, a court found that she
had defamed the staff of Prison 161/2 and
ordered her to publicly retract her
statements. On 3 July, she lost a defamation
case against the director of Prison 164/4 in
the village of Zarechny in Almatinsky region,
for reporting the beating of a prisoner by
prison guards on 10 April. Despite medical
reports documenting the prisoner’s injuries,
the court found that Elena Semionova’s
reports were untrue and harmed the
reputation of the prison director. Two cases
were dropped by the applicants and four
cases were ongoing at the end of the year.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
(LGBTI)
LGBTI activist Nurbibi Nurkadilova published
a statement in May by the European Union
and a number of foreign embassies in
Kazakhstan marking the International Day
against Homophobia, Transphobia and
Biphobia. The publication provoked
homophobic and transphobic comments,
including by a well-known mixed martial arts
fighter, Kuat Khamitov.
After Nurbibi Nurkadilova replied to him and
revealed that she was a transgender woman,
he encouraged people to attack LGBTI
people. No action was taken by the
authorities.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The closure of the Kazakh-Uzbek border due
to the pandemic caused labour shortages.
Radio Azattyk reported in October that
children were working in cotton fields in the
Turkestan region, in southern Kazakhstan.
Some were below the legal working age for
light work of 16. The World Bank reported
that the number of secondary school
students in Kazakhstan performing below
functional literacy would increase as a result
of pandemic-related school closures and
inadequate access to distance learning.

213

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH A DISABILITY
People with mental disabilities continued to
be deprived by the courts of legal capacity,
and thereby of their basic rights. In the
absence of systems for review it remained
very rare for people to regain their rights. In
January, a court in Almaty reinstated Vadim
Nesterov’s legal capacity. He had been
diagnosed as “retarded” and was deprived of
legal capacity when he reached the age of 18
while living in institutional care.
Levels of institutionalization remained high.
In April, four children living in a residential
care home for children with disabilities in
Ayagoz in eastern Kazakhstan died from
medical conditions while most of the staff
were on unpaid leave as part of quarantine
measures. An investigation found that the
home failed to provide adequate medical
care and disciplinary measures were taken
against some of the staff involved.
On 22 October, President Tokayev
announced that by 2022 Kazakhstan would
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of People with Disabilities,
allowing people to bring complaints under the
treaty.
1. Kazakhstan: Political activist sentenced to “restricted freedom” for
criticizing government’s COVID-19 response (News story, 22 June)

KENYA
Republic of Kenya
Head of state and government: Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta
Police used excessive and sometimes lethal
force to enforce a curfew and to disperse
peaceful protests; they also carried out
extrajudicial executions and enforced
disappearances. Journalists and bloggers
were subjected to harassment, intimidation
and arbitrary arrests. COVID-19 movement
measures were restrictive and undermined
the right to health for women and for people
from marginalized groups, and subjected
refugees and asylum-seekers to further

214

hardship. Women continued to face
inequality. The authorities forcibly evicted
thousands of people, and the President
disregarded the Constitution by failing to
appoint superior court judges.

BACKGROUND
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, on
27 March the President invoked the Public
Order Act to impose restrictions, including a
three-month nationwide curfew between 7pm
and 5am. It was extended in June and again
in November but with the hours reduced to
between 10pm and 4am.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January, residents of the Kasarani district
in the capital, Nairobi, peacefully
demonstrated against the poor state of roads
in their neighbourhood. Police officers
responded by firing live ammunition at them,
killing a 17-year-old boy.
The use of excessive force by police
escalated after the curfew was imposed in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Officers
shot at and beat people for violating the
curfew, sometimes hours before the curfew
was due to be imposed, and at least six
people were killed by police officers in the 10
days following its introduction.
On 27 March, a police officer beat
journalist Peter Wainaina with a baton while
he filmed police kicking, slapping and firing
tear gas at commuters, as they rushed them
to board a ferry ahead of the curfew.
In June, police officers killed a man in
Lessos in Nandi County when they fired live
ammunition into a crowd of motorcycle taxi
drivers protesting after one of their colleagues
was arrested, allegedly for not wearing a face
mask. When the protesters marched to the
police station the police shot dead two other
men. The Independent Police Oversight
Authority said it had launched an
investigation into the killings. No findings
were made public by the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
There were 144 extrajudicial executions and
11 people were subjected to enforced
disappearance during the year. In February,
the Senate began a formal inquiry into these
crimes. However, COVID-19 restrictions on
movement of people prevented its evidencegathering hearings from proceeding.
There was a spike in the number of
extrajudicial executions while security forces
enforced the curfew. On 28 March, police
officers beat Hamisi Juma to death, near
Zibani village, after he drove a woman in
labour to hospital at night during the curfew.
On 30 March, 13-year-old Yassin Moyo
was shot dead by a police officer in Eastlands
in Nairobi while he was playing on his
balcony after the 7pm curfew. A police officer
was charged with his murder in June.
In April, the Interior Minister said that 14
police officers accused of gross misconduct
during the curfew period had been
suspended pending investigation.
Later that month, Michael Njau, a social
justice activist, his cousin and a taxi driver
disappeared while travelling from Thika to
Nairobi. Two days later, police discovered
their abandoned car. There was no evidence
to implicate the police, but Michael Njau’s
colleagues said he had received threats for
his work on police killings. The men’s
whereabouts remained unknown at the end
of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Police intimidated, harassed and attacked
journalists and bloggers as a means to
silence them. On 29 March, three journalists
were arrested for allegedly violating the
curfew, despite their legal exemption from
curfew restrictions.
Several bloggers and journalists were
arrested and charged under the Computer
Misuse and Cybercrimes Act for publishing
what the government deemed to be
misleading information about COVID-19
(which it said amounted to incitement of the
public against the government), or for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

publishing corruption allegations. In August,
Milton Were and Jack Okinyi were arrested
by Directorate of Criminal Investigations (DCI)
officers after they had published a story on
alleged mismanagement of public funds, and
detained overnight at Muthaiga police station
in Nairobi. Nyukuri Barasa and Charles
Gichuki were also arrested by DCI officers in
August for, among other things, publishing
information exposing government corruption.
Nyukuri Barasa was detained at Kilimani
police station and Charles Gichuki was
detained at Capitol Hill police station, both in
Nairobi. They were both released without
charge the next day.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
In March, the Health Ministry issued
directives requiring everyone entering the
country to report to quarantine centres.
Anyone who violated the public health
guidelines by not wearing a mask or flouting
the curfew, for example, could also be held in
quarantine. According to the Ministry, around
2,000 people were quarantined. Many of
them said they were ill-treated and exposed
to increased health risks. Physical distancing
measures were not followed, sanitary
conditions were poor, and there was
inadequate food. Those confined were not
informed of how long they would spend in
quarantine and were charged excessive fees.
Hospitals detained patients, or refused to
hand over the bodies of those who died to
their families because of unpaid medical
bills, something the High Court had ruled to
be illegal in 2018. Dennis Bwire was detained
by a private hospital for three months after
his discharge date and released in July
following a civil society campaign.

RIGHT TO HEALTH AND WORKERS’
RIGHTS
In August, hundreds of public hospital
doctors held a week-long strike over delayed
salaries, inadequate PPE, and lack of
medical insurance.
Meanwhile, the Auditor General reported a
KES2.2 billion (US$20 million) corruption
scandal at the Kenya Medical Supplies

215

Agency in which PPE that had been donated
to the government was allegedly stolen. Most
front-line medical staff were forced to buy
their own PPE, and if they became infected
with COVID-19 they had to cover the costs of
their own treatment.
The COVID-19 curfew and the fear of
police deterred people from moving at night
and restricted access to maternal health care
for many women. Some women were unable
to get to hospital during labour, and pregnant
women reported being verbally and physically
assaulted by police when they sought health
care during curfew hours.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 4 May, the Nairobi Water Company,
accompanied by police, forcibly evicted
7,000 people from their homes at the
Kariobangi Sewerage settlement in Nairobi,
one day after a court ordered a temporary
halt to the evictions. Their homes and other
buildings were demolished to make way for a
sewerage system with only two days’ notice,
in violation of international human rights
standards and Kenyan law. On 11 May,
following a public outcry, the Interior Ministry
announced a moratorium on evictions during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although the moratorium halted 13
evictions planned to make way for sanitation
facilities, other evictions continued. On 15
May, the authorities forcibly evicted over
1,000 people in Ruai ward in Nairobi,
rendering them homeless. In October, the
Kenya Power and Lighting Company
demolished 3,000 homes in Dagoretti Corner,
an informal settlement in Nairobi.1
In September, the EU withdrew funding for
a €31million (US$35 million) conservation
project, in response to forced evictions and
other human rights violations against the
Sengwer Indigenous community in Embobut
Forest. In 2018, it had suspended funding
when a Kenya Forest Service guard killed a
Sengwer Indigenous man.

women, to improve women’s economic
participation and increase access to health
and education, women remained
disadvantaged and under-represented in
most public and private spheres.
Parliament failed to enact laws which
would ensure gender equality in accordance
with the Constitution’s “two-thirds gender
rule”. As a result, in September the Chief
Justice advised the President to dissolve the
legislative body.
The two-thirds rule stipulates that the
National Assembly and Senate shall not be
made up of more than two thirds of members
from one gender.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Relations between the National Executive and
the judiciary remained tense after the
Supreme Court nullified the presidential
election results in 2017. The President
ignored his constitutional obligation and a
High Court order to appoint 11 judges to the
Court of Appeal, and 30 judges to the High
Court. In January, Court of Appeal hearing
centres outside Nairobi were forced to close
due to a shortage of judges, and many
hearings were postponed until 2022.
Senior public officers continued to disobey
court orders. In January, the government
violated a court ruling when it prevented
Miguna Miguna, a government critic who was
deported to Canada in 2018, from returning
to Kenya.
Civil society organizations continued to
fight for justice. Residents of the OwinoUhuru settlement in Mombasa, together with
the Centre for Justice, Governance and
Environmental Action NGO, won damages
from the state amounting to KES1.3 billion
(US$11.6 million) as compensation after a
factory contaminated the community’s land,
resulting in some residents suffering lead
poisoning. The government appealed against
the decision.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Although the government increased
investment to address violence against

216

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In April, movement in and out of the Kakuma
and Dadaab refugee camps was restricted
under lockdown measures.
In May, Kenya closed its borders with
Somalia and Tanzania, citing COVID-19
concerns. Reception and registration centres
for asylum-seekers in urban areas and in the
refugee camps remained partially closed at
the end of the year. Over 13,000 new arrivals
in Dadaab refugee camp, many of them from
Somalia, were unable to register as asylumseekers.
1. Kenya: Forced eviction leaves 3000 people homeless (AFR
32/3151/2020)

KOSOVO*
Kosovo*
Head of state: Vjosa Osmani (acting, replaced Hashim
Thaçi in November)
Head of government: Avdullah Hoti (replaced Albin
Kurti in June)
*This designation is without prejudice to positions on
status, and is in line with UN Security Council
Resolution 1244 and the International Court of Justice
Opinion on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence.
The Kosovo Specialist Chambers in The
Hague opened proceedings against senior
Kosovo Albanian politicians and former
Kosovo Liberation Army commanders
suspected of crimes under international law
during the 1998-1999 war. Few survivors
applied for the pension awarded to victims
of wartime sexual violence. Under
restrictions and a curfew imposed by the
government during the COVID-19
pandemic, discrimination against Roma
continued and domestic violence rose.

BACKGROUND
Following a no confidence vote, Prime
Minister Albin Kurti’s government was
replaced in June, without an election, by
Avdullah Hoti’s government. However, in
December, the Constitutional Court ruled the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Assembly’s approval of this government
unlawful.
In mid-March, the Kurti government
introduced COVID-19-related restrictions and
limited freedom of movement. The Hoti
government lifted some restrictions, but in
July reinstated curfews and other limitations.
Inadequate health services and
environmental factors produced
disproportionately high COVID-19 mortality
rates.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Proceedings began at the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers (KSC) established in The Hague in
2016. The court allowed victims to be party
to the proceedings and to be eligible for
reparations. In June, the Specialist
Prosecutor’s Office (SPO) announced an
unconfirmed indictment against President
Hashim Thaçi, who resigned in November,
before appearing before the KSC. He is
indicted − along with former Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) General Staff Kadri
Veseli, Rexhep Selimi and Jakup Krasniqi −
for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including the murder of around 100 civilians,
including Serbs, Roma and ethnic Albanian
opponents.
In September, the SPO summoned Agim
Çeku, former Prime Minister and KLA
commander, for questioning. In the same
month, proceedings opened against former
KLA commander Salih Mustafa, indicted for
the arbitrary detention, cruel treatment,
torture, and murder of civilians at Zllash
detention camp in April 1999.
Confidential SPO files naming protected
witnesses were anonymously leaked to the
KLA War Veterans’ Organization;
subsequently two officials were transferred to
the court, and publicly indicted in December
for the obstruction of justice, witness
intimidation and secrecy violations.
In Kosovo, former Serbian police officer
Darko Tasić was convicted in June of war
crimes for his part in burning and dumping
100 bodies after the massacre in Krushe e
Vogel/Mala Kruša village. The victims’ families

217

protested the Appeals Court December
decision to halve his 22 year sentence.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 30 August, International Day of the
Disappeared, 1,643 people remained
missing. In both the Serbian capital,
Belgrade, and Pristina, families of missing
Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians together
called on their governments to open military
archives to help identify burial sites.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In March, former Kosovo Serb police officer
Zoran Vukotić was indicted by Kosovo
prosecutors for the rape of a 16-year-old girl
in the Mitrovica region in May 1999.
Only 200 victims of wartime sexual
violence applied to the government
commission established to decide on their
survivor status and grant them a €230
monthly pension. Including some
applications submitted in 2019, 222
applications were accepted and 69 rejected.
Although the NGO Medica Gjakova had
counselled over 4,500 rape survivors, only
300 of them had applied since 2018; many
feared stigmatization or family disapproval.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Investigative journalists faced threats, slurs
and attack. In June, the former Minister of
European Integration opened a defamation
suit against Jeta Xharra, director of the
Balkan Investigative Reporting Network,
KALLXO.com and Prishtina Insight. In July,
Jeta Xharra was threatened by another
former minister, and in September, former
Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj called
journalists “mercenaries”. In October,
journalist Shkumbin Kajtazi’s car was
damaged by gunfire outside his home in
Mitrovica.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In September, the UN Special Rapporteur on
hazardous substances urged the UN to
provide “individual compensation and a
public apology” to Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and
Egyptians who suffered lead poisoning while

218

living in UN-operated refugee camps situated
on contaminated land.
The NGO Admovere reported in July that
despite receiving additional social payments,
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians were
disproportionately disadvantaged in
accessing COVID-19 tests.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence cases increased in March
by 36% over the previous year. By December,
seven women had been killed by a partner or
family member.
In June, Luljeta Alija opened a
discrimination case against Pristina police
who refused to file a complaint against her
husband for violating a domestic violence
protective order because she was
“inappropriately dressed”.

KUWAIT
State of Kuwait
Head of state: Nawaf al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah
(replaced Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah in
September)
Head of government: Sabah al-Khaled al-Hamad alSabah
The authorities continued to unduly restrict
the rights to freedom of expression and
association. Members of the stateless Bidun
minority remained unable to access a range
of public services. With the spread of
COVID-19, residence permit violators were
granted a month’s amnesty, allowing them
to leave the country without paying fines or
travel costs. Migrant workers remained
inadequately protected against exploitation
and abuse.

BACKGROUND
Kuwait sped up its “Kuwaitization” process to
replace expatriates with nationals in the
workforce to address rising unemployment
among nationals.
Under the UN Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) process in July, the government
rejected recommendations to ratify or accede

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

to treaties, including those protecting the
rights of migrant workers and refugees, and
to bring its laws into compliance with the
rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association.
Kuwait remained part of the Saudi Arabialed coalition engaged in armed conflict in
Yemen, albeit in a very limited role.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
In August, Parliament approved amendments
to the law on press and publications,
including lifting the Ministry of Information’s
control over imported publications.
The authorities detained and prosecuted at
least 12 government critics and activists
under provisions of the Cybercrime Law and
Penal Code provisions that criminalize
legitimate speech, including for offending the
Emir, criticizing neighbouring countries or
spreading false news.
In April, a Ministry of Information source
told a news outlet that the Ministry had
intensified its “monitor[ing] of websites and
news services that broadcast lies and
rumours and provoke sedition” since the
COVID-19 pandemic began, referring “25
news services sites” for prosecution.1
On 28 January, a criminal court sentenced
three Bidun men, including Redha al-Fadhli,
Hammoud al-Rabah and one man in his
absence, to sentences ranging from 10 years
to life in prison for their peaceful activism.
The court acquitted another Bidun man and
released 12 others, including human rights
defender Abdulhakim al-Fadhli, on a pledge
of good conduct for two years.2 Security
forces had arrested them in July 2019 during
a crackdown on peaceful protesters. On 20
July, the 10-year sentences against Redha alFadhli and Hammoud al-Rabah, for
membership of a proscribed organization,
were overturned on appeal. The court
reduced their sentences to suspended twoyear prison terms.

DISCRIMINATION – BIDUN
Stateless Bidun people remained unable to
access a range of public services, including

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

health care. During the UPR process, the
government accepted recommendations to
ensure that the Bidun enjoy equal access to
education, health care and employment, and
some recommendations on their acquisition
of nationality.
In October, the Chairman of Kuwait’s
National Assembly attempted to speed up the
debate and vote on six proposed drafts laws
on the Bidun issue during the last
parliamentary session, ahead of
parliamentary elections. His attempts were
thwarted when Members of Parliament
boycotted the discussions.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The kafala (sponsorship) system, which ties
migrant workers’ right to be in Kuwait to their
employment, put these workers at greater
risk of human rights violations. The workers
were also at heightened risk of contracting
COVID-19, including because of poor living
conditions. Thousands lost their jobs as a
result of the economic impact of the
pandemic and hundreds were stranded in
Kuwait.
At the end of March, the government
announced a one-month amnesty for
residence permit violators, allowing them to
leave the country without paying fines or
travel costs. Those with ongoing court cases,
bank loans or bills were not eligible. While
awaiting repatriation, migrant workers were
set up in camps and shelters with dire
sanitary conditions, further increasing their
vulnerability to infection.
The authorities prosecuted at least three
cases of physical abuse of domestic workers
by their employers. On 30 December, a
criminal court sentenced a Kuwaiti woman to
death and her Kuwaiti husband to four years
in prison for the murder of their employee
Jeanelyn Villavende, a Filipina domestic
worker. Both have the right to appeal against
their conviction and sentence. In separate
cases, two Sri Lankan domestic workers were
abused by their sponsors’ wives, including
one who later succumbed to her injuries.
Following investigation, the authorities
arrested the two female suspects.

219

The authorities also arrested and
prosecuted scores of human traffickers and
illegal visa traders, investigating hundreds of
companies accused of exploiting government
contracts to engage in human trafficking.

3. Kuwait: Fulfil treaty obligations on women’s rights (MDE
17/2672/2020)

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

Kyrgyz Republic
Head of state: Talant Mamytov (replaced Sadyr Japarov
in November, who replaced Sooronbai Jeenbekov in
October)
Head of government: Artem Novikov (replaced Sadyr
Japarov in November, who replaced Kubatbek Boronov
in October)

During the UPR in July, Kuwait accepted
recommendations to fully implement CEDAW
but rejected other recommendations
including to ensure “full equality between
men and women”, to criminalize sexual
violence and marital rape and to make its
personal status and nationality laws genderneutral.3
In August, Parliament approved a bill
criminalizing domestic violence, offering
further protections for victims of domestic
violence as well as legal, medical and
rehabilitation services. Women continued to
face discrimination in law and practice.
Kuwait retained a law (Penal Code Article
153) that makes murder of a female relative
punishable by as little as a fine in “honour
killing” cases. Killings of women by their
brothers were reported in Kuwait City in
September and December.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
Maha al-Mutairi, a transgender woman, was
arrested several times and charged under
Article 198 of the Penal Code, which
criminalizes “imitat[ing] the other sex in any
way”. On 5 June, shortly before fulfilling a
summons to attend a police station, she
posted Snapchat videos accusing police
officers of raping and beating her during her
seven months’ detention in 2019 in a male
prison for “imitating the opposite sex”. She
was released on 8 June without charge.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were reported.
1. COVID-19 is new pretext for old tactics of repression in GCC (MDE
04/3136/2020)
2. Kuwait: Heavy prison sentences of activists demanding rights of
citizenship (Press release, 28 January)

220

KYRGYZSTAN

Reports of torture and other ill-treatment in
police custody continued. The government
failed to take adequate measures to protect
health workers during the COVID-19
pandemic. Survivors of gender-based
violence faced serious obstacles in
accessing justice. Prisoner of conscience
Azimjan Askarov died after contracting
pneumonia in prison. Human rights
defenders faced retaliation for their work.
Proposed new legislation threatened to
impose further restrictions on NGOs. Police
dispersed a peaceful march to mark
International Women’s Day.

BACKGROUND
The first cases of COVID-19 were reported on
18 March and a state of emergency was
declared from 22 March to 10 May.
Restrictions were severe; in some cases
residents were sealed into their apartment
blocks.
The country was plunged into a period of
instability, after the October parliamentary
elections results were widely contested and
then annulled after mass protests. Several
people held in custody were released by the
protesters, including Sadyr Japarov who had
been imprisoned in 2017 for hostage-taking.
Amid bitter disputes over leadership, a group
of parliamentarians nominated him as Prime
Minister on 10 October. President Sooronbai
Jeenbekov resigned under pressure on 15
October and Sadyr Japarov was confirmed as
interim President, but then stepped down in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

November to run in presidential elections set
for January 2021.

working conditions and lack of PPE faced
reprisals.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

Credible reports of torture and other illtreatment in police custody persisted.
Uzbekistani journalist Bobomurod Abdullayev
was arrested in the capital, Bishkek, on 9
August following an extradition request from
Uzbekistan. He was denied access to a
lawyer, and later alleged that investigators
tortured him on 11 August to force him to
sign a document by attempting to suffocate
him with a towel. On 22 August, Bobomurod
Abdullayev was forcibly returned to
Uzbekistan, where he was at real risk of
torture, while his application for asylum in
Kyrgyzstan was still pending.
The UN Human Rights Committee ruled in
the cases of Shukurillo Osmonov and
Zhanysbek Khalmamatov in May and June
respectively that Kyrgyzstan had failed to
carry out independent investigations into
torture allegations. Shukurillo Osmonov
alleged that he was tortured by four police
officers in 2011, to force him to confess to
taking part in the mass disturbances in Osh
in 2010, although he had been out of the
country at the time. His allegations of torture
were investigated by the same investigator
who had been in charge of the investigation
against him and who found no evidence of
torture despite medical reports and eyewitness statements. Shukurillo Osmonov was
later convicted of arson, rioting and murder.

Survivors of gender-based violence faced
serious obstacles in accessing justice, such
as the failure to provide a protected
environment for victims during the judicial
process. Survivors were often subjected to
threats from the prosecution or public, and in
many cases withdrew their complaints.
According to the Interior Ministry, in 2019,
8,519 cases relating to domestic violence
under the Code on Misdemeanours were
recorded, but only 554 cases reached the
courts (their outcomes were not reported),
and 560 were still under investigation. The
rest were terminated because the alleged
victims withdrew their complaints or
petitioned the prosecuting authorities to end
the proceedings. According to the Ministry,
between January and March 2020, the
number of reported cases of domestic
violence increased by 65% compared to the
same period in 2019. In June, the Code of
Criminal Procedure was amended to allow
police to detain perpetrators of domestic
violence for up to 48 hours.

RIGHT TO HEALTH – HEALTH WORKERS
The authorities failed to protect the human
rights of health workers. Doctors were not
provided with adequate PPE in a timely
fashion, they were expected to work
excessive hours, were subjected to enforced
and unsafe “prison like” quarantine, and
remained on low pay (and were often not
paid on time). Compensation payments to
workers for death and illness due to
COVID-19 were restricted and not paid to all
those who otherwise should have qualified.
Furthermore, doctors who spoke out about

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to face
harassment and reprisals for their work.
Kamil Ruziev, the leader of the human rights
organization Ventus in the city of Karakol,
was targeted by the criminal justice system in
retaliation for his work on behalf of victims of
torture. Police arrested him outside a court
building in Karakol on 29 May for not having
any identification with him, in full knowledge
that the relevant document had been
deposited in the court building. He was
remanded under house arrest on 31 May on
a charge of allegedly falsifying a hospital
letter presented to a court to explain why he
missed an appeal on behalf of one of his
clients, even though doctors confirmed that
they had issued the letter. The case was
ongoing at year’s end.

221

Prisoners of conscience
Azimjan Askarov died in prison on 25 July
reportedly of pneumonia despite repeated
calls for his release, including in view of the
risk to his health from the COVID-19
pandemic. Azimjan Askarov was sentenced
to life imprisonment in September 2010 on
false charges and following an unfair trial. He
alleged that he had been tortured while in
detention.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In June, Parliament passed at the second
reading amendments to the Law on NGOs
which would impose additional onerous
financial reporting requirements. Failure to
comply could result in dissolution. The
amendments passed without adequate
consultation – civil society’s access to the
discussion was limited because of COVID-19
restrictions, and online discussion was not
provided. By year’s end, the required final
third reading had yet to be timetabled.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 4 March, the Pervomaisky District Court
of Bishkek upheld a decision by the city
authorities to ban a peaceful march to
celebrate International Women’s Day on 8
March, on the grounds that measures
needed to be taken to prevent the spread of
COVID-19. The Court declared that “peaceful
demonstrations disturb the stable functioning
of everyday life of the capital” and imposed a
ban on all assemblies of over 100 people
except for official events in Bishkek until 1
July. Police dispersed a peaceful march on 8
March, detained 70 activists and held them
for several hours before charging six with the
administrative offence of disobeying a police
officer. The rally set for 8 March finally went
ahead on 10 March, and the ban on peaceful
gatherings was lifted until the state of
emergency was imposed later that month.

LATVIA
Republic of Latvia
Head of state: Egils Levits
Head of government: Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš
Roma and LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. Statelessness remained
high. There remained no comprehensive law
on gender-based violence. Limitations on
education in minority languages continued.

BACKGROUND
A state of emergency in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, effective from March to
June and then from November onwards,
allowed for restrictions on certain human
rights. During the first period, Latvia
derogated from several of its obligations
under the European Convention on Human
Rights.
The government implemented swift
measures to address the impact of the
pandemic and contain the spread of the
virus, but COVID-19 related infections and
deaths spiked at the end of the year.

DISCRIMINATION
The Latvian Centre for Human Rights noted
in March an increase in cases of incitement
to violence and discrimination targeting
Latvian nationals repatriating from abroad
due to COVID-19.

Roma
Discrimination against Roma persisted in
many areas of life.
Concrete measures to include Roma
children, in particular girls, in the mainstream
education system remained insufficient. Data
on dropout rates for Roma, disaggregated by
factors such as sex and age, were not
available.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people
Latvia’s legislative framework regarding
LGBTI rights remained weak, and NGOs

222

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

reported widespread discrimination against
LGBTI people. The EU’s Fundamental Rights
Agency reported that 47% of LGBTI people
did not report physical or sexual attacks to
the police out of fear of a homophobic and/or
transphobic reaction.
On 12 November, the Constitutional Court
recognized the right of same-sex couples to
parental leave.

STATELESSNESS
Statelessness remained high, with 212,814
people having the status of “non-citizen” – a
special category for citizens of the former
USSR who have neither Latvian nor another
citizenship – and 163 people with “stateless”
status. Domestic law provisions for “noncitizens” continued to fall short of
international standards, including a lack of
political rights and some restrictions on
employment and land ownership. Gaps
remained for stateless migrants, including a
lack of protection during the statelessness
determination procedure, absence of a
facilitated route to naturalization and few
safeguards against arbitrary detention, with
alternatives to detention applied only in a
small proportion of cases.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In Concluding Observations in March,
the CEDAW Committee reiterated many
concerns from its previous review in 2004,
including calling on Latvia to adopt a
comprehensive law on gender-based
violence.
Latvia again failed to ratify the Istanbul
Convention, and 21 members of parliament
lodged a case in the Constitutional Court
challenging the Convention’s compliance with
the Constitution.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The Council of Europe’s Venice Commission
noted in June that certain 2018 amendments
to the law on education in minority languages
failed to strike a fair balance between
protection of the rights of minorities and
promotion of the official state language.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

LEBANON
Lebanese Republic
Head of state: Michel Aoun
Head of government: Saad Hariri (replaced Hassan
Diab in October, who replaced Mustapha Adib in
September, who replaced Hassan Diab in August)
The authorities continued to repress the
protest movement that began in October
2019 through repeated summonses of
activists to security and military institutions
on charges of criminal defamation, as well
as the use of excessive force against largely
peaceful protesters, including with live
ammunition, tear gas and rubber bullets.
State officials rejected calls for an
international investigation into a
devastating explosion at the Port of Beirut.
Torture complaints remained without
effective investigation. Due to the economic
crisis and COVID-19, dozens of migrant
domestic workers were fired and found
themselves trapped without passports or
pay; the Ministry of Labour adopted a
revised, standard unified contract for
migrant workers that included new
protections for migrant domestic workers,
including vital safeguards against forced
labour, but a judicial review body
suspended its implementation.

BACKGROUND
Hassan Diab’s government won a
parliamentary vote of confidence on 11
February after his predecessor’s government
had resigned in response to the October
2019 protest movement calling for an end to
corruption and for radical change among the
political elite. The economic crisis
deteriorated, with unemployment rising
exponentially and the UN stating that more
than 55% of the population lived in poverty,
almost double the previous year’s rate. On 7
March, the government defaulted, for the first
time in its history, on Lebanon’s nearly
US$90 billion debt. By the end of the year,
the Lebanese lira had lost more than 80% of
its value, depositors were unable to access

223

their US dollar savings but only to withdraw in
lira at less than 50% of the black market rate,
and inflation had risen to 133.5%.
On 4 August, a massive explosion in the
port area of Beirut killed at least 204
people(nine people remained missing),
injured more than 6,500 others and left some
300,000 displaced or homeless. Material
damage was found up to 20km from the blast
and the World Bank estimated the repair cost
to be between US$3.8 and US$4.6 billion.
According to President Aoun, the blast was
caused by 2,750 tons of ammonium nitrate
stored for years at the port, while officials
exchanged blame.
On 10 August, the government of Hassan
Diab resigned amidst public uproar following
the explosion. On 22 October, parliament
named Saad Hariri as Prime Minister. He was
not able to form a government before the end
of the year.
In November, the country entered a
second full lockdown after an earlier one in
March, due to a spike in COVID-19 rates and
increasing scarcity of ICU beds.
In December, parliament passed a law
criminalizing sexual harassment specifically
in the workplace. It is the first law in Lebanon
to punish sexual harassment, but it did not
set a mechanism for complaints outside the
criminal justice system. Parliament also
passed amendments addressing some of the
shortcomings of the 2014 law on domestic
violence against women and strengthening
the punishment for sex work.

IMPUNITY
Following the explosion in Beirut, state
officials exchanged accusations of blame,
with leaked official documents indicating that
customs, military and security authorities, as
well as the judiciary, had warned successive
governments of the dangerous stockpile of
chemicals at least 10 times in the past six
years. Lack of trust in state procedures led
victims, their relatives and human rights
organizations to call for an international factfinding mechanism. Instead, the authorities
referred the investigation to the Judicial
Council, a court of exception whose

224

proceedings inherently lack independence,
impartiality and jurisdiction to prosecute
sitting officials despite serious allegations
against state bodies.1
On 18 August, the Trial Chamber of the
Hague-based Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
set up in 2009 to try those responsible for the
2005 assassination of former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri, found one person guilty and
acquitted three others. All were tried in their
absence.
Impunity for torture remained in place
three years after the 2017 Anti-Torture Law
was passed. Complaints rarely reached court
and most were closed without an effective
investigation, often because they were
referred for investigation to the same
agencies accused of torture or to the military
justice system.2
There was no further action on the torture
complaint actor Ziad Itanihad filed since the
single hearing session an investigative judge
had held in April 2019. In August, one of the
officers who Ziad Itani had accused of
torturing him was promoted. In September,
the same officer and his superior filed a
criminal defamation case against Ziad Itani
accusing him of “spreading false accusations
and damaging the prestige of the State” in
relation to his social media posts about his
ordeal.
In February, military prosecutors closed an
investigation of 15 complaints filed by the
Lawyers’ Committee to Protect Protesters on
behalf of 17 protesters in December 2019.
The complaints listed acts of torture and
other ill-treatment that occurred during
protests, arrests and transportation to and
inside detention centres.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Between 17 October 2019 and 15 March
2020, Military Intelligence, Internal Security
Forces and other security agencies arbitrarily
arrested 967 peaceful protesters, often
without a warrant, and subjected them to
severe beatings and blindfolding, in addition
to torture and other ill-treatment in custody,
to extract “confessions”: the authorities failed
to investigate. In three days on 14, 15 and 19

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

January, 167 protesters were arbitrarily
arrested in Beirut.3
On 30 September, parliament amended
Article 47 of the Code of Criminal
Procedures, introducing the right of suspects
to have a lawyer present during pre-trial
interrogations and requiring that there be
audiovisual recordings of interrogation
sessions. However, it added a provision
allowing for an open-ended extension of the
pre-trial detention period, previously set at a
maximum of four days, if the detainee is
transferred from one detention centre to
another.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Thousands of prisoners were at heightened
risk of exposure to COVID-19 due to
persistent overcrowding and inadequate
living conditions, often without access to
adequate preventive measures. From March
onwards, a number of riots took place inside
prisons, and family members held sit-ins
outside prisons and police stations, calling for
the release of prisoners. On 6 April, the
Ministry of Interior announced the release of
more than 600 prisoners who had been in
pre-trial detention, as part of the
government’s measures to contain the spread
of COVID-19.4

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Between January and July, judicial and
security officials summoned at least 60
activists and journalists for interrogation in
relation to charges of criminal defamation
mostly related to social media posts in
support of the protest movement or that
criticized the authorities.5 Security and
military agencies interrogated them, some
repeatedly and some during the COVID-19
lockdown, even though none of these
agencies is mandated to look into issues of
free speech.
In June, the State Prosecutor ordered the
Central Criminal Investigation Bureau to
investigate and identify people who posted on
social media statements or photoshopped
photos considered offensive to the President,
and to prosecute them for defamation,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

slander, libel, insult and for making those
posts public.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Protests continued in the first quarter of the
year with protesters feeling their demand for
genuine political change had not been met.
The protests continued until the March
COVID-19 lockdown.
In response to protests in January,
February and August, the military, the
Internal Security Forces and Parliament
Police used excessive force, including live
ammunition, rubber pellets and tear gas,
against largely peaceful protesters and failed
to protect them from armed supporters of
political parties. On 19 January, the Internal
Security Forcesunlawfully used rubber bullets
at close range, in addition to water cannons,
tear gas and baton beatings, while seeking to
disperse protesters in Beirut, leaving
hundreds of protesters injured. At least two
women who were arrested said that
policemen had threatened them with rape.
The Lebanese Red Cross announced that at
least 409 protesters were injured over two
nights.
On 8 August, thousands of protesters
gathered in Beirut’s Martyrs’ Square to call
for justice for the victims of the Beirut
explosion. The army and security forces
responded with unlawful force against
unarmed protesters, recklessly firing tear gas,
rubber bullets and pellets and injuring more
than 230 people.6

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Women migrant workers continued to suffer
discriminatory practices under the kafala
(sponsorship) system. Due to the economic
crisis coupled with the spread of COVID-19,
dozens of migrant domestic workers were
dismissed and unable to return to their
countries of origin. From May onwards,
employers abandoned scores of migrant
domestic workers outside their consulates or
embassies, often without their belongings or
even their passports. Many of them said that
their employers had stopped paying them
and refused to provide them with tickets to

225

return home, as per their contractual
requirements.7
The Ministry of Labour consulted the ILOfacilitated working group on the kafala on
draft versions of a revised unified standard
contract, and in September, the Minister of
Labour passed Ministerial Decision 1/90
adopting a revised unified standard contract
for migrant workers. It includes the right to
resign without losing immigration status,
change employer without the consent of the
current employer and be paid at least the
national minimum wage with a permissible
deduction that covers in-kind contributions
by the employer such as food and housing. It
also prohibited employers from confiscating a
worker’s passport and identity documents
and entitled workers to freedom of movement
during daily and weekly rest periods.
However, on 14 October, the Shura Council,
the country’s top administrative court,
suspended the implementation of the
decision introducing the new contract,
following an appeal made by the Syndicate of
the Owners of Recruitment Agencies, on the
grounds that the new contract comprised
“severe damage” to the agencies’ interests.
The Council made no reference to the rights
of migrant domestic workers.8

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Lebanon continued to host approximately 1.5
million Syrian refugees, including 879,598
people registered with UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, and, according to the
government, around 550,000 who were
unregistered, after a 2015 government
decision to bar the agency from registering
new Syrians arriving.
The organized returns of Syrians to Syria
continued until March, without their being
given the right to challenge their deportation
due to protection concerns. On 14 July, the
government adopted another general policy
paper that would enable the continuation of
its policy to push for the return of refugees to
Syria, putting many refugees at risk of
refoulement. However, the Ministry of Social
Affairs suspended implementation of the plan
following the explosion in Beirut.

226

In November, UNHCR announced that
between August and September, nine
resettlement countries had prioritized
departures from Lebanon once lockdown
measures were lifted, accepting 1,027
refugees.
Over 470,000 Palestinian refugees were
registered with the UN Relief and Works
Agency, the UN agency for Palestinian
refugees, including 29,000 Palestinian
refugees from Syria. The 180,000 of them
estimated to be still living in the country
remained subject to discriminatory laws,
excluding them from owning or inheriting
property, accessing public education and
health services and from working in at least
36 professions.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were carried out.
1. Lebanon: Only an international investigation can ensure Beirut
explosion victims’ rights to truth, justice and remedy (MDE
18/2997/2020)
2. Lebanon: Authorities’ failure to implement anti-torture law is a
disgrace (Press release, 25 November)
3. Lebanon protests explained (Press release, 22 September)
4. Lebanon: Government must urgently release more prisoners to
prevent spread of COVID-19 (Press release, 21 April)
5. Lebanon: Punishing the October protest movement (MDE
18/2628/2020)
6. Lebanon: Military and security forces attack unarmed protesters
following explosion – new testimony (Press release, 11 August)
7. Lebanon: Abandoned migrant domestic workers must be protected
(Press release, 3 June)
8. Lebanon: Blow to migrant domestic worker rights (Press release, 30
October)

LESOTHO
Kingdom of Lesotho
Head of state: Letsie III
Head of government: Moeketsi Majoro (replaced
Thomas Motsoahae Thabane in May)
Prime Minister Thomas Thabane faced
charges related to his alleged complicity in
murder and attempted murder, although no

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

one had been brought to justice for the
crimes by the year’s end and witnesses had
received death threats. Thousands faced
forced eviction to make way for a dam. The
outbreak of COVID-19 in the country put
the livelihoods of tens of thousands at risk
and led to state of emergency measures,
which the authorities used as a pretext to
violate the rights to freedom of movement
and peaceful assembly. Health care workers
went on strike when their demands for PPE
were not met.

IMPUNITY
No one was brought to justice for the murder
of Prime Minister Thomas Thabane’s
estranged wife, Lipolelo Thabane, and the
attempted murder of her acquaintance,
Thato Sebolla. In February, the police
announced that the then Prime Minister,
Thomas Thabane, faced charges in
connection with the crimes. Lipolelo Thabane
was shot dead in 2017 by unknown
assailants while driving home on the outskirts
of the capital, Maseru, with Thato Sebolla.
The authorities failed to provide adequate
protection to witnesses in the case. Thato
Sebolla and other key witnesses fled the
country after they felt unsafe due to lack of
witness protection. Three people, also
believed to be witnesses in the case, died in
mysterious circumstances in Maseru
between 2017 and 2020.1
In May, following mounting pressure from
various political parties for Thomas Thabane
to stand down, he resigned as Prime
Minister.2

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
On 27 March, the Prime Minister declared a
state of emergency which was backdated to
18 March, and which introduced measures
to control and prevent the spread of
COVID-19 after South Africa recorded its first
case on 5 March. Security forces used the
measures as a pretext to violate the rights to
freedom of movement and peaceful
assembly.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, senior government officials
acknowledged that the country’s health care
system would be unable to deal adequately
with a large-scale COVID-19 outbreak. They
had no capacity to test for the virus until midMay, before which samples were sent for
testing to South Africa.

Health workers
In April, many health care workers including
doctors, nurses and laboratory technicians,
went on strike to demand PPE provision and
higher wages which they said should reflect
the health risks arising from their exposure to
COVID-19. They returned to work after their
demands were met.

FORCED EVICTIONS
The construction of the Polihali Dam in
Mokhotlong district in the early part of the
year threatened nearly 8,000 people with
forced eviction and the loss of their
livelihoods. The affected communities were
not engaged in a process of genuine
consultation or adequately compensated for
losing their homes and some of the displaced
were given just over US$1 as compensation
for being resettled far from their homes in
areas around Mokhotlong. The dam was
being constructed to supply water to South
Africa as part of the transnational Lesotho
Highlands Water Project.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
COVID-19 disrupted the economy, putting the
livelihoods of tens of thousands of people at
risk. Many businesses were forced to cease
operations leaving their workers unemployed.
Mining and manufacturing sectors were
hardest hit with more than 40,000 workers
losing their incomes after being laid off.
In March, the government took measures
to address the economic meltdown, including
by providing financial relief for the private
sector and its employees who had lost their
jobs in the mining and textile industries.
However, hundreds of thousands of people

227

were adversely affected as the financial relief
was not enough. Those who worked in the
informal economy were disproportionately
affected and faced food insecurity.
In April, the government announced that
its already failing health system would not be
equipped to deal with the return of tens of
thousands of Basotho, an Indigenous People
from Lesotho, and appealed to them,
especially those living and working in South
Africa, not to return home while the
authorities implemented measures to mitigate
against the economic and social impact of
COVID-19.
At the end of June, the International
Monetary Fund approved US$49.1 million for
emergency support to Lesotho to address the
pandemic.
1. Lesotho: Authorities must protect key witnesses to the murder of
Lipolelo Thabane (Press release (21 February)
2. Lesotho: Thabane’s resignation should not be a license to immunity
over alleged complicity in the murder of late wife (Press release, 20
May)

LIBYA
State of Libya
Head of state and government: Fayez al-Sarraj
(disputed)
Militias, armed groups and third states,
backing warring parties, committed
violations of international humanitarian law,
including possible war crimes, with
impunity. Fighting in and around the
capital, Tripoli, and other cities in western
Libya between forces loyal to the
Government of National Accord (GNA) and
the Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF) led to
the killing and wounding of civilians, mass
displacement, and damage to civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals. In
violation of the UN arms embargo, Turkey,
Russia and the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), among other countries, continued to
supply their allies with arms and military
equipment, including banned antipersonnel mines. Thousands of people were

228

detained arbitrarily without trial or the
possibility to challenge the legality of their
detention. Militias and armed groups
abducted people on the basis of their actual
or perceived political, regional or tribal
affiliation and nationality, including
protesters, journalists, doctors, government
employees and civil society activists; took
hostages for ransom; and tortured or
otherwise ill-treated them in official and
unofficial places of detention. Women, girls
and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community
continued to face discrimination and
violence. Members of ethnic minorities
struggled to access adequate health care
and other essential services. Officials,
members of armed groups and militias, and
criminal gangs systematically subjected
detained refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants to torture and other ill-treatment,
unlawful killings, sexual violence and forced
labour. Military courts handed down death
sentences; no executions were reported.

BACKGROUND
Libya remained divided between two entities
competing for legitimacy and territorial
control: the UN-backed GNA led by Prime
Minister Fayez al-Sarraj based in Tripoli; and
the Interim Government based in eastern
Libya supported by the LAAF, also referred to
as the Libyan National Army, led by Khalifa
Haftar, and the House of Representatives,
headed by Ajila Saleh.
By June, the GNA, openly backed militarily
by Turkey, regained full control of the capital
and other cities in western Libya, pushing
UAE-backed LAAF forces eastward towards
Sirte and effectively reversing the April 2019
military offensive launched by the LAAF on
western Libya. In October, parties to the
conflict signed a permanent ceasefire
agreement.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
national and de facto local authorities across
Libya closed borders and introduced other
movement restrictions between March and
September. The health care system,
weakened by years of conflict and insecurity,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

struggled to cope. Libya recorded the second
highest per capita infection and death rate in
continental Africa.
In October, oil production and exports
resumed after the National Oil Company lifted
the force majeure it had declared in January
following the LAAF blockade between
January and September. The disruption
exacerbated fuel shortages and electricity
cuts throughout Libya.
Municipal elections took place in Ghat,
Misrata and al-Zawiya districts. In August,
armed groups connected to the LAAF forcibly
closed polling stations during municipal
elections in the town of Traghen.
The armed group calling itself Islamic
State claimed a small number of attacks
against local security forces in southern
Libya.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW AND THE UN ARMS
EMBARGO
Militias and armed groups committed serious
violations of international humanitarian law, in
some cases amounting to war crimes.
According to the UN Support Mission in
Libya, at least 170 civilians were killed and
319 were wounded between January and
June. The majority of civilian casualties
resulted from indiscriminate attacks with
inaccurate weapons in densely populated
areas, explosive remnants of war and air
strikes. Fighting also led to damage to
homes, hospitals and other civilian
infrastructure. Over 316,000 people
remained internally displaced due to conflict
and insecurity.
Armed groups and militias continued to
attack medical facilities and abduct health
workers. In April and May, LAAF-affiliated
forces shelled al-Khadra General Hospital in
Tripoli, designated by the Health Ministry to
treat COVID-19 patients, injuring at least 14
civilians and causing material damage.
GNA-affiliated militias carried out
retaliatory attacks against civilians perceived
as being associated with their rivals. Between
April and June, they looted civilian homes,
hospitals and public buildings, and set

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

properties on fire in areas recaptured from
the LAAF and allied armed groups, including
in the cities of Surman, Sabratha, al-Asabah
and Tarhuna as well as Tripoli
neighbourhoods.1
In May, LAAF-affiliated non-state actors
laid extensive Russian-supplied, triplineactivated, banned anti-personnel landmines
and other booby traps in homes and other
civilian property in areas from which they
withdrew in and around Tripoli, leading to
civilian casualties.
Since June, GNA-affiliated forces
discovered several mass graves in and
around Tarhuna, some containing bodies of
women, children and men suspected of
being unlawfully killed by the LAAF-affiliated
al-Kaniat forces. The GNA announced
investigations, but officials said resource
shortages impeded their ability to carry out
their work.
Several countries violated the UN arms
embargo established since 2011. Turkey
supplied the GNA with arms and equipment,
established a military presence, and directly
intervened through air strikes, such as in
June when at least 17 civilians were killed
and a further 12 wounded in Qasr Bin
Ghashir in the south-western outskirts of
Tripoli. The UAE provided the LAAF with
Chinese-manufactured Wing Loong drones
and operated them on its behalf in at least
one incident in January, causing fatalities
among individuals not directly involved in
hostilities. The LAAF used armoured vehicles
manufactured in Egypt.
The UAE used military airbases in Egypt to
launch airstrikes and to ship arms to the
LAAF. The GNA and LAAF used third country
nationals in their military operations. Turkey
recruited and brought Syrian nationals,
including children, to fight with the GNA.
Foreign fighters, employed by the Russian
military private company Wagner, fought
alongside LAAF forces.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Militias and armed groups continued to target
journalists and social media users through
arbitrary arrest, detention and threats, simply

229

for expressing critical views or carrying out
their work.
Militias in Tripoli and Misrata stopped
vehicles at checkpoints, forcing occupants to
unlock their phones and arresting those with
phones deemed to contain critical content.
In July, a military court in eastern Libya
convicted journalist Ismail Bouzreeba AlZway of “terrorism”-related charges and
sentenced him to 15 years’ imprisonment
solely for his media work and opinions critical
of the LAAF.
In August, al-Nawasi militia, nominally
under the GNA’s Interior Ministry, abducted
radio journalist Samy al-Sherif and detained
him in an undisclosed location for 11 days for
his coverage of the protests in Tripoli.

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
In August and September, people across the
country took to the streets in both GNA- and
LAAF-controlled areas in rare protests against
worsening living conditions, nepotism and
unaccountable militias. Militias and armed
groups responded to protests with excessive
use of force and arbitrary arrests.
In August, al-Nawasi militia fired live
ammunition, including from heavy machine
guns, to disperse demonstrations in Tripoli,
injuring at least three protesters and forcibly
disappeared at least 13 protesters for up to
12 days, before releasing them without
charge. The GNA deployed militias across
Tripoli and imposed a curfew to deter further
protests.2
In September, LAAF-affiliated armed
groups used live ammunition to disperse
protests in the eastern cities of Benghazi and
al-Marj, killing at least one man and injuring
at least three others in al-Marj. At least 11
people were arrested in connection to the
protests.
In October, staff in civil society
organizations in GNA-controlled areas
reported that the Civil Society Commission
had asked them to sign pledges not to
communicate with international actors
without prior authorization. Civil society
activists in both GNA- and LAAF-controlled

230

areas reported being subjected to threats,
surveillance and intimidation by militias or
armed groups.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND
DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY
Militias, armed groups and security forces
continued to arbitrarily detain thousands of
people without charge or trial, some for as
long as ten years. The GNA announced the
release of around 1,900 prisoners in
response to risks posed by COVID-19
outbreaks in custodial settings.
In June, in the LAAF-controlled city of
Ajdabiya, at least 11 individuals from the
Magharba tribe were abducted and remained
detained over their perceived family affiliation
to Ibrahim Jadran, former leader of the
Petroleum Facilities Guard armed group, at
odds with the LAAF.
In western Libya, militias affiliated to the
GNA, including the Special Deterrence Force
(Radaa Forces), the Bab Tajoura Brigade, alNawassi, the Abu Selim Brigade and alZawiya Support Force-First Division,
continued to unlawfully detain dozens of
individuals.
Throughout the year, families of those
arbitrarily detained without any judicial
process for years at Mitiga prison in Tripoli,
controlled by Radaa Forces and nominally
under the GNA, organized several protests
calling for their release.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Militias and armed groups systematically
tortured and otherwise ill-treated detainees in
official and unofficial places of detention with
impunity, subjecting them to beatings,
electric shocks, mock executions, suspension
in contorted positions and sexual violence.
Videos, including live footage of torture and
sexual violence involving members of a GNAallied militia and LAAF affiliated armed
groups according to activists, circulated on
social media, including in January, May and
September.
In July 30-year-old Tarek Abdelhafiz was
tortured to death while in the custody of the
128th Brigade, an armed group affiliated with

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the LAAF, which had captured him from the
town of Hon 14 days earlier.3
In August, members of al-Nawasi militia
and LAAF-affiliated armed groups beat
several people arrested in relation to the
protests, respectively in Tripoli and al-Marj.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women and girls faced sexual and genderbased violence from state and non-state
actors, amid the authorities’ failure to provide
them with protection and redress. Women
and girls faced barriers to seeking justice for
rape and other sexual violence, including the
risk of prosecution for engaging in sexual
relations outside marriage, criminalized in
Libya, and revenge by alleged perpetrators.
Women activists and politicians faced
gendered abuse and threats online.
In April, members of al-Kaniat armed
group abducted at least four women,
probably in retaliation for their family's
affiliation with the GNA.
In November, unknown gunmen publicly
shot and killed lawyer Hanan al-Barassi in
Benghazi, a day after she posted on social
media that she was going to release a video
exposing LAAF leader’s son Saddam Haftar’s
corruption. A vocal critic of the corruption of
several individuals affiliated to the armed
groups in eastern Libya, she and her
daughter had been receiving death threats as
a result.
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, including in matters related
to marriage, divorce and inheritance. In
October, the Libyan Supreme Judicial Council
appointed five women judges for two newly
created special courts in Tripoli and Benghazi
to hear cases of violence against women and
children. The courts were not operational by
the end of the year.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Articles 407 and 408 of the Penal Code
criminalize sexual relations between
consenting adults. Al-Radaa Forces
continued to detain men for their perceived

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

sexual orientation or gender identity, and
tortured and otherwise ill-treated them.

DISCRIMINATION
Ethnic minorities
Some members of the Tabu community in
southern Libya faced barriers in accessing
adequate health care as major local health
facilities were located in areas controlled by
rival armed groups. Some Tabus and
Touaregs in southern Libya were also denied
access to essential services, including
education and health care, because they
lacked identity documents.4

IMPUNITY
Officials and members of militias and armed
groups responsible for crimes under
international law and other serious human
rights violations enjoyed near total impunity.
Judges and prosecutors were targeted by
militias and armed groups.
Libyan officials on both sides of the conflict
continued to ignore the ICC’s arrest warrants
against Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled and Mahmoud al-Werfalli.
Mahmoud al-Werfalli, who is wanted by the
ICC for the murder of 33 people in Benghazi
and surrounding areas, remained a senior
leader in the Saiqa Force of the LAAF.
In April, Ahmad al-Dabbashi, also known
as al-Amu (the uncle), was seen fighting
alongside GNA forces in Sabratha, despite
being under an arrest warrant issued by the
Libyan prosecution and on the June 2018
UN Security Council sanctions list for his role
in human trafficking in Libya.
In a rare move, on 14 October, the GNA
Interior Ministry announced the arrest of
Abdelrahman Milad, also known as Bidja, for
his involvement in human trafficking.
In June, the UN Human Rights Council
established a fact-finding mission to
investigate violations and abuses of
international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed by
all parties to the conflict in Libya since 2016.

231

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Refugees and migrants were subjected to
widespread and systematic human rights
violations and abuses at the hands of
officials, members of militias and armed
groups, and criminal gangs.5
The Libyan Coast Guard (LCG) intercepted
11,891 refugees and migrants at sea and
brought them back to Libyan shores, where
they were subjected to enforced
disappearances, indefinite and arbitrary
detention, torture, forced labour and
extortion. Thousands of those disembarked
were detained indefinitely in facilities run by
the Directorate for Combating Illegal
Migration (DCIM), under the GNA Interior
Ministry, without the possibility to challenge
the legality of their detention. Thousands
more were forcibly disappeared after being
transferred to unofficial places of detention,
including the Tobacco Factory under the
command of a GNA-affiliated militia led by
Emad al-Tarabulsi in Tripoli. Their fate and
whereabouts remained unknown.
Italy and other EU member states
continued to support the LCG, including by
donating speedboats and training crews (see
Italy entry).
DCIM officials, members of militias and
armed groups, and traffickers systematically
subjected detained refugees and migrants to
inhumane and overcrowded conditions of
detention, torture and other ill-treatment, and
forced labour. Some were tortured or raped
until their families paid ransoms. Women and
girls were at heightened risk of rape and
other sexual violence.
The LAAF and affiliated armed groups
expelled over 6,000 refugees and migrants
from eastern Libya to neighbouring countries
without due process or the opportunity to
challenge deportation decisions or seek
international protection. Many were left at
land borders without food or water.
COVID-19 restrictions led UN agencies to
temporarily suspend repatriation and
resettlement programmes. Only 811 refugees

232

were evacuated, while 2,739 were returned
to their countries of origin during the year.
While hostilities were raging in Tripoli and
Tarhuna in May and June, militias and armed
groups forced refugees and migrants to take
part in military operations, for transporting
weapons and other equipment to combat
zones, endangering their lives and safety.
In May, traffickers in the town of Mazda,
180km south of Tripoli, shot at a group of
about 200 refugees and migrants, killing 30
and injuring others. In July, security forces in
the city of al-Khums opened fire at a group of
unarmed refugees and migrants attempting
to flee detention, leading to three deaths and
two injuries.

DEATH PENALTY
Libyan law retained the death penalty for a
wide range of offences not limited to
intentional killing. In May, two military courts
in the LAAF-controlled cities of Benghazi and
al-Bayda issued death sentences against
civilians after grossly unfair trials. Those
convicted were denied access to evidence
against them and the right to adequate
defence.
1. Libya: Retaliatory attacks against civilians must be halted and
investigated (Press release, 5 June)
2. Libya: Heavy weaponry used to disperse peaceful protesters
demanding economic rights (Press release, 26 August)
3. Libya: UN Rights Council Members must address widespread torture
during periodic review (Press release, 10 November)
4. Libya: Historic discrimination threatens right to health of minorities
in the south amid COVID-19 (Press release, 20 April)
5. “Between Life and Death”: Refugees and migrants trapped in Libya's
cycle of abuse (MDE 19/3084/2020)

LITHUANIA
Republic of Lithuania
Head of state: Gitanas Nausėda
Head of government: Saulius Skvernelis
Lithuania’s alleged complicity in the CIA’s
rendition and secret detention programme
remained under scrutiny. LGBTI people
continued to face discrimination. Measures

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

taken in response to the COVID-19 virus
negatively affected women.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

The case of Al-Hawsawi v Lithuania remained
pending before the European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR). Mustafa Al-Hawsawi,
a Saudi Arabian national detained at
Guantanamo Bay, claimed he had been held
at a secret CIA detention centre in Lithuania
and subjected to enforced disappearance,
arbitrary detention and torture by the CIA
between 2005 and 2006. In January, lawyers
for Mustafa Al-Hawsawi filed their response
to Lithuania’s submission to the ECtHR.

In April, the government proposed an
amendment to the Law on Electronic
Communications in response to the spread of
the COVID-19 virus. The amendment would
grant law enforcement broad powers to
obtain a person’s location data from
telecommunications providers during a state
of emergency or declared quarantine, without
prior judicial authorization. Opposition
politicians and health workers’ associations
warned that the proposed powers would
enable widespread surveillance and have
limited public health benefits.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE

MADAGASCAR

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

Discrimination against LGBTI people
remained prevalent in Lithuania. In January,
the ECtHR found in favour of two gay men
who had been subjected to online comments
amounting to incitement to hatred and
violence against LGBTI people. The
authorities refused to investigate the
comments, stating that the applicants’
behaviour had been “eccentric” and
deliberately provocative and citing “traditional
family values” in Lithuania. The ECtHR found
that the applicants had suffered
discrimination on the grounds of sexual
orientation and been denied an effective
domestic remedy.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Equal Opportunities Ombudsperson
voiced concern that measures imposed to
prevent the spread of COVID-19
disproportionately affected women, noting an
increase in reports of domestic violence to
police. Civil society groups reported that
some health care providers had suspended
or cancelled abortion services during the
nationwide lockdown from March to June,
restricting women’s access to sexual and
reproductive health care.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Republic of Madagascar
Head of state: Andry Rajoelina
Head of government: Christian Ntsay
The COVID-19 pandemic had a devastating
impact on access to food. Gender-based
violence remained widespread, and
increasing numbers of women and girls
underwent unsafe abortions. A woman
faced imprisonment for consensual samesex relations. Tens of thousands of people,
including hundreds of children, were
subjected to prolonged pre-trial detention in
appalling conditions. The right to freedom
of expression was restricted, and the
authorities imposed measures to prevent
broadcasters from sharing information
about COVID-19.

BACKGROUND
On 22 March, the President declared a state
of emergency in view of the COVID-19
outbreak. It was extended periodically until
18 October.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The COVID-19 pandemic had a devastating
impact on livelihoods and household
incomes. In June, the National Institute of
Statistics said that over 64% of households

233

surveyed said their incomes had decreased
significantly; around 60% said they did not
have enough food; and some 50%, in urban
areas, had difficulty buying rice during
lockdown, mainly due to a sudden increase
in price.
In the south, 1.5 million people were in
need of immediate emergency food
assistance following three years of droughtaffected harvests.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Despite the government’s recent efforts to
address women’s rights, including by
introducing a new law, 009/2019, in
December 2019, to combat gender-based
violence, the practice remained widespread.
Local organizations reported an increase in
the number of domestic violence cases
during lockdown.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The NGO Doctors of the World (MdM) said
that the increase in gender-based violence
during lockdown had led to an increase in
the number of unwanted pregnancies and to
more women and girls undergoing unsafe
abortions. Abortion remained a criminal
offence, and MdM said that unsafe abortions
were the second main cause of maternal
mortality in the country after post-partum
haemorrhage.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Gay and lesbian sexual relations remained
taboo in Malagasy society, and the
government consistently failed to protect
LGBTI people from stigmatization and
discrimination.
On 10 March, a 33-year-old woman was
put in pre-trial detention in Antanimora
Prison, on charges of “corruption of minors”
for having consensual same-sex relations
with a 19-year-old woman. Her trial was
postponed at least four times, but she was
finally acquitted on the benefit of the doubt in
December. Article 331 of the Penal Code
carries a prison term of two to five years and

234

a hefty fine for “anyone who has committed
an indecent or unnatural act with an
individual of the same sex, under the age of
21 years”. The age of consent for
heterosexual sex, on the other hand, was 14.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Despite promises made by the President in
2019, excessive use of prolonged pre-trial
detention and severe prison overcrowding
continued. Thousands of people continued to
be detained for years without trial, and by
May, pre-trial detainees constituted 55% of
the prison population. By August,
Madagascar's prisons, which had a capacity
for 10,360 inmates, held 27,327 people,
including 734 children, in inhumane
conditions.
In June, the President pardoned around
1,700 convicted prisoners. These included:
people convicted of minor offences who had
three months or less left on their sentence;
women over 55 and men over 60 who had
been in prison for 10 years or more; and
children who had served at least half their
sentence.
Meanwhile, thousands continued in
prolonged pre-trial detention, which was used
extensively against perpetrators of minor
offences. In August, 60% of women and girls
in prison were pre-trial detainees, and 75%
of all children in prison were in pre-trial
detention.
The right of pre-trial detainees to a fair trial
was violated. In practice, legal aid was not
available, despite legal provisions which
guaranteed the right to legal defence at all
stages of the process. They were therefore
denied access to information about their
rights, or the progress of their cases.
In August, 88 inmates escaped from the
Farafangana Prison in the southeast,
apparently in protest against pre-trial
detention, including its use against people
who had been charged with petty offences,
severe overcrowding and squalid conditions,
and widespread reports of corruption within
the prison system which forced them to pay
bribes to various people within the system to
obtain family visits, among other things. Local

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

sources reported that the detainees had had
no family visits since the COVID-19 outbreak.
During the escape, the security forces killed
20 detainees, and three more died from their
injuries in the following days. Seventeen of
them were pre-trial detainees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 28 May, Stéphane Ralandison, a
professor and Dean of the Faculty of
Medicine at Toamasina University, was
arrested and interrogated by the criminal
section of the gendarmerie’s Toamasina
Brigade. The following day, he was
summoned to the Toamasina Court and
accused of murdering his colleague, Dr
Daniel Randriamiarivonjy who, according to
hospital staff, hanged himself on 24 May.
However, during Stéphane Ralandison’s
three-hour interrogation, he was also
questioned about a recent LinkedIn post in
which he had criticized the government’s
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the
risks of disregarding scientific research into
cures, among other things. Ultimately, no
charges were brought against him.
On 16 July, Harry Laurent Rahajason, a
former journalist and Communication
Minister in the previous government, was
arrested along with four other people and put
in pre-trial detention in Antanimora Prison in
the capital, Antananarivo. He was charged
with undermining state security in connection
with organizing and funding a protest that
allegedly took place in July, despite state
emergency regulations which banned such
events. The protest was connected to the
case of Berija Ravelomanantsoa, a student
leader, who had been held in pre-trial
detention since 8 June. On 30 September,
Berija Ravelomanantsoa was convicted under
the Cybercrime Law of undermining the state
and insulting the President on Facebook and
sentenced to 44 months in prison. Harry
Laurent Rahajason and his four co-accused
were sentenced to 44 months’ imprisonment
on 15 October.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Media
After the COVID-19 outbreak, the government
took drastic measures to control information
shared by the media and individuals. It
evoked Law 91-011 of 1991 – which was
intended to be applied in exceptional
circumstances – and permitted the media to
share only official government information.
Other restrictive measures included
prohibiting radio stations from broadcasting
phone-in shows.
On 4 April, Arphine Helisoa, a journalist
perceived to be affiliated with the opposition,
was arrested and put in pre-trial detention in
Antanimora Prison. She was charged, for the
second time since 2019, with spreading fake
news and inciting hatred against the
President. She was released one month later,
following a presidential amnesty for
imprisoned journalists, although it was
unclear whether the charges were dropped.
Later that month, a television presenter,
known as “Sabrina”, who worked for the Kolo
Channel, was charged with spreading fake
news on social media about the number of
COVID-19 cases in the country. She was put
in pre-trial detention in Antanimora Prison
and released on 6 May under the presidential
amnesty.
On 6 April the pro-opposition Real TV
channel tried to broadcast a repeat interview
with former President Ravalomanana in
which he criticized the government’s
handling of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
broadcast failed because the transmitter and
antenna had been damaged. According to
Reporters Without Borders, the incident
followed soon after the Ministry of
Communication and Culture warned Real TV
and two other opposition media outlets not to
report on COVID-19. The warning noted that
the stations had failed to air live
transmissions of the state media’s news
bulletins on the pandemic.

235

MALAWI
Republic of Malawi
Head of state and government: Lazarus McCarthy
Chakwera (replaced Arthur Peter Mutharika in June)
Human rights defenders were intimidated,
harassed and arbitrarily arrested. The
independence of the judiciary remained
under attack from the executive. Prisons
were overcrowded and conditions poor.
Attacks against people with albinism
continued.

BACKGROUND
Following mass protests against the
controversial presidential elections in 2019
which saw President Mutharika re-elected,
the Constitutional Court annulled the results
in February and called for fresh elections
within 150 days, as well as for reforms to the
Electoral Commission Act. The elections took
place in June and a new President was
elected.
In March, the government declared a state
of disaster in response to the COVID-19
pandemic.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Human rights defenders
Human rights defenders were arrested,
attacked, harassed and intimidated as the
authorities mounted a crackdown on dissent
ahead of the June elections.
Between March and June, the President
and senior ruling party officials issued public
statements threatening human rights
defenders and activists.
In March, Timothy Mtambo, Gift Trapence
and MacDonald Sembereka, of the Human
Rights Defenders Coalition, were arrested for
calling on people to protest in front of the
President’s house to urge him to assent to the
Electoral Reforms Bill. They were charged
with, among other things, “inciting other(s) to
contravene the law”, under the Penal Code.
The police released them from Maula prison
in the capital, Lilongwe, four days later, under
stringent bail conditions.

236

Judiciary
In June, two weeks before the elections, the
President’s office issued a notice to forcibly
place the Chief Justice Andrew Nyirenda and
another judge Edward Twea on leave pending
retirement with immediate effect. This was
irregular as the President’s office has no
power to do so and was widely seen as an
attempt to punish the two for having been on
the bench that in February annulled the
2019 elections.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In August, the President pardoned 499
prisoners to ease overcrowding and reduce
the risk of COVID-19 infection. Nevertheless,
prisons remained overcrowded, and
prisoners’ health was at risk. Over 107
prisoners and 27 prison officers had tested
positive for COVID-19 by August which
accounted for 3% of infections nationwide.
Facilities were dilapidated and there was
insufficient access to food, water and medical
treatment throughout the country.

DISCRIMINATION - PEOPLE WITH
ALBINISM
Between January and October, at least three
abduction attempts were made against
people with albinism. In January, the grave of
a two-year-old boy with albinism was
tampered with in Mulanje. In February,
Tafwauli Ngona, a 92-year-old woman, had
two toes severed in an attack by an
unidentified assailant in Mzimba.
The trial of 12 people accused in
connection with the murder of MacDonald
Masambuka, whose body was found dumped
in a field in 2018, continued. A former
presidential adviser and some politicians
were implicated in the killing, but charges
were not brought against them.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In July, the Police Commissioner for the
Central Region and 11 police officers were
arrested in connection with the death of
Buleya Lule in police custody at Lilongwe
Police Station in Area 3 in 2019. According to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

an autopsy report, he died after being
electrocuted. He was being held in
connection with the abduction and murder of
a 14-year-old boy with albinism in Dedza.

MALAYSIA
Malaysia
Head of state: Abdullah
Head of government: Muhyiddin Yassin (replaced
Mahathir bin Mohamad in March)
Investigations into human rights activists
and government critics, mass raids against
undocumented migrants and the pushback
of refugee boats contributed to a
deterioration of human rights. LGBTI people
continued to face discrimination while
Indigenous communities remained under
threat from logging and mining. Human
rights reforms, including the formation of
an independent police oversight
commission and the abolition of the
mandatory death penalty, stalled under a
new administration.

BACKGROUND
In February, the Pakatan Harapan coalition
government collapsed after parliamentarians
defected to form Perikatan Nasional under
new Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin. The
country was placed under a Movement
Control Order (MCO) from March in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Prison
populations were not significantly reduced
despite an outbreak of over 5,000 infections.

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY, ASSOCIATION
AND EXP RESSION
Human rights defenders faced investigation
and prosecution, most commonly under
Section 233 of the Communications and
Multimedia Act (CMA). In March, activist
Fadiah Nadwa Fikri was investigated for a
social media post calling for demonstrations
against the change in government. Fadiah
and 18 other activists were later investigated
for failing to provide notice for a protest.1 In
May, 262 sedition investigations were

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

reported since the beginning of the year,
while 143 cases were opened under the
CMA. In June, opposition MP Xavier
Jayakumar was investigated under sedition
laws after criticizing the government for not
convening a full parliamentary session. Also
in June, radio personality Patrick Teohwas
charged under sedition laws for a social
media post allegedly insulting the royalty.
In July, a man was sentenced to 26
months in jail for social media posts deemed
insulting to Islam. Steven Ganof news website
Malaysiakini was charged with contempt of
court over reader comments. The
government also investigated journalists from
the Al Jazeera news channel and the South
China Morning Post newspaper for separate
reports on the treatment of migrants under
the COVID-19 lockdown.
The authorities charged five union activists
with violating the MCO after they had held a
peaceful demonstration protesting unfair
labour practices, union busting and
insufficient personal protective equipment for
hospital workers.2 The charges were later
dropped by a court.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
The government response to the COVID-19
pandemic was harsh on refugees, asylumseekers and migrant workers. Immigration
raids, involving arrests and detentions, were
conducted in areas with high migrant
populations amid rising xenophobia. A
COVID-19 outbreak emerged in immigration
detention centres,3 with over 600
peopleinfected.
Authorities turned away Rohingya refugees
arriving in boats or detained them in
overcrowded facilities.4 In April, the navy
turned back a boat carrying hundreds,
including women and children. That month,
another boat with hundreds of Rohingya
refugees aboard that was allegedly turned
away was accepted by Bangladesh
authorities. While the government permitted
two boats to land in April and June, the
refugees were placed in detention. Some
were charged under immigration law, and

237

sentenced to prison and caning sentences
before the latter punishment was overturned.
Allegations of migrants in forced labour
and living in cramped housing hit Malaysia’s
rubber glove industry, which experienced
elevated demand during the COVID-19
pandemic. Infection outbreaks hit glove
factories, with one employee fired after
raising concerns about overcrowding.
Outbreaks also occurred in construction
sites.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders faced investigations
following the change in government,
including the chair of the electoral reform
coalition Bersih, Thomas Fann; anticorruption activist Cynthia Gabriel of C4; and
Sevan Doraisamyof the human rights
organization Suaram.5 In July, police
investigated Heidy Quah, founderof the NGO
Refuge for the Refugees, after she posted an
account of dire conditions in immigration
detention centres. Quah also received threats
online, highlighting a worrying trend for
human rights defenders, especially women,
who faced harassment and sometimes had
their personal information made public.
Authorities rarely investigated violence online.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
The government continued to persecute
LGBTI people. In July, Minister for Islamic
Affairs Zulkifli Mohamad released a
statement online that gave “full licence” to
religious authorities to arrest and
“rehabilitate” LGBTI people.6 In September,
one of 11 men charged for “attempted sexual
intercourse against the order of nature” in
2019 filed a judicial review against the law
which criminalizes same-sex sexual conduct.
The case was ongoing at year end.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Indigenous Peoples across the country
remained under threat of losing land to
development and logging. In February, a
proposal to remove official protection from a

238

forest reserve in Selangor state was met with
protests by Indigenous communities, who
feared their homes and livelihoods would be
affected. In September, Indigenous Peoples
in Pahang state protested plans for the
development of three rare earth mines.

IMPUNITY
In August, the government withdrew a bill to
establish a police oversight commission
tabled by its predecessor in 2019, and
presented a new draft bill widely criticized as
ineffectual.7 Also in August, the government
revealed that from January to June, 23
detainees, including two children, died in
immigration detention.8 There were no
meaningful investigations into the causes of
these deaths. More cases of deaths in
custody followed, including Indian national
Zeawdeen Kadar Masdanwho died while
being held by immigration authorities.

DEATH PENALTY
In August the Federal Court declared the
mandatory death penalty constitutional.
Legislative amendments to repeal the
mandatory death penalty, proposed under
the former government, had not been
introduced in Parliament by the end of the
year. A moratorium on executions remained
in place.
1. Malaysia: Raft of investigations a blatant attempt to intimidate
peaceful protesters (Public statement by Amnesty International
Malaysia, 4 March)
2. Malaysia: Drop charges against hospital workers’ union activists
(Public statement by Amnesty International Malaysia, 15 September)
3. Malaysia: Act urgently to stop COVID-19 surge in detention centres
(Public statement by Amnesty International Malaysia 5 June)
4. Malaysia: Hundreds of Rohingya seeking safety by boat at acute risk
from coronavirus (News story, 8 April)
5. Malaysia must not return to climate of fear for activists and critics
(Public statement by Amnesty International Malaysia 12 June)
6. Malaysia: Government must end persecution of transgender people
(Public statement by Amnesty International Malaysia, 11 July)
7. Malaysia: Proposed IPCC bill a shameful step backwards in ensuring
police accountability (Public statement by Amnesty International
Malaysia, 28 August)
8. Malaysia: Government must be accountable for deaths in detention
centres (Public statement by Amnesty International Malaysia, 7
August)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MALI
Republic of Mali
Head of state: Bah Ndaw (replaced Ibrahim Boubacar
Keïta in September)
Head of government: Moctar Ouane (replaced Boubou
Cissé in September)
Armed groups and security forces
committed crimes under international law
with impunity. Police used excessive force
against protesters and others. Activists and
officials affiliated to the former government
were arbitrarily arrested and detained. The
authorities failed to act to protect women
and girls from female genital mutilation
(FGM). People were discriminated against
based on their perceived social status. The
ongoing conflict and the COVID-19
pandemic seriously undermined the rights
to health and education.

BACKGROUND
Legislative elections held between March and
April led to a political crisis. In June, a
coalition of opposition groups and religious
leaders formed the June 5 Movement, which
contested the election results and demanded
the President’s resignation. In August, a
National Committee for the People’s Salvation
deposed the President and his government
via a coup. A transitional government was
formed in October. The security situation
remained precarious in the context of the
ongoing conflict, particularly in the central
regions where different armed groups
operate, including the Group for the Support
of Islam and Muslims (GSIM), the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara and self-defined
“self-defence militias”.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups committed war crimes and
other abuses, including dozens of attacks
against civilians. According to the UN
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in January a
Dozo group (traditional hunters) attacked
Sinda village, killing 14 civilians. In February,
Dan na Ambassagou, an armed group,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

attacked Ogossagou village, killing at least 35
civilians and injuring three others, while the
fate of 19 people remained unaccounted for.
In July, gunmen thought to be affiliated with
the GSIM attacked several villages in the Tori
and Diallassagou communes, killing at least
32 civilians. Armed groups also targeted
MINUSMA. As of September, two UN
personnel were killed and 40 others injured.
Between September and the year’s end,
armed groups besieged Farabougou village in
the Ségou region, preventing villagers from
accessing their farmland and moving freely.

Abductions
At least three candidates were abducted
while campaigning during the legislative
elections. All were released. On 25 March,
Soumaila Cissé, leader of the opposition, and
five members of his campaign team were
abducted by members of the GSIM in
Niafounké town in the Timbuktu region. His
bodyguard was killed during the abduction
and, although all the campaign team were
released in the following days, Soumaila
Cissé was not released until 8 October along
with one French and two Italian hostages.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The Malian army committed war crimes and
other human rights violations against civilian
populations during their operations.
Between 3 February and 10 March, at
least 23 civilians were killed by soldiers in
Niono Cercle in the Ségou region, and at
least 27 others were subjected to enforced
disappearance.
In June, according to MINUSMA, 43
civilians were killed by members of the
National Guard in the villages of Binédama
and Yangassadiou, following a patrol with a
Dozo group. The army publicly acknowledged
the killings and, despite its promise to
investigate, no further information was made
public at the end of the year.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The security forces used excessive force,
including unlawful use of lethal force, to
disperse protests.

239

The Constitutional Court’s ruling which
validated 31 disputed results during the
elections led to nationwide protests. In
Sikasso on 7 May, security forces fired live
ammunition to disperse protests. Five
demonstrators were injured, and one died
from his wounds.
On 11 May, a 17-year-old motorcyclist was
killed while being arrested by an off-duty
police officer in Kayes. This led to
demonstrations in the city the following day
and two people, including a 12-year-old boy,
were shot dead by the police.
Between 10 and 12 July, security forces
fired at demonstrators in the capital,
Bamako, after they had occupied public
buildings and erected barricades to call for
the President’s resignation; 14 protesters
died from gunshot wounds and hundreds
were injured. In August, the government
announced an investigation into the deaths.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 9 May, Clément Dembelé, an anticorruption activist, was abducted while
driving in Banconi, a suburb of Bamako, by
eight hooded intelligence service agents after
he had called on security forces to stop using
violence against demonstrators in Sikasso.
He was detained incommunicado for 12 days
by the intelligence services and released on
21 May and charged with “inciting security
and defence forces to disobey their
commanders.” On 29 September, he was
acquitted of all charges.
Following the August coup, several cabinet
members and military officers, including the
then President, Prime Minister and National
Assembly President, were illegally detained
without charge. Deposed President Keïta was
detained for 10 days before being allowed to
travel for medical reasons at the end of
August. The others were released without
charge in October.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In June, humanitarian organizations
estimated that 23% of Mali’s health centres
were not operational or were partially
operational due to budget constraints, and

240

the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and
the conflict on public services. According to
the UN, around 287,496 people were
internally displaced and 42,780 were
refugees. The right to health of these groups
was seriously undermined.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Children were denied their right to education
as a result of the activity of armed groups,
especially in central Mali. This was
compounded by a 12-month teachers’ strike
in protest against the government’s reneging
on an agreement to increase their salaries. As
of March, according to UNICEF, 1,261
schools were closed because of the
continuing threat of attacks by armed groups,
affecting 370,000 students and 7,500
teachers.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination based on caste and social
status continued to be widespread, often
leading to violence. In June 2018, the village
chief of Diandioumé, Kayes region, evicted a
family from their farmland, based on their
perceived inferior social status. In September,
after the judicial authorities confirmed the
family’s land tenure, four individuals fighting
against this discrimination were beaten to
death by a local mob while three others,
including an 80-year-old woman, were
seriously injured. The authorities arrested 11
people suspected of being involved in the
murders and judicial proceedings were
ongoing at the end of the year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In June, the CEDAW Committee denounced
the government’s failure to criminalize FGM,
which, it said, enabled perpetrators to violate
women’s rights with impunity. A bill drafted in
2017 outlawed the practice but was yet to be
adopted.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, the Assizes Court in Bamako
provisionally released Amadou Haya Sanogo,
a former leader of a military junta, and 17 of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

his co-accused. They were charged in
December 2013 for the kidnapping, murder
and complicity in the murder of 21 soldiers.
They had spent more than six years in pretrial detention in Sélingué – three years
beyond the maximum allowed under Malian
law. Their trial, which had begun in 2016,
was suspended in January 2020 and was still
pending resumption at the end of the year.
The trial of Al Hasan ag Abdoul Aziz ag
Mohamed before the ICC started in July. He
was accused of crimes against humanity and
war crimes committed in Timbuktu while he
was a member of the Ansar Eddine, an
armed group which controlled the city during
the Islamist occupation of northern Mali
between 2012 and 2013.
At least 18 armed group members were
convicted on terrorism-related charges by the
Bamako Assizes Court, including three men
sentenced to death for their roles in the
attack on the Radisson Blu Hotel in 2015,
(although one was later released in a prisoner
exchange). Fifteen men were also convicted
for “terrorism, possession of war weapons
and murder” and sentenced to death in
November. However, most war crimes and
other serious human rights violations
perpetrated against civilians in the context of
the conflict remained unpunished.

MALTA
Republic of Malta
Head of state: George Vella
Head of government: Robert Abela (replaced Joseph
Muscat in January)
The public inquiry into the killing of
journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia
continued. The government resorted to
unlawful practices to prevent refugees and
migrants from reaching the country by sea,
and continued to arbitrarily detain asylumseekers whose living conditions were
aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic. A
total ban on abortion remained in place.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

BACKGROUND
On 7 March, the government declared a
public health emergency to combat the
spread of COVID-19 and adopted measures
to restrict movement and limit public
gatherings.
In June, the Council of Europe’s European
Commission for Democracy through Law
(Venice Commission) delivered an opinion on
the government’s proposals to strengthen the
rule of law. While some progress was noted,
more remained to be done to increase the
independence of the judiciary and the
powers of Parliament and the Ombudsman
and to involve civil society in the reform
process.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, former Prime Minister Joseph
Muscat stepped down following widespread
public protests at the end of 2019. Protests
were sparked by revelations that members of
his cabinet and close aides were involved in
the killing of journalist Daphne Caruana
Galizia in 2017. In August, he was formally
questioned by police. In September, the
Council of Europe urged Prime Minister
Abela to refrain from undermining the
inquiry’s credibility and interfering with its
timeframe. The public inquiry into the
journalist’s killing was ongoing at the end of
the year.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
Approximately 2,300 people were rescued at
sea and disembarked in Malta, a third fewer
than in 2019 when 3,300 people arrived by
sea. Nearly a quarter were unaccompanied
children, while about 30% of the total were
from Sudan.
In April, concerned about the number of
people arriving and the additional pressure
on resources due to the pandemic, the
government announced that no
disembarkations would be allowed and that
the Maltese authorities would not be able to
service their search and rescue region (SAR).

241

The government resorted to unlawful
practices to prevent people arriving by sea.
These practices exposed refugees and
migrants to grave dangers, including by
delaying their rescue, pushing them back to
Libya and denying disembarkation.1 In April,
the government contracted a merchant
vessel and instructed it to return to Libya a
group of people who had been in danger at
sea for several days. According to survivors,
12 people died, some before being rescued
and others during the journey to Libya. The
51 survivors were detained on arrival in
Libya. A magisterial inquiry into the
responsibilities of the Prime Minister and the
head of the Armed Forces of Malta, which
was initiated by the complaint of an NGO,
concluded at the end of May that there had
been no wrongdoing but failed to acquire key
evidence. An appeal was pending at the end
of the year.
In May, the government signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with Libya to
combat irregular migration, raising concern
by NGOs that it would lead to more
interceptions at sea and returns to Libya.
Between late April and early June, the
government detained more than 425 asylumseekers and migrants; they had been
rescued at sea in the Maltese SAR region
aboard ferry boats positioned outside
territorial waters to circumvent human rights
obligations. These boats were unequipped for
long stays. No legal grounds were provided
and access to lawyers and independent
organizations was denied. On 6 June, they
were all disembarked, some after nearly six
weeks of arbitrary deprivation of liberty.
For nearly six weeks, the government
refused to allow the oil tanker Maersk Etienne
to disembark 27 people, including a pregnant
woman and a child, rescued at sea upon
request of the Maltese authorities on 4
August. The rescued asylum-seekers and
migrants were eventually transferred aboard
the NGO ship Mare Jonio and disembarked
in Sicily, Italy, on 14 September.
In September, the Office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights raised
concerns about reports of failures to rescue

242

people at sea and the detention of asylumseekers and migrants in conditions that may
amount to ill-treatment, aggravated by
COVID-19. In one detention centre, the UN
experts received reports of self-harm and
attempted suicides. NGOs and lawyers were
increasingly restricted from accessing
migration detention centres. In some open
centres, hundreds of asylum-seekers and
migrants were subjected to quarantine
measures for prolonged periods in conditions
that did not allow for physical distancing due
to overcrowding and with inadequate sanitary
facilities.
In October, a court ordered the release of
an asylum-seeker who had been detained
without legal grounds for 144 days. The court
stated it was concerned that other foreign
nationals may be detained without legal basis
and notified the Home Affairs minister of its
judgment.
Three young asylum-seekers who refused
to be returned to Libya after being rescued by
the merchant vessel El Hiblu 1 in March
2019, and who were subsequently arrested
in Malta upon disembarkation, continued to
await their indictment. They risked life
imprisonment, including on charges under
counter-terrorism legislation.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women continued to be denied access to
abortion even when the life of the pregnant
woman was at risk.
In November, the independent body to
monitor compliance with the Istanbul
Convention, Grevio, commended Malta for
defining rape as sex in the absence of
consent, in line with international standards,
in 2018. However, it criticized the judiciary‘s
tendency to put the burden of proving the
lack of consent on the victim.
1. Waves of impunity: Malta’s human rights violations and Europe’s
responsibilities in the central Mediterranean (EUR 33/2967/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MEXICO
United Mexican States
Head of state and government: Andrés Manuel López
Obrador
The government responded to the COVID-19
pandemic with cuts to public spending in
various areas. Health workers reported that
they lacked access to personal protective
equipment and the benefits needed to
ensure a safe working environment. Reports
of violence against women increased.
Security forces continued to carry out
arbitrary detentions and employ excessive
use of force, at times resulting in unlawful
killings. The Attorney General’s Office
announced progress in the investigation into
the enforced disappearance of 43
Ayotzinapa college students in 2014. The
Senate recognized the competence of the
UN Committee on Enforced Disappearances
to examine individual complaints. The
President stigmatized human rights
defenders and the media on various
occasions and downplayed the problem of
violence against women.

BACKGROUND
According to authorities, Mexico registered
1,426,094 cases of COVID-19. In April, the
government implemented austerity policies
through a decree that cut public spending,
with exceptions for programmes deemed to
be priorities such as several major
infrastructure projects. In September,
Congress dissolved several public trust funds,
including those set up to support the
protection of human rights defenders,
journalists and human rights victims, and on
climate change.
The Supreme Court had yet to analyse the
National Law on the Use of Force that was
the subject of a constitutional challenge in
2019 by the National Human Rights
Commission.
The administration deployed a greater
number of military personnel in public

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

security operations than the previous two
presidential administrations.
In May, the President issued a decree
allowing the armed forces to be permanently
deployed in public security operations until
March 2024. The decree did not include
substantive regulations to ensure their
conduct was consistent with international
standards. The President also announced
that the control of ports and customs points
would pass to the armed forces.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) and numerous
human rights organizations condemned the
death of 30-year-old Giovanni López Ramírez
on 5 May while in the custody of municipal
police in Ixtlahuacán de los Membrillos,
Jalisco state.1 Giovanni López’ family reported
that police arrested him as part of COVID-19
enforcement measures because he was not
wearing a facemask; the state authorities
denied this.
Video footage emerged of an army
operation in Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas state,
on 3 July in which soldiers killed 19-year-old
Arturo Garza, an unarmed survivor of a
military shoot-out with an alleged criminal
group.2 In a separate event, 35-year-old
Jéssica Silva was killed by members of the
National Guard who opened fire on her
vehicle in the town of Delicias, Chihuahua
state, as she was returning from a protest of
agricultural workers over rights to water. Her
husband was seriously wounded in the
attack.3 The National Guard at first reported
that their personnel had repelled an armed
attack, but later admitted that the attack on
the couple had been an “accident”. The
Federal Attorney General´s Office arrested six
National Guard agents in relation to the
events.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The Federal Attorney General´s Office
attempted to close the investigation into the
killing of 22 people by soldiers in Tlatlaya,
México state, in 2014, before having properly
investigated chain-of-command responsibility

243

in the case. The attempted closure of the
case was halted by victims’ representatives.
Two officials were convicted of torture in
relation to the case (see below).

Jalisco State Police officers arbitrarily
detained at least 27 people during protests in
the city of Guadalajara in early June sparked
by the death of Giovanni López Ramírez.
Protesters were abducted in unmarked
vehicles and their whereabouts were
unknown for several hours. Local
organizations reported that at least 20 of
these detentions could amount to enforced
disappearances. The Jalisco State Governor
later announced that the police involved
would be subject to criminal investigations.
In March, the Yucatán State Prosecutor’s
Office announced it was closing the
investigation into events that led to the
arbitrary detention and torture in 2016 of
José Adrián, aged 14 at the time, due to lack
of evidence.4 The Yucatan State Victim
Support Commission agreed a reparation
settlement for José Adrián and his family.
The constitutional provision allowing
detention without charge (arraigo) was not
repealed during the year.

82,647, with 63,939 disappearances
recorded in the past decade.
In July, the special prosecutor for the case
of 43 Ayotzinapa college students
disappeared in 2014 announced that the
remains of Christian Rodríguez Telumbre had
been identified. The remains were discovered
in November 2019 in a ravine near the
municipality of Cocula, Guerrero state. The
authorities also declared that the official
version of events presented by the previous
administration had been rejected by the
current investigating authorities. Dozens of
arrest warrants were issued throughout the
year for public officials with possible links to
the case. Among them was Tomás Zerón,
head of criminal investigations in the Federal
Attorney General´s Office at the time of the
disappearances, who was accused of torture,
enforced disappearance and tampering with
the crime scene. In addition, for the first time
in the case, several arrest warrants were
issued for members of the military. In
addition, the first member of the army was
arrested, as well as a marine.
In September, the Senate recognized the
competence of the UN Committee on
Enforced Disappearances to consider
individual cases.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

Enforced disappearances by state agents and
disappearances carried out by non-state
actors continued to be a concern; those
suspected of criminal responsibility enjoyed
almost total impunity. In March, the
Extraordinary Mechanism for Forensic
Identification, an autonomous,
interdisciplinary task force, was formally
created by decree. The Mechanism is
designed to identify the more than 38,000
unidentified bodies awaiting forensic analysis
across the country. It includes civil society
organizations in its coordinating body, but
family groups have only participatory status
without being part of the coordinating body.
Federal authorities declared that 6,957
people had been registered missing during
2020. The total number of people reported
disappeared in Mexico since 1964 was

The killings of a woman and a girl in February
sparked outrage, leading to unprecedented
attendance at social protests on International
Women´s Day. A twenty-five-year-old woman
was reportedly skinned and mutilated by her
husband and, days later, the body of a sevenyear-old girl was found in a plastic bag.
During 2020, 3,752 killings of women
were reported, 969 of which were
investigated as femicides. Mexico state
registered the highest absolute number of
femicides, followed by Veracruz. Colima and
Morelos states reported the highest rates of
femicide per 100,000 women. Calls to the
911 emergency line to report incidents of
violence against women rose during the year,
with 260,067 calls up to December,
compared to a total of 197,693 for the whole
of 2019.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS

244

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Austerity measures proposing funding cuts
to help centres for Indigenous and Afrodescendent women and to the National
Commission to Prevent and Eradicate
Violence against Women were abandoned
following significant social outcry.
Nevertheless, in July, the National Women´s
Institute lost 75% (MXN151 million) of its
operational funding. The President continued
to downplay the issue of violence against
women, questioning the validity of calls made
to emergency services to report domestic
violence and criticizing women´s protests
against femicides. In September, relatives of
murdered women occupied the offices of the
National Human Rights Commission (CNDH)
in protest at the lack of progress by
authorities on the issue of violence against
women.
Twenty-one coordinated official response
protocols, known as “Alerts of gender-based
violence against women” remained
operational in 18 states. By the end of the
year, there was no indication that these
mechanisms had reduced gender-based
violence.
The San Luis Potosí Prosecutor’s Office
opened a new investigation into the 2012
killing of Karla Pontigo, this time as the crime
of femicide, in compliance with a Supreme
Court ruling in November 2019 that ordered
the case be investigated with a gender
perspective. In November, a judge in Jalisco
state handed down a guilty sentence for the
murder of Alondra González Arias which
occurred in March 2017 soon after reporting
violence by her partner.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In July, the Supreme Court rejected an
injunction that sought to change the
legislation criminalizing abortion in Veracruz
state. In May, the Congress of Guanajuato
state voted down a bill for the
decriminalization of abortion in the state.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
attacked and harassed and, according to civil
society organizations, 24 human rights

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

defenders were killed. Defenders of
environmental and Indigenous Peoples’
human rights expressed concern about the
Mayan Train mega project. The President
responded by publicly accusing them of
being “false environmentalists”. Six UN
special rapporteurs wrote to the government
expressing a series of concerns about the
Mayan Train project, including in relation to
Indigenous Peoples´ rights to land and
health, as well as possible environmental
impacts of the project.
In November, Mexico ratified the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice on Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(the Escazú Agreement), which includes
strong protections for Indigenous and
environmental defenders. The Protection
Mechanism for Human Rights Defenders and
Journalists maintained protection measures
for 1,313 people: 887 human rights
defenders and 426 journalists. The public
trust fund supporting this protection
mechanism was dissolved in October and its
funds were absorbed into the general public
budget.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Media workers continued to be threatened,
harassed and attacked; at least 19 journalists
were killed during the year, according to
official data from November.
During May, information emerged showing
that Notimex, the state news agency, was
involved in a smear campaign, including a
network of bots and fake accounts on social
media allegedly financed by public funds,
against several journalists and media outlets
that published content critical of the
government.
In August, a federal judge handed down a
sentence of 50 years in prison to the material
author of the killing of journalist Miroslava
Breach. She was killed by armed men
outside her home in Chihuahua in 2017.
In September, a letter signed by 650
journalists and academics accused the
President of actions harmful to freedom of

245

expression, including a series of public
statements undermining the press, permitting
an environment conducive to censorship,
administrative sanctions and misuse of the
law to intimidate the press.
During 2020, there were mass protests by
women in several cities against femicide and
other forms of gender-based violence. The
police responded in several instances with
excessive use of force, arbitrary detentions,
cell phone theft and physical, psychological
and sexual attacks, among other human
rights violations. Federal and state authorities
also stigmatized women protesters in public
statements.5 In August, police in the city of
León, Guanajuato state, arbitrarily detained
22 women and beat and sexually assaulted
several women and girls.6 In November, in
Cancún, police used live ammunition on a
series of mostly peaceful protest by women
protesting against femicides.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued to
be a major concern. Investigations into
reports of torture were generally flawed and
those suspected of criminal responsibility
were rarely brought to justice. The National
Programme for the Prevention and
Punishment of Torture and Ill-treatment had
still not been published by the end of the
year.
Two Mexico state policemen were
sentenced to seven years in prison for using
torture to extract false confessions from three
women survivors of the 2014 Tlatlaya
massacre.
Mónica Esparza, survivor of torture with
sexual violence, was released from prison in
March, more than seven years after she was
arbitrarily detained and tortured by police in
the city of Torreón, Coahuila state. She was
acquitted of the charges based on false
confessions extracted under torture. No
officers had been charged for the crimes
against her.
Adrián Vásquez Lagunes had not received
reparations from Baja California state, despite
a 2015 decision by the Baja California State
Human Rights and Citizen Protection

246

Ombudsman’s Office that he receive
reparations for being tortured by Tijuana
police in 2012. Adrián Vásquez Lagunes
contracted COVID-19 in June and had to
cope with the illness on a low income and
almost no support from the state.7

RIGHTS OF MIGRANTS, REFUGEES AND
ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers
continued to face excessive use of force and
arbitrary detention by authorities, as well as
abductions, assaults and killings by non-state
actors.
National Guard officials used tear gas
during an operation to detain hundreds of
migrants who crossed Mexico’s southern
border in January and dragged and beat
migrants who participated in a protest inside
a migration detention centre in Tapachula in
March.
Also in March, a Guatemalan asylumseeker died when a protest by detained
migrants demanding to be released led to a
fire in the Tenosique detention centre.8
Migration authorities released hundreds of
migrants from detention centres during April
and May because of the risk of COVID-19.
However, data on these releases was scarce
and concerns remained that unlawful
deportations or refoulements could have
taken place in this context.
The federal refugee agency (COMAR)
received 41,227 asylum claims in 2020,
down from 70,427 in 2019. The largest
number of asylum-seekers were from
Honduras, followed by Haiti, Cuba and El
Salvador. Migration authorities detained
87,260 irregular migrants, including more
than 11,000 children, and deported 53,891
people, a decrease compared to 2019. The
vast majority of those deported were from
Central America.
Civil society organizations presented
several injunctions between April and the end
of the year requesting the release of all
people in immigration detention and an end
to such detentions due to the risk COVID-19.
A federal judge in Mexico City ruled that all
those in immigration detention should be

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

released. However, authorities failed to
comply with the ruling and detentions
continued, depriving migrants not only of
their right to health but also to liberty.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers in Mexico expressed concern
at the lack of access to sufficient personal
protective equipment to work safely while
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.9 At
least 2,397 health workers died with
COVID-19 in Mexico.
Several health workers were physically
attacked in public places or on public
transport. In response, the government rolled
out a public campaign to raise awareness
about the important role of health workers
and combat stigma against them. A number
of health workers voiced concerns about
irregular contracts and the lack of sick pay
and other benefits, which at times led to
retaliation. Jorge Pérez, a 70-year-old cleaner
in a public hospital, was fired by a private
contractor after he spoke out about his poor
working conditions.
1. Mexico: Amnesty International exige la investigación y sanción de
responsables de violaciones de derechos humanos ocurridas durante
las manifestaciones del 4 y 5 de junio en Guadalajara (Press release,
7 June) (Spanish only)
2. The executions in Nuevo Laredo must be a watershed moment for
ending human rights violations in Mexico (Article, 28 August)
3. Mexico’s new National Guard is breaking its vow to respect human
rights (Article, 8 November)
4. False Suspicions: Arbitrary Detentions by Police in Mexico (AMR
41/5340/2017)
5. Autoridades de Guanajuato deben abstenerse de estigmatizar el
derecho a la protesta (Press release, 28 August) (Spanish only)
6. Mexico: Carta abierta (Open letter, 25 August) (Spanish only)
7. Mexico: Urgent Action: Torture Survivor Denied COVID-19 Support:
Adrián Vásquez Lagunes (AMR 41/2542/2020),
8. Americas: Governments must halt dangerous and discriminatory
detention of migrants and asylum seekers (News, 2 April)
9. Americas: The cost of curing: Health workers´ rights in the Americas
during COVID-19 and beyond (AMR 01/2311/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MOLDOVA
Republic of Moldova
Head of state: Maia Sandu, replaced Igor Dodon in
December
Head of government: Aureliu Ciocoi, replaced Ion Chicu
in December
The government response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns, including in
relation to the right to health and freedoms
of expression, peaceful assembly and
movement. No progress was made in
addressing systemic torture and other illtreatment. A new NGO law passed following
civil society input. Fair trial concerns
remained.

BACKGROUND
Moldova avoided political turbulence, unlike
previous years, although there was slowly
widening popular discontent and regular
peaceful protest throughout the year.
A three-month state of emergency effective
from March, in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, imposed restrictions on certain
rights, including to freedom of movement,
education (for example, remote schooling
requirements were not affordable for all
families) and peaceful assembly. During that
period, Moldova derogated from these
obligations under the European Convention
on Human Rights. The measures also
adversely impacted the economy and
standard of living.
In July, President Igor Dodon met the de
facto leader of the breakaway Transdniestria
region, Vadim Krasnoselskiy, although no
progress towards resolution of the 30-year-old
frozen conflict was reported.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Measures enacted to confront the COVID-19
pandemic resulted in the reduction of some
other medical provision and the temporary
suspension of non-emergency services.
Despite these measures, the ensuing strain
on the health care system left health workers
particularly vulnerable, reportedly suffering

247

from a shortage of effective PPE and a high
infection rate. However, few if any health
workers agreed to speak of these issues on or
off the record, for fear of reprisals.

Transdniestria region
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
de facto authorities in Transdniestria
introduced restrictions on travel from
Moldovan government-controlled territory for
individuals without local “passports”. While
wide-ranging exceptions were made, this
measure expressly targeted health workers
residing in Transdniestria and working across
the Dniester river who consequently were
forced to choose on which side of the conflict
line to live and work. This combined with the
general shortage of medical personnel,
reduced medical provision for the local
population.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
No progress was made compared to previous
years in addressing systemic problems
behind torture and other ill-treatment, and
impunity for perpetrators prevailed. Torture
survivors and victims’ families remained
unable to access full and effective reparation.
The number of allegations, independently
reported and officially registered, remained
broadly the same year on year.
Conditions in penitentiary institutions,
including overcrowding and inadequate
provision of health care, drew continuing
criticism. The lack of effective necessary
services and equipment to establish a
diagnosis when a detainee is ill, and denial of
transfer to civil medical institutions for
necessary treatment, remained a chronic
problem. This became more apparent in the
face of the COVID-19 pandemic, with
hundreds of confirmed cases among prison
staff and inmates.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Media remained generally pluralist but
heavily dependent on private sponsorship
which typically has clear political leanings.
Libel litigation in civil proceedings remained

248

an instrument of pressure on independent
media outlets because of taxing legal costs.
In March, the official media regulator
mandated that, with immediate effect and
throughout the emergency period, media
presenters and commentators “waive their
personal opinion” regarding COVID-19 and
rely exclusively on official information and
that of the WHO. The ensuing public
resentment forced the regulator to promptly
reverse this decision.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
With street protests regularly occurring
throughout the year, the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly was generally respected.
However, on 16 July, police in the capital,
Chisinau, used tear gas to disperse a
peaceful gathering of several dozen people.
The police detained and later released
without charge nine individuals.
In August, the mayor of Chisinau
prohibited agricultural vehicles to be used in
protests after some demonstrators used these
to travel to a protest. Protest organizers
challenged the decree in court; its outcome
was still pending at year’s end.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
A much-delayed NGO law was adopted by
Parliament in June, reflecting the draft bill
widely discussed and agreed with civil society
representatives in previous years. The law
clarified and streamlined provisions regarding
NGO funding and reporting. A proposal to
ban election monitoring by foreign-funded
NGOs was not included, nor an earlier
proposal to require NGO leaders and staff to
publish their annual income declarations.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Fair trial concerns remained. In February, the
Prosecutor General acknowledged the
political motivation behind a prosecution by
his predecessor, and announced a review of
38 criminal cases. By December, in none of
these cases had the conviction been
quashed or criminal proceedings terminated.
The most high-profile among them was the
case against Veaceslav Platon, sentenced to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

18 years in 2017 for fraud. In May, the
Prosecutor General announced that the
evidence against him had been fabricated,
and Veaceslav Platon was released the
following month pending further investigation
and re-trial. However, the review of the 38
cases raised concerns over selective justice,
including the lack of clear criteria supporting
the choice of cases.
The investigation against officials allegedly
responsible for the unlawful detention and
forcible return of seven Turkish nationals to
Turkey in 2018 was regarded as classified.
Following public pressure, however, in
September the Prosecutor General revealed
that one of the officials had been convicted
and fined in July. The court decision was not
published officially but leaked to the press.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
In March, Moldovan citizens returning from
abroad were obliged to purchase compulsory
health insurance within 72 hours of their
return. The measure remained in place until
the state of emergency was lifted, despite a
conclusion in April by the Council for Equality
that the measure was discriminatory as it
effectively made return conditional on the
ability to pay and was applied differently in
practice to those returning by air and
overland. No information on the
implementation of the measure was made
public.

MONGOLIA
Mongolia
Head of state: Khaltmaa Battulga
Head of government: Ukhnaa Khurelsukh
Measures to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 contributed to an increase in
domestic violence and affected children’s
rights to education and health. Prior to
elections in June, there was a rise in cases
of arbitrary detention of individuals
speaking out against the government. The
authorities failed to investigate most
reported cases of torture.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Domestic violence increased in the capital,
Ulaanbaatar, as lockdown measures were
imposed to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
The number of reports increased by more
than 50% during the first quarter of the year
compared to the same period in 2019; 90%
of the victims were women. Lockdown
measures also reduced the options available
for support and counselling services.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In May, the government submitted to
parliament a bill on the protection of human
rights defenders, which was discussed in
December but remained pending. Human
rights defenders lacked sufficient legal
protection, putting them and their families at
risk.
In September, a woman herder-activist and
NGO leader was harassed and beaten by
managers of a mining company, due to her
efforts to protect herders’ land from business
encroachment and to prevent environmental
degradation. Her case was dismissed after
investigation by the municipal police.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTION
Prior to parliamentary elections in June, the
government arrested and arbitrarily detained
individuals – including lawyers and activists –
for expressing their views on the human
rights situation and corruption. Many of them
were detained for weeks without being
charged or brought to court.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There were credible allegations of torture and
other ill-treatment by law enforcement
officials but the government showed
unwillingness to conduct investigations.
Between January and October, 54 cases of
torture were reported, but only three of them
were investigated and brought to court.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In January, an amendment to the Criminal
Code which criminalized the dissemination of
“false information” came into effect. A

249

dedicated police unit was created for its
enforcement. Civil society publicly expressed
concerns that the law was overly broad and
could be used to suppress press freedom.

RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED
EVICTIONS
People who were homeless or without
adequate housing, as a result of
redevelopment in Ulaanbaatar during recent
years, faced a higher risk of infection during
the COVID-19 pandemic due to lack of
access to sanitation facilities and protection
from weather. Residents who lived in areas
scheduled for redevelopment reported that
construction companies immediately asked
them to vacate their land and homes after
signing development contracts with the
government, but did not adequately consult
and compensate them.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Schools and other educational facilities were
closed from late January through August to
prevent the spread of COVID-19. The
government offered remote classes through
television programmes, but access to
education for children returning to remote
areas from urban boarding schools was
difficult because of poor internet connectivity
or television network coverage. For many
children who depended on school meals as a
main source of nutrition, school closures
affected access to adequate food and placed
their health at higher risk.

MONTENEGRO
Republic of Montenegro
Head of state: Milo Đukanović
Head of government: Zdravko Krivokapić (replaced
Duško Marković in December)
The government's response to COVID-19
violated rights to freedom of movement,
peaceful assembly, non-discrimination and
privacy. Impunity for war crimes, torture
and other ill-treatment, and attacks on
journalists persisted.

250

BACKGROUND
In August, the opposition coalition narrowly
won parliamentary elections, ending 29 years
of rule by the Democratic Party of Socialists
under Milo Dukanović as Prime Minister or
President. The period was characterized by
corruption, human rights violations, media
repression and impunity for war crimes.
Montenegro was the only European
country where, as part of the COVID-19
control measures, the names of individuals
required to self-isolate were published.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church
protested against 2019 legislation they feared
enabled the state to seize church property. In
May, police in Nikšić arrested a bishop and
seven priests for demonstrating under
COVID-19-related prohibitions on gatherings;
their supporters were dispersed with stun
grenades and tear gas. Orthodox
demonstrators in other towns were also
dispersed with tear gas. In June, police beat
protesters during an opposition party
demonstration in Budva.
In June, NGOs lodged a constitutional
appeal against the prohibition of open-air
gatherings.

IMPUNITY
Crimes under international law, perpetrated
in the 1990s, were neither investigated nor
prosecuted.
The European Court of Human Rights
considered Montenegro's failure to provide
justice to seven relatives of Bosniak refugees
transferred in 1992 by Montenegrin police to
Bosnian Serb forces and subsequently
murdered.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The State Prosecutor failed to effectively
investigate allegations that police used
torture, including electric shocks, in May/
June to extract “confessions” from two
suspects and a witness in two bombing
cases. In December, the Ombudsperson
found that police had ill-treated the witness.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

One suspect was acquitted, the court
suspecting that his statement was extorted.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Impunity continued for historic attacks on
journalists, including investigative journalist
Olivera Lakić, shot in 2018. In December,
NGO Human Rights Action urged the State
Prosecutor to provide protection to Olivera
Lakić, after a plan to assassinate her was
revealed.
In January, proceedings were initiated
against three journalists, detained for
between 14-28 hours for “causing panic and
disorder”; two were prosecuted. Private
individuals were similarly detained, four of
them for posting “false news” about
COVID-19 on social media; three were
indicted.
The Appeals Courts quashed the
convictions of two other individuals fined
under public order legislation for criticizing
officials online.

DISCRIMINATION
In July, Parliament adopted legislation
recognizing same-sex civil partnerships,
although registered partners were not allowed
to adopt or foster children.
In April, an exceptional three-week
quarantine monitored by the police was
imposed on 1,200 Roma former refugees
living in apartment blocks in Konik, after one
case of COVID-19 was discovered.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In April, women's NGOs established a
coalition to support women experiencing
domestic violence after court cases increased
and calls to the Centre for Women’s Rights
rose by 20%.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MOROCCO/
WESTERN SAHARA
Kingdom of Morocco
Head of state: Mohammed VI
Head of government: Saad-Eddine El Othmani
The authorities responded to the COVID-19
pandemic with a new health emergency
decree-law, which restricted freedoms of
movement, expression and assembly, and
used it to prosecute people for criticizing
the government’s handling of the crisis or
for breaking the emergency measures.
Sahrawi human rights defenders continued
to be intimidated, harassed and arrested for
peacefully expressing their opinions.
Women continued to face discrimination as
well as sexual and other gender-based
violence, and faced increased difficulties in
accessing justice during the pandemic.
Consensual same-sex sexual relations
between adults remained a criminal offence
and the authorities failed to investigate
incitement to violence against lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex people.
The rights of migrants were violated,
including as a result of inadequate
COVID-19 protection measures in migrant
detention centres. The Polisario Front,
which administers camps in Algeria for
refugees from Western Sahara, detained at
least one critic. Courts handed down death
sentences; there were no executions.

BACKGROUND
In January, Morocco passed laws adding the
waters off the coast of the disputed Western
Sahara land to its maritime territory,
extending its jurisdiction over the waters from
Tangier city in the north to Lagouira town on
the Mauritanian border.
On 20 March, the government declared a
state of health emergency that remained in
place until the end of the year. It also
imposed a national lockdown which was
gradually lifted in June and replaced by a set

251

of measures including restrictions on
movement and area-specific lockdowns.
In October, the UN renewed the UN
Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara’s mandate until October 2021,
without granting it a human rights component
unlike most other UN peacekeeping
missions. The territory of the Western Sahara
and the Polisario camps remained
inaccessible for human rights organizations,
making it difficult to monitor human rights
abuses.
In December, the government signed a
deal with the USA agreeing to establish full
diplomatic relations with Israel in exchange
for the USA’s official recognition of Moroccan
sovereignty over the Western Sahara.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities used the health emergency to
pass restrictive legislation. In March,
Parliament passed Law No. 2.20.292 which
set penalties of a three-month prison
sentence and a fine of MAD1,300 (around
US$146) for anyone breaching “orders and
decisions taken by public authorities” and for
anyone “obstructing” those decisions through
“writing, publications or photos”. Since its
adoption, the authorities have used the new
law to prosecute at least five human rights
activists and citizen journalists for criticizing
the government’s COVID-19 response,
accusing them of “incitement to violate the
authorities’ decisions”.
In April, authorities prosecuted and
detained Mohamed Bouzrou, Mohamed
Chejii and Lahssen Lemrabti, administrators
of the Facebook news page Fazaz 24, for two
posts that criticized the local authorities’
handling of COVID-19. Mohamed Chejii was
released soon after his arrest though his trial
continued, but Mohamed Bouzrou and
Lahssen Lemrabti remained in detention.1
In April, police in Nador in the northeastern Rif region arrested Omar Naji, the
local representative of the Moroccan
Association for Human Rights (AMDH), and
prosecuted him for spreading “false
allegations or lies” with the aim of “harming
privacy or defamation”, as well as for

252

breaching the health emergency law. He was
arrested after he published a post on social
media criticizing Nador authorities for
confiscating merchandise from unauthorized
vendors during the pandemic and released
the following day on bail. On 17 November,
the First Instance Court in Nador acquitted
him of all charges.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued their crackdown on
freedom of expression in Morocco and
Western Sahara, investigating and
prosecuting a number of journalists and
activists for their online posts.
In January, courts around the country
sentenced at least nine individuals, including
rappers and activists, to between six months
and four years in prison, for their online
speech on YouTube and Facebook. All were
accused of “offending” public officials or
institutions under the Penal Code.2
In May, Sahrawi journalist and human
rights activist Ibrahim Amrikli was arrested in
Laayoune, in Western Sahara, and detained
for over two days.3 Security officers
interrogated him about his work for Sahrawi
human rights organization Nushatta
Foundation and repeatedly beat and insulted
him. They forced him to sign a “confession”
to trumped-up charges of throwing stones at
police officers in April. Two days later, he was
charged with “breaking orders related to the
health emergency status” and “offending
public officials” under Article 263 of the
Penal Code. His trial opened on 18
November but was postponed to an unknown
date.
In June, an Amnesty International report
revealed that the phone of independent
journalist Omar Radi had been hacked using
surveillance technology produced by the
Israeli company NSO Group.4 After the report
was published, Omar Radi was summoned
for police interrogation several times and a
state media smear campaign accused him of
espionage. On 29 July, the Prosecutor of the
Appeals Court in Casablanca charged him
with sexual assault, rape, “undermining
external state security” and “harming internal

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

security” – all charges he vehemently denied
– under provisions in the Penal Code. He was
placed in pre-trial detention, where he
remained at the end of the year.
In July, police in Laayoune arbitrarily
detained Algargarat Media's founder Essabi
Yahdih for 10 hours when he went to the
police station to obtain an administrative
certificate, before releasing him without
charge. He said that police insulted and
threatened him with “arrest, rape and
murder” and interrogated him about
Algargarat’s editorial line, its staff and funding
as well as his personal online posts,
specifically a post that mocked another post
by a Moroccan parliamentarian about the
King.
In December, following years of
harassment and unlawful surveillance,
academic and human rights defender Maati
Monjib was arrested arbitrarily and detained.
He and members of his family were accused
of money laundering and he was awaiting
trial at the end of the year.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice as well as sexual and other
gender-based violence. Although Morocco
adopted Law 103-13 for the Prevention of
Violence against Women in 2018,
mechanisms for its implementation remained
weak. The Law requires victims to file for
criminal prosecution to obtain orders of
protection, which became virtually impossible
under the COVID-19 lockdown.
Women’s organizations such as Mobilising
for Rights Associates (MRA) reported an
increase of problems for women suffering
violence during lockdown, including being
confined with their abusers, often without
access to means of communication, and
difficulty accessing shelters. Between 20
March and 20 April, the number of
prosecutions for violence against women fell
to one-tenth of the monthly average,
according to the Chief Prosecutor. The
authorities said this was because of “the
stability of the Moroccan family”. However,
MRA attributed the decrease to difficulties

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

women faced in accessing justice during the
lockdown.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
In August, doctors began a national strike to
denounce their poor working conditions, the
absence of minimum protection measures for
health workers, and the lack of medical
treatment or proper confinement for frontline
workers who contracted the virus.
In August, the Health Ministry suspended
annual leave for doctors and other medical
staff in public hospitals, forcing them to work
without a break to meet the demands caused
by COVID-19. Hundreds of doctors
demonstrated around the country in protest
against the move.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
PUNISHMENT
Prisoners were held in harsh conditions,
including prolonged and indefinite solitary
confinement, in violation of the prohibition of
torture and other ill-treatment. Despite the
elevated risks of COVID-19 transmission in
prisons and other places of detention,
authorities imprisoned people solely for
breaching restrictions imposed in the context
of the pandemic.
Between April and August, the King issued
four royal pardons for a total of 8,133
detainees, including 20 activists from the
Hirak El-Rif social justice movement.
In August, Nasser Zefzafi and Nabil
Ahamjik, leaders of Hirak El-Rif, staged a 25day hunger strike to protest against the denial
of family visits and the scattering of Hirak ElRif detainees in different prisons inaccessible
to their families.
Sulaiman Raissouni, a journalist and editor
of Akhbar Al Yaoum, was detained from May
until the end of the year, and was permitted
only one hour a day to walk alone in the
courtyard.
Authorities continued to hold 19 Sahrawi
activists in prisons in Ait Melloul and
Bouizarkane in south-west Morocco, after
they were convicted following unfair trials in
2013 and 2017 that failed to adequately

253

investigate torture allegations. They were held
hundreds of kilometres from their families
and, due to the COVID-19 restrictions, were
not permitted family visits.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Article 489 of the Penal Code continued to
criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
relations.
Authorities failed to investigate incitement
to violence against LGBTI people or to
provide people protection regardless of their
sexual orientation or gender identity.
In April, in an apparent campaign, a
number of individuals forcibly “outed” people
on same-sex dating apps, disclosing their
sexual orientation or gender identity without
their consent. LGBTI organizations reported
that this “outing” campaign led to people
being assaulted and threatened, as well as a
Facebook group in Agadir calling for people
to lynch LGBTI sex workers. The authorities
failed to publicly condemn this, and the state
media failed to report on it.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to arrest, detain
and deport migrants throughout the year. In
early 2020, the Spanish governmental
delegation in Melilla, Spain, announced the
intention to end the migratory route between
the northern coast of Morocco and Spain,
and the Moroccan authorities reported their
arrests of migrants near the border with
Ceuta. Several NGOs reported an absence of
COVID-19 protection measures in migrant
detention centres in Nador and Laayoune.
According to the AMDH, around 100
migrants were detained for over a week in
Nador in May without access to a lawyer in
violation of Law 02-03 of 2003 on the entry
and stay of foreigners, which stipulates that
after 24 hours of detention, irregular migrants
must be put under judicial control and given
access to a lawyer.

254

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Moroccan law continued to criminalize
“insulting Islam”, which can be punishable
by a prison sentence. In May, Casablanca
police arrested actor Rafik Boubker for a
video posted on Facebook in which he
mocked Islamic rituals. He was charged with
“insulting Islam” and released the next day.
His trial opened in November and was
postponed several times. In July, a court in
the city of Safi in western Morocco sentenced
Muhammed Awatif Qashqash to six months
in prison and a fine, under the same
provision, for a caricature he posted online
depicting religious figures, including the
Prophet Mohammed.

POLISARIO FRONT CAMPS
The Polisario Front, which calls for the
independence of Western Sahara and has set
up a self-proclaimed government in exile,
detained at least one critic in the camps it
administers in Algeria. On 8 August, police in
the camps held citizen journalist Mahmoud
Zeidan for 24 hours, interrogating him about
posts he published online that criticized the
way camp authorities handled COVID-19 aid
distribution.
The Polisario Front failed to ensure that
those responsible for committing human
rights abuses in the camps in previous
decades were brought to account.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; there had been no executions
since 1993.
1. Morocco and Western Sahara: End prosecution of activists under new
health emergency law (Press release, 9 June)
2. Morocco/Western Sahara: Crackdown against activists for criticizing
the King, public institutions and officials (Press release, 11 February)
3. Morocco: Drop charges against Ibrahim Amrikli and cease arbitrary
arrests of journalists and activists in Western Sahara (MDE
29/3111/2020)
4. Moroccan journalist targeted with network injection attacks using
NSO group’s tools (Blog, 22 June)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

MOZAMBIQUE
Republic of Mozambique
Head of state and government: Filipe Jacinto Nyusi
Police used excessive force against people
who left their homes to look for food during
the COVID-19 lockdown. There was a spike
in gender-based violence as victims were
trapped at home with abusive partners.
Violence in the province of Cabo Delgado
intensified, becoming an armed conflict
which resulted in more than 2,000 deaths.
The authorities failed to hold to account
perpetrators of crimes under international
law and serious human rights violations and
abuses. Repression of freedom of
expression took a new turn when a
newspaper office was firebombed.

BACKGROUND
In January, the President began a second
term following a controversial election which
took place amid armed violence in the north
of the province of Cabo Delgado, an area
which remained closed to the media. The
government’s secret loans scandal
destabilized socioeconomic conditions.
Meanwhile, flooding in 2019 and 2020
destroyed infrastructure, further isolating the
population in northern Cabo Delgado. In
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
authorities imposed a state of emergency
between 30 March and 6 September. The
measures contributed to poor living
conditions nationwide, and in particular
exacerbated the precarious conditions in
Cabo Delgado when an armed opposition
group, known locally as al-Shabaab (although
there is no known relationship with alShabaab in Somalia), used the period to
intensify its attacks.

RIGHT TO FOOD
State of emergency provisions were punitive
and led to increased food insecurity in
marginalized neighbourhoods, particularly as
most people depended on the informal
economy to earn a living on the streets and in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

markets. Those who left their homes to work
or find food were subjected to excessive force
by the police, and an increased risk of
contracting COVID-19. The authorities did not
put in place adequate social security
measures to protect them from hunger and
ill-health.1

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Gender-based violence increased sharply
during the COVID-19 restrictions, when
women and girls were trapped in the home
and exposed to heightened risk of domestic
violence. Women’s prevalence in the
essential services workforce put them at
greater risk of violence outside the home;
restricted public transport exposed them to
the threat of violence because they had to
travel late at night or in the early morning
hours. School closures put more girls at risk
of child marriage.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
The armed conflict between the so-called alShabaab and government forces created a
humanitarian crisis in Cabo Delgado. By the
end of the year, over 500,000 people were
internally displaced, and more than 700,000
needed humanitarian assistance. The
government failed to provide shelter, food,
water, education or health services and many
people relied on the goodwill of local families
to give them shelter in Cabo Delgado and the
neighbouring provinces of Nampula and
Niassa. At the end of the year, it remained
unclear whether the government’s Northern
Integrated Development Agency had had an
impact on the humanitarian crisis.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for crimes under international law
and serious human rights violations and
abuses carried out in Cabo Delgado’s armed
conflict remained widespread. By December,
more than 2,000 people had been killed,
including civilians caught in crossfire or
deliberately targeted by armed opposition
groups and government forces. Throughout
the year, armed groups beheaded civilians,
burned houses, looted villages and

255

kidnapped women and girls. Meanwhile,
civilians, alleged members of armed
opposition groups and journalists reporting
on the attacks were subjected to detention,
torture and other ill-treatment, enforced
disappearance and extrajudicial execution by
security forces.
In June and July, photographic and video
evidence emerged of what appeared to be
Mozambique Armed Defence Forces soldiers
and officers of the Mozambique Rapid
Intervention Unit2 committing crimes against
suspected armed group fighters. The victims
were tortured, extrajudicially executed and
their bodies dismembered, and corpses were
apparently dumped in mass graves. The
authorities had not investigated the crimes by
the end of the year.

Enforced disappearances
On 7 April, community radio journalist
Ibraimo Abú Mbaruco, from the Palma
District in Cabo Delgado, disappeared after
being approached by army officers on his
way home from work at around 6pm.3 The
authorities did not respond to his family’s
request for information on his whereabouts,
which remained unknown at the end of the
year.

Extrajudicial executions
On 11 March, the security forces arrested
Roberto Mussa Ambasse and Muemede
Suleimane Jumbe, two local activists and
community leaders, from their homes in
Palma district. They were later found dead
among 12 other civilians. Despite numerous
calls for investigations, the authorities had not
conducted any meaningful investigations
leading to an arrest by the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
There was an escalation in the repression of
the right to freedom of expression,
characterized by intimidation, smear
campaigns, harassment, arbitrary arrests,
and prosecutions of journalists, human rights
defenders and government critics.
In June, the Public Prosecutor charged
Matias Guente, Executive Director, and

256

Fernando Veloso, Editorial Director of the
independent newspaper, Canal de
Moçambique, with “violation of state secrecy”
and “conspiracy against the state”, after the
paper had published an article, in March,
about an unlawful secret contract between
the Ministry of Defence, the Interior Ministry
and natural gas companies in Cabo Delgado.
On 23 August, police arrested investigative
journalist Armando Nenane in the capital,
Maputo, for failing to comply with COVID-19
regulations. This followed his depositing
funds in the former Defence Minister’s bank
account, the details of which he then
published as a means to corroborate Canal’s
story. Following this, government supporters
launched a social media campaign
demanding that he be prosecuted for
“violation of state secrecy”.
On the day of Armando Nenane’s arrest,
unidentified assailants firebombed Canal’s
offices in Maputo.4 The attack came just four
days after the newspaper had published
allegations about an unethical procurement
process involving senior Ministry of Mineral
Resources and Energy officials, and
governing party elites. Government
sympathizers responded with a social media
campaign calling for the newspaper’s
closure.
D. Luíz Fernando Lisboa, a Brazilian
national and Bishop of Pemba, the capital
city of Cabo Delgado, repeatedly raised
concerns about the human rights situation in
the province. In August, the President
indirectly denounced him saying that “certain
foreigners” disrespected those who protected
them “in the name of human rights”.
Following this, government supporters, and at
least one pro-government newspaper labelled
the Bishop a criminal, accused him of
supporting insurgency and called for him to
be expelled from Mozambique.
1. Southern Africa: Governments must move beyond politics in
distribution of COVID-19 food aid (Press release, 6 May)
2. Mozambique: Torture by security forces in gruesome videos must be
investigated (Press release, 9 September)
3. Mozambique: Journalist forcibly disappeared: Ibraimo Abú Mbaruco
(Urgent Action, 15 April)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

4. Mozambique: Media freedom in ashes (AFR 41/2947/2020)

MYANMAR
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Head of state and government: U Win Myint
Serious human rights violations occurred
across Myanmar as internal armed conflict
between the military and ethnic armed
groups continued. Indiscriminate airstrikes
and shelling by the military took place in
Rakhine and Chin States and thousands of
civilians were displaced. Humanitarian
groups faced severe restrictions on their
activities, which limited their access to atrisk populations. The authorities imposed
undue restrictions on access to information
in Rakhine and Chin States, which
negatively impacted the ability of
communities to receive potentially
lifesaving information, during both the
COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing armed
conflict. Persecution of human rights
defenders continued around the country.
Authorities imposed arbitrary restrictions on
the rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly.

BACKGROUND
On 23 January, the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) ordered Myanmar to prevent
genocidal acts against the Rohingya Muslims
pending the case filed by the Gambia. The
ICJ also ordered Myanmar to regularly report
on the implementation of this order.1
The government repeatedly emphasized
that the accountability of those responsible
for human rights violations was an internal
affair. Impunity continued to be pervasive,
however, and the government made no
meaningful moves towards establishing
civilian oversight of the military or creating
effective internal investigative and
accountability mechanisms.
The COVID-19 pandemic saw varying
degrees of lockdown measures in major
cities, as cases continued to rise. The
country’s health care system was ill-equipped

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

to cope with such large-scale outbreaks, and
the economic impact of the pandemic
negatively impacted at-risk populations,
including internally displaced people and
millions living in poverty.
In the general election held on 8
November, Aung San Suu Kyi’s National
League for Democracy retained its
parliamentary majority.
Voting was called off in conflict-affected
parts of the country, including much of
Rakhine State. As a result, over 1.5 million
mainly Rakhine people were deprived of their
right to vote. The vast majority of the
Rohingya population had already been
disenfranchised prior to the 2015 election,
through the annulment of “White Card”
identity papers.

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS IN THE
CONTEXT OF INTERNAL ARMED
CONFLICT
During the year civilians were killed or injured
by indiscriminate airstrikes and shelling by
the military in many parts of Rakhine State
and Paletwa township, Chin State2
Since the escalation of the conflict
between the military and the Arakan Army in
early 2019, cases of forced labour, arbitrary
detention, and torture and other ill-treatment
of civilians by government troops increased.
In Kachin and northern Shan States,
reports of human rights violations against
civilians by the military continued to emerge
in the context of several armed conflicts.
Reports of human rights abuses by ethnic
armed groups included abductions, murder,
illegal detention, forced and child recruitment
into armed groups, forced portering, and
extortion.
On 12 June, the Union Minister of Social
Welfare, Rescue and Resettlement
announced that it would form two bodies to
clear anti-personnel mines nationwide as part
of its plan to resettle civilians displaced by
armed conflict. Both the military and ethnic
armed groups continued to use antipersonnel mines and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs).3

257

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
There were some 300,000 individuals
displaced in Rakhine, Chin, Kachin and
northern Shan States due to armed conflict
between the Myanmar military and various
ethnic armed groups. Along the ThaiMyanmar border, tens of thousands
remained displaced from conflict decades
earlier.
Tens of thousands of people were
displaced during the year in Rakhine State
due to armed conflict. This added to the
existing displacement crisis in the state,
where 130,000 mostly Rohingya Muslims
remained effectively interned in camps since
violence in 2012. In Kachin State, almost
100,000 people remained in camps, having
been displaced since the 2011 resumption of
fighting between the Kachin Independence
Army and the military.
The government earmarked for closure
many camps for internally displaced people,
but none were closed during the year.
Repatriation of Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh who fled atrocities in Rakhine
State in 2016 and 2017 had yet to
commence.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
UN agencies and international NGOs
delivering humanitarian aid and supplies
faced significant impediments in their efforts
to conduct activities. The authorities
restricted access to conflict-affected areas
and where governance was contested by the
government and ethnic armed groups.
Restrictions on humanitarian actors were
particularly acute in Rakhine State, where a
cumbersome bureaucracy and governmentimposed travel bans prohibited access to atrisk populations, including in conflict and
displacement settings.
Travel within Rakhine State was risky for
humanitarian groups. In April, a WHO vehicle
carrying COVID-19 test samples in Minbya
township, Rakhine State, came under gunfire
and the driver was killed. On 28 October, two
men were injured and one killed aboard an
ICRC-contracted aid vessel in Rathedaung

258

Township. In both cases, the Myanmar
military and Arakan Army denied
responsibility.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities used a range of repressive laws to
arrest, prosecute and imprison individuals
who exercised their rights to freedoms of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly.
Arbitrary and politically-motivated arrests
and prosecutions took place throughout the
year, and 58 people were imprisoned.4 The
authorities often pursued charges under
Section 66(d) of the 2013
Telecommunications Law and Sections
505(a) and 505(b) of the Penal Code against
critics and human rights defenders.
Authorities charged poetry troupe the
Peacock Generation with “online defamation”
under these two laws for their peaceful
Thangyat performances criticizing the
military. Thangyat is a traditional art form
fusing poetry, comedy and music for satirical
ends, performed during the New Year water
festival in April. Six members of the group
were sentenced to between two and six years’
imprisonment. By year’s end, three remained
in prison.
Authorities used national security
legislation to arbitrarily limit the right to
freedom of expression and information. The
1908 Unlawful Associations Act was often
used by authorities to target, harass,
intimidate and punish activists and
journalists, especially those belonging to
ethnic and religious minorities.
On 24 March, the government designated
the Arakan Army as a terrorist organization,
which effectively outlawed any
communication with the group. At least three
journalists were prosecuted under the
Counter-Terrorism Law and Sections 17(1)
and 17(2) of the Unlawful Associations Act
for contacting the Arakan Army. Media
workers practised self-censorship and
routinely disclosed that they were not able to
contact the relevant ethnic armed group for
comment, for fear of prosecution.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Under the Peaceful Assembly and
Peaceful Procession Law, organizers of public
gatherings, such as peaceful demonstrations
or processions, were required to notify police
prior to the event. Failure to do so could
result in criminal sanctions. On 4 September,
poet and activist Maung Saungkha was
convicted under Section 19 of this law after
he placed a banner over a highway during a
protest marking the one-year anniversary of
restrictions on mobile internet
communications in parts of Rakhine and
Chin States. Maung Saungkha chose to pay a
fine of 30,000-kyat (US$22.50) rather than
serve a 15-day prison sentence.
During September the authorities arrested
15 members of the All Burma Federation of
Student Unions (ABFSU). They had
participated in peaceful anti-war
demonstrations and pamphleting awareness
campaigns around the country, calling for an
end to the conflict in Rakhine and Chin
States, and for the restoration of mobile
internet services in areas affected by the
government-ordered slowdown.
Six of them were charged under sections
505(a) and 505(b) of the Penal Code. One
was charged under Section 25 of the Natural
Disaster Management Law, and eight were
charged under Section 19 of the Peaceful
Assembly and Peaceful Procession Law.
Prison terms of up to six years were handed
down in several cases and legal proceedings
were ongoing. Other ABFSU members
remained in hiding.

ACCESS TO INFORMATION
In August, the government partially lifted
restrictions on mobile internet connectivity
imposed in June 2019 in the conflict-affected
areas of northern Rakhine and southern Chin
States. Areas where service was restored saw
a drastic reduction in connection speeds.
This impeded the flow of information,
especially the documentation of human rights
violations and abuses and the dissemination
of crucial health care information during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Authorities cited national security in their
use of broad powers to block websites critical

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

of the government. They issued three
directives between 19 and 31 March to block
a total of 2,147 websites under Section 77 of
the Telecommunications Law, which granted
the government broad and arbitrary powers
to suspend telecommunications networks.
The authorities restricted meaningful
access to independent media and human
rights monitors in conflict-affected areas.
Journalists and media outlets faced pressure,
intimidation and harassment for reporting on
sensitive issues. The threat of arrest loomed
large for those reporting on conflict,
disproportionately affecting journalists from
ethnic minority groups. Aung Marm Oo,
editor-in-chief of a Rakhine State-based news
agency reporting on violations during the
conflict between the military and the Arakan
Army, remained in hiding where he had been
since May 2019. He faced charges under
Section 17(2) of the Unlawful Associations
Act, which provided for up to five years’
imprisonment for any person who managed,
assisted or promoted an unlawful association.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In September, links were exposed between
international businesses and the financing of
the military, including many units directly
responsible for crimes under international law
and other human rights violations.5 Leaked
official documents revealed how the military
received huge revenues from shares in
Myanmar Economic Holdings Limited, a
secretive conglomerate whose activities
included the mining, beer, tobacco, garment
manufacturing and banking sectors.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Section 377 of the Penal Code criminalized
consensual same-sex relations. Although this
provision was rarely enforced, the fact that it
remained on the books created a hostile
environment that legitimized harassment,
discrimination and violence against LGBTI
people, placing them at risk of attack and
extortion by police and other authorities.

259

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
On 13 February, Children’s Day, an artillery
shell landed on the Basic Education PostPrimary School in Kha Mhwe Chaung village,
of San Hnyin Wai Village Tract in Buthidaung
Township, injuring at least 17 students.
The military occupied school buildings in
Rakhine State, using them as temporary
bases. Appropriation of educational facilities
not only denied children their right to
education, but potentially turned schools into
military targets, placing the lives and safety of
civilians at risk.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Progress towards a Prevention of and
Protection from Violence Against Women
(PoVAW) law was stalled. Members of
parliament continued to debate crucial
provisions of the draft law, including on the
definitions of rape. Under the Penal Code,
marital rape was not considered a crime.
Although the latest version of the PoVAW
criminalized marital rape, its penalties were
lighter than for rape outside of marriage.
On 21 January, Myanmar’s Independent
Commission of Enquiry (ICOE), a domestic
body charged with investigating atrocities
against the Rohingya in Rakhine State during
2016 and 2017, released an executive
summary of its findings in which it claimed
that there was “no evidence of gang rape
committed by Myanmar’s security forces”.
The ICOE conceded, however, that it had not
carried out interviews with Muslim Rohingya
survivors who had fled to Bangladesh. The
ICOE’s claim directly contradicted the
findings of human rights groups, attending
medical practitioners and the UN
Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission on Myanmar, which documented
widespread and systematic rape against
Rohingya women and girls.
On 11 September, the military admitted
that three of its soldiers raped an ethnic
Rakhine woman during operations in
Rathedaung Township on 30 June, despite
their previous denials when the allegations
were first raised by local media after rape

260

charges had been filed by the survivor in
July. In its statement, the military publicly
named the survivor but not the perpetrators.
In late December, the three soldiers were
each sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment
with hard labour.
1. World court orders Myanmar to protect the Rohingya (Press release,
23 January)
2. Myanmar: Indiscriminate airstrikes kill civilians as Rakhine conflict
worsens (Press release, 8 July)
3. Myanmar: Villages burned, civilians injured and killed as Rakhine
State conflict escalates (Press release, 12 October)
4. "I will not surrender": The criminalization of human rights defenders
and activists in Myanmar (ASA 16/2041/2020)
5. Myanmar: Leaked documents reveal global business ties to military
crimes (Press release, 10 September)

NEPAL
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
Head of state: Bidya Devi Bhandari
Head of government: Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli
Legislation limiting the rights to freedom of
expression and privacy remained pending.
Security forces detained individuals for
“spreading misinformation” and criticizing
the government during the COVID-19
pandemic. Protesters were detained and
security forces continued to use excessive
force to disperse protesters and enforce
lockdowns. Efforts toward securing justice,
truth and reparation for crimes under
international law and human rights
violations committed during the
1996-2006 conflict remained grossly
inadequate. Indigenous families were
forcibly evicted and their homes destroyed.
Sexual and gender-based violence
continued with impunity. Gender-based
discrimination continued in both law and
practice. Dozens of abuses against Dalits
were reported and abuses were often carried
out with impunity. The government did not
take adequate measures to protect Nepali
migrant workers stranded and otherwise
affected by the pandemic abroad.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

BACKGROUND
Amid disputes within the ruling party, in
December President Bhandari dissolved the
lower house of Parliament on the
recommendation of the Cabinet led by Prime
Minister Oli. At the end of the year, several
challenges against the decision were pending
before the Supreme Court.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
The Nepal Special Service Bill, which
included broad and vague provisions allowing
intrusion on the right to privacy without
judicial authorization, remained pending in
the Parliament’s lower house after being
endorsed by the upper house in May. The
Ministry of Information and Communication
drafted a Bill on Telecommunications giving
authorities sweeping powers to conduct
surveillance and collect and record
information on individuals and organizations
without adequate legal safeguards.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
A series of bills threatening to severely restrict
freedom of expression remained pending in
Parliament, including the Media Council Bill,
the Mass Communication Bill and the
Information Technology Bill. Dozens of
individuals, including journalists, were
detained for “spreading misinformation” or
criticizing the government in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Nepal Press
Council shut down more than 30 news
websites for “publishing false and fabricated
news”.
The security forces continued to detain
activists and frequently resorted to excessive
force to disperse peaceful protesters. In
January, police detained human rights
activists peacefully demonstrating for justice
for conflict-era crimes. In July, security forces
tear gassed protesters demanding
investigations and accountability for the
deaths of Dalits in Dhanusha. In November, a
man died and two others were critically
injured by bullets after security forces opened
fire at protesters in Mahottari district

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

protesting the rape and murder of a six-yearold girl. The security forces often used
excessive force to enforce the lockdown
imposed amid the pandemic.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The government failed to deliver truth, justice
and reparation for thousands of victims of
crimes under international law and human
rights violations committed during the
1996-2006 armed conflict. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the
Commission of Investigation on Enforced
Disappeared Persons, which together had
collected more than 63,000 complaints of
crimes committed by state security forces
and armed opposition groups, failed to carry
out effective and independent investigations.
The government failed to amend the
Enforced Disappearances Enquiry, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission Act 2014 to bring
it in line with international human rights law
and standards, as repeatedly ordered by the
Supreme Court. In January, the government
finalized the appointment of new
commissioners to the two commissions
without adequate consultations with conflict
victims and without amending the law
allowing amnesties for serious crimes under
international law.
The ruling party also continued to appoint
people implicated in conflict-era crimes to
positions of power without thorough and
independent investigations. In October, the
National Human Rights Commission named
286 alleged individual perpetrators and
highlighted the government’s failure to
implement the Commission’s
recommendations and hold perpetrators to
account.

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The government failed to protect the rights of
hundreds of thousands of Nepali migrant
workers stranded abroad as COVID-19
lockdowns came into force. They failed to
ensure the protection and affordable
repatriation of migrant workers through the
Foreign Employment Welfare Fund. The

261

authorities also failed to ensure adequate
standards of living and protect the health and
safety of several returnee migrant workers in
COVID-19 quarantine facilities. In June, a
migrant woman was raped in a quarantine
facility in Kailali district.

FORCED EVICTIONS
In July, without prior notice the Chitwan
National Park authorities forcibly evicted 10
Indigenous Chepang families, setting two
houses on fire and destroying eight other
homes with the use of elephants. Others
living in informal settlements across the
country remained at risk of forced evictions.

DISCRIMINATION
The government failed to ensure timely
appointments of commissioners to various
constitutional commissions, severely
impacting their ability to protect and promote
women’s rights and the rights of marginalized
groups including Indigenous Peoples, Dalits,
Madheshis, Tharus and Muslims.
Gender-based discrimination continued
and the government did not address
constitutional flaws which denied women
equal citizenship rights. More than 2,100
incidents of rape and sexual violence were
reported to the police. Victims included
children and Dalits. Rigid statutory limitations
for rape in the Criminal Code continued to
allow impunity for perpetrators.
In September, the government passed two
ordinances aimed at ending acid attacks
against women and girls.
Despite provisions in law and policy to
address discrimination based on caste,
numerous incidents of discrimination,
ostracization, killings and sexual violence
against members of the Dalit community
were reported. In May, opponents of an intercaste relationship killed six men including
four Dalits in Western Rukum district. Also in
May, a 12-year-old Dalit girl was allegedly
raped and killed in Rupandehi district after
being forcibly married to her alleged rapist,
who belonged to a dominant caste. In
September, another 12-year-old Dalit girl was
raped and killed in Bajhang district, allegedly

262

by a man who was not prosecuted after
raping a 14-year-old a month earlier.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment were
widespread in pre-trial detention to extract
“confessions” and intimidate detainees.
Although the 2017 Criminal Code
criminalized torture and other ill-treatment,
no one had been convicted under it by the
end of 2020.
Several allegations of deaths due to torture
were reported, particularly of Dalits and
Indigenous people. In July, Indigenous man
Raj Kumar Chepang died allegedly after
being tortured by Nepal Army personnel
stationed at the Chitwan National Park. An
army officer was remanded on charges of
murder.
The authorities failed to carry out
independent and credible investigations into
several deaths in custody suspected to have
resulted from torture, especially of young
Dalit men. In August, Bijay Mahara died in
police custody, allegedly from torture during
interrogation. Three police officers were
suspended for six months, but were not
charged with torture or murder. Shambhu
Sada died in police custody in Dhanusha in
June and Roshan BK in Kailali district in
September. The police claimed that both
men had committed suicide, while their
families alleged that they were tortured to
death.

NETHERLANDS
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Head of state: Willem-Alexander
Head of government: Mark Rutte
Prison-like migration detention remained a
concern. The Minister of Justice and
Security announced changes to rape
legislation to bring it more in line with
human right standards. Ethnic profiling by
police continued to be a concern. Predictive
policing methods used artificial intelligence

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

without safeguards against mass
surveillance and discrimination.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The use of punitive measures such as
isolation in migration detention remained a
concern, with its use more than doubling in
the past few years.
In June, a pending bill on migration
detention was amended to give the directors
of detention centres powers to respond to
unrest by imposing a lockdown and
restricting all detainees to their cells in a way
akin to isolation for a period of up to four
weeks.
Some asylum-seekers remained at risk of
deportation as documents which could not
be verified were not taken into account in
asylum applications. In December 2019, a
preliminary ruling had been requested by the
District Court of The Hague challenging this
situation, but no decision was handed down
by year’s end.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In May, the Minister of Justice and Security
published a preliminary draft bill of the
Sexual Offences Act which proposed no
amendments to the legal definition of rape,
retaining “forcible coercion” and “violence”
as its central elements. It introduced a new,
lesser crime of “sexual acts against the
person’s will” which would carry half the
sentence for the current crime of rape.
The definition of rape proposed was not in
line with international human rights law and
did not offer sufficient protection for victims
of sexual violence. After criticism from civil
society organizations, survivors and
Parliament, the Minister announced in
November that he would amend the proposal
so that all forms of involuntary sex would be
defined as rape.
During the COVID-19 lockdown measures
in March and April, a specialist helpline
reported the number of people calling to seek
support due to sexual violence went up.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
During the year the Minister of Justice and
Security worked on the introduction of
electro-shock weapons in policing, with the
aim of equipping some 17,000 patrol officers
with a Taser X2. Contrary to international
standards, electro-shock weapons may be
used against persons who do not pose an
imminent threat to life or risk of serious
injury.

DISCRIMINATION
Despite mass demonstrations in May and
June in reaction to the Black Lives Matter
movement, no measures to combat
discrimination were taken. In 2014 the
authorities had acknowledged ethnic profiling
in law enforcement and introduced
interventions such as professional standards,
training modules and software applications
supporting officers to use their stop and
search powers fairly and effectively. However,
evaluations showed their implementation
continued to be inconsistent.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
Law enforcement agencies increasingly used
algorithmic risk profiles. Police in the city of
Roermond conducted an ongoing predictive
policing experiment designed to prevent and
detect alleged thefts committed by people
from Eastern Europe. In September, an
investigation revealed that the project violates
the rights to non-discrimination, privacy and
data protection.1
1. Netherlands: We sense trouble: Automated discrimination and mass
surveillance in predictive policing in the Netherlands (EUR
35/2971/2020)

NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Patricia Lee
Reddy
Head of government: Jacinda Ardern

263

Investigations revealed that police had used
excessive force during arrests and failed in
their duty of care to detainees.

BACKGROUND
To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the
government enforced a state of emergency
from 25 March until 13 May and restricted
movement, mass gatherings and entry into
the country.
In August, the High Court ruled that during
the first nine days of the nationwide lockdown
the government acted in a necessary,
reasonable and proportionate way but
exercised powers which lacked legal basis for
those nine days.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In July, an inquiry into New
Zealand Defence Force (NZDF) in
Afghanistan operations in 2010 found that
the NZDF gave erroneous information
to ministers and the public about civilian
casualties over a number of years and failed
to follow up on credible allegations of torture
of a prisoner they had delivered into Afghan
detention.
In August, reports from recent inspections
of five secure mental health units within
hospitals under the Optional Protocol to the
UN Convention against Torture (OPCAT)
found that two units had practices amounting
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
including one unit which used seclusion
rooms as long-term bedrooms when facilities
were over capacity.
Prison inspections under OPCAT in April
and May observed that while the prisons’
overall COVID-19 response had been wellresourced, balanced and efficient, four out of
the nine prisons “had difficulties ensuring
that all prisoners received one hour of fresh
air on a daily basis”. A Department of
Corrections review of this practice in May
found
that inconsistent manual documentation
practices meant that it was unclear whether
minimum entitlements had been met in all
instances.

264

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In February, the Independent Police Conduct
Authority (IPCA) found that a police officer
had unjustifiably kicked a 13-year-old boy in
the head during arrest. In April, the IPCA
found in a separate incident that a police
officer was not justified in punching a 13year-old boy during arrest, and that the police
had failed in their duty of care to arrange
immediate medical attention for an obvious
head injury after the arrest.
In August, the IPCA found the police had
failed in their duty of care to a man who died
after being in police custody. It found
insufficient assessment and monitoring, and
incorrect application of a spit hood.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
The Community Sponsorship of
Refugees pilot, a community-led
complementary pathway to the governmentled Refugee Quota Programme, received a
further three years of funding in
the government budget.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In March, the Abortion Legislation Act was
enacted, allowing women to seek an abortion
without restrictions within the first 20 weeks
of their pregnancy. After 20 weeks, women
must consult a qualified health practitioner to
assess their physical and mental health and
well-being.

NICARAGUA
Republic of Nicaragua
Head of state and government: Daniel Ortega Saavedra

Nicaragua’s human rights crisis continued
throughout 2020, as did the authorities'
strategy of repressing dissent. The
government’s response to the COVID-19
pandemic ignored the health
recommendations of international
organizations. Arbitrary arrests and
detentions of political activists continued

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and new threatening laws against dissent
were adopted. Hundreds of migrant workers
and asylum-seekers from Nicaragua seeking
to return to the country in the context of the
pandemic faced obstacles imposed by the
government. Impunity persisted for those
suspected of criminal responsibility for
violence against Indigenous Peoples.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Despite recommendations of international
organizations in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, the Nicaraguan authorities
promoted mass gatherings where social
distancing was not possible. In April, the Pan
American Health Organization (PAHO)
expressed concern about the Nicaraguan
government’s response to COVID-19, which
did not include promoting social distancing
measures, but rather called for mass
gatherings. PAHO also described the
prevention and control processes
implemented by the authorities as
inadequate.1 In May, PAHO added that,
despite repeated requests and the
government’s response that it would allow
PAHO to visit health facilities and provide
detailed information, the authorities took no
action.
Local groups highlighted the lack of
information that the government provided
about the pandemic and public policies for
prevention, diagnosis and containment. The
OHCHR also noted with concern the lack of
state transparency regarding official
information about the response to COVID-19.
By August, at least 31 health workers had
been dismissed from their jobs in the public
sector, according to the Citizen Observatory
COVID-19 Nicaragua and local lawyers.
These dismissals occurred after workers
expressed concerns about their working
conditions, the lack of personal protective
equipment (PPE), or made public their
concerns about the state response to the
pandemic.2
In the context of COVID-19, the situation of
political activists and those perceived as
government opponents who remained
detained in Nicaragua’s precarious,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

overcrowded and unsanitary prison system
was especially concerning. Moreover, reports
of the poor supply of drinking water and lack
of adequate medical care and medicine
within the prison system continued.3
Local organizations and relatives of
individuals whose detention was politically
motivated reported that some of these
detainees suffered from serious pre-existing
health problems that render them especially
vulnerable to COVID-19. In addition, they
reported that none of them was tested for
COVID-19 or receiving proper health care.4 In
May, the OHCHR expressed concern over
reports that approximately 40 of these
detainees had presented symptoms
consistent with COVID-19 and/or suffered
from chronic health conditions.

FREEDOMS OF ASSOCIATION,
ASSEMBLY AND EXPRESSION
The authorities continued targeting
journalists, human rights defenders and local
NGOs. By the end of 2020, the legal
registration of nine human rights
organizations, which had been cancelled by
the National Assembly in December 2018,
had not been restored and their assets
remained confiscated. In June, the National
Assembly cancelled the legal registration of
an additional NGO that worked in the
municipality of Camoapa. Later, in August,
Fundación del Río reported that six of its
properties, including reforestation areas and
nature reserves, had been
arbitrarily confiscated.
Throughout the year, reports of illegitimate
restrictions on the right of peaceful assembly
continued. The OHCHR and the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) received reports of different
demonstrations and public events that were
repressed or restricted by the government or
pro-government groups.
Between March and mid-July, the
Observatory of Aggressions on the
Independent Press of Nicaragua reported
351 aggressions, including the
criminalization of journalists, arbitrary
detentions and the harassment of media

265

workers and their families. Additionally,
between mid-July and mid-December the
Observatory received reports of 943
aggressions.
In October, the National Assembly
approved the Law for the Regulation of
Foreign Agents and the Special Law on
Cyber-crimes. The following month, the
National Assembly approved, on first reading,
a reform of the Constitution that would allow
lifetime imprisonment. In the current context,
there was a well-founded fear that these laws
would be used to target people who speak
out against repressive policies and call for
respect for human rights.
In December, the Law for the Defence of
the Rights of the People to Independence,
Sovereignty and Self-Determination for Peace
was approved by the Assembly. The same
month, the General Secretariat of the
Organization of American States stated that
this law seeks to restrict political rights and
jeopardize fundamental rights enshrined in
international instruments.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Hundreds of people have been incarcerated
since April 2018 for the free exercise of their
rights. By December, local organizations
reported that more than 100 of them
remained in prison. Arbitrary arrests and
detentions of political activists were reported
even during the pandemic.
Additionally, political activists released
from prison reported harassment and
surveillance by the authorities and progovernment groups. As of early December, at
least 31 people held for political reasons had
been re-arrested after being released,
according to local organizations.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Local NGOs and communities continued to
report the presence of non-Indigenous
settlers on their lands, as well as threats and
attacks by settlers. Despite the fact that some
of the attacks resulted in deaths of
Indigenous people, according to local
organizations and media reports, no special
protection measures were put in place by the

266

government to establish responsibility for the
killings or to prevent future attacks.
1. Nicaragua: Government increases risk of COVID-19 infection in a
country already devastated by two years of crisis (Press release, 16
April)
2. Nicaragua: International organizations call on president Ortega to
stop harassment and arbitrary dismissals of health workers (Press
release, 17 June)
3. Prison and the pandemic: The lethal cocktail used by the Nicaraguan
government against those who criticize them (Press release, 10
August)
4. ‘She doesn’t want to die there’: Women activists punished with jail in
Nicaragua amid COVID-19 (Press release, 14 August)

NIGER
Republic of Niger
Head of state: Mahamadou Issoufou
Head of government: Brigi Rafini
Freedoms of expression and peaceful
assembly were routinely violated; civil
society members and journalists who
criticized government policy were targeted.
New legislation allowed the authorities to
intercept electronic communications,
without adequate oversight by an
independent authority. Armed groups
committed human rights abuses against the
population. At least 72 people were
extrajudicially executed and dozens forcibly
disappeared by the army in Tillabéry.

BACKGROUND
Presidential and legislative elections were
held in December. The National Commission
for Political Dialogue acceded to opposition
demands by rescheduling local elections to
December, but differences persisted over the
composition of the Independent National
Electoral Commission and the electoral
enrolment of Nigeriens abroad.
In February, a Ministry of Defence audit of
government contracts was leaked and
revealed allegations of misuse of defence
funds within the Ministry. Opposition and civil
society members responded with demands

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

that those suspected of being involved be
held accountable.
The government declared a state of
emergency on 27 March to respond to the
COVID-19 pandemic. On 30 March, the
authorities released 1,540 prisoners to ease
overcrowding and thereby reduce the risk of
COVID-19 infection. One of those released
was Hama Amadou, an opposition leader.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists, human rights defenders and civil
society activists were arrested after they
demanded government accountability in
connection with the leaked Ministry of
Defence audit, or otherwise criticized
government measures to control the spread
of COVID-19. The authorities used the 2019
Cybercriminality Act to arrest people for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression.
In March, police arrested Mamane Kaka
Touda, a journalist, for “disseminating data
likely to disturb public order” after he posted
a Facebook message which warned about a
potential COVID-19 case in the Niamey
General Hospital. In the same month, he was
convicted by a court in the capital, Niamey,
and received a three-month suspended
sentence. In April, the same charges were
used against Mahaman Lawali Mahaman
Nassourou, a member of the Network of
Organizations for Transparency and
Budgetary Analysis (ROTAB) after he shared
a WhatsApp message from a religious
organization which denounced the closure of
places of worship in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. He was detained for
one month and provisionally released on 25
May.
Also, in April, Ali Idrissa, the ROTAB Coordinator, was arrested and charged with
defamation and “disseminating data likely to
disturb public order” for posting a message
on Facebook about the involvement of
military officers in the misuse of defence
funds. He was released without charge after
five days.
In June, Samira Sabou, a journalist, was
subject to the same charges after the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

President’s son complained about a
comment on his role in the alleged misuse of
defence funds, which had been made by
another user on her Facebook page. In July,
the Niamey High Court dismissed the
charges and she was released after 48 days
in detention.

Mass surveillance
In May, the National Assembly voted to pass
the Interception of Electronic
Communications law which authorized the
government to intercept electronic
communications for the purpose of national
security and threatened to seriously
undermine the rights to privacy and freedom
of expression. The law did not provide for an
independent authority to sanction
surveillance requests, or for a body which
could adequately oversee interceptions.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 13 March, the government banned all
gatherings of over 1,000 people as a
measure to control the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic. On 15 March, security
forces brutally suppressed a demonstration in
Niamey organized by civil society
organizations which called for an
investigation into the audit that revealed the
Defence Ministry had misused funds.
Security forces prevented the protesters’
access to a venue where they intended to
hold their demonstration and fired tear gas to
disperse them, resulting in a fire at Tagabati
market in which three people died.
Six of the organizers were arrested in the
following days on trumped-up charges
including complicity in the damage of public
property, arson and manslaughter. On 1 May,
three of them, Moussa Tchangari, the
General Secretary of Alternative Espaces
Citoyens, Habibou Soumaila, member of
Tournons La Page Niger (TLP Niger) and Sani
Chekaraou, President of the Niamey
Wholesalers’ Association, were provisionally
released. On 29 September, the remaining
three, Maikoul Zodi, Co-ordinator of TLP
Niger, Halidou Mounkaila of the teachers’

267

union SYNACEB, and Moudi Moussa, a
journalist, were also provisionally released.

WOMENS’ AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Niger failed to implement the 2019
concluding observations of the Human Rights
Committee which recommended changes to
legislation to provide safe access to abortion
for women and girls. Abortion was still
criminalized in Niger and only allowed in
instances where the mother’s life is at risk.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In January, the High Court in Agadez ruled
sit-ins held by asylum-seekers in front of the
office of UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, to
be illegal. The asylum-seekers had been
protesting against the refugee camp living
conditions and resettlement delays. Following
the ruling, the police violently dispersed the
sit-ins, forcing protesters to return to the
UNHCR camp where some of them
destroyed part of the camp. Subsequently,
the police arrested 336 asylum-seekers. They
were charged for “organized rebellion” and
“arson”. On 10 February, the High Court in
Agadez convicted 111 of them, including one
woman, on these charges. After being given
suspended sentences ranging from six to 12
months, they were released.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed attacks continued and emergency law
was maintained in several departments of
Diffa, Tahoua and Tillabéry, and extended
during the year to Kollo and Balléyera, also in
the Tillabéry region.
Armed groups, including the Islamic State
in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) and the Islamic
State in West Africa Province, perpetrated
human rights abuses including abductions
and unlawful killings.
On 9 May, unidentified gunmen killed 20
men in the villages of Gadabo, Zibane-Koira
and Zibane-Tegui in the Tillabéry region.
On 25 June, 10 humanitarian workers with
the NGO APIS, were abducted by gunmen in
Bossey Bangou in the Tillabéry region while
they were distributing food to residents. On 9
August, eight visitors to the Kouré giraffe

268

reserve in Tillabéry, including seven
humanitarian workers, were killed by ISGS
members.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between 27 March and 3 April, at least 115
people were forcibly disappeared by the army
who were deployed in Tillabéry as part of
operation Almahou. The authorities denied
any responsibility on the part of the army.
On 4 September, the National Human
Rights Commission published its report on
these incidents and concluded that the army
was responsible for the enforced
disappearances and that 72 of the
disappeared had been extrajudicially
executed by soldiers and their bodies buried
in at least six mass graves. The fate or
whereabouts of the others remained
unknown at the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH AND WORKING
CONDITIONS OF HEALTH WORKERS
The authorities failed to provide health
workers who treated COVID-19 patients with
adequate PPE, despite the announced
recruitment of 1,500 additional health
personnel, who were deployed from July
onward.
The ban on motorbikes due to the
emergency law in several departments also
negatively impacted the accessibility of health
centres to the population.

NIGERIA
Federal Republic of Nigeria
Head of state and government: Muhammadu Buhari

Both the armed group Boko Haram and
Nigerian security forces continued to
commit serious crimes in the north-east,
including war crimes and likely crimes
against humanity. Boko Haram killed
hundreds of civilians and carried out
abductions which targeted women and girls.
Government forces carried out
indiscriminate attacks against villages and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

continued to detain thousands in inhumane
conditions. In the north-western and northcentral regions, over 1,500 people died in
inter-communal violence and bandit
attacks. Everywhere, excessive use of force
resulting in unlawful killings, and torture
and other ill-treatment were widespread.
The fate of hundreds of Islamic Movement
of Nigeria (IMN) members who disappeared
in 2015 remained unknown. Meanwhile,
impunity for such crimes persisted. The
rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly and association were
routinely violated. In the context of
COVID-19, gender-based violence increased
and the right to health was undermined.
Thousands of people were forcibly evicted
from their homes.

Daciya Dalep, a 22-year-old student, was
executed by a child soldier.
At least 30 civilians were killed in February
when members of Boko Haram attacked
people trying to enter the town of Auno. In
June, around 81 people were killed and
several others abducted during an attack on
the village of Faduma Kolomdi. In October,
some 20 farmers were killed in Boko Haram
attacks in the villages of Ngwom and
Moromti.
Throughout the year, Boko Haram
abducted hundreds of women and girls and
subjected them to rape and forced marriage,
including 20 who were taken in July when
they were searching for firewood near the
Gamboru internally displaced people’s camp
in Borno state.

BACKGROUND

Humanitarian workers

In January, Chad withdrew its troops from
Nigerian territory. The Chadian troops were
part of the Multinational Joint Task Force, a
regional initiative established to counter
armed group attacks in the region. In March,
at least 50 soldiers were killed in a Boko
Haram ambush in Yobe state.
In March, the government introduced
measures to control the spread of COVID-19,
including an initial lockdown on non-essential
activities, a curfew, school closures and a
ban on international and domestic flights.
Restrictions were gradually eased and then
lifted in September.

In June, the Islamic State West Africa
Province (ISWAP), a Boko Haram faction,
threatened to target aid workers,
humanitarian facilities and anyone it believed
to have “helped” the military.
On 15 January, following negotiations with
the authorities, ISWAP released five aid
workers – two women and three men – who
had been abducted outside Maiduguri a
month earlier. On 22 July, the same group
executed five aid workers it had abducted in
June on the Monguno-Maiduguri road in
Borno state.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS

More than 1,531 people died and thousands
were displaced in inter-communal violence
mostly between herdsmen and farming
communities, as well as in attacks by
bandits, in the north-central and northwestern regions. More than 1,015 people
were taken hostage by unidentified gunmen;
in December, over 300 students of
Government Science Secondary School in
Kankara in Katsina state were abducted from
their hostels, although they were released a
few days later. The violence forced many
farming families to flee to urban areas or
displacement camps.

Boko Haram continued to commit grave
human rights abuses in the north-east,
including killings and abductions of civilians,
which amounted to war crimes and may have
constituted crimes against humanity. More
than 420 civilians died in around 45 attacks,
many of them in Borno state, but also in
Adamawa and Yobe. Meanwhile, Boko
Haram continued to recruit child soldiers.
In Adamawa state, on 20 January, Boko
Haram members beheaded Reverend Lawan
Andimi, 18 days after abducting him in
Michika, Adamawa state. In the same month,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS

269

Between January and July, at least 366
people were killed in villages in Kaduna state
by suspected herders. In May, some 74
people were reportedly killed in Sokoto state
when gunmen attacked four villages in the
Sabon Birni Local Government Area.
Civilians were also killed when government
forces launched indiscriminate attacks
against Boko Haram. On 13 April, at least 10
children and seven women were among
those killed when the Air Force accidentally
bombed the village of Sakotoku in Damboa
Local Government Area in Borno state.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Thousands of people were internally
displaced by inter-communal violence and
attacks by armed groups in the northern
regions. Many were also displaced as a result
of military attacks against Boko Haram. On 3
January, soldiers razed the villages of Bukarti,
Ngariri and Matiri, forcing hundreds of
residents to flee to a camp near Maiduguri in
Borno state. In September, the Borno state
Governor facilitated the return of around
1,000 people, who had been displaced for
years, to their homes in the town of Baga.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The security forces committed grave human
rights violations, including torture and other
ill-treatment, and the use of excessive force
which resulted, on some occasions, in
unlawful killings.
In January, security agents shot and
injured five IMN members during a protest to
demand the release of their leader, Sheikh
Ibraheem El-Zakzaky, and his wife, Zeenah,
in Abuja.
The authorities repressed human rights,
including the rights to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and freedom of
movement. Such violations were prevalent in
the context of enforcing COVID-19 measures:
between 30 March and 13 April, at least 18
people were killed by the Nigerian
Correctional Service, the police and the
military. The National Human Rights
Commission documented 105 complaints of
human rights violations between March and

270

mid-April, including the use of excessive
force perpetrated by security forces in 24 of
the country’s 36 states and in the Federal
Capital Territory Abuja.
On 23 August, security forces opened fire
on unarmed members of the separatist group
the Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB), who
were holding a meeting at a school in Emene
in Enugu state, killing at least four people.
Witnesses said officers of the Department of
State Services (DSS), police and military were
at the scene, some of whom shot directly at
IPOB members who were carrying stones
and sticks. The authorities said two security
force officers were also killed in the incident.
In October, security forces used excessive
force to disperse peaceful protests and
assemblies, including the #EndSARS
demonstrations, resulting in the deaths of 56
protesters, bystanders and members of the
security forces. (SARS - the Special AntiRobbery Squad - is a unit of the police tasked
with fighting violent crime.)

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The military continued to detain thousands of
people. They arbitrarily arrested and detained
those suspected of links to Boko Haram.
Detainees were denied access to their family
members and lawyers and were not brought
before courts. Children who fled Boko
Haram-controlled areas were also arrested
and held in military detention facilities,
including Giwa barracks in Maiduguri and the
Kainji military base in Niger state. In June,
602 Boko Haram suspects were released to
the Borno state government for resettlement.
The military flouted an Abuja High Court
order in July for the release of Martins
Idakpini, an army officer who was detained in
June after he publicly condemned the
military’s handling of the fight against Boko
Haram insurgents.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The use of torture and other ill-treatment
remained pervasive throughout the criminal
justice system and was perpetrated by the
police (particularly the SARS), the DSS and
the military.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Throughout the year, security agencies,
including police, military and DSS officers,
arbitrarily detained and subjected people to
enforced disappearance.
Security agencies had not yet accounted
for about 600 members of the IMN who went
missing in 2015, following an incident in
which at least 347 IMN members were killed
by the military in Kaduna state.
There was no news of Abubakar Idris (also
known as Abu Hanifa Dadiyata), an activist
and government critic, who was abducted in
August 2019 by unidentified armed men
from his home in Kaduna.

IMPUNITY
The government failed to promptly,
thoroughly and effectively investigate
allegations of human rights violations and
abuses or bring suspected perpetrators to
justice. In particular, no genuine steps were
taken to investigate or prosecute crimes
under international law committed by Boko
Haram or the Nigerian military in the context
of the conflict in the north-east.
The government had still not released its
report on the findings of a presidential panel
which had claimed to investigate the
military’s compliance with human rights
obligations and the rules of engagement. In
December, the ICC Prosecutor announced
the closure of the court’s preliminary
examination and stated that she would
request authorization from the judges of the
Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court to open
investigations.
The authorities continually ignored court
orders and undermined the rule of law. In
March, the Attorney General defied an Abuja
Federal High Court order to hand over the
soldiers who were allegedly responsible for
killing three policemen in Taraba state in
August 2019.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities used repressive laws to
harass, intimidate, arrest and detain human
rights defenders, activists, media workers

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and perceived critics. Non-state actors also
subjected journalists to intimidation,
harassment and beatings.
The Social Media and Hate Speech bills
remained before the Senate at the end of the
year. If enacted, there could be an increased
risk of repression of human rights, including
the right to freedom of expression.
In April, in Ebonyi state, police arrested
The Sun newspaper journalist Chijioke Agwu
after he published an article on a Lassa fever
outbreak. Peter Okutu, of the Vanguard
newspaper, was arrested for his report about
a military attack on the Umuogodoakpu-Ngbo
community in the Ohaukwu Local
Government Area. They were both released a
few hours after their arrests.
Also in April, Mubarak Bala, President of
the Humanist Association of Nigeria, was
arrested by Kano state Police Command
officers on allegations that he had insulted
the Prophet Muhammad on Facebook. He
remained in detention, without charge or
access to lawyers at the end of the year,
despite a 21 December order for his release
by the Federal High Court of Abuja.
The authorities took measures to limit
broadcast media’s ability to carry out their
constitutional watchdog roles. In August, the
federal government amended the Nigerian
Broadcasting Code, increasing the fine for
“hate speech” from NGN500,000
(US$1,300) to NGN5 million (US$13,000).
The National Broadcasting Commission fined
Channels TV, Arise TV and African
Independence Television for reporting on the
#EndSARS protests in October, citing alleged
violation of the broadcasting code, including
the use of “unverified online video footage”.
In November, Amnesty International
Nigeria received threats and harassment
from a group calling itself the Centre for
Africa Liberation and Socio-Economic Rights
after it had issued a statement on reports of
killings of peaceful protesters at the Lekki Toll
Gate in Lagos state. The group issued an
ultimatum for Amnesty International to leave
the country within seven days. The group’s
spokesperson also threatened to attack the

271

staff, supporters and premises of Amnesty
International.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Prison conditions
Prisons remained chronically overcrowded
and around 70% of inmates were in pre-trial
detention, some for over five years. In April,
the federal government announced the
release of 2,600 prisoners in an amnesty to
reduce overcrowding and control the spread
of COVID-19. On 31 March, six inmates in
Kaduna Correctional Centre were killed by
prison guards following a protest sparked by
fears of the spread of COVID-19.

Health workers
Health workers were not adequately
protected from COVID-19 infection. Working
conditions were hazardous as a result of PPE
shortages, dilapidated and over-stretched
health facilities, low wages and harassment
by security forces. These were among the
reasons for the strike by the National
Association of Resident Doctors in June.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence, including sexual
violence, against women and girls was
widespread.
In February, over 200 women’s groups
took to the streets in Abuja to protest against
the physical attack by Enugu state police on
Goodness Ibangha, a lawyer for the NGO
Women’s Aid Collective.
According to official statistics, over 3,600
rapes were recorded during the COVID-19
lockdown. Barakat Bello, aged 18, and
Uwaila Omozuwa, aged 22, were raped and
killed in separate incidents in May and June.
In June, governors in all states announced
their intention to declare a state of
emergency to tackle rape and other genderbased violence against women and children.
They also agreed to impose harsher
punishments against perpetrators.
In September, a Kogi state Commissioner
was prosecuted for rape, and a Federal High
Court in Abuja ordered a Senator to pay
NGN50 million (US$130,000) in

272

compensation to a woman he had physically
and verbally assaulted in 2019. The Senator’s
appeal against the decision was pending at
the end of the year.
By the end of the year, 17 of the 36 states
had adopted legislation which provided
protection from gender-based violence.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Gay men, lesbians and bisexual people
continued to be arrested by security agents
on the basis of their sexuality, and gay men
were subjected to blackmail and extortion by
mobs and individuals.
In October, a court in Lagos dismissed a
case against 47 men prosecuted for public
displays of affection with members of the
same sex at a hotel in Lagos in 2018.

RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED
EVICTIONS
Authorities in the Federal Capital Territory,
Lagos and Benue states forcibly evicted
thousands of people without adequate notice,
compensation or the provision of alternative
accommodation. In January, the Navy used
live ammunition over a two-day period to
forcibly evict hundreds of families from their
land in Tarkwa Bay, Lagos state. Some
residents said their children went missing
during the incident.
In April, Lagos state officials demolished
around 10 houses during a forced eviction in
Yaya Abatan in Ogba.
In May, more than 20 houses were
destroyed in the Logo 1 area of Makurdi in
Benue state, overseen by armed police. The
Benue state Governor denied any
involvement in the demolition and failed to
investigate the incident.
In August, hundreds of houses were
demolished, and thousands of people were
displaced at the Nepa Junction settlement in
Apo in the Federal Capital Territory, while
armed police dispersed residents with tear
gas, resulting in some residents being
hospitalized.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 31 December, residents of Monkey
Village in the Opebi area of Lagos state were
forcibly evicted when houses and buildings
were demolished by bulldozers with the aid of
police and thugs.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to impose death sentences,
but no executions were carried out. In
August, Yahaya Sharif-Aminu, a musician,
was sentenced to death by hanging for
blasphemy by the Upper Shari’a Court in
Kano.

NORTH KOREA
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Head of state: Kim Jong-un
Head of government: Kim Tok-hun (replaced Kim Jaeryong in August)
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
authorities enforced even more severe
restrictions on the rights to freedom of
movement and expression. Significant parts
of the population suffered from food
shortages and inadequate health care. The
government continued to refuse entry to the
UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, amid numerous reports
of arbitrary detention and gender-based
violence.

BACKGROUND
The government reported no cases of
COVID-19 during the year. On 24 July, it
ordered a lockdown of the city of Kaesong on
the border with South Korea, after it
suspected a man who had returned from
South Korea of being infected with the virus.
He eventually tested negative for COVID-19.
The government ended the lockdown on 14
August.
Relations with South Korea deteriorated.
The Inter-Korean liaison office in Kaesong
was closed on 30 January to prevent the
spread of COVID-19. In June, authorities
warned that they would destroy the office,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

while condemning the South Korean
government for failing to stop North Korean
activists living in South Korea from sending
politically sensitive leaflets over the border
using balloons and drones. On 16 June, the
authorities demolished the office building.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
On 22 January, the authorities closed all
borders and imposed a total ban on the
movement of people and goods in and out of
the country, to prevent the spread of
COVID-19. Prior to this, North Koreans
already needed to secure government
approval to leave the country. Due to the
reinforced border security measures, only
195 North Koreans resettled in South Korea
between 1 January and 30 September, the
lowest number since 2003 when records
were first made available.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
On 22 September, the military shot dead a
South Korean civilian official floating on an
object in North Korean waters after
questioning him at a distance. Three days
later, the government issued a public apology
to the South Korean President but did not
mention whether an investigation or judicial
procedures had been initiated into the killing.
Earlier that month, foreign media reported
that the Ministry of Social Security had
empowered border guards to shoot
unauthorized people coming within 1km of
the North Korean-Chinese border, as part of
the stricter border security measures to
prevent COVID-19 infections.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
More than 70% of North Koreans who left the
country and settled in South Korea since
2003 were women and girls. Some of these
North Korean women told Amnesty
International that sexual and other violence
against women and girls was common in
their home country, but the topic was taboo
and people often blamed the victim.
Frequently, the women remained silent about
such abuses, even when continuing to suffer
similar treatment after leaving North Korea.

273

Reports of North Korean women who were
sexually abused by officials in South Korea
after their arrival revealed the wider
phenomenon of continuing violence faced by
women during different stages of their
journey. Women and girls were subjected to
rape and other forms of gender-based
violence by human traffickers who facilitated
their passage out of the country. As North
Korean women illegally entering China faced
a high risk of being arrested and forcibly
repatriated, human traffickers were able to
coerce them into sex work or forced
marriage. The UN reported instances where
women were subjected to physical abuse,
unnecessary and invasive body searches, or
other forms of ill-treatment by North Korean
authorities after being arrested in China,
forcibly repatriated, and detained.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
A lack of medical supplies, exacerbated by
the imposition of UN sanctions since 2017,
left the country ill-prepared for public health
emergencies, including the COVID-19
pandemic. According to individuals who
worked in North Korea’s health sector, the
scarcity of resources prompted the emerging
middle class to secure medicines or health
services in the informal economy, or so-called
“grey markets”. The resulting pay-for-care
system for those who could afford it existed
alongside the official system of nominally free
medical care.1 The border closure and
stricter security measures further interrupted
humanitarian aid supplies, legal imports and
smuggling of goods into the country, causing
a shortage of medicines in the markets.
Many aid agencies temporarily withdrew
their operations because of health and safety
concerns during the COVID-19 pandemic. A
number of UN agencies and NGOs were
nonetheless able to obtain exemptions from
UN sanctions and managed to bring
materials including medicines and personal
protective equipment into the country.

RIGHTS TO FOOD, WATER AND
SANITATION
The UN estimated that half of the country’s
schools and health facilities lacked access to
safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. It
estimated that 10 million people were food
insecure and in urgent need of food
assistance. Nineteen per cent of children
suffered from chronic malnutrition, which
was also linked to diseases arising from
unsafe drinking water and poor sanitation.
The border closures significantly reduced
food imports, causing a surge in grey market
food prices. This brought another challenge
to a poverty-stricken population that
depended on these markets for much of its
food supply. Heavy rains and typhoons in
August and September caused damage to
infrastructure and farmland, including where
food production was concentrated, increasing
the risk of food shortages.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities made no improvements in
allowing information exchange between
people inside and outside the country. All
communications continued to be strictly
controlled, and only a select few from the
ruling elite were able to access the internet or
international mobile phone services. The
general population relied on imported mobile
phones and data SIM cards available in the
grey markets to reach people abroad.
According to people from North Korea who
spoke to Amnesty International, any
communications on these phones were
subject to heavy surveillance and signal
jamming by the authorities. Individuals
caught using them to communicate with
people outside the country, especially
concerning COVID-19, could be charged with
crimes such as espionage, and faced the risk
of arrest, detention and harsh punishment.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The government continued to deny the
existence of four known political prison
camps, where up to 120,000 people
remained detained and subjected to torture,

274

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

forced labour and other ill-treatment, and
harsh conditions including inadequate food.
Many of them had not been convicted of any
internationally recognizable criminal offence
and were arbitrarily detained solely because
they were related to people who were
deemed a threat to the state or for “guilt-byassociation”. Others were detained for
exercising their rights, such as the freedom to
leave their own country.
At least six South Korean nationals were in
custody. Three of them were missionaries
serving life sentences and three were
originally North Koreans who had moved to
the South. The authorities denied their rights
to access South Korean diplomats, lawyers of
their choice, or their families.
1. North Korea: No COVID-19 cases? Two medical professionals tell their
story (News story, 9 July)

NORTH MACEDONIA
Republic of North Macedonia
Head of state: Stevo Pendarovski
Head of government: Zoran Zaev (until 3 January and
from 20 August); Oliver Spasovki (caretaker from 6
January, until July elections)
Despite the implementation of reforms
identified by the European Commission
(EC), concerns remained about impunity,
hate speech, discrimination against women,
Roma, and LGBTI people. Unlawful
detention and pushbacks of refugees and
migrants continued.

BACKGROUND
The EC approved the start of accession talks
in March, recognizing progress in judicial,
policing and security service reform and in
addressing organized crime and corruption.
In September, the government announced a
media reform programme, which included
addressing the proliferation of “fake news”.
Following the outbreak of COVID-19, states
of emergency were declared from mid-March
and lifted in mid-June to enable campaigning
for parliamentary elections in July. The police

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

were selective in enforcing compliance with
curfews and the ban on religious or public
gatherings.
In April, the government cut NGO funding
by €525,000, compromising their ability to
deliver essential services. Courts barely
functioned, making slow progress in
prosecuting individuals charged with violating
COVID-19 restrictions.

IMPUNITY
Legislation in March closed the Special
Prosecution Office, created in 2015 with
jurisdiction over alleged serious crimes,
including human rights violations, by former
government ministers and officials. Over 20
unprosecuted cases were transferred to the
Public Prosecutor. The trial of the former
secret police chief and Interior Minister for
their involvement in unlawful surveillance
continued. In June, former Special
Prosecutor Katica Janeva was sentenced to
seven years’ imprisonment for abuse of
office.
North Macedonia had not yet ratified the
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,
signed in February 2007.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination based on ethnicity, religion,
gender and sexual orientation persisted, often
fuelled by the pandemic. Hate speech and
misinformation on social media often targeted
Albanian citizens. The Helsinki Committee for
Human Rights reported an 80% increase in
anti-Islamic hate speech before the elections,
and in July filed five criminal charges for
spreading hatred.

Roma
Roma suffered discrimination in accessing
COVID-19-related financial benefits. Instead
of government support, vulnerable families
received occasional humanitarian packages
from NGOs and some municipalities. The
National Roma Centrum also assisted Roma
families required to self-isolate.
In March, nine Roma musicians who had
travelled through Italy in a 200-person

275

convoy were quarantined for five days at an
army barracks on entering North Macedonia,
then released; non-Roma travellers were told
to self-isolate at home.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people
In May, the Constitutional Court struck out
the 2019 Law on Prevention and Protection
against Discrimination, which recognized
discrimination based on gender identity and
sexual orientation, for procedural reasons. In
October, Parliament reinstated the law, but
failed to ensure the independence of the
Discrimination Commission. In August, the
president of the Tetovo-based NGO LGBTUnited was assaulted, receiving head and
eye injuries.

Women

taken to Skopje hospital, she had to wait six
hours for her COVID-19 test result before
admission. By then, the baby had died.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
Almost half of the 172 asylum claims lodged
by the end of June were made by individuals
unlawfully detained as witnesses in
proceedings against smugglers; one
applicant was granted temporary protection.
The NGO Macedonian Young Lawyers
Association reported that by 30 September
24,153 refugees and migrants had been
prevented from entering the country or were
unlawfully pushed back to Greece.

NORWAY

Employers failed to implement COVID-19related measures to assist working parents,
disproportionately affecting women, some of
whom had their wages unlawfully reduced if
they took time off. In the textile industry,
women were threatened with lay-offs, nonrenewal of contracts, or – as in Štip, in June –
required to work through a weekend curfew.
The government failed to fully implement
recommendations from NGOs to protect
women and children fleeing domestic
violence.

Kingdom of Norway
Head of state: Harald V
Head of government: Erna Solberg

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

In April, the government rolled out the mobile
application Smittestopp (“infection stop”) to
track possible COVID-19 infections. The
contact tracing app put the right to privacy
and security of hundreds of thousands of
people at risk. After heavy criticism, the app
was suspended and all collected data deleted
in June.1

During the pandemic, state clinics could not
provide routine sexual health and
reproductive services; the NGO HERA
prioritized services for Roma and other
vulnerable women.
In March, the CEDAW Committee ordered
North Macedonia to provide reparation to six
pregnant Roma women unlawfully evicted
from their homes in the capital, Skopje, in
August 2016.
According to the NGO European Roma
Rights Centre, a Roma woman died in March
during a procedure to remove her dead baby.
She was twice refused admittance at Ohrid
hospital, despite presenting with pain, then
an infection and fever. When she was finally

276

The government suspended its invasive
COVID-19 tracing mobile application which
risked the right to privacy. Violence against
women remained a serious concern. A
consultation took place on a draft law on
human rights in business and supply
chains.

MASS SURVEILLANCE

DISCRIMINATION
Sex-workers’ rights
Public health restrictions introduced on 12
March to limit the spread of the COVID-19
virus curtailed people’s freedom of movement
and assembly, including that of sex workers
(80% of whom are women). Despite being
temporarily prohibited from selling sex from

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

March until 27 April, sex workers were
excluded from, and largely unable to access,
state-funded emergency financial aid
packages. This meant some may have been
compelled to continue to sell sex despite the
risks.

Violence against women and girls
The number of rape cases reported to the
police decreased by 10% between 2018 and
2019 and continued to decrease in 2020. It
was not clear whether the decrease was
caused by a reduction in the incidents of
rape, or by a reduced willingness to report
rape.
In June, the Director of Public
Prosecutions published a report on the
quality of police investigations in rape cases.
The report noted some progress but
highlighted that in half of the reported rape
cases the lack of a timely and efficient
investigation was a problem.

INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
In May, the Ministry of Justice concluded that
a Rwandan national accused of complicity in
the 1994 Rwandan genocide would not be
extradited. The accused spent four years in
custody as the Ministry of Justice had
previously concluded he could be extradited
to Rwanda, but further investigation
concluded two prosecution witnesses were
not sufficiently credible.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
A public consultation was held on a draft law
on human rights in business operations and
supply chains. The government was expected
to present a proposal for a human rights due
diligence law to Parliament before the end of
June 2021.
In April, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) noted the
law but expressed concern, among other
things, about inadequate access to remedies
by non-nationals whose rights had allegedly
been violated by Norwegian companies
abroad.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

1. Bahrain, Kuwait and Norway contact tracing apps among most
dangerous for privacy (News story, 16 June)

OMAN
Sultanate of Oman
Head of state and government: Haitham bin Tariq
(replaced Qaboos bin Said Al Said in January)
Freedom of expression remained unduly
restricted, including through prosecutions
of and sentences against individuals for
publishing COVID-19-related information
deemed “false” by the government. Oman
amended the Foreign Residency Law,
removing the requirement for foreign
workers to obtain a “no objection
certificate” from their current employer to
change jobs. Women continued to face
discrimination in law and practice. Courts
handed down death sentences.

BACKGROUND
Oman continued its “Omanization” drive to
replace expatriates with Omani nationals in
the workforce.
In April, Oman acceded to the
International Convention against Enforced
Disappearance, the UN Convention against
Torture, and the ICESCR. However, it rejected
the competence of the UN Committee on
Enforced Disappearances and the Committee
against Torture to receive individual and
interstate complaints. The reservation to
Article 8 of the ICESCR impinged on the right
of public employees to unionize and strike.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government continued to unduly restrict
the right to freedom of expression, arresting
and sometimes prosecuting journalists and
online activists.
On 1 March, shortly after the first
confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Oman, the
new Sultan Haitham bin Tariq issued a
decree reaffirming the extraordinary powers
of the Internal Security Service (ISS) which
has an open-ended mandate “to combat

277

activities harmful to the Sultanate’s security
and stability” and has repeatedly been
implicated in the arrest of individuals for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression.
Also in March, the government prohibited
the circulation of all printed publications as
part of measures adopted to contain
COVID-19. It announced that several
individuals had been prosecuted and
sentenced, including publishers and
“purveyors of rumours”, for failing to abide by
COVID-19 regulations that prohibit
“spreading false news” or “inciting” against
the positions taken by state health agencies.
In June, the government established the
Cyber Defence Centre led by the head of the
Internal Security Service. The Centre was
afforded sweeping powers including to
inspect internet networks, information
systems and electronic devices of civil,
military and private institutions.
Also in June, the Ibri Court of First
Instance sentenced Awad al-Sawafi to a
suspended one-year term of imprisonment, a
fine and a ban on social media use for one
year for criticizing government agencies for
“their continuous intimidation of citizens” on
Twitter. The Court of Appeals later confirmed
the judgement. During the same month, the
Court of First Instance in Muscat, the capital,
sentenced former Shura Council member
Salem al-Awfi and journalist Adel al-Kasbi to
one year in prison for online comments about
corruption and justice. They were both
released on bail. In July, the ISS arrested
activist Ghazi al-Awlaqi for comments he
made on social media criticizing the
authorities for their intimidation of social
media users. He was released in September.
On 17 November, the Sultan pardoned
390 prisoners, including four of six prisoners
of conscience who had received life
sentences after unfair trials of Shuhuh people
in 2018 on vague charges related to national
security. The same month, police aggressively
entered two homes in the town of Khasab,
Musandam province, without a warrant and
arbitrarily detained several residents for a
week.

278

MIGRANT WORKERS
Migrant workers continued to be tied to their
employers through the kafala (sponsorship)
system, under which they depend on their
employer to enter the country and maintain a
legal residency status.
In June, Oman Royal Police passed an
amendment – effective from January 2021 –
allowing migrant workers to change jobs at
the end of their contracts without the
permission of their employers. It was unclear
whether domestic workers are covered by
this amendment. Prior to that, migrant
workers who moved jobs without the
permission of their employer were banned
from entering the country for two years.
The labour system coupled with migrant
workers’ insanitary living conditions,
including crowded labour accommodation
and inequitable access to medical care and
health insurance, put migrant workers in an
even more vulnerable position and at risk of
infection during the COVID-19 pandemic.1

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Discrimination against women continued in
law and practice, particularly in matters of
divorce, child custody and inheritance.
Specific legislation to address gender-based
violence remained absent. Oman maintained
its reservations on provisions of CEDAW,
including Article 9(2) which grants women
equal rights with men with respect to the
nationality of their children; and Article 16
which grants women equal rights in matters
relating to marriage and family relations.

DEATH PENALTY
No new death sentences were reported.
Three men and one woman were executed.
1. Oman: Ensure protection of migrant workers in COVID-19 response
(MDE 20/2166/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PAKISTAN
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Head of state: Arif Alvi
Head of government: Imran Khan
The crackdown on the media, civil society
and the political opposition intensified.
Frequent enforced disappearances
continued; nobody was held accountable.
COVID-19 created new challenges for
economic, social and cultural rights. Health
workers were detained for peacefully
exercising their right to freedom of
expression, and also came under attack at
their place of work. The Supreme Court
blocked efforts to relieve prison
overcrowding, despite the spread of
COVID-19 in prisons. Religious minorities
continued to be prosecuted under
blasphemy laws and attacked by non-state
actors. Violence against women remained
prevalent. Prime Minister Khan made
encouraging announcements to release
women prisoners and criminalize torture but
there was little progress in implementing
these measures. The Ministry of Human
Rights presided over critical reforms around
the death penalty and child abuse. The
National Commission on Human Rights
remained defunct.

BACKGROUND
For most of the year, the COVID-19 pandemic
overwhelmed the country’s health
infrastructure, paralysed educational
institutions and laid bare existing economic
inequalities. The outbreak dominated events
in Pakistan for most of 2020, as cases surged
after authorities lifted lockdowns prematurely
in a bid to stabilize the economy. Difficulties
in socially isolating meant that daily wage
earners and essential workers, as well as
prisoners, refugees, students and others,
were exposed to greater risks of infection.
The country returned to a policy of “smart
lockdowns” in June, isolating certain districts
and areas with a high number of reported
cases. Cases started dropping significantly in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

August, baffling medical experts, after which
the government relaxed restrictions.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Frontline health workers
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic,
health care facilities faced a severe shortage
of PPE. Doctors were photographed attending
to suspected COVID-19 patients wearing
plastic bags instead of face masks, protective
suits and gloves. Between March and July,
almost 5,400 health workers were infected
with COVID-19. At least 58 died. Balochistan
police used unnecessary and excessive force
against health workers protesting the lack of
PPE, resources and government support in
Quetta, Balochistan province. Some of the
protesters were arrested and detained for
almost 24 hours.
There were instances of violence against
health workers by police and members of the
public when they were forced to turn patients
away because hospitals were overwhelmed,
or when they did not immediately return the
bodies of COVID-19 victims to their families
as part of the protocol to control the spread of
the disease. They included a doctor who was
shot in the legs by a police officer on 17
June, another whose nose was broken by the
family member of a COVID-19 patient on 2
June, and an instance on 29 May where
women health workers were forced to lock
themselves in a room for their own protection
when their hospital quarters were vandalized
by angry people. No investigation into the
attacks was known to have been carried out
by the end of the year, and it remained
unclear whether the government provided
additional security to health workers following
repeated requests from hospitals. On 6 April,
security forces used excessive force against
peacefully protesting doctors in Quetta,
beating them with batons and detaining 53
health workers for at least 24 hours. In July,
doctors peacefully protesting the lack of
security were arrested in the region of Azad
Jammu and Kashmir.

279

Prisoners
Prison populations were well over the
maximum capacity and prisoners were
particularly vulnerable to contracting
COVID-19. The lack of adequate hygiene and
sanitation facilities, scarce medical
resources, inconsistent testing and the
inability of prisoners to socially distance all
contributed to easy transmission of the virus.
Prison authorities took steps to relieve
overcrowding. Directives from provincial
courts also allowed for the release of
prisoners considered especially vulnerable to
the virus. However, shortly after the releases
were ordered the Supreme Court intervened,
citing a technicality, and the prisoners were
re-arrested. By September, at least 1,800
prisoners had tested positive for COVID-19 in
prisons around the country. The true number
was probably higher, since insufficient
numbers of tests were conducted.
On 2 September, the Prime Minister
ordered officials to implement a Supreme
Court decision to release women prisoners
who were under trial, convicted of minor
offences or had served most of their term.
However, by the end of the year no list of
women prisoners had been prepared for
release and the government had not issued
any special notification to facilitate the
process.

DISCRIMINATION
Amid the economic impact of the pandemic,
there was a surge in charity drives to help
support those who had lost their livelihoods.
Despite this, members of the persecuted
Ahmadiyya community were reportedly
denied alms and donations on account of
their faith. Calls were circulated on social
media by religious organizations asking
charities to ensure that Ahmadis did not
receive food supplies or other essentials.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The closure of factories producing nonessential items, disruptions in supply chains
and travel restrictions resulted in tens of
thousands of workers being laid off. The

280

government announced in April it would
create 60,000 jobs to hire these workers to
support its reforestation drive. This was
implemented partially. Pakistan’s social
security systems remained crippled by a lack
of resources; most re-employment
programmes were ad hoc.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The government closed schools and
universities for almost six months to prevent
the spread of COVID-19, forcing classes to
move online. Internet coverage remained
inadequate, with some 68% of the population
having limited or no access, especially in
remote areas. This negatively affected the
right to education of many students who were
unable to join classes because of a lack of
equipment or limited internet access.
Students in the city of Quetta protested,
calling for equal internet access to be able to
continue their education. At least 24 students
were beaten and detained by police officers.
Video footage showed that those conducting
the arrests were not wearing PPE or
maintaining physical distance, increasing the
risk of spreading COVID-19.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The use of enforced disappearances to
punish dissent became more public and
widespread, with people being abducted by
intelligence agencies in broad daylight from
urban centres. In previous years the victims
of enforced disappearances included human
rights defenders, political activists, students
and journalists who were rarely well-known
outside their communities. However, in July a
vocal critic of the government, Matiullah Jan,
was apprehended by armed men in the
federal capital, Islamabad. Security cameras
captured the abduction and the footage was
published online. It provoked a strong
backlash against the perpetrators and
Matiullah Jan was released 24 hours later.
In June, the Ministry of Defence admitted
to having held human rights defender and
former Amnesty International consultant Idris
Khattak in their custody since he was
subjected to enforced disappearence by

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

armed men on 13 November 2019. Despite
the public admission that he was in military
custody there was no accountability for the
perpetrators, underscoring the culture of
impunity around enforced disappearances.
Multiple directives from the provincial high
court to produce him were ignored. The Joint
Investigation Team assembled to investigate
the case was dissolved as Idris Khattak was
no longer considered a missing person, even
though his whereabouts were not disclosed.
In September, Sajid Gondal, a former
journalist and member of the Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan, was
reported missing after his car was discovered
in a suburb of Islamabad. He had recently
been linked with an investigation by another
journalist into corruption allegations against a
top aide to the Prime Minister. He was
returned five days later.
There was no progress towards
criminalizing enforced disappearances, an
election promise of the ruling government.
The Minister for Human Rights, Shireen
Mazari, tweeted in September that in her
conversations with the Prime Minister, he had
found the practice “unacceptable”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities tightened their control on the
media, and media workers reported
increased coercion and censorship. In an
interview in September, the Prime Minister
denied there was a press crackdown and
said that he did not mind criticism. However,
journalists who published critical pieces were
subjected to harassment, intimidation,
censorship and even arrest.
In a joint statement published on 12
August, at least 16 women journalists
reported being systematically harassed and
threatened with violence by the social media
team of the ruling party, particularly when
their journalism was not favourable towards
the government. They noted that this had
affected their ability to work and to express
themselves without fear. The number of
signatories to the women’s statement grew to
161 in one month. The ruling party failed to
renounce such attacks or online abuse;

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

instead, the same pattern of intimidation and
harassment was perpetuated in statements
from its parliamentarians.
Ahmed Noorani, a journalist who had
previously been violently attacked in 2017,
allegedly by intelligence agents, was targeted
in a vicious online campaign after he
published a story in August investigating the
businesses of a top aide to the Prime Minister
and former army official.
In September, journalist Bilal Farooqi was
arrested and detained for social media posts
about an anti-Shi’a demonstration in the city
of Karachi. He was arrested under the
draconian Pakistan Electronic Crimes Act.
Mir Shakil ur Rahman, editor and founder
of the Jang Media Group – Pakistan’s largest
media conglomerate – was placed in pre-trial
detention in March on charges related to a
property transaction that had taken place
more than three decades previously. The
trumped-up allegations were seen as
reprisals for his media group’s critical
coverage of the government’s “anticorruption” drive.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The slogan “my body, my choice” became
the rallying cry for the growing women’s
movement in Pakistan. In February, as
preparations were underway to hold the third
annual Aurat (Women’s) March, a provincial
court was petitioned by a lawyer to ban the
event. The court ruled such a ban to be
unconstitutional. Following the ruling, a
religious political party accused the Aurat
March of “vulgarity” and called on its workers
to block it and be prepared for “any sacrifice”
should the government provide security to
the marchers. Peaceful protesters in
Islamabad were pelted with stones. Despite
the threat level to the Aurat March, the
authorities failed to put in place adequate
security measures.
In September, the gang rape of a woman
on a motorway in front of her sons caused a
national outcry, with protests taking place
across the country demanding the
resignation of a high-ranking police official
who stated the attack was the victim’s fault.

281

The incident triggered public calls for harsh
punishments for perpetrators, including
chemical castration and public hangings.
Civil society groups responded with
pushbacks and the media underscored the
inefficacy of such steps to curb violence
against women and girls.
The passage of the Zainab Alert Bill was a
rare success. The law aimed at expediting
procedures and allowing for better coordination between various government
institutions to recover missing and abducted
children.
Hundreds of cases of violence against
women and girls were reported throughout
the year. Few, if any, perpetrators were held
to account.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In July, authorities in Islamabad bowed to
pressure from a discriminatory campaign
mounted by politicians, media outlets and
clerics to halt the construction of the first
Hindu temple and community centre in the
capital. The boundary wall of the construction
site was torn down by a mob.
While vague and broad blasphemy laws
had been used in previous years to target the
most marginalized people in society, in 2020
their application widened to include artists,
human rights defenders and journalists.
In July, Tahir Ahmed, a 54-year-old man
with mental disabilities, was fatally shot in
court by a young man who had come to
observe his hearing on blasphemy charges.
In August, police filed a case against
female actor Saba Qamar and male singer
Bilal Saeed for recording a music video in a
mosque. The clip was released online and
led to large protests in the city of Lahore
during which the leaders of religious party
Tehreek-i-Labbaik Pakistan threatened
“vengeance” against the artists.
In August police filed a case against
journalist and human rights defender Marvi
Sirmed under the blasphemy laws for a tweet
she posted.

282

PALESTINE (STATE
OF)
State of Palestine
Head of state: Mahmoud Abbas
Head of government: Mohammed Shtayyeh
The Palestinian authorities in the West
Bank and the Hamas de facto
administration in the Gaza Strip continued
to crack down on dissent, including by
stifling freedoms of expression and
assembly, attacking journalists and
detaining opponents. Security forces in
both areas used unnecessary and/or
excessive force during law enforcement
activities, including when imposing
lockdown measures in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Torture and other illtreatment of detainees were committed with
impunity. Women faced discrimination and
violence, including killings as a result of
gender-based violence. Lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
people continued to face discrimination and
lacked protection. In the West Bank,
authorities made widespread use of
administrative detention without charge or
trial. In Gaza, civilians continued to be tried
before military courts. Courts in Gaza
handed down death sentences. Palestinian
armed groups in Gaza occasionally fired
rockets indiscriminately into Israel. Two
Israeli civilians were killed after lone
attacks by Palestinian individuals.

BACKGROUND
The two major political factions – Fatah which
runs the authorities in the West Bank, and
Hamas which runs the de facto
administration in Gaza – remained split.
On 15 January, President Abbas
announced the postponement of
parliamentary elections until further notice,
citing Israel’s refusal to allow elections in East
Jerusalem. Both authorities introduced
emergency regulations in response to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

COVID-19 in areas under their control. In
March, the Palestinian authorities in the West
Bank imposed lockdown measures,
significantly restricting freedom of movement,
easing some of the restrictions after a few
months.
People in Gaza grappled with the virus
while under an Israeli air, sea and land
blockade, in force since 2007, which further
threatened the fragile health care system. In
September, the authorities in the Gaza Strip
imposed lockdown measures after a
significant COVID-19 outbreak. Egypt
continued to enforce an almost total closure
of the Rafah border crossing with Gaza. Qatar
transferred cash into the Gaza Strip in coordination with Israel to pay public sector
employees.
On 17 November, the Palestinian
authorities in the West Bank announced that
they would resume security and civil coordination with Israel, suspended since May,
in response to Israel’s plans to annex parts of
the West Bank. During the suspension, the
Palestinian authorities did not facilitate
permits, including for medical patients to
transfer from the Occupied Palestinian
Territories into Israel, and stopped submitting
documents as proof of identity to the Israelicontrolled population registry. The Palestinian
authorities also stopped accepting the tax
collected by Israel on their behalf – about
80% of their revenue – forcing them to slash
the salaries of tens of thousands of public
sector employees, including health workers.
Palestinian judges and civil society actors
continued to protest against what they
deemed to be significant executive
interference in the judiciary and called on
President Abbas to repeal laws by decree
issued on judicial affairs.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities in the West Bank and Gaza
repressed dissent by arbitrarily arresting tens
of peaceful demonstrators, opponents,
critics, journalists and human rights
activists.1 In some cases, authorities used
emergency COVID-19 regulations to stifle
freedom of expression and assembly.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The Independent Commission for Human
Rights (ICHR), the Palestinian national
human rights institution, recorded 37
incidents of violations of freedom of
expression, freedom of assembly, and
freedom of the press: 21 in the West Bank
and 16 in Gaza. The ICHR also recorded 158
cases in the West Bank and 118 in Gaza of
the arbitrary arrests of opponents and critics.
The Palestinian Centre for Development and
Media Freedoms recorded 97 incidents of
attacks against journalists, including arbitrary
arrests, ill-treatment during interrogation,
confiscation of equipment, physical assaults
and bans on reporting: 36 in the West Bank
and 61 in Gaza.
On 9 April, authorities in Gaza arrested
activist Rami Aman, a resident of al-Rimal
neighbourhood in Gaza City, and seven
others after they held a video call on 6 April
with a group of Israelis. While five were
released, Rami Aman and two other activists
were tried in a military court on charges
related to treason under the Palestinian
Liberation Organization (PLO) Revolutionary
Penal Code of 1979. On 17 September, Rami
Aman was convicted and sentenced to one
year in prison, while the two others were
deemed to have served their time. On 26
October, the Permanent Military Court in
Gaza issued a decision to release all three on
grounds of time already served in detention.
Between 11 and 25 June, authorities in
Gaza arbitrarily arrested more than 50 Fatahaffiliated activists in relation to their plans to
organize demonstrations to mark the 14th
anniversary of the in-fighting between Fatah
and Hamas. The Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights reported that most of the
activists said they were tortured and
otherwise ill-treated in detention. None of the
detained was charged and all were
subsequently released.
On 19 July, authorities in the West Bank
arrested 19 anti-corruption activists for
holding a peaceful protest in the city of
Ramallah, which breached an overly broad
COVID-19 ban on assembly. While three were
released, 16 were charged with “illegal
gathering” and “violating the emergency

283

rules”. All were released on bail; their trial
continued.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces in the West Bank and Gaza
used excessive force during law enforcement
activities, including when enforcing lockdown
measures in response to COVID-19. Judicial
authorities failed to effectively investigate
these acts.
On 18 June, security forces in Gaza
assaulted members of the Wishah family in
al-Bureij refugee camp in the centre of the
Gaza Strip when they tried to block the
authorities from demolishing a structure that
belonged to the family to open a new road.
According to the Al Mezan Center for Human
Rights, security forces injured Handoumeh
Wishah, aged 90, and two of her daughters,
all of whom needed hospital treatment.
On 24 June, plain-clothed Palestinian
security forces shot dead Alaa al-Amouri from
the West Bank town of al-Ezariyeh during an
operation to implement a judicial decision to
seize a rented property from the tenants. The
forces opened fire when members of the alAmouri family tried to prevent the arrest of
Alaa al-Amouri and his two brothers.
According to the ICHR, Alaa al-Amouri was
shot in the abdomen. At least three other
family members sustained bullet wounds.
The Palestinian authorities announced that
they would open an investigation.
On 25 July, Palestinian security forces shot
and killed Imad Dweikat in the Balata
Refugee Camp in the West Bank city of
Nablus, when he tried to stop the arrest of a
shop owner during a police operation to close
shops that had opened in contravention of
the lockdown measures. According to the
ICHR, Imad Dweikat did not pose a threat.
The Ramallah-based authorities announced
they would open an investigation.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Palestinian security forces in the West Bank
and Gaza routinely used torture and other illtreatment with impunity. Between January
and November, the ICHR received 95

284

complaints of torture in the West Bank and
51 in Gaza.
On 9 June, the General Intelligence
Service in Ramallah arrested activist
Mohammed Jaber after he reported following
a summons. He said that interrogators had
put him in stress positions including by
forcing him into a small wooden cabinet for
prolonged periods. He was then kept in a one
square metre solitary cell for 13 days until his
release on 21 June.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women and girls faced discrimination in law
and practice and were inadequately
protected against sexual and other genderbased violence, including so-called honour
killings. Nineteen women died in the West
Bank and 18 in Gaza as a result of genderbased violence, according to the Women's
Center for Legal Aid and Counselling
(WCLAC).
On 28 July, Razan Moqbel was killed near
the Beitunia industrial zone, west of
Ramallah. Security forces arrested her fiancé
the next day and the case was referred to the
Public Prosecution to carry out an
investigation. On 3 August, the two families
reached an agreement to drop the case in
exchange for the family of her fiancé paying
about NIS487,000 (approximately
US$150,000). The Palestinian authorities did
not comment about the agreement which
sparked a public outcry at the use of tribal
customs in a criminal case of femicide.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Palestinian authorities in the West Bank
continued to use a 1954 law to
administratively detain dozens of people for
up to six months on the order of a regional
governor, many on political grounds,
according to Palestinian human rights
organizations. These detentions require no
charges to be brought and lack due process.
The ICHR documented 43 such cases in
2020.
Authorities in Gaza continued to try
civilians before military courts.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
The civil society organization alQaws for
Sexual and Gender Diversity in Palestinian
Society reported that LGBTI people continued
to be denied the freedom to exercise their
rights, even though consensual same-sex
relationships are not criminalized in the West
Bank. Meanwhile, Section 152 of the Penal
Code applicable in Gaza criminalizes
consensual same-sex sexual activity and
makes it punishable by up to 10 years’
imprisonment.

DEATH PENALTY
Neither of the Palestinian authorities took any
steps to translate the State of Palestine’s
commitments under the Second Optional
Protocol to the ICCPR to abolish the death
penalty.
In Gaza, Hamas-administered courts
continued to sentence people to death and to
carry out executions.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza
occasionally fired rockets indiscriminately
into Israel, injuring at least 27 Israelis,
according to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
The Hamas authorities failed to investigate or
prosecute those responsible and occasionally
allowed groups to launch incendiary kites
and balloons into Israel.
Most of the Palestinians responsible for
stabbing, shooting and other attacks on
Israelis in the West Bank and Israel, which
killed two Israeli civilians during the year,
were not members of Palestinian armed
groups. However, these groups often praised
such attacks.
1. Palestine: End arbitrary detention of critics in West Bank and Gaza
(Press release, 7 May)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Robert
Dadae
Head of government: James Marape

A state of emergency remained in place due
to the COVID-19 pandemic. The authorities
continued to restrict the right to freedom of
expression and intimidate journalists.
Dozens of people were killed in intercommunal violence. Women continued to
experience high rates of gender-based
violence.

BACKGROUND
The government declared a state of
emergency after its first confirmed case of
COVID-19 in March but replaced it in June
with the National Pandemic Act 2020. This
act continued to raise concerns regarding
parliamentary oversight and will expire only
when the Prime Minister declares the
pandemic or health emergency over. At the
start of the pandemic the country closed its
borders to people from all Asian countries,
not limited to those with confirmed cases of
COVID-19. This left some Papua New
Guinean students stranded in the
Philippines. Emergency regulations gave
government officials wide-ranging powers to
restrict the freedoms of movement and
expression and impose quarantines. There
were some reports of excessive force by
police implementing the restrictions.
Only around a third of the population had
access to electricity, and only 41% had
access to safe drinking water. COVID-19
restrictions and lockdowns negatively
impacted food supplies and increased the
cost of food.
At year’s end, parliament had not yet
enacted laws to give effect to Bougainville’s
vote for independence from Papua New

285

Guinea in 2019. Bougainville remained
governed as an autonomous region.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In April, the Minister for Police criticized two
journalists and called for their dismissal after
they reported on public spending of
COVID-19-related funds. The emergency
regulations included fines and imprisonment
for vaguely defined acts such as spreading
“misleading information” and could
unreasonably limit the right to freedom of
expression.1

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
By March, only four refugees and asylumseekers remained on Manus Island, with all
others sent to the capital, Port Moresby. The
remaining 18 out of 53 men who were
detained at Bomana detention centre were
released by 23 January as reports of poor
conditions emerged.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Women and girls
Sexual and other gender-based violence
experienced by women and girls continued,
with inadequate resources dedicated to
addressing the issue. Women and children
were at risk of physical and sexual violence
from intimate partners, family members and
their communities, including as a result of
accusations of sorcery. Women and girls had
limited access to sexual and reproductive
health care services and abortion remained
criminalized.

Sex workers
Sex work and consensual same-sex sexual
activity between adults remained
criminalized. In September, a sex worker in
Port Moresby was gang-raped and beaten,
prompting calls for stronger protection of sex
workers from violence.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
As part of the COVID-19 response, the
government offered little assistance to those

286

who worked in the informal sector, which
disproportionately impacted on women.
High rates of poverty and the presence of
other chronic illnesses, combined with
limited access to health care, compounded
the situation for those who developed
COVID-19.

Health workers
In March, 600 nurses went on strike due to
concerns about the lack of safe and healthy
working conditions. As of 21 December,
Papua New Guinea had recorded 761 cases
of COVID-19 and eight confirmed deaths.
The most affected provinces were Western
(bordering Indonesia) and Central (around
Port Moresby). At least one health care
worker died, and early outbreaks occurred in
hospitals and a testing clinic. Medical
professionals reported limited availability of
appropriate personal protective equipment.

FAILURE TO PREVENT COMMUNAL
VIOLENCE
Ten people, including three children, were
killed in Porgera in March, after a policeman
was killed in January. Police expressed
concerns that these were retaliatory attacks
as a result of killings in 2019. In July, 24
people in Hela Province, including two
pregnant women, were killed during three
days of violent clashes between local
communities. It was not clear what prompted
these attacks, but the lack of adequate
policing was a factor in increased communal
violence.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In September, more than 150 residents of
Bougainville filed a complaint against
Australian mining company Rio Tinto in
Australia, seeking reparations for alleged
environmental damage caused by the
operation of the Panguna copper and gold
mine between 1972 and 1989.
1. Pacific countries must not use COVID-19 to regress on human rights
(Public statement, 15 April)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PARAGUAY
Republic of Paraguay
Head of state and government: Mario Abdo Benítez
There were allegations of torture and other
ill-treatment in the context of policies
implemented in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Indigenous Peoples continued to
be overlooked in public policies, as did
their rights to territory. Children and
adolescents continued to face obstacles in
accessing their rights, including their right
to protection from sexual abuse and access
to comprehensive sexuality education from
the state. A new anti-discrimination law and
criminal complaints against the treatment
of LGBTI people made no progress in the
year. Human rights defenders continued to
lack an official protection mechanism.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, the authorities placed thousands of
people, mostly Paraguayans returning after
losing their jobs in the informal sector in
Brazil, in mandatory government-run
quarantine centres. Early on, reports of
inadequate conditions, including lack of
robust information about procedures,
inadequate staffing, insufficient sanitary
supplies and food were particularly
concerning. Some of these health and food
concerns improved over time.1
The health system proved precarious and
poorly prepared to address COVID-19 and
other diseases. Several allegations of
corruption in relation to public purchases of
medical supplies were under investigation at
the end of the year.

Health workers
Health workers reported that they did not
have sufficient personal protection
equipment or adequate working conditions to
enable them to work in a safe environment
during the COVID-19 pandemic.2

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Between March and June, the authorities
deployed 24,000 police officers and at least
3,000 military personnel to, among other
things, enforce COVID-19 lockdown
measures and patrol borders. There were
several reports of ill-treatment and
humiliating or degrading punishment inflicted
by members of the security forces enforcing
lockdown measures.3
On 15 and 16 July, a military operation in
the town of Ciudad del Este designed to
enforce lockdown measures resulted in a
shooting incident in which a member of the
Navy was killed. Another operation followed,
apparently in retaliation for the death of the
marine, which resulted in the detention of 35
people and allegations of torture and other illtreatment at a naval base. The authorities
opened an investigation into the incident, but
by the end of the year no official had been
charged.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 2 September, two 11-year-old girls of
Argentine nationality died during an operation
by the Joint Task Force (FTC) in the
department of Concepción. The FTC initially
alleged they had killed members of the
Paraguayan People’s Army, an armed
opposition group. However, evidence
emerged that the people killed were girls, and
the prosecutor’s investigation contained
several flaws in its forensic handling of the
bodies, as well as a failure to comply fully
with the Minnesota Protocol on the
Investigation of Potentially Unlawful Death
during the investigation of the deaths.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In compliance with an Inter-American Court
of Human Rights ruling, an expropriation law
was passed in 2019 to allow the construction
of a road for the Yakye Axa community to
access their lands. However, the law had
technical flaws and was amended and
promulgated by the Executive on 9
September. Construction of the road resumed
in September.

287

Lands were not returned to the Tekoha
Sauce community of the Avá Guaraní People,
who had been evicted on two occasions in
previous years, one of them to permit the
construction of a hydroelectric power plant in
Itaipú. A legal action for eviction of the
community, filed by the bi-national (Brazilian/
Paraguayan) Itaipú company in 2019,
remained active throughout 2020, posing a
threat to the Avá Guaraní People’s human
rights.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the
authorities did not implement sufficient and
culturally relevant measures for Indigenous
Peoples. They also failed to mitigate
Indigenous Peoples’ lack of access to food,
water and medicine in a comprehensive
manner.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
There was no progress during the year in
criminal complaints relating to attacks against
LGBTI people during a 2019 Pride march in
the city of Hernandarias. The municipality of
Hernandarias had banned the march for
being “contrary to public morality”. There
was also no progress in the constitutional
challenge presented by Amnesty
International in October 2019 against this
and another resolution declaring the city
“pro-life and pro-family”, both decisions of
the municipality of Hernandarias.
A bill against all forms of discrimination,
presented in 2015, made no progress during
the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Paraguay had yet to ratify the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice on Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(the Escazú Agreement), which includes
strong protections for Indigenous Peoples
and for environmental defenders. The
authorities also did not establish a
mechanism for the protection of human
rights defenders, nor did they disseminate
the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders.

288

In December, the Senate approved a
declaration that recognized the work of
human rights defenders to be “of national
interest”.

RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS
The authorities did not implement sufficient
and effective measures to prevent, identify
and address cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse of children. The Public Prosecutor’s
Office registered 1,877 reports of sexual
abuse of children in the first nine months of
the year.
The authorities fell short of guaranteeing
the sexual and reproductive rights of
adolescents. As of August, the Ministry of
Health registered 339 births to girls aged
between 10 and 14 and 9,382 births to
adolescents aged between 15 and 19.
Anti-rights groups harshly questioned the
National Plan for Children and Adolescents
(2020-2024), which includes objectives on
sexual abuse, prevention of violence, and
comprehensive sexuality education. In
December, following criticism from anti-rights
groups, the Chamber of Deputies ordered the
Minister for Children and Adolescents
(SNNA) to appear for questioning in
Congress.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The judiciary did not guarantee the right to
due process or ensure a gender perspective
in cases of sexual harassment of women. The
case of Alexa Torres, a young woman
harassed by a priest, came to trial in 2020.
Even though the tribunal acknowledged her
account of the facts as true, the judges ruled
that it did not constitute harassment and
dismissed the complaint in favour of the
priest. In December, an appeals court
overturned the ruling and ordered a new trial.
1. When protection becomes repression: Mandatory quarantines under
COVID-19 in the Americas (AMR 01/2991/2020)
2. The cost of curing: Health workers’ rights in the Americas during
COVID-19 and beyond (AMR 01/2311/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

3. Américas: Las Autoridades deben proteger a la población del
COVID-19 en lugar de recurrir a medidas represivas (Press release,
16 May)

PERU
Republic of Peru
Head of state and government: Francisco Rafael
Sagasti Hochhausler (replaced Manuel Arturo Merino
de Lama on 17 November, who replaced Martín
Vizcarra Cornejo on 10 November)
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed
shortcomings regarding access to the right
to health in Peru. Inequality in access to a
fragmented and underfunded health
system, coupled with a lack of protection
for health workers, contributed to Peru
remaining among the 10 countries with the
highest per capita death rate in the world.
People and communities exposed to toxic
metals and other toxic substances
continued to demand public policies to
ensure medical care. The state failed to
respond effectively to continuing high rates
of violence against women and girls. The
lives of human rights defenders remained at
serious risk due to lack of effective
protection by the state and of successful
criminal investigations into attacks and
threats against them. Peru experienced a
political, social and human rights crisis
following the impeachment of the then
President, Martín Vizcarra, in November.

BACKGROUND
A new Congress was elected in January. The
country reported its first cases of COVID-19
in March and the President declared a state
of emergency. Supreme decrees and
subsequent laws established mandatory stayat-home orders, among other economic and
social measures to deal with the pandemic.
As of 31 December, the Ministry of Health
had reported 1,017,199 confirmed cases of
COVID-19 and 37,724 related deaths.
According to the National Statistics
Institute, the informal employment rate in
Peru was 72.6%. In this context, the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

mandatory measures implemented to deal
with the pandemic had a particularly strong
impact on livelihoods.
On 9 November, Congress voted to remove
Martín Vizcarra from the Presidency due to
allegations of corruption. A series of
demonstrations protested against the actions
of Congress. These intensified on 10
November during the inauguration of Manuel
Merino as President and continued until his
resignation on 15 November. On 17
November, Congressman Francisco Sagasti
was sworn in as President.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In March, Congress passed the Police
Protection Law which, among other
provisions, establishes a presumption in
favour of the police about the reasonableness
of the use of lethal force. There were calls for
the President to repeal the law as it violates
international human rights law and could
pave the way for impunity and excessive use
of force by the National Police,1 particularly
after the November protests.
The National Police responded to the
protests in November against the
impeachment of President Vizcarra using
excessive and unnecessary force, which
resulted in the death of two young men, Jack
Bryan Pintado Sánchez and Jordan Inti
Sotelo Camargo, on 14 November and the
injury of more than 200 others. Human rights
organizations reported that police fired
ammunition and tear gas at peaceful
demonstrators and beat or otherwise violently
subdued people. Plainclothes police officers
who refused to identify themselves arbitrarily
arrested people, including a human rights
defender. There were also reports of illtreatment by the security forces, including of
people who were reported missing. Criminal
investigations into the deaths and injuries
were continuing at the end of the year.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
During December, workers from the agroexport sector held protests calling for better
salaries, benefits and working conditions.

289

Protesters blocked major highways,
demanding that the government repeal the
Law for the Promotion of Agriculture and
issue a new regulation. The Office of the
Ombudsperson reported incidents of violence
during the protests. Human rights
organizations indicated that police repression
of the protests resulted in three deaths and
several injuries. The Minister of the Interior
announced an internal investigation into the
incidents and affirmed his willingness to
cooperate with criminal investigations.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The lives and physical integrity of human
rights defenders remained at serious risk.
Despite a protection protocol, protection
measures remained insufficient and human
rights defenders continued to be attacked
and killed.
The Office of the Ombudsperson reported
in September that five defenders of the land,
territory and environment had been killed in
the first nine months of the year.
On 11 September, human rights defender
Roberto Carlos Pacheco was shot dead by
unidentified attackers. He had received death
threats since 2012 linked to his activism
against illegal mining in the Tambopata
Reserve, Madre de Dios region, in the
Amazon. By the end of the year, no one had
been brought to justice for the killing and
measures to protect the Pacheco family
remained inadequate.2
Peru had yet to ratify the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(the Escazú Agreement).

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the end of the year, the Peruvian Medical
Association had reported 11,856 confirmed
cases of doctors with COVID-19 and 256
deaths related to the virus. In December, the
Peruvian Nurses Association reported 87
deaths related to the virus. Health workers’
unions believed that many infections were
due to a lack of personal protective
equipment.

290

Although significant progress had been
made in developing a Special Multisectoral
Plan for those exposed to toxic metals, the
National Platform of Persons Affected by
Toxic Metals continued to demand public
policies to ensure medical care for those
affected.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The virus quickly reached the territories of
Indigenous Peoples and the state response
was inadequate; health policies were
introduced very late, lacked an intercultural
approach and did not involve Indigenous
Peoples in their design or implementation.
On 31 December, the Ministry of Health
reported 28,592 confirmed cases and 159
deaths related to COVID-19 among
Indigenous Peoples.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In July, Law 31030, which guarantees parity
and gender alternation on lists of candidates
for general elections, was approved. The law
stipulates that at least 50% of each party’s
candidates for election to Congress must be
women.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the Ministry of the Interior
Registry of Disappeared Persons, 10,685
women were reported missing between
January and November. According to the
Ministry of Women and Vulnerable
Populations, between January and November
gender-based violence hotlines received
171,631 calls from women, compared to
88,399 during the same period in 2019, and
121 women were victims of femicide.
In June, the Ombudsperson's Office stated
that there were cases in which emergency
kits, containing emergency medication and
tests, approved by the Ministry of Health for
victims of sexual violence were not being
provided to girls and women during the
pandemic.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX
(LGBTI) PEOPLE
More than two years after it was presented in
Congress, a bill to recognize same-sex
marriage had yet to be approved.
Transgender people continued to be
denied social and legal recognition of their
gender identity, affecting their rights to work,
housing, freedom of movement, education
and health, among others.
The Ministry of Justice issued a resolution
recognizing same-sex couples for the
purpose of granting economic benefits to
those whose partners were health workers
who died due to COVID-19.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The closure of borders to curb the spread of
COVID-19 meant migrants and asylumseekers resorted to using irregular routes,
putting them at risk of violence and
trafficking, particularly women and children.
For several months it was not possible to
apply for asylum because the government
office responsible was closed and on-line
applications were suspended.
During the pandemic, migrants, asylumseekers and refugees, mainly Venezuelans,
did not receive any financial support to
enable them to comply with stay-at-home
measures. Some were evicted from their
homes in circumstances that denied them
their rights to health and housing.
1. Peru: State must immediately repeal law that sends a wrong
message of impunity for possible police abuses amidst the COVID-19
emergency (Article, 30 March)
2. Peru: Murdered defender’s family still in danger (AMR 46/3303/2020)

PHILIPPINES
Republic of the Philippines
Head of state and government: Rodrigo Roa Duterte

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Extrajudicial executions and other human
rights violations continued under the
government’s “war on drugs”. Human rights
defenders and political activists were killed,
harassed, detained and unjustly charged.
Media freedom was unduly curtailed and
dangerous anti-terror legislation was
passed. Various groups condemned the
government’s heavy-handed approach to the
COVID-19 pandemic. President Duterte
renewed his call on Congress to reinstate
the death penalty.

BACKGROUND
Measures taken by the government to curb
the spread of COVID-19 led to numerous
abuses of human rights. President Duterte
ordered security forces and local government
officials to “shoot dead” those causing
“trouble” during community quarantine.1
Local officials faced charges for locking
people in dog cages for alleged violations of
the quarantine.
The UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC)
adopted a resolution to provide technical
assistance and capacity building to the
government. The resolution fell short of calls
for stronger action to address ongoing
violations in the country.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
IMPUNITY
Killings and other human rights violations
continued under the government’s “war on
drugs”. On several occasions, President
Duterte incited violence against people
suspected of using or selling drugs, while
promising to protect those who kill them.2
Reports of killings increased in cities where
police chiefs who had previously overseen
abusive operations were appointed. Based on
government data, police killed at least 155
people from April to July, compared to 103
people from December 2019 to March.
Killings by unknown individuals, many with
suspected links to the police, continued.
Victims were overwhelmingly poor.
Vice President Leni Robredo released a
report in January countering government
information on the “war on drugs”. She

291

stated that government efforts targeted
people who use or sell small amounts of illicit
drugs and called on the government to end
its deadly approach known as Oplan Tokhang
(“Operation Knock and Plead”), prosecute
those involved in drug trafficking, and
improve its collection and interpretation of
drug-related data.3
In June, the UN Human Rights Office
released a report detailing extrajudicial
executions and attacks against human rights
defenders, political activists and the media,
among other violations.
In July, the government announced the
establishment of an inter-agency panel to
“review” cases of drug-related killings by the
police. Human rights groups said the panel
was formed to shield the government from
international scrutiny.
Despite repeated calls for an international
investigation, the UNHRC adopted in October
a resolution providing technical assistance
and capacity-building to the government. The
resolution required the UN Human Rights
Office to continue to provide the UNHRC with
updates over the next two years.4
In December, the International Criminal
Court stated crimes were committed in the
“war on drugs”, adding that it expected to
decide in 2021 whether or not to open an
investigation.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
In February, prisoner of conscience Senator
Leila de Lima marked her third year in
detention on politically motivated charges
after she sought to investigate drug-related
killings.5 Also in February, a court issued
arrest warrants against former Senator and
critic of the “war on drugs” Antonio Trillanes
IV, activist priest Fr. Flaviano “Flavie”
Villanueva and nine others on charges of
conspiracy to commit sedition. Five activists
were arrested in raids by security forces in
Tacloban City.
In March, a court issued arrest warrants
for perjury against activists seeking court
protection after the Philippine military tagged
them as “terrorists”.

292

In July, President Duterte signed into law
Republic Act 11479 (Anti-Terrorism Act of
2020).6 Human rights groups criticized the
new law for contravening international
standards and granting the government
unchecked powers to detain perceived
enemies of the state. Over 30 petitions
challenging its constitutionality were pending
before the Supreme Court at year’s end.
On 10 August, activist and peace advocate
Randall Echanis and his neighbour were
killed in Metro Manila.7 A week later, human
rights defender Zara Alvarez was shot dead in
Bacolod City.8 Echanis and Alvarez were
branded as “terrorists” in a 2018 government
list. Other human rights defenders and
political activists were arbitrarily detained and
faced increased threats and harassment after
the government “red-tagged” or linked them
to communist armed groups.
In October, police treatment of detained
activist Reina Mae Nasino attending the
funeral of her three-month-old baby sparked
public outrage.
On 10 December, police arrested journalist
Lady Ann Salem and six trade unionists
during raids in Metro Manila on charges of
illegal possession of firearms and explosives.
Human rights groups claimed the charges
were fabricated.
On 30 December, police killed nine people
and arrested 17 in Capiz and Iloilo provinces.
Local groups said they were from an
Indigenous community defending their land
while police claimed they were members of
the New Peoples Army and that the nine
were killed after resisting arrest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In May, unidentified assailants shot dead
radio broadcaster and anti-corruption critic
Cornelio Pepino in Dumaguete City. His
murder was the first in a string of killings in
Negros Oriental over nine days that left six
others dead.
In June, Maria Ressa, Chief Executive
Officer of news website Rappler, and former
Rappler researcher Reynaldo Santos Jr. were
convicted of cyber libel.9 A month later,
Congress denied the franchise renewal of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

broadcast media network ABS-CBN.10 Both
Rappler and ABS-CBN produced reports
highlighting killings and other violations
under the “war on drugs”. In December,
Maria Ressa was charged for a second time
for cyber libel after sharing a tweet.

including for drug-related crimes. At least 24
bills reintroducing the death penalty were
pending at year’s end.

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION

In February, Makati City police sparked an
outcry after “profiling” 67 individuals as part
of its “Oplan X-Men” targeting transgender
women.
In April, a local government official
subjected three LGBTI individuals to
degrading treatment by forcing them to
perform sexually-suggestive acts as
punishment for alleged COVID-19 curfew
violations. In December, a Senate panel
approved a bill that aims to prohibit
discrimination and violence on the basis of
sexual orientation and gender identity and
expression.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE

Violations of the right to freedom of assembly
occurred amid the COVID-19 pandemic. In
April, police violently dispersed residents of
an urban poor community in Quezon City
peacefully demanding government aid.
In June, police arrested eight people
protesting anti-terror legislation in Cebu City,
detaining them for three days. Police also
arrested at least 20 people, including three
minors, during a Pride march in the capital,
Manila. Police accused the protesters of
breaching restrictions on mass gatherings
during the pandemic, among other alleged
violations. They were released pending
investigation four days later.

1. Philippines: President Duterte gives “shoot to kill” order amid
pandemic response (Press release, 2 April)

RIGHT TO HEALTH

2. "My Job is to kill": Ongoing human rights violations and impunity in
the Philippines (ASA 35/3085/2020)

There were repeated calls for the release of
certain groups of prisoners, including people
detained for political reasons, to prevent the
further spread of COVID-19 in prisons after
hundreds of prisoners and staff tested
positive for the virus. As of October, the
Supreme Court said over 80,000 prisoners
were released.
There were concerns over the protection of
health workers during the pandemic. A ban
on their deployment overseas was partially
lifted in November.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Clashes between government forces and the
communist New People’s Army continued. In
August, two young members of the Manobo
tribe died amid escalating violence in Surigao
del Sur.

DEATH PENALTY
In his State of the Nation Address in July,
President Duterte renewed his call on
Congress to reinstate the death penalty,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

3. Philippines: Vice President’s ‘insider account’ shows failure of deadly
anti-drugs campaign (Press release, 6 January)
4. Philippines: UN resolution a missed chance for justice but scrutiny
continues (Press release, 7 October)
5. Philippines: Free senator; end attacks on human rights defenders
(ASA 35/1854/2020)
6. Philippines: Dangerous anti-terror law yet another setback for human
rights (Press release, 3 July)
7. Philippines: Cold-blooded murder of another activist and peace
advocate must be investigated (Public statement, 10 August)
8. Philippines: Another human rights defender murdered; cycle of
bloodshed must end (Press release, 18 August)
9. Philippines: Quash conviction of Rappler journalists Maria Ressa and
Rey Santos (Press release, 15 June)
10. Philippines: Denial of ABS-CBN franchise another nail in the coffin of
press freedom (Public statement, 10 July)

POLAND
Republic of Poland
Head of state: Andrzej Duda
Head of government: Mateusz Morawiecki

293

The authorities continued to erode the
independence of the judiciary. COVID-19
measures served as a pretext to crackdown
on peaceful protesters and to restrict access
to asylum. Criminal charges were used to
curtail freedom of expression. LGBTI rights
remained under attack. Authorities
attempted to further restrict access to
abortion.

BACKGROUND
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the May
Presidential election was postponed until July
and partially held by postal vote. In response
to the pandemic, in March, the government
introduced a total ban on public assemblies;
in May, assemblies of up to 150 people were
permitted; in October, only up to 10 or 25
people were allowed to assemble, depending
on zones. Legislation intended to support
businesses and workers affected by the
pandemic included amendments on
unrelated matters. This included enhanced
penalties for illegal abortion and for insulting
the President.

STATE OVERREACH − INDEPENDENCE
OF THE JUDICIARY
The government continued to implement
legal and policy changes that undermined
the independence of the judiciary.
Parliament adopted a new law in January
imposing severe restrictions on judges’ rights
to freedom of expression and association.1
The law prohibits judges from questioning the
credentials of judges appointed by the
President. The state’s Deputy Disciplinary
Commissioner sought to initiate disciplinary
proceedings in August against 1,278 judges
who had asked the OSCE to monitor the
presidential election.
International scrutiny also continued. A
number of cases against Poland regarding
attacks on the judiciary were pending before
the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) and the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR). In
September, the European Parliament
adopted a resolution expressing concerns
regarding the independence of the judiciary
and threats to human rights in Poland.

294

In April, the CJEU issued an order for
interim measures requiring the government
to immediately suspend its new system of
disciplinary proceedings against judges. The
authorities, however, continued to refuse to
implement this ruling and the Supreme Court
carried on examining such disciplinary cases.
The Deputy Minister of Justice stated that the
CJEU had violated Poland’s sovereignty by
intervening in its domestic affairs.
In September, the ECtHR formally
requested a response in the case of judge
Igor Tuleya who was challenging disciplinary
proceedings against him as violations of his
rights to private life and freedom of
expression. The Disciplinary Prosecutor
initiated the proceedings against Igor Tuleya
in 2018. He had, among other things,
submitted a request for a preliminary ruling
from the CJEU on whether the new national
legislation that undermined the
independence of the judiciary was
compatible with EU law.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Peaceful anti-government protesters
continued to face fines and detention, amidst
COVID-19 measures used to crack down on
some protests beyond what was necessary to
protect public health.2
In May, during the electoral campaign,
police arrested hundreds of peaceful
protesters simply for protesting in the streets
and imposed heavy fines. The police
especially targeted with fines protesters
demanding respect for the independence of
the judiciary and those criticizing the lack of
support for small companies during the
COVID-19 lockdown. The authorities imposed
fines against peaceful protesters outside the
Trójka state radio station who were opposing
censorship of a song.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Two activists were charged in June with “theft
and burglary” for replacing advertisements
on bus shelters with posters that accused the
government of manipulating COVID-19

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

statistics.3 They faced up to 10 years in
prison, with the case pending at year’s end.
In July, human rights defender Elżbieta
Podleśna was indicted for “offending religious
beliefs” for allegedly possessing and
distributing posters and stickers depicting the
Virgin Mary with a rainbow halo.
The Minister of Justice and Minister of
Environment proposed a law in August
requiring NGOs to declare any sources of
foreign funding and to publish them in a
public register.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Widespread anti-LGBTI rhetoric from
politicians persisted.
In July, the President signed an anti-LGBTI
rights pamphlet before the election called the
“Family Charter”, which pledged to ban
marriage equality, adoption of children by
LGBTI people and LGBTI education in
schools.
Police arrested 48 LGBTI activists in
August during a peaceful protest against a
prominent activist’s pre-trial detention. They
faced charges for “participation in an illegal
gathering”. The investigation was continuing
at year’s end.
Since March 2019, about 100 local
authorities had adopted discriminatory antiLGBTI resolutions, including resolutions
explicitly “against LGBTI ideology”; some
refer to “traditional values” or “family rights”.
In July, the European Commission rejected
six town-twinning applications because local
authorities had declared so-called LGBTI-free
zones or had adopted “family rights”
resolutions. In September, the head of the
European Commission stated that so-called
LGBTI-free zones were in fact “humanity-free
zones” that had no place within the European
Union.
According to a report published in May by
the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights, 15%
of LGBTI people in Poland had experienced a
physical attack or sexual violence in the last
five years. This was the highest rate in the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

EU. Most reported attacks on LGBTI people
resulted in no prosecution.4

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Sexual and reproductive rights remained
under attack.
A parliamentary debate was scheduled for
April to address two “citizens’ initiatives” that
would set criminal penalties for sex education
in schools and would further restrict access
to abortion.5 Large protests took place, held
virtually or while respecting physical
distancing owing to COVID-19. Members of
Parliament voted to send the bills to
parliamentary committees, postponing the
debates.
In July, the Ministry of Justice announced
a plan to withdraw from the Istanbul
Convention, an international treaty on
violence against women. The government
openly lobbied other countries to withdraw as
well. The Prime Minister announced a plan to
have the Constitutional Court examine the
Convention’s compatibility with the Polish
Constitution, claiming that the Convention
was “harmful” because it “contains elements
of an ideological nature”.
In October, the Polish Constitutional
Tribunal ruled that access to abortion on the
ground of “severe and irreversible foetal
defect or incurable illness that threatens the
foetus’ life” are unconstitutional. The
Constitutional Tribunal’s ruling will mean an
almost total ban on abortion in the country.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
In April, the CJEU ruled that Poland had
failed to fulfil its obligations under EU law by
refusing to relocate asylum-seekers under the
EU relocation scheme.
The ECtHR ruled against Poland in July
concluding that the situation at border
crossing points amounted to inhuman or
degrading treatment because the authorities
refused to receive asylum applications and
conducted summary removals that put some
people at risk of being forcibly transferred to
a place where they are at risk of serious
human rights violations (refoulement).

295

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Office
for Foreigners suspended direct customer
services and there were some limitations on
the submission of asylum applications at
border crossings.

4. Polki i Polacy chcą, by przestępstwa motywowane homofobią i
transfobią były rozpoznawane przez państwo (in Polish only,
translates as ‘Polish people want crimes motivated by homophobia
and transphobia to be recognized by the state’) (News story, 24
September)

one third continued to lack PPE until the end
of June. By November, 8,755 health
professionals had contracted COVID-19.
Older people in care homes accounted for
one third of COVID-19 deaths, which reached
6,972 by the end of the year. A criminal
investigation was ongoing into the deaths of
18 people at a nursing home in Reguengos
de Monsaraz, following a report concerning
failures to follow government health
guidelines.
With sub-standard conditions and
overcrowding persisting in some prisons, the
government released over 2,000 prisoners to
limit contagion. However, some prisoners
faced homelessness on release.

5. Poland: Abortion ban and regressive sexuality education laws must
not be rushed through under cover of COVID-19 (News story, 14 April)

RIGHT TO HOUSING

1. Poland: Judges and lawyers from across Europe protest judicial
takeover in Warsaw (News story, 9 January)
2. Poland: COVID-19 is no excuse to crack down on protests (EUR
37/2421/2020)
3. Poland: Activists at risk of 10-year jail term for COVID-19 poster
campaign challenging government statistics (News story, 11 June)

PORTUGAL
Portuguese Republic
Head of state: Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa
Head of government: António Costa

The government’s response to COVID-19
exposed gaps in the rights to health and
housing. Discrimination against Roma
continued. A man died following a beating
in border police custody. Prosecutions and
convictions for gender-based violence
remained low.

BACKGROUND
From 18 March to 2 May, the government
declared a state of emergency to control
COVID-19, imposing limitations to freedoms
of movement and assembly, including for
religious purposes or protest. The
government declared a second state of
emergency on 9 November until the end of
the year, restricting freedom of movement
and gatherings.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Portuguese Medical Association reported
that over half of doctors lacked adequate PPE
during the first state of emergency, and that

296

The government suspended foreclosures and
evictions during the state of emergency and
until the end of the year. Nevertheless, many
families continued to lack access to adequate
housing. In March, just before the
suspension was in place, the City Council in
the capital, Lisbon, evicted about 70 people
who had occupied social housing for lack of
alternatives. At least nine evicted families
reported that they had not been offered
alternative accommodation and had to sleep
in vans, tents or entrance halls of
neighbouring buildings.
There were several reports that shelters for
the homeless were both insufficient and of
poor quality. Support for the homeless was
largely left to local authorities and volunteers.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
In March, the government temporarily
granted access to health and social care to
asylum-seekers and non-nationals with
pending residency applications.
The government relocated only 72
unaccompanied minors from Greece out of
500 it had pledged to receive.
The death in custody in March of a
Ukrainian national, following a beating by
border police at Lisbon airport, exposed
failures in the protection of people during
border procedures. Three border police

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

officials were charged with aggravated
murder in September.
In April, the UN Human Rights Committee
(HRC) expressed concern about reports that
unaccompanied children were detained at
airports. In June, the Border Control Services
announced that the Child Protection
Commission would ensure support for
children in Lisbon airport’s border patrol
facilities.

In September, health care professionals
protested over the reported lack of PPE and
access to tests for the COVID-19 virus,
according to news reports.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

In April, the HRC expressed concern over
continuing racial discrimination against Roma
and people of African descent in education,
employment and housing, and about reports
of hate speech and hate crimes.

In May, the Youth Development Institute, a
local NGO, warned that measures related to
COVID-19 could increase child poverty from
58% to 65% if sufficient resources were not
allocated to mitigate it.
Civil society organizations criticized the
closing of canteens that provide free school
lunches in public schools in the context of
COVID-19, indicating that an estimated 70%
of children in the public education system
live in poverty and rely on school meals.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

RIGHT TO HOUSING

In April, the HRC expressed concern at the
low levels of reporting, prosecution and
conviction in relation to gender-based
violence.
In July, prosecutors charged a mother for
subjecting her daughter to female genital
mutilation, the first such case to go to trial in
Portugal.

In January, two earthquakes resulted in
damage to hundreds of homes and left
thousands of people living in temporary
housing, shelters, vehicles or tents for
months.
By late March, according to news reports,
the Department of Housing had closed all the
refugee centres they administered.
By September, according to the University
of Puerto Rico in Cayey, of the 40,628
requests for housing assistance made to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) in the most affected municipalities,
only 34% had received assistance.
Media reports estimated that 10,000
families may still have had their homes
affected ten months after the earthquakes.

DISCRIMINATION

PUERTO RICO
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Head of state: Donald Trump
Head of government: Wanda Vázquez Garced
The authorities failed to ensure the rights of
thousands of people made homeless by
earthquakes in January. The number of
femicides increased. For the first time,
federal hate crime charges were brought
following the killings of two transgender
women.

BACKGROUND
In March, in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, Governor Wanda Vázquez
declared a state of emergency and signed the
first of many Executive Orders issued during
the year in relation to curfews.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Despite declaring a state of national alert in
2019, a symbolic response to the high
number of gender-based violence cases, the
authorities did not present a plan to mitigate
this or protect the rights of women and girls.
By late December, 60 people had been
killed due to their gender, compared with 37
in the whole of 2019, according to the
Observatory of Gender Equality of Puerto
Rico.
During the first three months of the islandwide lockdown implemented in response to

297

COVID-19, between mid-March and late May,
there were 11 femicides, compared with six
during the same period in 2019, according to
data from the Observatory of Gender Equality
of Puerto Rico.
The government continued to exclude any
content related to “gender” from the
educational curriculum.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
During the island-wide lockdown
implemented in an effort to mitigate the
impact of COVID-19, there were reports of
excessive use of force by the police enforcing
lockdown measures, including a verified
video in which police appeared to stop an
individual on his way to get food and other
basic items.1
By October, the police had received more
than 3,300 complaints related to alleged
violations of Executive Orders issued since
the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic
and had arrested more than 1,000 people for
alleged breaches.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The day before the annual 1 May protests,
the police announced that protests were
prohibited by Executive Order. Following
criticism by civil society organizations who
alleged this was unconstitutional, the protests
went ahead.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX
(LGBTI) PEOPLE
Among the 60 femicides during the year, six
of those killed were transgender people, four
more than in the previous year, according to
the Observatory of Gender Equality of Puerto
Rico.
In February, the violent killing of Alexa
Luciano Ruiz, a transgender woman,
provoked a public outcry. According to news
reports, the day before her killing the police
had intervened after a complaint was made
against her for using the women’s bathroom
in a fast-food restaurant, photos of which
went viral on social media.

298

In April, for the first time, federal
authorities in Puerto Rico brought charges
under the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd
Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, signed by
former President Obama in 2009, for the
killing of two other transgender women,
Serena Angelique Velázquez and Layla
Peláez Sánchez.
1. Americas: Authorities must protect people from COVID-19 instead of
resorting to repressive measures (News, 15 May)

QATAR
State of Qatar
Head of state: Tamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani
Head of government: Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz
Al Thani (replaced Abdullah bin Nasser bin Khalifa Al
Thani in January)
New laws were passed offering migrant
workers better legal protections. Despite
government measures to control the spread
of COVID-19, migrant workers bore the
brunt of the pandemic’s impact. The
authorities further tightened restrictions on
freedom of expression. Women continued to
face discrimination in law and practice.
Executions resumed after a 20-year hiatus.

BACKGROUND
The Gulf crisis that started in 2017
continued, with ties severed between Qatar
and Bahrain, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
In January, the Emir appointed Sheikh
Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz Al Thani as
Prime Minister and formed a new cabinet.
In March, the government introduced a
series of measures to control the spread of
COVID-19, including access to free health
care, and provided financial support to
businesses. The Emir also amended the
Prevention of Infectious Diseases Law to
increase fines and prison sentences for
anyone violating its provisions and
established a Health Prosecution Unit
dedicated to such prosecutions.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In November, the Emir announced that
long-promised elections to the Shura Council
(an advisory body that acts as a quasiparliament) will be held in 2021.

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Significant reforms aiming to protect migrant
workers from labour abuse and exploitation
were introduced, but employers continued to
retain disproportionate powers as they
oversee the entry and residence of migrant
workers and can file criminal “absconding”
charges against them. Following
announcements by the Minister of
Administrative Development, Labour and
Social Affairs (MADLSA) in 2019 to abolish
the kafala (sponsorship) system, in January
the Ministry of Interior extended the abolition
of the exit permit requirement to include
domestic workers, stipulating, however, that
they inform employers 72 hours before their
departure.
In June, MADLSA announced the opening
of a joint office with the Judiciary Supreme
Council to facilitate implementation of the
decisions of newly established committees to
resolve labour disputes. However, access to
justice for migrant workers remained largely
slow and fruitless, and the conditions under
which workers could collect their unpaid
wages from the support fund, set up to help
them recoup their money, were unclear.
Around 100 migrant workers, employed on
a construction project for a FIFA World Cup
stadium, worked for up to seven months
without pay. While most employees eventually
received the majority of their basic salaries,
some workers still had several months of
salaries or allowances outstanding at the end
of the year.1
Despite some pilot projects to set up joint
committees to represent workers in various
companies, migrant workers, unlike Qatari
nationals, were still unable to form or join
trade unions.
In its July report following a visit to Qatar,
the Special Rapporteur on racism raised
serious concerns regarding the “structural
forms of racial discrimination against nonnationals” and called on the government to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

“take urgent steps to dismantle what is in
effect a quasi-caste system based on national
origin”, including in the private sector.
In August, the Emir signed a series of laws
setting a non-discriminatory minimum wage
that must be revised annually, and two others
abolishing the necessity for migrant workers
to obtain the “No-Objection Certificate” from
their employer to change jobs. The new
legislation enabled workers to change jobs
freely through an online process led by
MADLSA.2 In preparation for this move, in
July, the government launched a reemployment platform to enable companies
and employees to seek new employment
opportunities.

Migrant women domestic workers
Migrant domestic workers, mostly women,
continued to face severe forms of abuse
without access to a remedy despite the
Domestic Workers Law introduced in 2017.
Many employers made women work an
average of 16 hours a day, denied them rest,
prevented them from taking a day off in the
week, and confiscated their passports despite
this being illegal. These abuses took place in
a climate of complete impunity for
perpetrators. The only shelter, established in
2019, to offer refuge for domestic workers
fleeing abuse and exploitation was not fully
operational, making it even more difficult for
them to leave an abusive workplace, let alone
press charges against their employer.3

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 crisis exposed the vulnerability
of migrant workers in Qatar.4 Although the
government introduced some positive
measures, such as free health care and
testing for everybody, migrant workers were
particularly affected by the pandemic and
exposed to infection as a result of
overcrowded and often insanitary living
conditions.5 Cases of unpaid wages increased
sharply from March and despite governmentbacked financial packages to support
businesses and mitigate the impacts of the
pandemic, thousands of companies failed to
pay workers on time. Despite the

299

government’s announcement of measures
and efforts to provide support to migrant
workers, some of those living in lockdown
areas complained about the lack of food and
supplies.
In April, police rounded up dozens of
Nepali migrant workers and told them they
were to be tested for COVID-19 and then
returned to their accommodation. Instead,
they were taken to detention centres and
held in appalling conditions for several days,
before being expelled to Nepal without
explanation or due process.6

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression was further restricted
by a vaguely worded law passed in January
that criminalized a broad range of speech
and publishing.7 Under the law, “biased”
broadcasting or publishing can be punished
by up to five years in prison and a fine of
QAR100,000 (over US$25,000).
The authorities continued to exercise
arbitrary executive powers, placing
administrative sanctions such as travel bans
on individuals without judicial process, in
some cases seemingly as punishment for
their political opinions or peaceful activities.8

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice.
Family law continued to discriminate
against women, including by making it much
harder for them to seek a divorce, severely
disadvantaging them economically if they
sought a divorce or their husband left them.
In its report following its visit to Qatar, the
UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
noted that women under the age of 25 must
obtain the permission of their male guardians
to engage in daily activities such as signing
contracts and leaving the country. As a result,
it said, “women were prevented from leaving
their family homes without the permission of
their legal guardians, resulting in de facto
deprivation of liberty by their families.”
On 2 October, the Qatari authorities took a
number of women off planes when they were
travelling out of Doha’s airport in the capital

300

and subjected them to forced, private
medical examinations to determine if they
had given birth; a baby girl had been found
abandoned in a bin at the airport. The
incident drew a public outcry prompting
Qatar to issue an apology and launch an
investigation into the incident.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Qatar’s contact tracing app EHTERAZ,
developed by the Ministry of Interior to
contain the spread of COVID-19, had a
serious security flaw that exposed sensitive
personal details of over 1 million users. Once
the authorities were alerted to the flaw, they
quickly fixed it.9 The app, like many others,
remained problematic due to its lack of
privacy safeguards.10

DEATH PENALTY
Executions resumed in April after a 20-year
hiatus.
1. Qatar: Migrant workers unpaid for months of work on FIFA World Cup
stadium (Press release, 11 June)
2. Qatar: New laws to protect migrant workers are a step in the right
direction (Press release, 30 August)
3. Qatar: “Why do you want to rest?”: Ongoing abuse of domestic
workers in Qatar (MDE 22/3175/2020)
4. Qatar: Migrant workers in labour camps at grave risk amid COVID-19
crisis (Press release, 20 March)
5. COVID-19 makes Gulf countries’ abuse of migrant workers impossible
to ignore (Campaigns, 30 April)
6. Qatar: Migrant workers illegally expelled during COVID-19 pandemic
(Press release, 15 April)
7. Qatar: Repressive new law further curbs freedom of expression (Press
release, 20 January)
8. Qatar: Arbitrary executive action puts lives on hold (MDE
22/2772/2020)
9. Qatar: Contact tracing app security flaw exposed sensitive personal
details of more than one million (Press release, 26 May)
10. Bahrain, Kuwait and Norway contact tracing apps among most
dangerous for privacy (Press release, 16 June)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ROMANIA
Republic of Romania
Head of state: Klaus Iohannis
Head of government: Florin Cîțu (replaced Ludovic
Orban in December)
The government’s response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns including in
relation to policing, the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly and the right to
education. Roma continued to experience
systemic discrimination, and some faced
excessive use of force and ill-treatment by
police. The Constitutional Court declared
unconstitutional the law adopted in June by
Parliament prohibiting the teaching about
gender identity. The European Court of
Human Rights found the authorities had
acted unlawfully in deporting two Pakistani
men.

Roma
A European Commission report in February
found that Roma continued to face
discrimination and segregation including in
education, employment, access to housing
and forced evictions.
During the state of emergency, NGOs and
the media reported several cases of unlawful
use of force and allegations of ill-treatment of
Roma by the police.1
Human rights groups and NGOs raised
concerns about Roma being scapegoated
during the pandemic. They denounced “the
rise of hate speech and racism” targeting
Roma in mass media and social media,
especially by opinion leaders and public
figures. Romania’s equality body, the National
Council for Combating Discrimination,
criticized a local newspaper, a member of
Parliament, a former President and a
university professor for discriminatory
statements against Roma.

BACKGROUND
In March, the government declared a state of
emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
It derogated temporarily from a number of
rights protected under the European
Convention on Human Rights, including the
right to education and to freedoms of
movement, expression and association. In
May, the state of emergency was replaced
with a “state of alert” which remained in
place until the end of year.
The European Commission continued to
pressure Romania to roll back legislative
changes that posed a threat to the rule of law,
including the independence of the judiciary.

DISCRIMINATION
A legislative proposal which would expand
existing anti-discrimination legislation
remained before the Senate at year’s end.
The bill proposed other forms of
discrimination – discrimination by
association, intersectional discrimination and
segregation – as well as the inclusion of
discrimination criteria on citizenship and skin
colour.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) people
In June, Parliament passed a law which,
among other things, prohibited teaching and
training about gender identity. The law,
adopted without public debate, prohibited
“activities aimed at propagating the gender
identity theory or opinion, understood as the
theory or opinion that gender is a different
concept from that of biological sex and that
the two are not always identical.”
Human rights groups and universities
condemned the ban, arguing it would
legitimize discrimination against the LGBTI
community. The law, which also raised
concerns around the rights to academic
freedom and freedom of expression, was
declared unconstitutional by the
Constitutional Court in December.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Despite 2016 legislation prohibiting
segregation in primary and secondary
education, and subsequent guidelines
adopted by the Ministry of Education to apply

301

the law, the government failed to implement
the guidelines by year’s end.
A study by the NGO Caritas Romania
highlighted the challenges faced by children
from vulnerable groups while accessing
remote learning during the March-June
lockdown, with Roma among the worst
affected. According to the study, an average
of only 15% of children from marginalized
groups participated habitually in online
activities during the lockdown, marking a
drastic reduction compared to the 83%
average for school attendance of the children
registered before the pandemic. The main
obstacles included a lack of technical
equipment, overcrowded homes with a lack
of adequate study spaces, and the absence
of support from parents to complete online
tasks.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Following Romania’s temporary derogation in
March from the right to freedom of peaceful
assembly, a blanket prohibition on public
gatherings was in place. Civil society groups
criticized such measures as disproportionate.
Gatherings of up to 100 people were
permitted from November as long as certain
protection measures were observed.

DUE PROCESS
In October, in the case of Muhammed and
Muhammed v. Romania, the Grand Chamber
of the European Court of Human Rights
found that the authorities acted unlawfully
when, in 2012, they deported two Pakistani
nationals residing legally in the country. The
deportation was based on secret evidence
seen only by the government and the courts
alleging that their activities posed a potential
threat to Romania’s national security.2
The Court found that in expulsion
proceedings people have a right to be
informed of the relevant factual elements
which led authorities to consider that they
represent a threat to national security, and to
be given access to the content of the
documents and the information relied upon
by the government. It found that where
limitations are necessary to protect national

302

security, they must be accompanied by
sufficient counterbalancing safeguards.
1. Policing the pandemic: Human rights violations in the enforcement of
COVID-19 measures in Europe (EUR 01/2511/2020)
2. Romania: European Court verdict strikes a blow to decisions based
on secret evidence (News story, 16 October)

RUSSIA
Russian Federation
Head of state: Vladimir Putin
Head of government: Mikhail Mishustin (replaced
Dmitry Medvedev in January)
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed chronic
under-resourcing in health care. The
authorities used the pandemic as a pretext
to continue the crackdown on all dissent,
including through amendments to a vaguely
worded law on “fake news” and tightening
restrictions on public gatherings. Peaceful
protesters, human rights defenders and
civic and political activists faced arrest and
prosecution. Persecution of Jehovah’s
Witnesses intensified. Torture remained
endemic, as did near total impunity for
perpetrators. The right to a fair trial was
routinely violated while legal amendments
resulted in a further reduction in judicial
independence. Reports of domestic violence
rose sharply during COVID-19 lockdown
measures, although the draft law on
domestic violence remained stalled in
Parliament. LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination and persecution. Thousands
of labour migrants lost their jobs during the
pandemic but were unable to leave because
of border closures. Evidence emerged to
corroborate allegations of war crimes by
Russian forces in Syria.

BACKGROUND
The economic downturn, underpinned by
falling oil prices, dwindling investment and
foreign sanctions, and exacerbated by the
COVID-19 pandemic, led to a further
impoverishment of a growing proportion of
the population. Discontent widened, with a

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

slow but steady increase in protests. The
government continually faced, and ignored,
mounting allegations of corruption at all
levels. Measures announced by President
Vladimir Putin and his government, like
extended fully paid leave for all workers in
response to COVID-19, failed to address
people’s broader concerns.
The authorities introduced multiple
amendments to the Constitution, with the
apparent purpose of removing legal
restrictions on President Putin’s participation
in future presidential elections.
Russia maintained a strong influence on
its immediate neighbours, and its occupation
of Crimea and other territories continued.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic placed further
strain on the health care system, exposing
chronic under-resourcing. A shortage of
hospital beds, key protective and medical
equipment and medications, together with
the delayed wages of health workers, were
frequently reported across the country.
Official and independent numbers on
infection and mortality rates varied greatly,
indicating government under-reporting.

Health workers
Whistle-blowers from among health workers
and other groups faced reprisals, including
disciplinary measures and prosecution for
“fake news”.
Doctor Tatyana Revva was arbitrarily
reprimanded and threatened with dismissal
after she repeatedly complained about the
shortage and inadequacy of protective
equipment. Police considered and dismissed
“fake news” allegations against her following
a complaint from the hospital’s head doctor.1

Prison conditions
Health care and sanitary provisions in
penitentiary institutions remained inadequate
and further exacerbated by the pandemic.
Although the authorities implemented
restrictive and additional sanitary measures,
they did not take measures to reduce the
prison population. Official COVID-19 figures

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

in custody were considered unreliable by
independent monitors.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Freedom of peaceful assembly remained
constrained with further restrictions
introduced in December. The rules relating to
public assemblies and single-person pickets
were further restricted in response to the
pandemic, and some regions banned them
outright. Public protests were typically small
but regular, despite reprisals. There was a
sharp increase in the numbers of single
picketers arrested and prosecuted.
On 15 July, over a hundred peaceful
protesters against constitutional changes
were arbitrarily arrested and at least three
severely beaten by the police in Moscow.
Dozens were heavily fined or detained for five
to 14 days.
The 9 July arrest of Sergey Furgal, who in
2018 had defeated the pro-Kremlin
candidate to be elected Governor in the Far
East Khabarovsk Region, prompted weekly
peaceful mass protests in Khabarovsk as well
as solidarity protests across Russia.
Unusually, tens of thousands were allowed to
march repeatedly in Khabarovsk before
police made the first arrests on 18 July. On
10 October, police dispersed the protest for
the first time, arresting at least 25 people,
with at least five later sentenced to several
days in detention. The protests in Khabarovsk
were continuing at year’s end.
In December, peaceful protester
Konstantin Kotov was released following his
imprisonment in 2019 for “repeated
violation” of regulations on public assemblies.
In January, the Constitutional Court had
ordered a review of his case, and in April, the
Moscow City Court reduced his sentence
from four years to 18 months. Others
prosecuted for the same offence included
political activist Yulia Galyamina, who was
given a two-year conditional sentence in
December, activist Vyacheslav Egorov
standing trial in Kolomna, and protester
Aleksandr Prikhodko from Khabarovsk. In
December, Aleksandr Prikhodko’s case was
dropped.

303

While police routinely used excessive and
unnecessary force against protesters, they
also allowed anti-protester violence by other
groups. In Kushtau, Bashkiria, peaceful
environmental activists who opposed a local
mining project were repeatedly assaulted,
with impunity, by private security staff,
occasionally operating alongside police. Late
on 9 August, around 30 private security
guards and around 100 masked men
attacked a camp of 10 environmental
activists. Police were called but did not
intervene. This triggered further local protests
which forced the closure of the mining
project in late August.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Restrictions on freedom of expression
continued. On 1 April, amendments to the
so-called “fake news” law, first passed in
2019, criminalized dissemination of
“knowingly false information about
circumstances posing a threat to the lives
and security of citizens and/or about the
government’s actions to protect the
population.” Individuals face up to five years’
imprisonment if dissemination of information
leads to bodily harm or death, with hefty fines
for the media. Hundreds of people were fined
under administrative proceedings, and at
least 37 faced criminal proceedings under
this law, many of them critical civil activists,
journalists or bloggers. At least five media
outlets were prosecuted. The newspaper
Novaya Gazeta and its chief editor were fined
twice, in August and September, for
publications about COVID-19 and ordered to
delete respective articles online.

had not been informed about any
investigation.
A journalist from Nizhnii Novgorod, Irina
Slavina, faced routine harassment by the
authorities. On 1 October, her home was
raided and searched, and police summoned
her as a witness in a criminal case against a
local activist under the “undesirable
organizations” law. On 2 October, she died
after self-immolating in protest in front of the
regional police headquarters.
On 6 July, a military court in Pskov
convicted journalist Svetlana Prokopieva of
“public justification of terrorism” and fined
her RUB500,000 (US$6,300) for her public
comments on repressive policies that may
have motivated a 17-year-old to blow himself
up near the Federal Security Service building
in Arkhangelsk.

Internet
Censorship of the internet continued. In
June, the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) in Vladimir Kharitonov v. Russia and
three other cases ruled that internet-blocking
measures were “excessive and arbitrary” and
violated the right to impart and receive
information. A court in Moscow fined Google
RUB1.5 million (US$18,899) in August and
RUB3 million (US$ 40,580) in December for
its search engine listing “dangerous content”
banned by Russian authorities. In December,
President Putin signed a law introducing
sanctions on foreign internet platforms for
blocking Russian media content. Another law
passed in December introduced
imprisonment for libel committed via the
internet.

Journalists

Repression of dissent

Harassment, prosecution and physical
attacks against journalists continued. On 30
June, police in Saint Petersburg assaulted
reporter David Frenkel at a polling station and
broke his arm. On 15 October, a journalist
from Khabarovsk, Sergei Plotnikov, was
abducted by masked men, driven to the
woods, beaten and subjected to a mock
execution. He reported the incident to the
police once released but by year’s end, he

Opposition activists and other dissenting
voices faced severe reprisals. As part of the
politically motivated criminal case against
opposition leader Alexei Navalny’s AntiCorruption Fund, 126 bank accounts
belonging to his associates were frozen in
January, followed by criminal and civil libel
cases against Alexei Navalny and others. On
20 August, Alexei Navalny was taken ill on a
flight from Tomsk. He was urgently

304

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

hospitalized, and later flown to Germany
where he was diagnosed with poisoning by a
military-grade nerve agent. The Russian
authorities failed to investigate the poisoning.
Siberian shaman Aleksandr Gabyshev,
who had vowed to “purge” President Putin
from the Kremlin, was on 12 May confined to
a psychiatric hospital after he refused to be
tested for COVID-19. He was discharged on
22 July following criticism in Russia and
abroad.
In June, political blogger Nikolay
Platoshkin was placed under house arrest on
criminal charges of “calls to mass
disturbances” and dissemination of
“knowingly false information” for planning a
peaceful protest against constitutional
amendments.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Harassment, prosecution, and physical
attacks against human rights defenders
remained commonplace.
Activists Alexandra Koroleva, in
Kaliningrad, and Semyon Simonov, in Sochi,
were charged and faced possible
imprisonment for non-payment of arbitrary
and heavy fines by their respective NGOs.
Journalist Elena Milashina and lawyer
Marina Dubrovina were assaulted by a mob
in a hotel in Grozny, Chechnya, on 6
February.2 A formal investigation started in
March but was manifestly ineffective.
Meanwhile, Chechen head Ramzan Kadyrov
issued thinly veiled death threats against
Elena Milashina, with impunity.
Lawyer Mikhail Benyash’s appeal against
his criminal conviction – which could lead to
disbarment – started in October and was still
ongoing at year’s end.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Laws on “foreign agents” and “undesirable
organizations” were actively used to smear
independent NGOs, deprive them of funding
and severely penalize their members. In
December, further draconian legislative
changes were signed into law, including to
extend the “foreign agents” provisions to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

NGOs’ staff, unregistered groups and
individuals.
In April, the education NGO Projectoria
was forced to register as a “foreign agent” to
avoid fines while its foreign donor, Project
Harmony, was declared “undesirable”.
In October, activist Yana Antonova from
Krasnodar was sentenced to 240 hours of
forced labour for association with an
“undesirable organization”, re-posting Open
Russia-branded materials online and taking
part in single person pickets. She was
subsequently fined again under new
administrative proceedings.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The prosecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses
under “extremism” charges escalated,
including in occupied Crimea, with a growing
number of convictions, and longer sentences.
At year’s end, 362 people were under
investigation or standing trial, 39 had been
convicted and six were imprisoned. Artem
Gerasimov, for example, was sentenced on
appeal in June to six years’ imprisonment
and a fine of RUB400,000 (US$5,144) by
the de facto Supreme Court of Crimea.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
pervasive, and the number of perpetrators
convicted was negligible. Prosecutions were
typically for “abuse of authority” and resulted
in lenient sentences.
Twelve former prison officers from
Yaroslavl colony were sentenced to up to four
years and three months’ imprisonment after a
leaked video showed an inmate being beaten
in 2017. Six of them were immediately
released on account of time already spent in
detention. The former head and deputy head
of the colony were acquitted.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Violations of the right to a fair trial remained
common. Detainees were denied meetings
with their lawyers and a number of trials
continued to be closed to the public, with the
COVID-19 pandemic being often abusively
used as a justification.

305

In February and June respectively, seven
young men from Penza, and two from Saint
Petersburg, received sentences of up to 18
years’ imprisonment under trumped-up
terrorism charges over their purported
involvement with a non-existent organization
called “Network”. Numerous allegations of
torture and other ill-treatment, and of
fabrication of evidence, were ignored.3
Constitutional and legislative amendments
further eroded the right to a fair trial,
including by giving the President power to
nominate the judges of the Constitutional and
Supreme Courts, and initiate the appointment
of all federal judges and dismissal of senior
federal judges.

Counter-terrorism
Counterterrorism legislation was widely
abused, often to target dissent.
Journalist Abdulmumin Gadzhiev, from
Dagestan, remained in custody under
fabricated charges of financing terrorism and
participation in terrorist and extremist
organizations. His trial started in November.
In occupied Crimea, allegations of
membership of the Islamist organization
Hizb-ut-Tahrir (labelled as a “terrorist”
movement by Russia in 2003) were widely
used to imprison ethnic Crimean Tatars. In
June, Crimean human rights defender EmirUsein Kuku lost the appeal against his 12year prison sentence. In September, another
Crimean human rights defender, Server
Mustafayev, was sentenced to 14 years in
prison.
In September, 19 men from Ufa,
Bashkiria, convicted for alleged Hizb-utTahrir membership and sentenced to
between 10 and 24 years, lost their appeal,
with one defendant’s sentence reduced by a
year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Proposals to introduce legislation on
domestic violence remained stalled in
Parliament, while NGOs reported a sharp
increase in domestic violence following
COVID-19 lockdown measures.

306

In June, the ECtHR held in Polshina v.
Russia that deficiencies in the legal system
related to domestic violence violated the
prohibitions of torture and discrimination.
The Court underlined Russia’s consistent
failure to investigate abuse, and years-long
tolerance of “a climate which was conducive
to domestic violence”.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination and persecution.
Constitutional amendments redefined
marriage as a “union between a man and a
woman”, reinforcing existing limitations on
same-sex marriage and ensuing restrictions,
including adoption by same-sex couples.
LGBTI rights activist Yulia Tsvetkova was
fined RUB75,000 (US$1,014) for posting
online her drawings in support of same-sex
couples and faced other penalties, including
ongoing prosecution for pornography relating
to her body positive drawings featuring
female genitalia.4

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over a third of foreign labour migrants
reported having lost work owing to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and thousands were
stranded in Russia due to related border
closures. In April, a presidential decree eased
work permit and residency rules for migrants
and refugees, and temporarily suspended
forcible returns of foreign and stateless
individuals. Some regional authorities ceased
temporary detention of migrants, although
new decisions on forcible returns were also
reported.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
Evidence including witness statements,
videos, photographs and satellite imagery of
seven air strikes against medical facilities and
schools by Russian forces, and four by Syrian
or Russian forces, between May 2019 and
February 2020 in Syria, corroborated
allegations of serious violations of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

international humanitarian law amounting to
war crimes (see Syria entry).5
1. Russian Federation: Russian doctor’s persecution continues: Tatyana
Revva (EUR 46/2970/2020, 2 September)
2. Russia: Prominent investigative journalist and lawyer attacked
during visit to Chechnya (News story, 7 February)
3. Russia: Prosecution for membership of a non-existent “terrorist”
organization must stop (News story 7 February)
4. Russian Federation: Activist faces jail for female body drawings:
Yulia Tsvetkova (EUR 46/2977/2020)
5. Syria: 'Nowhere is Safe for Us': Unlawful attacks and mass
displacement in north-west Syria (MDE 24/2089/2020)

RWANDA
Republic of Rwanda
Head of state: Paul Kagame
Head of government: Édouard Ngirente
The authorities took measures to promote
the right to health during the COVID-19
pandemic and promised accountability for
excessive use of force by police officers.
Reports of enforced disappearances,
arbitrary detention, excessive use of force,
unfair trials and restrictions on the right to
freedom of expression continued.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In March, the authorities responded rapidly
to the COVID-19 pandemic, imposing a strict
nationwide lockdown and suspending
commercial flights. They provided free
treatment and mass testing. Until mid-May,
the government covered the cost of
mandatory quarantine for travellers entering
the country. Thereafter, it offered subsidized
provision.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In January, the UN Committee on the Rights
of the Child reviewed the government’s report
and commended Rwanda’s progress in
reducing poverty and infant and child
mortality rates, improving access to
education and health services, and fighting
HIV/AIDS. Meanwhile, it urged the
government to take further measures to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

tackle sexual exploitation and abuse of
children, to ensure that protection of children
with disabilities included those with
intellectual and psychosocial disabilities, and
to ensure the police fully respected the rights
of children living on the streets.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In May, the President pardoned 36 women
convicted for abortion. All except eight of
them were arrested and convicted after 2018
Penal Code revisions. While abortion
remained illegal in most circumstances, the
2018 Penal Code introduced legal exceptions
in cases of rape, incest or forced marriage.

RIGHT TO LIFE
On 17 February, the Rwanda National Police
announced that the popular singer Kizito
Mihigo had been found dead that morning in
his cell in Remera police station in the
capital, Kigali. Three days earlier the Rwanda
Investigation Bureau (RIB) had confirmed his
arrest on charges which included joining
“terrorist” groups and attempting to cross the
border illegally. There was no independent
investigation into his death. The National
Public Prosecution Authority concluded he
died by suicide and that there was no basis
for criminal charges, in a finding based on a
RIB investigation and the Rwanda Forensic
Laboratory.1

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Enforced disappearances of political
opposition members continued and several
probable cases from previous years remained
unresolved. In June, Venant Abayisenga, a
member of Development and Liberty for All
(DALFA-Umurinzi), and former member of
the United Democratic Forces (FDU-Inkingi),
both unregistered opposition political parties,
was reported missing. He had been acquitted
in January of forming an irregular armed
group and released from prison. He told the
media that he was tortured in detention. His
whereabouts remained unknown at the end
of the year.

307

Rwanda had not ratified the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance.2

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In September, following an outcry on social
media in response to police use of excessive,
and at times lethal, force, including in
response to alleged curfew violations, the
President and the Minister of Justice
condemned the actions of individual police
officers. They said these actions violated
operational guidelines and promised to hold
perpetrators accountable. On 9 September, a
police spokesperson said several officers
were in custody while investigations and
prosecutions were ongoing.

UNFAIR TRIALS
On 31 August, the RIB announced the arrest
of Paul Rusesabagina, famed as the manager
of Hotel des Milles Collines where over 1,200
people sought refuge during the 1994
genocide. He was later charged with offences
including terrorism, arson, kidnap and
murder in relation to his support for an
armed group. He had left Dubai overnight on
27/28 August in mysterious circumstances;
in court in November, he said that he had
been abducted and blindfolded with his arms
and legs bound. The authorities refused to
explain how he arrived in Kigali but asserted
that due process had been followed. He was
initially denied access to a lawyer hired by his
family and chose two lawyers from a list of
pro bono advocates. From November he was
represented by the lawyer chosen by his
family. He remained in pre-trial detention at
the end of the year, after three requests for
release on bail were denied.3

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In May, Félicien Kabuga, acknowledged as a
chief financier of the 1994 genocide, was
arrested by French authorities in a Paris
suburb. In 1997 the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), which tried
genocide cases until 2015, indicted him on
seven counts of genocide and related crimes.

308

He was transferred to the custody of the
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) in The Hague in
October, and a plea of not guilty was entered
during a pre-trial hearing in November.
In May, the IRMCT Chief Prosecutor
confirmed DNA tests had proved that
Augustin Bizimana, whom the ICTR had
indicted in 2001 for genocide, had died in
2000 in the Republic of the Congo.
The authorities sought the extradition of
genocide suspect Aloys Ntiwiragabo from
France. In July, a preliminary investigation for
crimes against humanity was launched in
France after a journalist located him in
Orléans, about 100km south-west of Paris.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
A night-time curfew was introduced in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Police
instructed those alleged to have violated the
curfew to report to centres, including openair stadiums, where they remained until the
end of curfew the next morning. The police
spokesperson said these were not “detention
or prison facilities” but “central grounds used
to control movements during curfew hours as
well as sensitization centres with space for
physical distancing, where people are
educated on the pandemic and safety
practices.”
In July, the Rwanda National Police
published a list of 498 motorists (including
some registration plate details) who, since
April, had allegedly ignored orders and not
reported to the centres. Those who did not
report to the police within an allotted time
were warned they would be arrested. Several
similar lists were published on a regular basis
until October.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, several YouTube bloggers reported
on allegations that soldiers raped women and
committed other human rights violations
during lockdown in the Kangondo II
neighbourhood known as “Bannyahe” in
Kigali. Although the Rwanda Defence Force
announced on 4 April that they were holding
five soldiers suspected of involvement in

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

these crimes, four bloggers who reported on
the abuses and other consequences related
to the authorities’ COVID-19 response, were
later arrested. Two of the bloggers were
provisionally released later the same month,
and one was released on bail in May while
Dieudonné Niyonsenga, also known as
Cyuma Hassan, and his driver, Fidèle
Komezusenge, remained in detention at the
end of the year. The Rwanda Media
Commission said that bloggers were not
recognized as journalists and were “not
authorized to interview the population.”

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
In late August, UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, and the governments of Rwanda and
Burundi began to facilitate organized returns
of Burundian refugees from Rwanda.
1. Rwanda: Shocking death of gospel singer in custody must be
effectively investigated (Press release, 17 February)
2. Rwanda: More progress needed on human rights commitments:
Amnesty International submission for the UN Universal Periodic
Review, 37th session of the UPR Working Group, January-February
2021 (AFR 47/2858/2020)
3. Rwanda: Paul Rusesabagina must be guaranteed a fair trial (Press
release, 14 September)

SAUDI ARABIA
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Head of state and government: Salman bin Abdulaziz
Al Saud
Repression of the rights to freedom of
expression, association and assembly
intensified. Among those harassed,
arbitrarily detained, prosecuted and/or
jailed were government critics, women’s
rights activists, human rights defenders,
relatives of activists, journalists, members
of the Shi’a minority and online critics of
government responses to the COVID-19
pandemic. Virtually all known Saudi
Arabian human rights defenders inside the
country were detained or imprisoned at the
end of the year. Grossly unfair trials
continued before the Specialized Criminal

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Court (SCC) and other courts. Courts
resorted extensively to the death penalty
and people were executed for a wide range
of crimes. Migrant workers were even more
vulnerable to abuse and exploitation
because of the pandemic, and thousands
were arbitrarily detained in dire conditions,
leading to an unknown number of deaths.

BACKGROUND
The country maintained economic and
political sanctions against Qatar, along with
Bahrain, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), in the ongoing political crisis in the
Gulf that began in 2017.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition in the longrunning armed conflict in Yemen continued
to be implicated in war crimes and other
serious violations of international law (see
Yemen entry).
In March, the Saudi Press Agency
announced that the Control and AntiCorruption Authority (the Nazaha) had
arrested 298 public sector officials and was
investigating them for corruption.
In May, in response to plummeting oil
prices and the economic impact of
COVID-19, the authorities introduced
austerity measures, tripling Value Added Tax
to 15% and ending the cost of living
allowance for state employees.
In November, the G20 summit was held
virtually, chaired by Saudi Arabia. More than
220 civil society organizations pledged not to
participate in the parallel civil society
engagement process to protest against Saudi
Arabia’s human rights record.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities escalated repression of the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly, including through a
crackdown on online expression and undue
restrictions on freedom of expression related
to the government’s responses to the
COVID-19 pandemic. They harassed,
arbitrarily detained and prosecuted
government critics, human rights defenders,
family members of activists and many others.

309

In March, the Public Prosecution
announced that social media posts that
question, or instigate against, the COVID-19
curfew would be punished under Article 6 of
the Anti-Cyber Crime Law, which carries
penalties of up to five years’ imprisonment
and a maximum fine of almost SAR3 million
(US$800,000).
Courts frequently invoked the Anti-Cyber
Crime Law to sentence government critics
and human rights defenders for peacefully
exercising their rights to freedom of
expression, citing tweets or other peaceful
online expression as evidence.
The authorities continued to ban the
formation of political parties, trade unions
and independent human rights groups, and
to prosecute and imprison those who set up
or participated in unlicensed human rights
organizations. All gatherings, including
peaceful demonstrations, remained
prohibited under an order issued by the
Ministry of Interior in 2011.
Members of the ruling family, former
governmental officials and their relatives were
among those arbitrarily arrested or detained.
A year after her arrest, an official Twitter
account confirmed in April the detention
without charge of Basma bint Saud Al Saud,
a daughter of former King Saud bin Abdulaziz
Al Saud and a writer and human rights
activist. Her family expressed concern about
her health as she has underlying conditions
that require medical treatment.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities arbitrarily detained,
prosecuted and imprisoned human rights
defenders and family members of women’s
rights activists for their peaceful activities and
human rights work, including under the
Counter-Terrorism Law and Anti-Cyber Crime
Law. By the end of the year, virtually all Saudi
Arabian human rights defenders were in
detention without charge, or were on trial or
serving prison terms.
Among those arbitrarily detained for
prolonged periods without appearing before a
judge or being charged was Mohammed alBajadi, a founding member of the Saudi Civil

310

and Political Rights Association (ACPRA),
detained since May 2018.
In April, Abdullah al-Hamid, a prisoner of
conscience and founding member of ACPRA,
died in detention following medical neglect.
He had written extensively on human rights
and the independence of the judiciary.1 In
late April, the authorities arrested writers and
others for expressing sympathy over his
death, including Abdulaziz al-Dakhil, an
economist, writer and former Deputy Finance
Minister.
More than two years after a wave of arrests
targeted women human rights defenders and
supporters, the authorities continued to
detain incommunicado Loujain al-Hathloul
and Nassima al-Sada for between two to four
months at a time. In December, Loujain alHathloul was sentenced to five years and
eight months in prison, after her case was
transferred to the SCC in November. The
court suspended two years and 10 months of
the total prison term. Several other women
activists continued to be detained and on trial
before the Criminal Court in Riyadh for their
human rights work or expression.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Grossly unfair trials continued before the
SCC, a counter-terror court notorious for due
process violations including mass trials.2
Among those who continued to be tried or
were convicted after such trials were a
woman human rights defender, religious
clerics and activists charged with offences,
including capital offences, arising from the
peaceful expression of their views.
A mass trial of 68 Palestinian, Jordanian
and Saudi Arabian nationals facing trumpedup charges under the Counter-Terrorism Law
began in March before the SCC. Two of them,
Mohammed al-Khudari and his son Hani alKhudari, were charged with “joining a
terrorist entity” understood to be the Hamas
de facto authorities in Gaza. Both were
forcibly disappeared during the first month of
their detention and were detained
incommunicado and in solitary confinement
for two months. They had no access to legal
representation from their arrest onwards.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In June, 14 individuals detained since
April 2019 for their peaceful support of the
women’s rights movement and women
human rights defenders were charged under
the Anti-Cyber Crime Law, the CounterTerrorism Law or both. Among them was
Salah al-Haidar, the son of Aziza al-Yousef, a
woman human rights defender who remained
on trial for her women’s rights work.
In September, eight people received final
sentences for the murder of Saudi Arabian
journalist Jamal Khashoggi in Turkey in 2018.
The Criminal Court in Riyadh commuted five
initial death sentences, and sentenced all
eight to prison terms ranging from seven to
20 years. The authorities permitted the
attendance of diplomats, but closed the trial
to media and independent
observers. Additionally, the identity of those
on trial and the charges they faced were not
disclosed.
Also in September, the SCC sentenced
writer and academic Abdullah al-Maliki to
seven years in prison for his tweets and other
online posts in which he wrote about freedom
of expression and political representation and
defended ACPRA members. He was also
accused of hosting an intellectual forum to
discuss books and philosophy, on charges of
“inciting public opinion against the country’s
rulers.”

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to impose death sentences,
and carried out scores of executions for a
wide range of crimes.
In April, a royal order announced an end
to the use of the death penalty against people
aged under 18 at the time of the crime for
offences that attract discretionary
punishments under Shari’a (Islamic law). The
order was aligned to the 2018 Law on
Juveniles, which prevents judges from
imposing discretionary death sentences on
those aged under 15. This law does not
prevent judges handing down death
sentences for that age group in the case of
hadd crimes (those with fixed and severe
punishments under Shari’a) or crimes
punishable by qisas (retaliation).

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In August, in a long-overdue development,
the Saudi Human Rights Commission
announced that the country’s Public
Prosecutor had ordered a review of the death
sentences against Ali al-Nimr, Abdullah alZaher and Dawood al-Marhoun, who were at
imminent risk of execution.3 The three young
men had been arrested in 2012 when
children and charged with offences relating
to their participation in anti-government
protests in the Eastern Province. In
December, the public prosecution also
reviewed its call for the execution of
Mohammad al-Faraj, a member of the
country’s Shi’a minority, who was arrested at
the age of 15 for his “participation in [antigovernment] protests” in the Eastern
Province, and instead demanded a prison
term.
The authorities failed to abide by
international fair trial standards in capital
cases, often holding summary proceedings in
secret and without allowing defendants
access to representation or legal assistance.
Foreign nationals often did not have access
to translation services throughout the various
stages of detention and trial.

CORPORAL JUDICIAL PUNISHMENT
In April, the Minister of Justice issued a
circular to all courts to implement the
Supreme Court’s decision to end
discretionary flogging punishments and
replace them with prison sentences and/or
fines. Flogging continued in cases where the
punishment is mandatory under Shari’a.
It remained unknown whether the
discretionary flogging punishment imposed
on blogger Raif Badawi had been dropped. In
2014, he was sentenced to 1,000 lashes, 10
years in jail followed by a 10-year travel ban,
and a large fine for “insulting Islam” and
creating an online forum for debate. In
January 2015, he received the first 50
lashes. Further floggings were delayed,
initially on medical grounds and since then
for unknown reasons.

311

WOMEN AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In July, members of the Shura Council, a
body that advises the monarchy, proposed an
amendment in the executive by-law to the
Saudi Nationality Law to give permanent
residency, without any fee or lengthy
procedures, to the children of Saudi Arabian
women married to foreign nationals. This was
presented as an interim solution to
shortcomings of the Nationality Law, which
bars Saudi Arabian women married to foreign
nationals from passing on their citizenship to
their children.
In a positive development, also in July, a
court ruled that “an adult, rational woman
living independently is not a crime” in the
case of Maryam al-Otaibi, a Saudi Arabian
woman on trial in a case filed by her father –
also her legal guardian – for leaving her
family home. Maryam al-Otaibi had actively
participated in the campaign to end the
guardianship system. It remained unclear
whether this signalled the authorities’
intention to end the criminalization of women
fleeing their homes without the permission of
their guardian, which allowed male guardians
to initiate “absentees” cases against them.
Women and girls continued to face
discrimination in law and practice in relation
to marriage, divorce and inheritance, and
remained inadequately protected from sexual
and other forms of violence. Those who had
experienced domestic abuse continued to
need a male guardian’s permission to leave
shelters.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
“Homosexuality” remained prohibited in
Saudi Arabia, punishable by flogging and
imprisonment.
In July, Yemeni LGBTI rights defender
Mohamed al-Bokari was sentenced to 10
months in prison followed by deportation to
Yemen for charges related to violating public
morality, promoting homosexuality online and
imitating women. He was arrested after he

312

appeared in a video defending the personal
freedoms of LGBTI people.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, at the start of the COVID-19
pandemic, the authorities extended residency
permits of foreign workers without charge,
and the Saudi Human Rights Commission
announced the release of 250 foreign
detainees held for non-violent immigration
and residency offences.
However, the approximately 10 million
migrant workers in Saudi Arabia continued to
be governed by the kafala (sponsorship)
system, which gives employers
disproportionate powers over them and
prevents them from leaving the country or
changing jobs without the permission of their
employers, increasing their vulnerability to
labour abuses and exploitation. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, this situation –
alongside dire living conditions, scarce legal
protection and limited access to preventive
health care and treatment – put migrant
workers in an even more vulnerable position
and at higher risk from COVID-19.
From March onwards, thousands of
Ethiopian migrants, including pregnant
women and children, were arbitrarily
detained in harsh conditions in at least five
detention centres across the country.
Detainees said that they lacked adequate
food, water, health care, sanitation facilities
and clothes. Cells were severely overcrowded
and prisoners could not go outside. The
specific needs of pregnant and lactating
women were not addressed. Newborn
babies, infants and teenagers were detained
in the same dire conditions as adults.4
While it was difficult to establish the scale
of deaths in detention and corroborate all
such allegations, detainees interviewed said
that they had seen seven bodies of inmates.
Three women said they had had contact with
a female detainee whose baby had died in
detention. Eight detainees said they had
experienced and witnessed beatings by
guards and two reported that guards had
administered electric shocks as punishment.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

1. Saudi Arabia: Prisoner of conscience Dr Abdullah al-Hamid dies while
in detention (Press release, 24 April)
2. Saudi Arabia: Muzzling critical voices – Politicized trials before Saudi
Arabia’s Specialized Criminal Court (MDE 23/1633/2020)
3. Saudi Arabia: Review of young men’s death sentences overdue step
towards justice (Press release, 27 August)
4. Saudi Arabia: “This is worse than COVID-19”: Ethiopians abandoned
and abused in Saudi prisons (MDE 23/3125/2020)

SENEGAL
Republic of Senegal
Head of state and government: Macky Sall
The Criminal Code was amended to
increase sentences for perpetrators of rape
and child sexual abuse. Police used
excessive force. Detainees protested against
poor health conditions and health workers
threatened strikes over inadequate
resources. Communities were at risk of
forcible eviction. There was a resurgence of
violence in the Casamance conflict.

BACKGROUND
In January, the Criminal Code was amended,
criminalizing rape and child sexual abuse
and increasing sentences for both.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the government introduced state of
emergency legislation in March, giving them
extensive powers to rule without
parliamentary oversight. Most of the
restrictive measures, including a national
curfew, were lifted in June.
The ruling party, opposition and civil
society organizations came together under
the Political Commission of National Dialogue
to discuss reforms related to the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
Violence resurfaced in Casamance with
several attacks against military positions, and
targeted killings.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

In January, a man died in police custody in
the city of Fatick after he was allegedly
beaten by police. An autopsy, which found he
had died from “natural causes”, led to violent
protests. The authorities then began an
investigation into three police officers
suspected of being responsible.
In May, the gendarmerie tear gassed a
youth press conference, in the town of Cap
Skirring, called to highlight the lack of
drinking water in the town. At least two
participants were seriously injured.
In June, four protesters were injured when
police violently dispersed them while they
were demonstrating against the 2013
demolition of their homes in Gadaye suburb
in the capital, Dakar.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In June, police arrested Assane Diouf after he
criticized the government in a live video
discussion. He remained in detention on
charges including inciting an armed
gathering and issuing public insults online.
In August, members of Dahiratoul
Moustarchidine wal Moustarchidati, a
religious organization, ransacked Les Échos
newspaper’s office after it alleged that the
organization’s leader had contracted
COVID-19. Six suspects were arrested for the
attack.
In September, Adja Ndiaye, a journalist
working for Dakaractu was verbally abused
and assaulted by police agents in Dakar,
while reporting on a story. She suffered
injuries to her neck and back from the
assault and her camera was also damaged.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
In June, the doctors’ union SAMES
threatened strike action over the inadequate
provision of PPE and other resources to
manage the COVID-19 pandemic, and
frontline doctors threatened to strike over
unpaid salaries and poor working conditions.

Security forces used excessive force to
maintain public order.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

313

Prison conditions

FORCED EVICTIONS

Detention facilities were overcrowded and
health risks to inmates were exacerbated by
COVID-19. By October, there were 10,804
detainees of which 5,052 were in pre-trial
detention. Between March and September,
the government released 3,731 prisoners in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The death of two detainees from COVID-19
in Thiès prison led to hunger strikes by
inmates calling for mass testing. At least six
people died apparently due to poor detention
conditions while in police custody and in
Thiès and Diourbel prisons.

Rural communities in the Thiès region
continued to challenge the threat of forced
eviction as agricultural and petrochemical
companies encroached on their land. A
farming community in the village of Ndingler,
near Mbour city, lost 0.75 square kilometers
of communal land to an agri-business
project. In July, the authorities brokered a
truce, allowing farmers limited access to their
land.
The villagers of Tobène accused a
petrochemical company of polluting their
farmlands and challenged the government’s
decision to allocate an additional 6 hectares
of farming land to the company. The
residents protested the company’s
compensation offer of XOF9 million
(US$16,110). In August, demonstrations
turned violent and the gendarmerie arrested
22 residents, including the activist Ardo
Gningue, who said he was tortured and
otherwise ill-treated during detention in
Tivaouane.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
LGBTI activists were subjected to smear
campaigns and death threats. Under the
Criminal Code, same-sex sexual relations
were punishable by up to five years’
imprisonment. In October, 25 men and boys
were arrested at a private party in Dakar and
charged with “unnatural acts” and detained.
On 6 November, a court in Dakar sentenced
two of the men indicted to six-months and
five men to three-months in prison. The rest,
including those who were under-age, were
acquitted.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
A draft law to regulate Qur’anic schools
awaited parliamentary approval. Twelve
Qur’anic students were reportedly tortured
and otherwise ill-treated by their teachers. In
February, a 13-year-old boy was beaten to
death by his teacher in Louga city. In March,
the Dakar Criminal Court sentenced a
Qur’anic teacher to 10 years’ imprisonment
for “assault and battery of an individual
under 13”; another staff member was
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment for
failing to assist the victim.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the government said it had taken 2,015
children off the streets, returned 1,424 of
them to their families and placed the rest in
government centres.

314

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
There was a resurgence of violence in
Casamance. In August, Hamidou Diémé, a
former combatant of the Movement of
Democratic Forces of Casamance armed
group, was killed in Diégoune in the
Ziguinchor region, by unidentified gunmen.
No one had been brought to justice for the
attack by the end of the year.

SERBIA
Republic of Serbia
Head of state: Aleksandar Vučić
Head of government: Ana Brnabjić
Serbia failed to indict any former senior
police or military commanders for war
crimes and resolution of the fate of missing
persons stalled. Protesters and journalists
were seriously injured in the capital,
Belgrade, when police used excessive force.
Few refugees gained access to asylum.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Protections against domestic violence
remained inadequate.

BACKGROUND
With an increasingly repressive President,
and no viable opposition, the Serbian
government controlled both police and
judiciary, weakening the rule of law, eroding
political and civil rights and enabling
widespread corruption.
In March, state of emergency COVID-19
legislation introduced a 5pm to 5am curfew
and other restrictive measures; armed forces
patrolled Belgrade and other cities to enforce
public health measures.1 People who violated
unclear self-isolation regulations were
sentenced to up to three years'
imprisonment. Measures were lifted in May
for election campaigning and reimposed in
June, triggering mass demonstrations.
There was little progress in normalizing
Serbia-Kosovo relations in EU-facilitated
talks.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
No progress was made towards implementing
the national war crimes strategy, opening
investigations into the backlog of more than
2,500 war crimes cases, or indicting senior
police or military officials for command
responsibility. Seven indictments were raised,
and five first instance decisions were
delivered. Prosecutions of low-level
perpetrators in cases transferred from Bosnia
and Herzegovina (BiH) were extremely slow.
Proceedings against 10 men related to the
Srebrenica genocide continued to be delayed
by absences of the accused. In January,
proceedings opened against a Bosnian Serb
police officer, charged with raping a Bosniak
woman in August 1992.
At the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, the retrial continued of
former Serbian State Security officials Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović for “ethnic
cleansing” in Croatia and BiH.
New legislation providing reparation to
victims of war discriminated against civilian
victims. A series of cumulative conditions

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

required a higher percentage of bodily injury,
only applied to those injured in Serbia and
discriminated between physical and
psychological damage. An estimated 15,000
people, including relatives of the missing and
survivors of sexual violence, still had no right
to reparation.

Enforced disappearances
Impunity persisted for those responsible for
the transfer of bodies of over 900 KosovoAlbanians from Kosovo to Serbia in 1999.
The UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions urged Serbia to prosecute senior
police officials suspected of murdering the
three US-Albanian Bytici brothers, whose
remains were recovered from a police
training ground in 2001. In November,
human remains, believed to be Kosovo
Albanians, were discovered in a quarry in
Kizevak.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Over 70 people were seriously injured and
223 arrested during several days of
demonstrations in July following the
President’s ban on public gatherings and
proposed weekend curfew. Although rightwing activists invaded the Parliament, most
protesters were peaceful. However, police
fired tear gas and stun grenades
indiscriminately, and protesters and
bystanders alike were charged by mounted
police or beaten. Four journalists were
seriously injured by police in separate
incidents across the country, including Žikica
Stevanović who was hospitalized with head
injuries, despite showing his press card. A
joint NGO report documenting 13 allegations
of ill-treatment was sent in July to the UN
Special Rapporteur on torture. No police
officers had been prosecuted by the end of
the year.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination persisted against ethnic
minorities, and anti-migrant protests and
attacks increased. The Equality
Commissioner reported an increase in hate
speech during the state of emergency; her

315

mandate expired in May, rendering the
institution unable to function effectively until
her re-election in November.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Physical attacks, intimidation and political
slurs on social media against media workers
continued. In April, journalist Ana Lalić was
arrested for “causing panic” when
investigating conditions in hospitals; staff
were prohibited from providing
“unauthorized” information. Journalists were
briefly excluded from government press
conferences, ostensibly for health reasons.
In July, the Finance Ministry targeted
individuals, investigative journalists and 37
human rights NGOs in demanding bank
account details under a law used to
investigate terrorist financing and money
laundering.

RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED
EVICTIONS
In June, the Belgrade Court of Appeal
awarded €2,600 compensation each to two
Roma families who were unlawfully evicted
from their homes in Belvil, Belgrade, in 2012
and bussed to a derelict warehouse in Niš.
Violating legal protections against eviction,
Belgrade authorities paid Roma residents at
Resnik €19,000 “compensation” to leave the
settlement in December.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Between January and November, 24,180
refugees and migrants arrived in Serbia.
Asylum claims were suspended until May as
refugees and migrants in overcrowded
asylum reception centres were placed under
mandatory quarantine controlled by the
military. Support staff and NGOs were denied
entry, although preventative health measures
were not implemented. In May, a government
order restricting exit from asylum centres was
successfully challenged by NGOs, but in
October refugees’ freedom of movement was
again limited.
The asylum process remained inadequate:
of 2,639 refugees registering an intention to

316

claim asylum, only 118 applied; by 30
November, 16 had received asylum and 18
subsidiary protection.
Pushbacks into Serbia from EU member
states, and from Serbia to neighbouring
countries, continued. In April, 16 men,
believing they were being moved to another
temporary reception centre due to COVID-19,
were driven by police to the southern border
and forced at gunpoint to walk into North
Macedonia.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
In April, the NGO Autonomous Women’s
Center reported a threefold increase in
contacts from women during the curfew.
Many described the intensification of
psychological, economic or physical violence,
and their fear of reporting violence to the
authorities without access to protection. At
least 22 women were killed by a partner or
family member before 25 November.
1. Policing the pandemic: Human rights violations in the enforcement of
COVID-19 measures in Europe (EUR 01/2511/2020)

SIERRA LEONE
Republic of Sierra Leone
Head of state and government: Julius Maada Bio
Security forces used excessive force against
protesters. Provisions of the Public Order
Act (POA) used to criminalize freedom of
expression were repealed. The ban on
pregnant girls attending school and sitting
exams was lifted. Discrimination against
women and LGBTI people persisted and
sexual violence against women and girls
remained widespread. Health workers and
prisoners were at particular risk from
COVID-19.

BACKGROUND
The political tensions between the ruling
Sierra Leone People's Party and the All
People's Congress (APC), the main
opposition party, persisted. Measures taken

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

to fight the COVID-19 pandemic led to
violations of economic, social, civil and
political rights.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In May, Sylvia Blyden, publisher of the
Awareness Times newspaper and a leading
APC member, was arrested and charged
with, among other things, seditious and
defamatory libel, conspiracy to pervert the
course of justice and publication of false
news for alleging, on social media, that
former Defence Minister Alfred Paolo Conteh
had been ill-treated in detention. Her case
was brought on the same charges before a
magistrate court and the High Court. In July,
the High Court dismissed the charges against
her on the basis of insufficient evidence.
In July, Parliament repealed Part V of the
1965 POA, used to prosecute people on
defamation and sedition charges for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression. Consequently, all charges against
Sylvia Blyden before the magistrate court
were dropped in November.
On 9 December, 17 environmental and
land rights activists, members of the Malen
Affected Land Owners Association, were
discharged after a prolonged trial which
followed their arrest in early 2019 after a land
rights demonstration.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Concerns about public order management by
the security forces continued.
In April, during the lockdown period
imposed to control the spread of COVID-19,
there were multiple allegations of police
brutality on social media, notably against
those who went out for essentials like food
and water.
According to the Freetown Correctional
Centre’s July report, 30 prisoners and one
correction officer were killed, and dozens of
people injured during a riot at the Pademba
Road prison in the capital, Freetown, on 29
April. The prisoners were protesting against
overcrowding and COVID-19 restrictions. The
report concluded that the military used
reasonable force to control the riot while

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

NGOs called for an independent investigation
into the incident.
Between 17 and 18 July, security forces
used excessive force against protesters at a
demonstration, which turned violent in
Makeni, a city in the Northern Province.
According to NGO reports, six protesters were
killed in the demonstration against the
government’s decision to relocate an
electricity power generator to another town.

WOMEN AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Sexual violence continued unabated. The
Rainbo Initiative NGO said it received over
1,000 reports of sexual assault between
January and May. Survivors of sexual violence
continued to struggle to access justice, health
care, legal aid and counselling. In July, the
first Sexual Offences Model Court was
established to expedite sexual offencesrelated trials and reduce the backlog of
cases. A one-stop centre for sexual violence
survivors was established, providing
psychosocial support and treatment.
On 30 March, the Ministry of Basic and
Senior Secondary Education announced with
immediate effect the lifting of the ban on
pregnant girls attending school and sitting
exams. In 2019, the ECOWAS Court of
Justice had ruled that the ban should be
revoked.
In December, the President launched the
first Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment Policy, partly to normalize the
gender balance within the political process.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Male consensual same-sex sexual relations
remained a criminal offence under the
Offences Against the Person Act, carrying a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
LGBTI people continued to suffer
discrimination and stigmatization.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
In April, the government pledged that health
workers’ wages would reflect the risks to their

317

health posed by COVID-19. According to
UNICEF, health workers accounted for 10.2%
of all COVID-19 cases as of July. On 2 July,
doctors stopped treating COVID-19 patients
because they had not received compensation
or PPE. On 28 July, the government
announced that health workers would benefit
from a health insurance scheme, and that
families of health workers who died of
COVID-19 would be financially compensated.

The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were further curtailed,
including via the use of a “fake news” law.

Prison conditions

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Detention facilities were chronically
overcrowded and the health risks to inmates
were exacerbated by the outbreak of the
COVID-19 pandemic. On 27 April, the
President announced that 235 prisoners
nationwide would be pardoned to ease
overcrowding and reduce the risk of
COVID-19 infection. The decision was
delayed following the prison riot in April two
days later, but on 21 July, 153 inmates were
released.

Throughout the year, directives under the
Protection from Online Falsehoods and
Manipulation Act (POFMA) – a so-called
“fake news” law – were issued against
government critics. In January, authorities
claimed it was a “coincidence” that the first
cases under POFMA involved political
opponents. In February, Facebook expressed
concerns over being forced to block a news
site page under POFMA.1 Independent media
outlets, including The Online Citizen (TOC)
and New Naratif, were repeatedly hit with
POFMA orders. In September, the Court of
Appeal reserved judgement on the first legal
challenges to POFMA.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
On 19 March, former minister Alfred Paolo
Conteh was arrested after he entered the
State House in Freetown carrying a gun. Two
others were also arrested for the incident.
They were detained at Pademba Road prison
but on 29 April, following the riot there, they
were transferred to an unknown location
without access to their lawyers for several
days. In July, Alfred Paolo Conteh was
acquitted of treason but convicted on two
charges of possession of arms and sentenced
to 24 months’ imprisonment by the High
Court in Freetown. His appeal against the
conviction remained pending at the end of
the year.

SINGAPORE
Republic of Singapore
Head of state: Halimah Yacob
Head of government : Lee Hsien Loong

318

BACKGROUND
In July, the People’s Action Party retained
power in general elections with a reduced
majority. The country was placed under strict
lockdown from April to June, in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic.

MIGRANT WORKERS
In April over 300,000 migrant workers were
quarantined in overcrowded dormitories due
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Almost all of
Singapore’s cases of infection were among
migrant workers. Heavy restrictions on their
movement remained at the end of the year.
In September the acquittal of a domestic
worker accused of theft from her employer
drew attention to access to justice and
inequality for migrant workers.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In March, police investigated human rights
lawyer M Ravi and TOC editor Terry Xu for
contempt of court under the Administration
of Justice (Protection) Act. The investigation
followed the publication of articles on TOC’s
website regarding Mohan Rajangam, a
Singaporean who challenged his extradition
to Malaysia in 2015.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Also in March, the Court of Appeal upheld
the conviction of human rights defender
Jolovan Wham for a Facebook post allegedly
“scandalising the judiciary” in 2018. Wham
served one week in jail.2 In August, Wham
spent 10 days in jail for organizing a 2016
event at which Hong Kong activist Joshua
Wong spoke. In September, media outlet New
Naratif and editor PJ Thum faced police
investigation for the publication of paid
advertisements on Facebook during the July
elections. In November, Jolovan Wham was
charged with “illegal assembly” after posing
on his own for a photo with a smiley face
earlier in the year.3

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Laws continued to discriminate against
LGBTI people. A constitutional challenge to
the law criminalizing consensual sexual
relations between men was dismissed by the
High Court.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed,
including for drug trafficking. In May, during
the COVID-19 pandemic, a man was
sentenced to death in a hearing held online,
sparking international attention.4

1. Singapore: Social media companies forced to cooperate with abusive
fake news law (News story, 19 February)
2. Singapore: Drop investigations under abusive contempt of court law
(Public statement, 25 March)
3. Singapore: Drop charges against peaceful activist (Public statement,
27 November)
4. Singapore: Man sentenced to death on Zoom call (News story, 20
May)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

SLOVAKIA
Slovak Republic
Head of state: Zuzana Čaputová
Head of government: Igor Matovič (replaced Peter
Pellegrini in March)
Discrimination against Roma remained
prevalent. The European Court of Human
Rights found in favour of two Roma victims
of police ill-treatment. A bill restricting
access to abortion was rejected by
parliament.

BACKGROUND
Parliamentary elections on 29 February
resulted in a new government led by Igor
Matovič, who was elected on an anticorruption platform.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the government declared a state of
emergency in March and implemented a
wide range of measures to stop the spread of
the virus.
In April, a former soldier was convicted of
the 2018 murder of investigative journalist
Ján Kuciak and his fiancée Martina
Kušnírová, whose deaths sparked widespread
protests. In September, a court acquitted
businessman Marián Kočner, who had been
accused of ordering the murder. The
journalist had been investigating allegations
of corruption, including in relation to the
business activities of Marián Kočner.

DISCRIMINATION – ROMA
Anti-Roma prejudice and discrimination
remained prevalent as Roma communities
were stigmatized as a public health threat
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The authorities targeted Roma settlements
with disproportionate and discriminatory
measures in response to the COVID-19
virus.1 In April, the authorities tested
residents of some Roma settlements for
COVID-19 with the assistance of the army
and ordered the mandatory quarantine of five
Roma settlements on the grounds of public
health. The legal basis for these mandatory

319

quarantines, enforced by the police and
army, was unclear, raising concerns of
arbitrary detention. Residents were not
promptly informed of the duration and
conditions of the quarantine. Inadequate
access to water and sanitation in informal
Roma settlements and a lack of adequate
alternative accommodation are long-standing
problems that were not sufficiently addressed
by authorities in their response to COVID-19,
making compliance by the community with
public health recommendations much more
difficult.
In July, the Ministry of Education wrote to
the European Commission regarding ongoing
infringement proceedings against Slovakia for
systemic discrimination and segregation of
Roma children in schools. In the letter, the
government acknowledged the existence of
racial segregation in education in Slovakia
and set out a series of measures, including
the preparation of a legal definition of
segregation.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Complaints of excessive use of force and illtreatment by police against Roma continued.
In May, the Ministry of Interior opened an
investigation into allegations that a police
officer beat five Roma children who had
briefly left an area under mandatory
quarantine in the village of Krompachy.
In January, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) ruled in A.P. v. Slovakia in
favour of a Roma boy who was subjected to
ill-treatment by police in 2015 and criticized
the authorities’ failure to effectively
investigate his complaint. In March, the
ECtHR formally requested a response from
Slovakia regarding the alleged ill-treatment of
six Roma boys in a police station in the city of
Košice in 2009 (M.B. & Others v. Slovakia).
In September, the ECtHR ruled in R.R.
& R.D. v. Slovakia that two Roma residents of
the settlement of Moldava nad Bodvou had
been subjected to inhuman treatment during
a police operation in June 2013 in which over
30 people had been injured. The ECtHR also
found that the authorities had violated the
prohibition on discrimination by failing to

320

investigate alleged discrimination in the
planning of the operation.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violations of women’s rights, often under the
guise of protecting religious or traditional
values, increased.
Although Slovakia remains a signatory to
the Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence, parliament has refused to ratify it
and in February voted to reject the
Convention altogether. Organizations working
on violence against women reported an
increase in domestic violence following the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Public Defender of Human Rights
expressed concerns regarding women’s
access to safe and timely sexual and
reproductive health care during the
pandemic. Some health care providers
suspended abortions, referring to a
government requirement to postpone nonessential operations in response to
COVID-19.
In October, parliament rejected a bill that
would have imposed new barriers on access
to abortion, and thereby endangered the
health and wellbeing of women and girls.
1. Stigmatizing quarantines of Roma settlements in Slovakia and
Bulgaria (EUR 01/2156/2020)

SLOVENIA
Republic of Slovenia
Head of state: Borut Pahor
Head of government: Janez Janša (replaced Marjan
Šarec in March)

Asylum-seekers were denied access to
asylum; refugees and migrants were forcibly
returned to Croatia. The COVID-19
pandemic severely affected care home
residents who accounted for most deaths.
Freedom of peaceful assembly was under
threat.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
Asylum-seekers irregularly entering the
country continued to be denied access to
asylum and were forcibly returned, frequently
in groups, to neighbouring Croatia. Such
collective expulsions were against the
principle of non-refoulement, which prohibits
states from returning individuals to a country
where there is real risk of serious human
rights violations. In November, the
Ombudsman’s Office criticized the treatment
of hundreds of asylum-seekers by the
authorities. The asylum-seekers were
detained under inhumane conditions in the
Centre for Foreigners in Postojna, some
before being deported to Croatia. There were
reports of widespread violence and abuse by
Croatian police.
The Administrative Court ruled in
December that the authorities violated the
right of a Cameroonian national to seek
asylum when he was deported without
procedure to Croatia and subsequently to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Court found
the authorities ignored the man’s asylum
request and failed to provide translation, legal
assistance or to assess the risk of
refoulement, in violation of domestic and EU
law.
In August, the Supreme Court ruled that
the accelerated returns of irregularly entering
migrants and asylum-seekers to Croatia,
based on a bilateral agreement between the
two countries from 2006, were lawful. The
case was referred to the Constitutional Court.
In December, the government proposed to
Parliament changes to the Law on Foreigners
and the Law on International Protection
which would further restrict asylum-seekers’,
refugees’ and migrants’ access to protection.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The definition of rape in the Criminal Code
remained based on the use of force, threat of
force or coercion, rather than consent,
contrary to international human rights law
and standards. As part of a wider reform of
the Criminal Code, the Ministry of Justice

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

proposed to remove use of force as a
condition for the commission of offence.
However, the proposal does not fully rely on
the absence of consent.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic severely affected
care home residents, accounting for almost
60% of all COVID-19 deaths. The Ministry of
Health was criticized during the first wave
over deciding not to hospitalize care home
residents and instead rely on an advance
medical assessment, allegedly conducted in
the care home without patients’ knowledge or
consent, and which may have deprived some
people of hospital care. Instead, care homes
had to set up their own isolation units which
lacked space, technical equipment and
trained staff. Consequently, they did not
adequately protect patients while risking
exposing other residents and staff to
infection.
In August, the Ministry of Health
announced new draft legislation on long-term
care for older people to address the issue of
insufficient accommodation and care
capacities for the growing elderly population.

DISCRIMINATION
Roma continued to face widespread
discrimination, high levels of unemployment
and social exclusion. Many continued living
in segregated settlements in inadequate
housing, lacking security of tenure and
access to adequate water, electricity,
sanitation and public transport.
In March, the European Court of Human
Rights, in a majority decision which largely
ignored the practical obstacles faced by
Roma living in informal settlements to access
basic services, ruled that Slovenia did not
violate the rights of two Roma families by
failing to ensure access to water and
sanitation.1 The families claimed their
communities were consistently denied access
to a public water supply based on living in
informal settlements. The ruling became final
in September after a referral to the Court’s
Grand Chamber was rejected.

321

FREEDOMS OF ASSEMBLY, ASSOCIATION
AND EXPRESSION
During anti-government demonstrations
between May and December, police
conducted random identity checks, detained
and fined peaceful protesters simply for
carrying anti-government placards and
subjected them to legal proceedings. In
November, the authorities considerably
increased fines for organizing and
participating in public gatherings in defiance
of a blanket ban, which was in place
intermittently throughout the year.
1. Slovenia: ECHR judgment is a blow to Roma communities (Press
release, 10 March)

SOMALIA
Federal Republic of Somalia
Head of state: Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
(Farmaajo)
Head of government: Mohamed Hussein Roble
(replaced Hassan Ali Khayre in September)
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
civilian targets continued. Freedom of
expression was suppressed; journalists were
threatened, harassed, intimidated, beaten,
subjected to arbitrary arrests and killed.
Women and girls continued to be subjected
to sexual violence. Internally displaced
people were disproportionately impacted by
the COVID-19 pandemic, and faced forced
evictions. In Somaliland, government critics
and journalists were censored, harassed and
prosecuted, and attacks on media houses
continued.

BACKGROUND
The ongoing conflict between the government
and its regional and international partners on
one side, and the armed group Al-Shabaab
on the other, combined with a series of
natural disasters and the COVID-19
pandemic, had a devastating impact on the
civilian population, causing further food
insecurity and mass displacement.

322

All parties to the conflict continued to
commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law with impunity.
Heightened political tensions between
federal and regional authorities ahead of the
2020/2021 elections prevented the
implementation of necessary judicial,
constitutional and human rights reforms.

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
USAFRICOM (the US military’s command
responsible for military operations in Africa)
continued to use drones and manned
aircrafts to carry out at least 53 airstrikes.1
On 2 February, a US airstrike targeted a
house in Jilib in the Middle Shabelle region.
Nurto Kusow Omar, an 18-year-old woman,
died from a shrapnel wound to the head. Her
sisters, aged seven and 12, and their 70year-old grandmother were injured.
On 24 February, a Hellfire missile from
another US airstrike killed Mohamud Salad
Mohamud at his farm near Kumbareere
village on the outskirts of Jilib. During the
year, USAFRICOM admitted responsibility for
killing three civilians and injuring eight others
in three separate airstrikes in 2019 and
2020. Although USAFRICOM acknowledged
responsibility for the 2 February killing of
Nurto Kusow Omar and the injuring of her
two sisters and grandmother, it maintained
that Mohamud Salad Mohamud was an AlShabaab operative, despite significant
evidence suggesting he was a civilian. None
of the victims were compensated by the US
or Somali governments.
In April, July and November, USAFRICOM
issued its first civilian casualty assessment
reports. It also established an online civilian
casualty reporting portal, which allowed
people with internet access to report
allegations of civilian casualties. However,
there was a need for further safe and
accessible mechanisms to ensure
accountability for such attacks, which
constitute war crimes when they target
civilians or civilian objects.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Al-Shabaab continued to enjoy impunity for
frequent and indiscriminate attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including
restaurants and hotels. It also carried out
targeted killings of those it perceived to have
links with the government and other people,
including journalists. According to the UN,
Al-Shabaab was responsible for 207 out of
the 596 civilian casualties it had recorded
between early February and early August.
On 16 August, Al-Shabaab attacked the
popular seaside Elite Hotel in Mogadishu,
detonating a car bomb and indiscriminately
firing at residents and staff inside the hotel.
At least 11 people were killed and 18 injured.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In April, a police officer shot dead two people
in Mogadishu because they were outside
their homes during the night-time curfew,
introduced to control the spread of
COVID-19. After protesters took to the streets
calling for justice for the victims, the
authorities arrested a police officer in
connection with the killings. He was
sentenced to death in July by a military court
in Mogadishu.
On 27 May, eight health workers, including
seven who worked at a mother and child
clinic in the village of Gololey in the Middle
Shabelle region, were abducted and killed by
unidentified armed men dressed in Somali
military and police uniforms. On 28 May, the
then President of Hirshabelle state appointed
a seven-person committee to investigate the
incident. The outcome of the investigation
had not been made public by the end of the
year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists
Two journalists were killed during the year.
Journalists were also threatened, harassed,
intimidated, beaten and arbitrarily arrested
and prosecuted by the police, military and
other government officials throughout southcentral Somalia and Puntland.2 The
authorities restricted access to information by

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

occasionally denying journalists access to
government buildings, major events and
scenes of incidents such as Al-Shabaab
attack scenes. Journalists were also denied
interviews with senior government officials.
Authorities also failed to effectively investigate
reports of attacks against journalists.
In February, Abdiwali Ali Hassan, a
freelance journalist, was shot several times by
unknown assailants suspected to be AlShabaab members, near his home in
Afgooye, Lower Shabelle region. He died on
his way to hospital. In May, Said Yusuf Ali, a
Kalsan TV journalist, was stabbed to death in
Mogadishu by a lone attacker. Media reports
suggested the killing was linked to his
coverage of Al-Shabaab activities.
In March, Mohamed Abdiwahab Nur
(known as Abuja), an editor for Radio Hiigsi,
was arbitrarily arrested for the second time in
eight days. He was detained incommunicado
by the National Intelligence and Security
Agency (NISA) without access to his lawyers
or family for almost three months. His
lawyers, other journalists and his family
believed he was held for criticizing the
security forces’ conduct in Mogadishu. On 7
June he was secretly taken to a military court,
which ordered his transfer to Mogadishu
Central Prison where he was finally allowed to
see one of his lawyers the following day. He
remained there for a further two months. The
authorities said he was detained while they
investigated his alleged Al-Shabaab
membership and involvement in a murder. In
August he was acquitted by a military court of
all charges.3
On 2 April, the NISA used Twitter to
intimidate and harass Harun Maruf, a
Washington DC-based Somali journalist with
the Voice of America. The Twitter posts
threatened him with legal action for having
“links that threatened national security” and
for “engaging with actions outside the media
code of conduct.” On 23 April, the NISA
announced it had concluded its
investigations against the journalist and
forwarded his case to the Attorney General.
In April police arrested Abdiaziz Ahmed
Gurbiye, editor and deputy director of the

323

independent Goobjoog Media. He was
arrested for alleging on Facebook that the
government had mismanaged its response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, and that the
President had taken a ventilator which had
been donated to a local hospital. On 29 July,
he was sentenced to six months in prison by
the Banadir Regional Court in Mogadishu,
but released the same day after paying a fine.
In May, the President said he was
committed to “decriminalizing journalism and
reviewing the Penal Code”, under which
journalists frequently faced prosecution, and
to respecting the right to freedom of
expression. However, journalists continued to
be prosecuted.
In August, the President approved
amendments to the 2016 Media Law.
Although it contained provisions on
protection and promotion of the right to
freedom of expression – including media
freedom – and journalists’ right to safety and
security and access to information, other
provisions threatened these rights. For
example, it criminalized the reporting of a
wide range of issues and gave the authorities
broad and sweeping powers to regulate and
monitor the media.
In September, the Attorney General
established a Special Prosecutor to address
crimes against journalists.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Sexual violence against women and girls was
widespread in south-central Somalia and in
Puntland. Attacks often went unreported due
to the climate of impunity, as well as the
stigma and fear associated with the crime,
which prevented many survivors from
seeking justice.
The UN documented 45 incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence against four
women and 41 girls between May and
August, mostly by unidentified armed men.
In April, two girls, aged three and four,
were raped near Afgooye and left in a nearby
field with serious injuries. In September, a
public outcry followed the alleged gang rape
and murder of 19-year-old Hamdi Mohamed

324

Farah in Mogadishu. Her attackers then
allegedly threw her to her death from a
building. The authorities said that during the
month of September they had arrested at
least 11 suspects in relation to the case.
In August, despite the authorities’ pledge
to strengthen laws to protect women and girls
from sexual violence, the Federal Parliament
introduced the Sexual Intercourse Related
Crimes Bill which contained provisions that
breached international law and regional
standards regarding rape and other forms of
sexual violence. It also contained flawed
definitions of offences, and failed to provide
survivors of rape and other forms of sexual
violence with adequate protection.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
The prolonged conflict, droughts, floods and
a locust invasion worsened the humanitarian
crisis and resulted in the displacement of
over 1.2 million people by November, in
addition to the nearly 2.6 million already
displaced in the country.
Internally displaced people (IPDs) were
disproportionately affected by the COVID-19
pandemic, and were forced to live in severely
overcrowded conditions. Many of them
earned an income from the informal
economy, but COVID-19-related restrictions
prevented them from earning a living and
meeting basic needs, like water, food and
sanitary items.4
Security forces and private landowners
continued to evict IDPs, despite the
pandemic. According to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, over
100,000 IDPs had been evicted from their
homes by September, most of them forcibly
and with no alternative accommodation
offered. They faced difficulty finding housing,
and some lived in the open where they were
exposed to additional health risks during the
pandemic.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION IN
SOMALILAND
Censorship, harassment and prosecution of
government critics and journalists, and
attacks on media houses continued. In June,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the Somaliland authorities arbitrarily closed
the independent Universal TV and Star TV
stations. The Minister of Information ordered
local television cable providers to remove the
two stations from their receivers and revoke
their licences. Universal TV was targeted for
allegedly failing to broadcast Independence
Day celebrations and events as demanded by
the authorities, and Star TV owners said they
were targeted for airing reports and analysis
on the condition of a detained former air
force pilot, Fouad Youssouf Ali, in
neighbouring Djibouti. In August, the
Information Ministry issued arbitrary fines of
SOS127,500,000 (US$15,000) and
SOS42,500,000 (US$5,000) on Universal TV
and Star TV respectively. Star TV paid the fine
and resumed operations, but Universal TV
remained closed as of mid-December.
In June, Abdimalik Muse Oldon, a
journalist, was released from Hargeisa
Central Prison after spending over a year in
prison for criticizing the President on
Facebook. He had been arrested and
sentenced to three-and-a-half years in prison
in 2019 and charged with “spreading antinational propaganda” and “disseminating
false news”. He was released following a
presidential pardon.
1. Somalia: Zero accountability as civilian deaths mount from US air
strikes (Press release, 1 April)
2. “We live in perpetual fear”: Violations and abuses of freedom of
expression in Somalia (AFR 52/1442/2020)
3. Somalia: Authorities must immediately release journalist Mohamed
Abdiwahab Nur (Abuja) (AFR 52/2649/2020)
4. Somalia: Internally displaced people surviving by “the grace of God”
amidst COVID-19 (Press release, 21 July)

SOUTH AFRICA
Republic of South Africa
Head of state and government: Matamela Cyril
Ramaphosa
The use by security forces of excessive and
lethal force increased during the COVID-19
lockdown. At least 115 people died in
police custody. Incidents of gender-based

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

violence soared. The asylum system failed
those most in need; immigrants and other
non-nationals were subjected to xenophobic
social media campaigns. COVID-19 put
health workers at particular risk of infection
due to the lack of PPE, while women’s
access to sexual and reproductive health
services was restricted. Children faced
significant inequalities and hardship in the
public education system. Millions of people
did not have access to safe drinking water;
and lockdown placed an additional burden
on women having to walk long distances for
water.

BACKGROUND
The President continued to take a lead in
national and regional efforts to resolve
political instability and address the need for
human rights reforms in Lesotho and
Zimbabwe.
The Commission of Enquiry into State
Capture continued to hear testimonies in
relation to allegations of corruption and other
abuses of power known as “state capture”,
during former President Zuma’s rule. Jacob
Zuma was removed from office in 2018 by
the African National Congress (ANC).
On 15 March the President declared a
National State of Disaster in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic which, in turn, invoked
the Disaster Management Act (2002). A
national lockdown was imposed on 27 March
which threatened to undermine rights to
freedom of movement and association, and
was eased in August.
The President established a ministerial
team to investigate allegations of corruption
connected to COVID-19-related
procurements, including PPE and food aid,
which was allegedly distributed by ANCaligned politicians in a way that favoured
certain communities.
The pandemic forced several media
houses to close, cut down on staff or cut
salaries due to the pandemic’s effect on
advertising revenue.

325

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In March, during lockdown, the authorities
deployed around 76,000 officers of the South
African National Defence Force (SANDF) and
police officers onto the streets to enforce
lockdown restrictions. Widespread reports of
their use of excessive, and sometimes
unnecessary, lethal force against the
population quickly emerged.
The Independent Police Investigative
Directorate (IPID), an official oversight body,
received 828 complaints of police
misconduct between 25 March and 5 May.
They included 16 deaths in police custody;
32 deaths as a result of police action; eight
incidents of rape by police officers; 25
reports of torture in custody; and 589
assaults.
On 7 April, South African Police Service
(SAPS) officers fired rubber bullets at
homeless people living in a camp at the
Strandfontein sports grounds in Cape Town
when they protested against their poor living
conditions, including lack of food.1
In August, police fired rubber bullets and
stun grenades at protesters who had
gathered peacefully outside Parliament in
Cape Town to mark the first anniversary of
student Uyinene Mrwetyana’s murder and to
protest the soaring levels of gender-based
violence. Eighteen protesters were arrested.
Uyinene Mrwetyana had been raped and
killed in Cape Town by a male post office
employee.

Unlawful killings
Elma Robyn Montsumi, a 39-year-old sex
worker, died in suspicious circumstances in
custody in Mowbray police station in Cape
Town, four days after being arrested on 9
April on suspicion of possessing drugs. The
police claimed she had committed suicide
and the IPID said they were looking into the
circumstances of her case. No one had been
arrested in connection with the case by the
end of the year.
Collins Khosa died on 10 April in
Alexandra, a township north of Johannesburg

326

city, after he was assaulted and brutally
beaten by members of the SANDF and the
Johannesburg Metropolitan Police
Department. Collins Khosa’s attackers
claimed he had violated lockdown rules when
they found a half-consumed glass of beer in
his yard. The authorities had banned alcohol
during lockdown.2 On 19 August, the Military
Ombudsman found that SANDF officers
implicated in the killing had acted
“improperly”.
Between 29 August and 1 September, the
IPID arrested three police officers and
charged them with the murder of Nathaniel
Julies, a 16-year-old disabled boy, on 26
August in Eldorado Park, south of
Johannesburg. He was allegedly shot by
police officers after he refused to answer their
questions.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence continued to soar and
the rate was nearly five times higher than the
global average. The President described the
increase as “a war” against women. Reports
of rape and sexual assault increased by 1.7%
in the first quarter of the year, with more than
42,000 rapes reported in 2019-2020 and
almost 144 sexual offences committed every
day. Such violence increased during the
lockdown period and within the first week,
police had received over 2,300 complaints.
Twenty-one women were reportedly killed in
June alone, including Tshegofatso Pule, a 28year-old pregnant woman from Roodepoort
town, west of Johannesburg, who was found
hanging from a tree with multiple stab
wounds. A man was charged with her murder
and he was awaiting trial at the end of the
year.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
During lockdown, medical and civil society
organizations documented complaints
relating to the lack of availability of, or access
to, sexual and reproductive health services,
including safe abortion.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
The asylum system failed those who needed
it most and left asylum-seekers and migrants
in limbo without legal status. The Refugees
Amendment Act came into force in January;
many argued that it severely undermined the
legal and human rights framework for
refugees, as well as South Africa’s
international obligations to protect refugees.
During lockdown, the authorities’ failure to
abide by their constitutional and international
legal obligations towards refugees, asylumseekers and undocumented migrants was
particularly marked. The government’s
COVID-19 aid programmes and social relief
arrangements were only available to people
with national identity documents. A legal
challenge brought by the Scalabrini Centre, a
civil society organization, led to some asylumseekers and special-permit holders receiving
a six-month COVID-19 Social Relief of
Distress grant in June. Refugees, asylumseekers and migrants were unable – like
citizens – to work in the informal economy
which had previously sustained them. Only
spaza shops owned by nationals were
allowed to operate during the period when
lockdown was most strictly enforced. In
August, the President announced his support
for a 2019 initiative from the Department of
Small Business Development to develop
legislation to restrict foreigners from working
in some sections of the economy.
A malicious Twitter campaign,
#PutSouthAfricaFirst, evoked a dangerous
xenophobic narrative in the COVID-19
context, and targeted African migrants,
accusing them of stealing jobs and draining
public health resources. The media reported
that nationals damaged or looted 124 spaza
shops owned by foreigners, and other
businesses in Thokoza township, south of
Johannesburg, in September.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
At the end of the year, the families of 34 mine
workers, and 10 others unlawfully killed by

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

SAPS officers in 2012 in Marikana, a mining
town in North West Province, were still
waiting for justice and reparation including
adequate compensation for their loss. The
police had responded, using unnecessary
lethal force, to a strike at the Marikana mine,
owned by Lonmin Mine plc, near Rustenburg
city in the North West province. More than 70
people sustained serious injuries after the
shooting, including permanent disability,
causing some of them to lose their jobs.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By early August, at least 240 health workers
had died after contracting COVID-19.3 On 3
September, the National Education, Health
and Allied Workers’ Union protested outside
Parliament against the authorities’ failure to
meet their demands for adequate PPE, and
for fair pay to reflect the health risks arising
from their exposure at work to COVID-19.
Their situation was compounded when they
were denied an annual salary increase as a
result of the weak economy and the bloated
civil service wage bill. In July, there was a
surge in COVID-19-related deaths among the
population as a whole, and there were more
than half a million confirmed cases
nationwide. The surge in COVID-19 cases
and deaths accelerated in late December
during the holiday period.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The public education system, one of the most
unequal in the world, continued to be
characterized by decaying and dangerous
infrastructure, overcrowded classrooms and
poor educational outcomes that perpetuated
inequality, particularly among those living in
poverty. More than 75% of nine-year-olds
could not read properly; 50 to 60% got as far
as high school, and of those, only around 40
to 50% passed their matriculation, while just
14% went to university.4
Students attending underfunded schools
were forced to study in inadequate
conditions; hygiene levels were poor and
children had to use pit latrines which
contravened health and safety legislation.5

327

Educational inequality was further
exacerbated when the pandemic led to
school closures and students in poorer
communities did not have access to remote
learning. Meanwhile, the government paused
its national school feeding programme that
over 9 million learners had benefitted from.
The authorities failed to use the school
closures as an opportunity to improve school
infrastructure. Children and staff who
returned to school in August did not have
adequate water, sanitation or PPE, and
teaching/learning conditions prevented them
from practising physical distancing.
Meanwhile, the government diverted funding
which had been promised for the
improvement of infrastructure in around
2,000 schools to COVID-19-related projects.

RIGHT TO WATER
According to the government’s National
Water and Sanitation Master Plan, around
5.5 million households did not have access to
safe and reliable drinking water as a result of
poor infrastructure management and a lack
of investment in water services. The
COVID-19 pandemic compounded problems
accessing water and the associated health
risks arising from poor hygiene. For example,
people, particularly women, had longer
distances to walk to find safe drinking water.
Women from QwaQwa region in the Free
State province, in the central eastern part of
the country, said their health suffered from
carrying heavy buckets of water over long
distances. Others relied on rainfall to get
water and some were forced to break
lockdown regulations to get to neighbouring
villages, risking fines or arrest, only to find the
water was unfit for consumption.
According to official information between
March and August, the Department of Water
and Sanitation delivered 18,678 water tanks
to 158 municipalities and districts, and
407,665 households.
1. South Africa: Use of excessive force against protesters worrying
(Press release 9 April)
2. South Africa: Call for independent investigation into Collins Khosa’s
death (Press release 11 June)

328

3. Global: Amnesty analysis reveals over 7,000 health workers have died
from COVID-19 (Press release 3 September)
4. South Africa: Broken and unequal education perpetuating poverty
and inequality (Press release 11 February)
5. Broken and unequal: The state of education in South Africa (AFR
53/1705/2020)

SOUTH KOREA
Republic of Korea
Head of state and government: Moon Jae-in
Women were subjected to violence and
abuse online and by public officials. LGBTI
people faced discrimination in media
reporting on the COVID-19 pandemic, in
the military and in education. Logistics
companies did not provide adequate
protection for delivery workers who faced
elevated health risks during the pandemic.

BACKGROUND
National Assembly elections took place as
planned on 15 April, despite an earlier wave
of COVID-19 infections, with the Democratic
Party winning the majority of seats. InterKorean relations deteriorated, as North Korea
blamed the South Korean government for
failing to stop civil society groups formed by
North Koreans who had moved to the South
from sending politically themed leaflets into
North Korea using balloons or drones.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Pervasive online violence and abuse against
women and girls was revealed when the
police arrested the main operators of the socalled “Nth Room", which involved the
distribution of sexually exploitative videos
through chatrooms in the Telegram
messaging app. The operators and other
perpetrators of similar “digital sex crimes”
had blackmailed 1,000 women and girls,
mostly after luring them into providing
sexually exploitative photos or videos.
The government passed laws directed at
the better protection of women and children
against sexual exploitation and abuse. In
April, the National Assembly passed law

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

revisions which increased punishment for
digital sex crimes. The age of consent for
sexual activity was raised from 13 to 16
without discrimination. A wider range of
behaviours involving the possession or use of
illegally produced sexually exploitative
content was criminalized. The revisions
removed the statute of limitations for crimes
involving the sexual exploitation of children.
Multiple elected public officials were
involved in cases of alleged abuse of
authority and sexual misconduct. In April, Oh
Keo-don resigned as Mayor of the city of
Busan after admitting to sexually harassing a
woman staff member. In July, Park Wonsoon, Mayor of the capital, Seoul, was
accused of sexually abusing a former
secretary, but the police investigation of the
case ended due to his subsequent death.
The National Human Rights Commission of
Korea (NHRCK) then launched an
independent investigation into the abuse
case. In September, two government officials
were indicted on charges of sexually
assaulting a woman originally from North
Korea.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In May, a COVID-19 cluster outbreak among
club visitors in Itaewon, a nightlife district in
Seoul, generated media reports that
suggested unfounded links between
infections and sexual orientation. Some
reports included personal information, such
as the age, residence, workplace, occupation
and commuting patterns of individuals,
impacting on their privacy. The discriminatory
reports caused stigma against LGBTI people,
many of whom subsequently avoided
COVID-19 testing for fear of being “outed”.
Civil society called on the government to offer
anonymous testing, and such tests were
expanded to become nationally available. The
authorities also revised their practice in
publicizing personal information, so that third
parties could not use information such as
location history to identify individuals.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In June, the Justice Party and five
members of the National Assembly from
other parties co-sponsored a bill towards a
comprehensive anti-discrimination law, which
among other things prohibited discrimination
based on sexual orientation and gender
identity.1 The bill was pending under the
relevant committee of the National Assembly
at year’s end. The NHRCK also made a
submission to the National Assembly, urging
it to adopt comprehensive anti-discrimination
legislation, as long recommended by the
international community.
Transgender people continued to face
institutionalized and other discrimination. In
January, the military authorities dismissed a
transgender soldier after she underwent
gender reassignment surgery. She filed an
administrative suit with the court in August,
after the military authorities had dismissed
her appeal. Another transgender woman
withdrew from a women-only university after
her admission, due to the pressure of
students opposing her enrolment.
A case on the constitutionality of Article
92-6 of the Military Criminal Act, which
criminalizes consensual same-sex sexual
activity in the military, remained pending at
the Constitutional Court.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
With physical distancing measures in place
during the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand
for delivery services soared. At least 16
delivery workers died from overwork during
the year according to a coalition of civil
society organizations, while there were
ongoing concerns over the lack of timely
health and safety measures for workers in the
industry. More than 150 people were infected
with COVID-19 in outbreak clusters linked to
a major logistics centre near Seoul.
According to media reports, the company
failed to provide necessary hygiene
guidelines, clean uniforms and adequate
personal protective equipment to workers.
Inmates and staff of correctional facilities
were at greater risk of COVID-19 infection, as
the pre-existing problem of overcrowding
persisted. In December, at least 772 people,

329

more than one-third of the inmates at the
Seoul Eastern Detention Centre, were
infected. The authorities also neglected
specific health needs of detainees. In May, a
man suffering from a psychosocial disorder
died in the Busan Detention Centre after
being constrained and placed in solitary
confinement overnight, while waiting for a
COVID-19 test. His family later filed a
complaint of ill-treatment with the NHRCK.
Abortion ceased to be criminalized as the
year ended, following the order of a
Constitutional Court decision in 2019, but
regulatory frameworks to ensure safe access
to abortion services were not yet developed.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
The arrival of nearly 500 asylum-seekers on
Jeju Island in 2018 had sparked a trend of
increasingly strict immigration and refugee
policies. The Ministry of Justice subsequently
changed the interpretation of procedures
provided for in the Refugee Act, thereby
excluding transit passengers from applying
for asylum at Incheon International Airport.
The Incheon District Court ruled in June that
this exclusion was unlawful, but the ministry
appealed, and asylum-seekers could be held
at the airport until a final court decision was
reached.
Reports that individuals were held at the
airport transit zone for months during the
COVID-19 pandemic raised concerns among
domestic legal experts. They noted that such
extended confinement was often without valid
reasons and may have constituted arbitrary
detention, as it grossly exceeded the
necessary time ̶ up to seven days according
to the Refugee Act ̶ for examining the
admissibility of asylum applications.

provide significant space for arbitrary police
decisions. Under many circumstances,
outdoor assemblies within sight and sound of
key venues, including the National Assembly
building, the official residence of the Prime
Minister and all levels of courts, remained
illegal.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS
From 30 June, people objecting to
compulsory military service could apply for
alternative service for the first time. The
newly created Commission for Examination of
Alternative Service operating under the
purview of the Ministry of National Defense
received 1,959 applications. At year’s end,
the commission reviewed only those
applications made on religious grounds and
accepted 730 of them. In October, the first
batch of alternative service personnel started
their 36-month duty, which was much longer
than the average military service and was
limited only to working in prisons or other
detention facilities.

DEATH PENALTY
On 16 December, the government voted in
favour of the resolution on a moratorium on
the use of the death penalty adopted by the
UN General Assembly (UNGA). South Korea
had previously abstained from all seven
UNGA moratorium resolutions.
1. South Korea: New anti-discrimination bill offers hope and safety to
many (News story, 16 July)

SOUTH SUDAN
Republic of South Sudan
Head of state and government: Salva Kiir Mayardit

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The National Assembly passed an
amendment to the Assembly and
Demonstration Act in May. The revision did
not fully abolish the automatic bans on
assemblies contained in Article 11, which
had been ruled unconstitutional by the
Constitutional Court, and continued to

330

Thousands of people fled fighting and
sought refuge in neighbouring countries.
Fighting between ethnic groups, clans and
sub-clans surged across the country and
sporadic clashes between parties to the
armed conflict continued, mainly in the
south. All parties to the conflict perpetrated

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law, including the
killing of civilians, the recruitment and use
of children and acts of sexual violence.
Impunity for human rights violations
remained the norm. The security forces
continued to arbitrarily arrest and detain
actual and perceived government opponents
and other critics. The government
continued to fail in its obligation to respect
and protect the right to health.

BACKGROUND
By the end of the year, parties to the 2018
revitalized peace agreement had not
established the new Parliament, leading to
delays in the passing of critical legislation.
They had also failed to amend crucial laws
like the 2014 National Security Service Act.
Efforts to reform the security sector were not
successful, partly because the National
Security Service (NSS) – the best-equipped
security force in the country and a key agent
of repression – was left out of the process. In
February, parties began to form the
Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity; however, they did not ensure
that the new executive included a 35% quota
of women, in accordance with provisions in
the agreement.
In March, the government imposed an
overnight curfew and travel restrictions,
banned social gatherings and closed
educational institutions as neighbouring
countries confirmed COVID-19 cases.
In April, evidence emerged of new small
arms and ammunition imports, violating the
UN Security Council’s 2018 arms embargo
which was renewed for another year in May.
In September, the UN peacekeeping
mission (UNMISS) started withdrawing from
three of its Protection of Civilian sites, which
accommodate over 40,000 people displaced
since the conflict began in 2013.
In October, the government and armed
groups not party to the 2018 peace
agreement resumed peace negotiations
which had been paused, in part by the
pandemic.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
According to the UN, the armed conflict
displaced over 38,100 civilians during the
year, of whom at least 17,000 fled to
Ethiopia, Sudan and Uganda. Hundreds of
people trying to seek refuge in Uganda were
stranded in makeshift structures near the
border and lacked food, adequate shelter,
medical care and clean water after a
COVID-19 outbreak led Uganda to close its
borders between 20 March and 1 October
(see Uganda entry).1 According to the UN,
nearly 110,000 refugees returned to South
Sudan.

CONFLICT AND ARMED VIOLENCE
Fighting, including cattle raiding, between
ethnic groups, clans and sub-clans surged
across the country, with the alleged
involvement of members of armed groups
and government forces. According to the UN
Commission on Human Rights in South
Sudan, weapons were supplied by state
actors.
Reports from the UN Secretary-General
said that clashes resulted in the killing of at
least 600 people, while around 450 were
injured and hundreds of thousands were
displaced without access to adequate shelter,
food, water or health care. In June the
President appointed a high-level committee
to investigate the security situation in Jonglei
state and the Greater Pibor Administrative
Area, focusing on containing the violence.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Fighting between parties to the conflict
continued, particularly in the south. Soldiers
committed serious violations and abuses,
including war crimes. They killed civilians,
committed acts of sexual violence, looted
civilians’ belongings, burned villages and
destroyed property and buildings.
Consequently, many villages were made
uninhabitable, and those internally displaced
by the fighting were unable to return to their
homes.2

331

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In March, the government closed schools to
control the spread of COVID-19 and only
started reopening them in October. Due to
the closures, over 2 million children were
denied access to education and the schoolrun feeding and health programmes. The UN
said this was in addition to the estimated 2.4
million children out of school before the
pandemic.
Between December 2019 and December
2020, the UN Country Task Force on
Monitoring and Reporting on Children and
Armed Conflict documented 133 grave
violations committed against children by
armed groups and government security
forces, including the forced recruitment of
children and their use in combat and
supportive roles like porters, cooks and spies.
The Task Force also reported killings,
maiming, abductions and rapes of children.
At least 28 children died and two were
maimed as a result of explosive remnants of
war. During fighting between ethnic groups in
Jonglei state, the UN recorded that at least
16 children had been killed, about nine
injured, and at least 194 abducted.

Child soldiers
Throughout the year, child soldiers were
identified among the members of armed
opposition groups and the Presidential
Guard3. In February, the government signed
an action plan with the UN to end and
prevent all grave violations against children;
several opposition groups committed to
achieving this goal. Between February and
May, the UN Task Force supported the
release of 57 children from armed groups
and government security forces.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Between December 2019 and December
2020, UNMISS documented 79 incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence, including
gang rape, rape, sexual slavery and forced
nudity, by government forces, armed groups
and community militias.

332

Inter-communal violence in Jonglei state
resulted in at least 74 women being killed,
around nine injured, and some 224
abducted, according to UN figures. In
Western Equatoria state, the main opposition
group released 47 women and 26 children,
including 12 girls, in January.
There was also a high incidence of genderbased violence outside conflict situations. In
May, Eye Radio reported that in the capital,
Juba, three men took an eight-year-old girl
from her home after holding her mother at
gunpoint, gang raped her and dumped her
unconscious body outside her house. Save
the Children said that after the schools were
closed in March, there was an increase in
violence against girls, and teenage
pregnancies. In July, a media outlet said that
in Cueibet county, in the Lakes state, two
girls, one of whom was 15 years old, were
beaten to death by male relatives in relation
to pregnancies their families disapproved of.
The case of the 15-year-old girl was
submitted to the High Court and four
suspects remained on remand in prison.
Early and forced marriages were
commonplace and had detrimental effects on
women and girls’ sexual and reproductive
health. In July, the media reported that a
government soldier killed a 19-year-old
woman in Aweil because she had refused to
marry him. In September, a High Court in
Aweil sentenced him to death, and he was
transferred to Wau Central Prison. According
to the UN Population Fund, almost half of
18-year-old women were married.
In March, the police established a national
committee to oversee the implementation of
its action plan to combat sexual violence.

IMPUNITY
Despite several trials related to sexual
violence, impunity for crimes under
international law remained the norm and
victims lacked access to redress, and
medical and psychosocial services.
In June, the President appointed a former
opposition commander suspected by the UN
of widespread conflict-related sexual
violence, as governor of Western Equatoria

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

state. Also in June, according to the UN,
civilian courts in the towns of Kuacjok and
Wau convicted a soldier and a police officer
“of conflict-related sexual violence against
children.” They were given prison sentences
of between five and 10 years and ordered to
pay damages to the families. In September, a
special court martial established by the army
convicted soldiers of nine rapes and two gang
rapes involving 11 survivors, despite the fact
that military courts were not competent to
deal with the case.
According to the UN Development
Programme, between October 2019 and
October 2020 a court established to hear
sexual and gender-based violence cases and
juvenile cases, concluded 13 out of 369
registered cases, resulting in one dismissal
and 12 convictions. These included three
rape cases against government soldiers and
one rape case against an NSS officer, all
unrelated to the conflict.
The government took no discernible action
to establish the Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing, the
Compensation and Reparation Authority and
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan (HCSS),
provided for in the 2015 and 2018 peace
agreements. The HCSS is an envisaged AUbacked tribunal with a mandate to investigate
and prosecute crimes under international law
and other serious violations committed since
December 2013.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The NSS and the Military Intelligence
Directorate continued to arbitrarily arrest
actual and perceived government opponents
and other critics, including journalists and
civil society members, and to hold them in
prolonged arbitrary detention in harsh
conditions without charge or prospect of trial.
Detainees were denied the right to have their
detention reviewed by a court4. Those
suspected of criminal responsibility for these
violations acted with impunity.
On 29 May, Kanybil Noon, a civil society
representative on the Strategic Defense and
Security Review Board, a body created under
the 2018 peace agreement, was arbitrarily

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

arrested and detained in the NSS’ main
detention facility in Juba, known as Blue
House. In June he accessed a lawyer who
filed an application to the High Court in Juba,
at the end of the month, for him to be
unconditionally released or brought before a
court. He suffered poor health and was
denied medical care until he was released
without charge on 22 September.
On 1 May, a journalist was briefly detained
while covering a story about motorcyclists
who stormed a police station after alleged
police harassment on the roads during the
enforcement of COVID-19 restrictions.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 3 June, security forces shot at unarmed
protesters in Juba’s Shirkat neighbourhood,
injuring at least two people. The protests were
sparked by the unlawful killing by soldiers of
four people, including a pregnant woman and
an older man, following a physical
confrontation over a land dispute involving a
relative of the President who succumbed to
his injuries later that night. At least 14
demonstrators were arrested, and illegally
detained in Juba Central Prison. They were
released in November but charged with
offences against public order and public
nuisance.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be handed
down and executions were carried out. On 14
July, the Court of Appeal quashed the death
sentence against Magai Matiop Ngong on
grounds that he was a child at the time of his
crime in 2017, and ordered that his case be
sent back to the High Court to rule on an
appropriate sentence. He was removed from
death row on 29 July and remained on
remand in Juba Central Prison pending
appeal before the Supreme Court by the
family of the man he killed.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The right to health remained under serious
threat. Public health facilities were underresourced, and according to the UN, 56% of
the population did not have access to primary

333

health care services. The public health sector
was underfunded and received only 2.8% of
the national budget (around US$14 million).
Medical equipment for COVID-19 treatment,
such as ventilators, and personal protective
equipment for health workers was lacking.
Media outlets reported that at the onset of the
pandemic in South Sudan in April, the
country only had four ventilators for an
estimated 11 million people.
Post-traumatic stress disorder was
widespread in the population, but access to
mental health and psychosocial support
services remained extremely limited. As a
result, people with mental health conditions
were routinely housed in prisons.

Health workers
The government failed to protect the rights of
health workers during the COVID-19
pandemic. They had insufficient access to
PPE and suffered under huge workloads.
Doctors on the government payroll were not
paid between February and May and did not
receive welfare packages or medical cover. In
May, doctors held a one-day strike, after
which the government offered them
SSP10,000 (US$40) as a lump sum to cover
part of the salary arrears. Some doctors who
refused to accept the offer were threatened
with dismissal.5

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
The humanitarian crisis was compounded by
inter-communal violence, the COVID-19
pandemic and floods, which affected about
half the country. Up to 1.7 million people
remained internally displaced, and an
estimated 6 million people, over half the
population, were acutely food insecure.
Millions of people had limited or no access to
safe water and sanitation, adequate health
care and related services.
The crisis was exacerbated by attacks on
aid workers between January and November
of whom nine were killed. Humanitarian
organizations reported that there were 459
incidents which impeded humanitarian
access. Aid workers were frequently robbed
and attacked on main roads.

334

1. East Africa: People seeking safety are trapped at borders due to
COVID-19 measures (Press release, 22 June)
2. South Sudan: UN arms embargo must be maintained after surge in
violence against civilians in 2020 (Press release, 30 November)
3. Systematic harassment of civil society, journalists, private sector and
critics by South Sudan’s intelligence agency (AFR 65/2727/2020)
4. Accountability critical to ending grave human rights violations in
South Sudan (AFR 65/3105/2020)
5. Exposed, silenced, attacked: Failures to protect health and essential
workers during the COVID-19 pandemic (POL 40/2572/2020)

SPAIN
Kingdom of Spain
Head of state: Felipe VI
Head of government: Pedro Sánchez

Health care workers lacked adequate
personal protective equipment at the
beginning of the pandemic. COVID-19
deaths among older people were
disproportionate. Police officers issued
more than one million fines and subjected
some individuals to arbitrary punishments
for COVID-19 lockdown breaches.
Allegations of excessive use of force by law
enforcement officers policing protests
continued. There was a significant rise in
calls to helplines by women at risk of
gender-based violence. Lack of affordable
housing and homelessness remained a
major concern. Migrants and refugees were
confined to overcrowded facilities in Melilla
during lockdown.

BACKGROUND
In January, a new coalition government was
sworn in comprising the socialist party
(PSOE) and the left-wing Unidas Podemos.
On 14 March, three days after the World
Health Organization declared the COVID-19
outbreak a global pandemic, the government
approved a Royal Decree establishing a state
of emergency. The decree granted
emergency powers to enforce lockdown
regulations and was extended on six
occasions until 21 June. In October, an

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

additional state of emergency was adopted
for six months.
In June, Parliament adopted the Minimum
Subsistence Income, a benefit intended for
people living in severe poverty.
Spain accepted most of the
recommendations made under the UN
Universal Periodic Review, including those
referring to freedoms of expression and
peaceful assembly, as well as those relating
to past human rights violations.1
Assistance to victims of gender-based
violence was considered essential and a
Specific Contingency Plan was approved to
ensure that such services remained available
during the lockdown.
In March, the government announced a
draft law on sexual violence that included a
new legal definition of rape to comply with
international human rights law.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the end of the year, at least 93,000 health
workers had contracted COVID-19,
accounting for 5.1% of cases; 89 died as a
result. Over 78% of infected health care
workers were women.
During the first weeks of the pandemic,
there was a shortage of quality personal
protective equipment (PPE). As a result,
health care workers were frequently forced to
resort to inadequate PPE or to reuse items
designed for single use. Health care workers
in settings outside hospitals, such as primary
care medical centres and care homes,
received PPE later than staff in hospitals.
Additionally, during the first three months
of the pandemic, health care workers only
had limited access to COVID-19 tests.

Rights of older people
As of November, around 20,000 older people
had died from COVID-19 in care homes; they
comprised approximately 50% of all
COVID-19 deaths reported until that period. It
was estimated that around half of the deaths
of older people in care homes occurred in the
capital, Madrid, and in Catalonia. There were
concerns that referral protocols in both
regions which recommended treating sick

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

older people in the care homes rather than
transferring them to hospitals were
discriminatory and violated the right to
health.
At the height of the pandemic some older
people living in care homes were confined to
their rooms, with little or no contact with their
families, for an indefinite period and without
effective supervision by the national and
regional authorities, resulting in violations of
their human rights. Throughout this time,
health care workers’ associations expressed
concerns about persistent staff shortages and
the failure to provide sufficient quality PPE to
staff, as well as the inadequate provision of
medical care to people living in care homes
in the first months of the pandemic.2

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
During the lockdown, there was a 60%
increase in women calling the support
helplines against gender-based violence run
by the Ministry of Equality, compared to the
same period the previous year. Online
consultations with women seeking safety
during the lockdown increased by 586%.
Forty-five women were killed by their partners
or former partners.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Many people, especially in low-income areas,
continued to face challenges in accessing
adequate housing. Royal Decree Law 8/2020
and Royal Decree Law 11/2020, both
adopted in March, established a three-month
moratorium on mortgage payments for
particularly vulnerable people and a sixmonth moratorium on rental payments
respectively. The decrees also suspended
eviction procedures for vulnerable
households without alternative housing. Royal
Decree Law 30/2020 adopted in September
extended this suspension until January 2021.
In April, the UN Special Rapporteur on
extreme poverty and human rights
recommended that Spain introduce new
legislation to guarantee the right to housing.
The Rapporteur also recommended greatly
increased investment in public housing and
fiscal disincentives for leaving housing

335

vacant, as well as increased rent-control
arrangements in key cities.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The 2015 Law on Public Security, which
limits freedoms of expression, assembly and
information, continued to be enforced,
adding to the coercive powers of security
forces.
During the state of emergency, and until
23 May, law enforcement officials issued over
one million fines and arrested 8,547 people
for breaches of lockdown. There were reports
of excessive and disproportionate use of force
by law enforcement officials to ensure
compliance with lockdown rules. Law
enforcement officials lacked clear criteria to
use their powers and applied them arbitrarily,
for example by imposing fines on journalists
who were carrying out their job and against
people who were homeless or experienced
other specific marginalization.3
In June, the government revealed that four
internal investigations into the National Police
were ongoing and that 41 Civil Guards had
been sanctioned for their actions during the
state of emergency.
In October, the European Court of Human
Rights found that Spain had violated the right
to freedom of assembly and association in
the case of a woman who had been left
permanently injured after police forcefully
dispersed a spontaneous peaceful protest
against austerity measures and
unemployment in 2014.
Investigations into allegations of excessive
use of force by law enforcement officials
during the October 2017 protests in Catalonia
remained open at the end of the year.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
At the end of the year, Jordi Sánchez and
Jordi Cuixart, presidents of two proindependence organizations in Catalonia,
remained in prison after being convicted for
sedition in connection with protests and the
referendum on independence in 2017.
In November, the Constitutional Court
found that offences foreseen in the Law on

336

Public Security, criminalizing some legitimate
forms of protests, were in line with the
Constitution, but found that the requirement
of prior authorization in the use of video
recordings of the police limited the right to
freedom of information.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Following the declaration of the state of
emergency, eight migration detention centres
were closed, and irregular migrants were
released to help prevent the spread of
COVID-19. Alternative accommodation was
provided. However, in June, the government
announced the progressive re-opening of
detention centres due to the increase of
arrivals by sea.
While the total number of people arriving
irregularly in Spain grew by 29%, in
comparison to 2019, irregular arrivals in the
Canary Islands increased by 756.8%.
Between June and November, lack of
adequate and sufficient accommodation
resulted in many refugees and migrants
spending several days outdoors on the docks
in unsafe conditions.
The number of asylum applications
dropped significantly due to restrictions of
movement and border closures. From
January to November, 84,705 people
submitted asylum applications; 39,839 of
those were women and 15,206 were minors,
compared to more than 117,000 people in
2019. Concerns remained about the backlog
of asylum applications, with 99,105 cases
pending in November. Lockdown restrictions
compounded disruptions to asylum
interviews and renewal of documents.
Asylum-seekers encountered difficulties in
obtaining an appointment to formalize their
asylum application.
Asylum-seekers and migrants continued to
live in overcrowded reception conditions and
without adequate protection from COVID-19.
The Centre for Temporary Stay of Immigrants
in Melilla remained at overcapacity during the
pandemic, accommodating up to 1,600
people, including minors and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex people.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Despite the health risks, transfers of people
from Melilla to mainland Spain were limited.
In July, the Spanish Supreme Court
reiterated that asylum-seekers had a right to
freely move across Spanish territory and
access the mainland from Ceuta and Melilla,
upholding 22 lower court decisions. However,
the government continued its containment
policy in both Ceuta and Melilla at the end of
the year.
In February, the European Court of Human
Rights found that Spain had not breached
the European Convention on Human Rights
when it summarily expelled two men from
Melilla to Morocco in 2014.
In November, the Constitutional Court
upheld the constitutionality of the provision
allowing for border rejections of people
attempting to enter the Spanish enclaves of
Ceuta and Melilla, provided that it applies to
individualized entries, border rejections are
subjected to judicial review and carried out in
compliance with international law.
1. The authorities must fulfil their commitments and take measures to
guarantee the right to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly Human Rights Council adopts Universal Periodic Review outcome on
Spain (EUR 41/2732/2020)
2. Spain: Older people in care homes abandoned during COVID19
pandemic (Press release, 3 December)
3. Human rights violations during the state of emergency (in Spanish
only, Violaciones de derechos humanos durante el estado de alarma,
June)

SRI LANKA
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Head of state and government: Gotabaya Rajapaksa
There was continued impunity for violations
committed during the internal armed
conflict, and the government failed to
uphold commitments to the UN Human
Rights Council around justice and
reconciliation. As such, justice stalled and
impunity prevailed, including in cases of
killings and other violations allegedly linked
to the ruling Rajapaksa family. Human
rights defenders, journalists, lawyers and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

criminal investigators were increasingly
intimidated and harassed. There were
reports of deaths in custody and
extrajudicial executions. Violence against
women remained widespread. Minority
Malayaha Tamil labourers suffered
disproportionately from loss of wages during
the COVID-19 pandemic and their efforts to
secure better pay were halted.

BACKGROUND
The election results of 2019 sparked
concerns among human rights defenders in
light of allegations of gross human rights
violations under Mahinda Rajapaksa during
his 2005-2015 presidency. His brother,
President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, had served
as the Secretary to the Minister of Defence
during the last phase of the internal armed
conflict, which ended in 2009. Both parties
to the conflict – the Sri Lankan armed forces
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) – were accused of war crimes and
other serious violations and abuses of
international human rights law.
Soon after the elections, the new
government announced its intention to
withdraw support for UN Human Rights
Council resolution 40/1 and all linked
resolutions promoting post-war reconciliation,
accountability and human rights in Sri Lanka.
In October, the Constitution was amended,
with serious implications for independent
institutions including the national Human
Rights Commission and the Police
Commission, as well as the independence of
the domestic judiciary and the police.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The government announced its intention to
review the Act establishing the Office on
Missing Persons (OMP), the permanent body
established during the previous government
in line with commitments to the UN Human
Rights Council with a mandate to investigate
the fate of “the missing” in the country. In
January, the practice of issuing interim relief
to families of the disappeared, as
recommended by the OMP and carried out
during the previous administration, was

337

discontinued, putting these families under
further financial strain.
Lawyers involved in cases of enforced
disappearance, especially the so-called Navy
11 case and the Navatkuli case, faced
intimidation and attacks on social media. In
both cases, members of the Sri Lankan
armed forces were suspected perpetrators.
The cases saw little progress during the year.
After months of delays, the court case for the
disappearance of journalist Prageeth
Eknaligoda began at the Permanent High
Court Trial-at-Bar. During the trial, witnesses
appeared before the President-appointed
Commission of Inquiry on “political
victimization”, leading to concerns that the
parallel inquiry would interfere with the
ongoing court case. In December, the
President appointed the Chairman of the
Commission as the new Chairperson to the
OMP, raising further fears around the future,
commitment and independence of domestic
mechanisms.

IMPUNITY
Little or no progress was made towards
accountability for violations and abuses
committed during the armed conflict and in
the post-conflict period. Sri Lanka failed to
establish a judicial mechanism with special
counsel to investigate allegations of violations
of human rights and international
humanitarian law as promised at the UN
Human Rights Council. There was no notable
progress in the investigations of the killings of
journalist Lasantha Wickrematunge in 2009
and sportsman Wasim Thajudeen in 2012.
In March, President Gotabaya Rajapaksa
pardoned Sergeant Sunil Rathnayaka, who
was convicted and sentenced to death by a
Sri Lankan high court in 2015 for the
December 2000 murder of eight Tamil
civilians, including three children, in the
village of Mirusuvil, Jaffna. The pardon was in
line with the President’s campaign pledge to
acquit and release those who he called “war
heroes” being held on “baseless” charges.
In June, Vinayagamoorthi Muralitharan
(known as Karuna), former deputy leader of
the LTTE and current supporter of the ruling

338

party, boasted of killing some 2,000 to 3,000
Sri Lankan Army personnel in one night
during the armed conflict. Although the
police began investigations into the
statement, they did not investigate war
crimes he allegedly committed. The
investigation had not produced an outcome
by the end of the year. Vinayagamoorthi
Muralitharan was later given a position in
Prime Minister Mahinda Rajapaksa’s
personal staff. Several military officers who,
according to the findings of various UN
investigations, could be responsible for
crimes under international law were also
promoted during the year and appointed to
powerful positions within the administration.
During the year there was a further
crackdown on law enforcement officers
pursuing accountability for human rights
violations. Immediately after the presidential
election, more than 700 criminal investigators
were banned from leaving the country. Shani
Abeysekara, former Director of the Criminal
Investigations Department (CID), was
arrested in July over allegations of concealing
evidence. A sub-inspector who made the
allegation later confessed to a magistrate that
he was pressured into framing Shani
Abeysekara. During his time at the CID,
Shani Abeysekara pursued many criminal
cases involving human rights violations, some
allegedly linked to the Rajapaksa ruling
family. While in custody, Shani Abeysekara
tested positive for COVID-19, but was
withheld prompt access to medical care at a
hospital for days.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Human rights defenders, journalists, lawyers
and criminal investigators came under
increased intimidation and harassment
during the year. Law enforcement officials
paid unannounced visits to human rights
organizations and enquired about their work
and funders. At least 18 such visits were
recorded in the north, east and west of Sri
Lanka during the year and 13 incidents of
intimidation of journalists. Dharisha Bastians,
former editor of a state-owned newspaper

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and New York Times correspondent, was
under investigation for reporting on various
cases and human rights issues.
In April in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, the police announced that they
would take legal action against those who
publish posts on social media criticizing
government officials and obstructing their
duties. Several social media commentators
were arrested following the announcement.
Ramzy Razeek was arrested and detained
after peacefully expressing himself in a
Facebook post. His health deteriorating, he
was granted bail five months later. The
investigation against him was continuing at
the end of the year. The 2019 case against
short story writer Shakthika Sathkumara also
remained pending. Hejaaz Hizbullah, a
prominent lawyer, was arrested in April on
suspicion of offences under Sri Lanka’s
draconian Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).
He continued to be arbitrarily detained at the
end of the year without any evidence of
wrongdoing produced in court. Muslim poet
Ahnaf Jazeem was arrested under the PTA
for a collection of poems he published. He
continued to be held in custody without legal
representation at the end of the year. The
PTA remained in use despite the previous
government’s pledges to repeal and replace
the law, which was used arbitrarily against
the minority Muslim population following
bombings on 21 April 2019.
Thousands of people were arrested for
violating the COVID-19 curfew, despite it
having no legal basis. Police also used
excessive force to arrest activists peacefully
carrying out a Black Lives Matter solidarity
protest in strict observance of COVID-19
guidelines, without first giving the protesters
the opportunity to disperse voluntarily.
The pandemic also led to an increase in
anti-Muslim rhetoric in social and
mainstream media, in some instances by
senior government members. The authorities
carried out forced cremations (forbidden by
the Muslim faith) of Muslims who died from
COVID-19, despite domestic directives at the
time allowing for burials. WHO guidelines
allowed for either burials or cremations for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the safe management of a corpse in the
context of COVID-19.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Incidents of police brutality were recorded in
many parts of the country. In one incident in
the south, the victim was a Muslim child with
disabilities. In the north, Tamil ethnic
minorities were targeted.
At least 14 prisoners died and more than
100 were injured when the authorities used
lethal force to control protests against the
spread of COVID-19 inside several prisons.
Detainees in police custody too were shot
dead, allegedly while trying to escape. People
allegedly involved in drug-related crimes were
extrajudicially executed, reportedly during
“crossfire” with the police.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND
CHILDREN
There was continued impunity for sexual and
gender-based violence, despite repeated
assurances by consecutive governments to
tackle the issue. A total of 142 rapes and 42
cases of “serious sexual abuse” against
children were reported to the police in just
the first 15 days of the year.

DISCRIMINATION
Malayaha Tamil estate labourers and their
families continued to suffer marginalization
and poverty. They were particularly affected
by the lack of income during the COVID-19
pandemic. Many relied on loans or were
forced to pawn jewellery to cover basic living
expenses. Many young people from the
community lost their daily wage jobs in towns
and cities. Children in plantation estates were
deprived access to online education during
the pandemic because of a lack of
computers and internet access in their
homes. In spite of record profits for Sri
Lanka’s tea exporters of LKR353 billion
(US$1.9 billion) in 2019, the call by Tamil
labourers for an increase from LKR700
(US$3.8) to LKR1,000 (US$5.4) a day was
rejected. The tea companies blamed the
pandemic for stalling talks with the

339

government over workers’ pay, despite
President Rajapaksa’s promise to secure a
wage increase.

LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Sections of the Penal Code that prohibit
“carnal intercourse against the order of
nature” and “gross indecency between
persons” continued to be used to persecute,
harass and discriminate against LGBTI
people. Rights organizations reported in
October that at least seven LGBTI people had
been subjected to forced anal and vaginal
examinations by the police and Judicial
Medical Officers since 2017 in an attempt to
prove allegations of same-sex sexual
relations.

DEATH PENALTY
In 2019, former President Maithripala
Sirisena signed death warrants for four death
row prisoners who had been convicted of
drug-related crimes. The Supreme Court
granted a temporary reprieve while cases
challenging the order were heard in court.
The case was ongoing at the end of 2020
and the stay of executions was extended. Sri
Lanka has not carried out any executions
since 1976.

SUDAN
Republic of the Sudan
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Burhan
Head of government: Abdalla Hamdok
Positive legal reforms were instituted,
including abolition of some forms of
corporal punishment, and criminalization of
female genital mutilation (FGM). Security
forces used excessive, and sometimes
lethal, force against protesters. Opposition
activists and officials of the deposed former
government of Omar al-Bashir were
subjected to prolonged arbitrary detention.
COVID-19 lockdown measures left millions
in need of relief assistance. The authorities

340

failed to adequately protect civilians in
Darfur, South Kordofan and eastern Sudan
from serious human rights abuses arising
from armed attacks by militias.

BACKGROUND
A year after the 2019 overthrow of President
Omar al-Bashir, the transitional government
continued to struggle to address the former
government’s legacy of corruption, economic
crisis, past human rights violations, and lack
of justice and accountability.
In March, the government declared a
national health emergency in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, introducing measures
including an overnight curfew, movement
restrictions and border closures.
In August, a peace agreement was signed
between the government and the Sudan
Revolutionary Front, an alliance of nine
armed political groups based throughout the
country, including in the conflict-torn areas of
Blue Nile, Darfur and South Kordofan. Some
armed groups did not sign the agreement.
The Sudan Liberation Movement/Army-Abdul
Wahid Nur in Darfur refused to participate in
any peace talks. Also, no agreement was
reached with the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North which controlled parts of
South Kordofan and Blue Nile.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
The government took steps to improve the
protection of women's and girls’ rights. In
June, it adopted a National Action Plan for
the Implementation of UN Security Council
Resolution 1325 on women, peace, and
security, which provides guidance on
preventing gender-based violence in armed
conflict and increasing women’s participation
in the peace processes.
In July, the government introduced
legislation criminalizing the practice of FGM.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In September, police used live ammunition to
disperse demonstrators in the town of Nertiti
in Central Darfur, killing two protesters and
injuring four others. The demonstrators were
protesting against the government’s failure to

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

protect civilians after unknown assailants
attacked their community, killing a 14-yearold girl and a 24-year-old man, earlier that
day. The Central Darfur State Security
Committee promised to investigate the two
incidents. There was no further information
on the investigation at the end of the year.

In July, the government introduced legal
reforms to protect certain rights. It abolished
some provisions in the 1991 Criminal Act,
including the use of flogging and some forms
of corporal punishment as penalties for
various crimes, and introduced legislation to
decriminalize apostasy.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

ARBITRARY DETENTION

The National Committee of Inquiry,
established to investigate the killing and
injuring of protesters on 3 June 2019, had
not concluded its work by the end of the year.
On that day, members of the Rapid Support
Forces and other security forces fired live
ammunition at peaceful protesters outside
the military headquarters in Khartoum, killing
at least 100 and injuring 700 others. Many
survivors and relatives of those killed were
not optimistic that the Committee would
provide them with justice and reparation.
In February, the government announced
that former President Omar al-Bashir should
appear before the ICC on charges related to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide carried out in Darfur. The ICC
issued arrest warrants for Omar al-Bashir in
2009 and 2010. It also issued arrest warrants
for two other officials in Omar al-Bashir’s
former ruling National Congress Party (NCP)
— Ahmad Harun in 2007 and Abdel Raheem
Muhammad Hussein in 2012. However, the
transitional government continued to fail to
meet its obligation to surrender them to the
Hague court, and still had not ratified the
Rome Statute of the ICC.
In June, Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-AlRahman (also known as Ali Kushayb), a
former senior commander of the Janjaweed
militia, surrendered to the ICC to answer
charges of war crimes and crimes against
humanity allegedly committed in Darfur.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Despite the widespread practice of torture
during the past 30 years, the government
had not ratified the UN Convention against
Torture.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

At least 40 people remain arbitrarily detained,
including opposition activists and members
of the former government.
On 2 June, Muammar Musa Mohammed
Elgarari, an opposition activist and leader of
the Future Movement Group, was arrested in
Khartoum for allegedly harassing members of
the Committee for Removal of Empowerment.
The Committee had been established to
dissolve the NCP and confiscate its property.
He remained in detention without charge in a
police station in Khartoum North at the end
of the year.
At least 40 NCP senior party leaders and
members, who had been detained without
charge for 14 months, were finally charged
and brought before a special criminal court in
July. They had been arrested following the
2019 military coup, after which they were
held in Kober prison. In June 2020, the
Attorney General announced that at least five
cases would be submitted to the courts over
the following weeks, including those involving
suspects accused of serious human rights
violations committed during the years under
Omar al-Bashir. The first trial began on 21
July and related to the 1989 military coup
that brought Omar al-Bashir to power. It was
ongoing at the end of the year.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Doctors and other health workers were
physically and verbally attacked by patients
or their relatives who blamed them for the
government’s mishandling of the COVID-19
pandemic.1 In May, the Central Committee of
Sudanese Doctors reported 28 attacks on
health workers nationwide between March
and May. In June, the government passed
legislation to protect health workers, and

341

deployed dedicated security forces to prevent
further attacks.
Between 18 April and early June, the
authorities imposed a 24-hour lockdown in
Khartoum, although people were still allowed
to leave their homes to buy essentials.
Thousands who worked in the informal
economy struggled to earn a living when
movement between states was restricted. The
measures put human rights at risk,
particularly the rights to food, health, water
and sanitation, of groups facing
marginalization and discrimination like
internally displaced people, refugees,
migrants, women and children. In
September, the UN Independent Expert on
the Situation of Human Rights in Sudan said
that 9.3 million people needed humanitarian
assistance, an increase from 5.2 million in
2015.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the extent
of under-investment in the public health
system. Hospitals were found lacking key
equipment for PPE and ventilators.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The violence in Darfur, South Kordofan and
eastern Sudan continued. Inter-communal
violence resulted in unlawful killings, sexual
violence, torture and other ill-treatment,
destruction of property and burning and
looting of villages. At least 20 incidents were
reported by the end of the year. The security
forces and the government repeatedly failed
to provide protection for civilians or to
intervene in a timely manner to prevent the
escalation of fighting and human rights
abuses.
On 21 April, residents of the village of
Tamar Bol-Jimeil, north-east of Zalingei in
Central Darfur, were attacked by members of
a militia from the neighbouring nomadic
Rizeigat Arab ethnic group. Some of the
attackers were said to have been wearing
military uniforms. Two people were killed and
14 injured. At least 18 houses were burnt
down and more than 400 families reportedly
temporarily displaced.2

342

On 13 July, 10 protesters were killed in
Fata Borno camp for internally displaced
people in North Darfur, and at least 17
people injured, during an attack by an armed
militia group, thought to be affiliated with
government security forces. The attack took
place as protesters staged a peaceful eightday sit-in to demand, among other things,
better security, protection for their crops from
militia and other armed group attacks, and
the dismissal of officials affiliated with the
former government.3
On 25 July, at least 60 people from the
Massalit ethnic group were killed and more
than 54 wounded in a reprisal attack by an
armed group in and around the village of
Masterei in West Darfur. The Sudanese
authorities failed to intervene or to prevent
the attack, which lasted several hours.
Although the authorities announced they
would investigate the attack, no findings were
made public by the end of the year.
1. Exposed, silenced, attacked: Failures to protect health and essential
workers during the COVID-19 pandemic (POL 40/2572/2020)
2. Sudan: UN and AU must prioritize protection of civilians in Darfur
(AFR 54/2351/2020)
3. Sudan: Promptly investigate protester killings at Fata Borno (Press
release, 14 July)

SWEDEN
Kingdom of Sweden
Head of state: Carl XVI Gustaf
Head of government: Stefan Löfven
COVID-19 deaths occurred
disproportionately among older people and
in immigrant communities. Despite the
pandemic, authorities carried out hundreds
of evictions.

DISCRIMINATION
In June, “Black Lives Matter” protests took
place in several cities. The Minister for
Gender Equality publicly acknowledged that
people of African descent and ethnic
minorities faced discrimination in accessing

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

employment, housing, education and health
care.

Right to health
At year’s end, 7,389 people aged over
had 70 died from COVID-19, out of a total of
8,154 deaths. Almost 6,000 of them were
care home residents or had received care at
home. The Health and Social Care
Inspectorate and the National Corona
Commission identified failures in carrying out
individual medical assessments in care
homes and shortages of personal protective
equipment for staff as contributing factors.
In June, public health research indicated
that the number of older people in some
immigrant communities dying from COVID-19
was disproportionately high. Initial studies
suspected a link between higher mortality
risk and the crowded living conditions
experienced by some immigrant
communities, combined with the exposure
risk of employment in the service sector.

Right to housing and forced evictions
Between February and mid-December,
despite the COVID-19 pandemic, the
authorities carried out 4,621 evictions, which
was a 6% increase over the same period the
previous year. The police forcibly evicted EU
nationals living in informal settlements in the
capital Stockholm, many of whom were
Roma. The authorities failed to offer
alternative accommodation.

Sami Indigenous People
In January, the Supreme Court ruled that the
Sami village of Girjas had the exclusive right
to manage fishing and hunting licences for
their traditional lands. Following the ruling,
hate speech on social media against Sami
people was reported.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In June, a review of Sweden’s 2018 consentbased rape legislation was published showing
a significant increase in the number of
prosecutions and convictions for rape since
the law’s introduction.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHT TO SEEK ASYLUM
Authorities continued to forcibly return to
Afghanistan people whose asylum
applications were rejected, in risk of violating
the principle of non-refoulement (forcible
return of individuals to a country where they
risked serious human rights violations).

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In its October review, the UN Committee
Against Torture repeated its long-standing
criticism of Sweden for failing to define or
criminalize torture in domestic law.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In June, the Swedish Prosecutor confirmed
the completion of an investigation into two
representatives of oil company Lundin Energy
(formerly Lundin Petroleum) for alleged
complicity in serious violations of
international law in what is now South Sudan.

SWITZERLAND
Swiss Confederation
Head of state and government: Simonetta Sommaruga

Parliament adopted draconian anti-terrorism
laws. The government’s COVID-19 response
disproportionately limited the right to
freedom of expression. Parliament began
reviewing the criminal law relating to sexual
offences; Swiss citizens voted to include
sexual orientation in hate-speech
legislation. The government refused to
resettle more refugees from the Greek
islands, and temporarily suspended asylum
applications at borders due to COVID-19. A
landmark referendum calling for mandatory
human rights due diligence for
multinational companies was held.

BACKGROUND
Between March and June, the government
ruled by emergency powers in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, impacting a range
of rights such as freedom of assembly and

343

movement. Despite pressure by numerous
organizations and associations, by year’s end,
no comprehensive, independent study had
been commissioned to determine measures
to provide maximum protection to health
workers in Switzerland.1 The Senate (2nd
Chamber) accepted a government proposal
to create an independent national human
rights institution; the proposal was expected
to go to the other Chamber in 2021. In
September, Parliament decided to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 50% below
1990 levels by 2030.

UNFAIR TRIALS
In May, the Council of Europe Human Rights
Commissioner and UN experts criticized
proposals for “draconian” new anti-terrorism
laws.2 In September, Parliament adopted the
laws which pre-emptively restrict a person’s
liberty without charge or trial, and included a
vague and overly broad definition of
“terrorism”.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
At the start of the pandemic, the police
lacked clear guidelines to implement
emergency measures and disproportionately
limited protesters’ right to freedom of
peaceful assembly by imposing blanket bans
on demonstrations in public and handing out
fines in certain cantons. 3

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In January, a parliamentary committee
reviewed the criminal law relating to sexual
offences.4 It instructed the government to
submit a proposal to redefine sexual acts
committed against a person's will. The
current definition of rape required a female
victim and the use of coercion or force.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Parliament voted in favour of introducing
same-sex marriage. Same-sex couples will
now have the same rights with the exception
of certain restrictions in the area of sperm
donation.

344

In July, hate speech legislation was
extended to criminalize advocacy of hatred
and discrimination based on sexual
orientation, following a referendum in favour
of the change.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES AND ASYLUMSEEKERS
There were allegations of disproportionate
use of force by security staff at federal
asylum-seeker reception centres.5 By
December, no independent investigations
had been announced or conducted. During
the closure of the border with Italy from midMarch to mid-May, asylum applications at the
borders were suspended, except for
vulnerable people, as part of COVID-19
emergency measures.
In March, a parliamentary initiative calling
for the introduction of a humanitarian clause
in the legislation which penalizes
“Encouraging unlawful entry, exit or an
unlawful period of stay” was rejected. In July,
the Federal Court upheld the convictions for
“facilitation of unlawful entry” of human
rights defenders Anni Lanz and Lisa Bosia
Mirra, who had helped asylum-seekers in
need to enter Switzerland.
The government refused to accept more
refugees from the Greek islands, although
several major cities offered relocation places.
Exceptions included 54 unaccompanied
minors with family ties to Switzerland who
were relocated. After the destruction of Moria
refugee camp in Lesbos, Greece, in
September, (see Greece entry) the
government accepted another 38 minors,
intended to be resettled by the end of the
year.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
On 29 November, the referendum on the
Responsible Business Initiative, calling for
mandatory human rights and environmental
due diligence for multinational companies
doing business abroad, was held and voted
down. Although the initiative was rejected by
the cantons it won the majority of the
people’s vote. This was the first time that the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

voters of any country had said yes to this kind
of mandatory due diligence.6

IMPUNITY
In June, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled Switzerland had violated the
right to life after failing to take adequate
measures to protect a man who committed
suicide in police custody in 2014. Swiss
authorities had also neglected to conduct an
effective investigation.
1. Garantir les droits des professionnel-le-s de la santé (in French only),
(Press release, 18 August)
2. Les lois antiterroristes sapent l’état de droit! (in French only), (Press
release, 24 September)
3. COVID-19: Des directives claires pour l'expression de l’opinion dans
les lieux publics (in French only), (Press release, 5 May)
4. Projet distinct de révision du droit pénal sexuel (in French only),
(Press release, 18 January)
5. Un régime rigide dans les centres fédéraux et des délais très courts
(in French only), (Press release, 28 February)
6. Multinationals seem too big for accountability. Switzerland may
change that (News story, 27 November)

SYRIA
Syrian Arab Republic
Head of state: Bashar al-Assad
Head of government: Hussein Arnous (replaced Imad
Khamis in June)
Parties to the conflict in Syria continued to
commit with impunity serious violations of
international humanitarian law, including
war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and gross human rights abuses. Syrian and
Russian government forces carried out
direct attacks on civilians and civilian
objects, including hospitals and schools,
through aerial bombing of cities in the
governorates of Idlib, Hama and Aleppo,
displacing close to 1 million people.
Government forces continued to impede
access to humanitarian aid to civilians.
Security forces arbitrarily detained peaceful
protesters as well as civilians who had
reconciled with the government, and
continued to arbitrarily detain tens of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

thousands of people, including peaceful
activists, humanitarian workers, lawyers and
journalists, subjecting many to enforced
disappearance. The self-styled Syrian
National Army, supported by Turkey,
subjected civilians in the northern cities of
Afrin and Ras al-Ayn, which are under
effective control of Turkey, to a wide range
of abuses, including looting and
confiscation of property, arbitrary detention
and abduction. In the north-west, the
armed opposition group Hay’at Tahrir alSham arbitrarily detained and attacked
media activists, journalists, medical and
humanitarian workers, and others. In the
north-east, the Autonomous Administration
led by the Democratic Union Party (PYD)
arbitrarily detained individuals and
continued holding tens of thousands of
people suspected of affiliation to the armed
group Islamic State (IS) in inhumane
conditions. The Syrian government failed to
adequately protect its health workers from
COVID-19 and lacked a robust national
response, which endangered thousands of
lives. Tens of thousands of internally
displaced people were at risk of contracting
COVID-19 due to dire living conditions.

BACKGROUND
The conflict continued between the
government and its allies, and armed
opposition groups in Idlib, Hama, Aleppo and
Daraa. In January, hostilities between the
government, supported by Russia, and
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham significantly escalated
in north-west Syria. By 2 March, the
government had recovered control of the
Damascus-Aleppo highway as well as key
towns and cities in the southern Idlib
governorate and in the western part of the
Aleppo governorate. On 5 March, Russia and
Turkey agreed to a ceasefire and to carry out
joint military patrols of the Aleppo-Latakia
highway (also known as the M4 highway).
Between January and April, unidentified
armed groups shelled and detonated car
bombs in Afrin, a city in northern Syria under
the control of pro-Turkey armed groups,
killing and injuring many civilians and

345

damaging civilian infrastructure such as
homes and markets. Between March and
July in Daraa governorate in the south-west,
tensions escalated between armed opposition
groups and government forces following
clashes, shelling and targeted killings by both
sides.
In April, the Board of Inquiry established in
2019 by the UN Secretary-General to
investigate “incidents” that destroyed or
damaged “facilities on the de-confliction list
and UN-supported facilities” in north-west
Syria published a summary of its findings.
The Board’s conclusions included that it was
“highly probable” that “the Government of
Syria and/or its allies” carried out three air
attacks and that a ground rocket attack it
investigated was carried out by “armed
opposition groups or by Hayat Tahrir alSham”. In October, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons published
two reports into two alleged chemical weapon
attacks on Idlib and Aleppo on 1 August
2016 and 24 November 2018, respectively.
Neither established whether or not chemicals
were used as weapons.
Israel continued air attacks targeting the
Syrian government and Iranian and Hizbullah
forces in Syria.
In June, the USA adopted the Caesar
Syrian Civilian Protection Act imposing
sanctions on Syrian government officials,
military officials and business people.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
Direct attacks on civilians and civilian objects
by the Syrian government and Russia
Civilians in north-west Syria, including Idlib,
northern Hama and western Aleppo
governorates, continued to face air and
ground attacks, combined with dire
humanitarian conditions. Between January
and March, the Syrian government, backed
by Russia, subjected civilians to unlawful
attacks targeting residential areas and civilian
infrastructure, including medical facilities and
schools.1
Residents, medical workers and teachers
described how they endured relentless
attacks on their homes, hospitals and

346

schools. A doctor said that in January, three
air strikes in the vicinity of the hospital he
worked at in Idlib flattened at least two
nearby residential buildings and killed 11
civilians, including one of his colleagues.
Evidence showed that Russia was
responsible for the attack.

Denial of humanitarian access
The barrage of attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure in north-west Syria
between December 2019 and March 2020,
when a ceasefire was reached, pushed close
to one million people to seek refuge in
already overstretched displacement camps
close to the Turkish border or in unfinished
buildings, farms and schools, or on the
streets. The displaced people lived in
intolerable conditions, with limited access to
adequate shelter, food and medication.
The spread of COVID-19 in north-west
Syria further exacerbated the conditions and
challenged humanitarian organizations,
already struggling to meet needs. On 10
January, the UN Security Council extended
until July the authorization of the mechanism
that allowed the UN to deliver humanitarian
aid to Syria across the border with Turkey.
The resolution reduced the geographic scope
of the mechanism from four to two crossings,
Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam. After several
failed attempts, the UN Security Council on
11 July adopted resolution 2533 extending
the UN-facilitated delivery of aid from only
Bab al-Hawa for 12 months.
Government forces continued to impede
access to UN humanitarian aid agencies and
Damascus-based international humanitarian
organizations across Syria. A report published
by Oxfam and the Norwegian Refugee
Council in July described the challenges and
obstacles imposed by government forces on
the delivery of humanitarian aid, including
bureaucratic impediments, interference in
humanitarian activities, and restricting
partnerships with Syrian NGOs and local
communities.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
The Syrian government continued to subject
tens of thousands of people, including
journalists, human rights defenders, lawyers
and political activists, to enforced
disappearance.
It continued to resort to arbitrary detention
to suppress peaceful protest and curb
human rights and humanitarian activities. On
7 June, rare anti-government protests
erupted in Sweida city in the southwest
calling for “regime change” and better living
conditions after rising unemployment and
food prices, amongst other issues, ensued
from the economic crisis. Between 9 and 16
June, security forces arbitrarily arrested at
least 11 men for participating in the protests
and denied them access to lawyers and their
families.2 They were released in July following
pressure by community leaders.
In Daraa and Damascus Countryside
governorates, government forces continued
to arbitrarily detain former humanitarian
workers, doctors, former civil defence
members, political activists and local
committee leaders even though they had
gone through the so-called reconciliation
agreement and received security clearance.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Syrian National Army
The Syrian National Army (SNA), a proTurkey armed group, perpetrated a wide
range of human rights abuses against
civilians in Afrin and Ras al-Ayn, including
looting, confiscation of property, arbitrary
detention, abduction, and torture and other
ill-treatment.
The looting and property confiscation
particularly affected Syrian Kurds, who had
left the area during hostilities in 2018 and
2019. In some incidents, fighters confiscated
homes of remaining civilians after subjecting
them to extortion, harassment, abduction and
torture to force them to leave. They also
threatened and arbitrarily detained people
who filed complaints, forcing them to pay
money for their release, according to the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (UN
Commission of Inquiry).
The SNA arbitrarily detained and abducted
civilians in Afrin and then tortured and
otherwise ill-treated them for various reasons,
including for criticizing SNA members and for
formerly belonging to the PYD-led
Autonomous Administration and its security
and military branch. For example, in August
armed group members took a 70-year-old
Kurdish man from his home in Afrin and held
him for two months after he had verbally
condemned the beating of a young man by
SNA fighters. They denied him access to his
family who had to pay “intermediaries” a
significant sum of money for his release. In
addition, the armed group confiscated his
car.
The SNA detained, raped and otherwise
sexually assaulted women and girls,
according to the UN Commission of Inquiry.

Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, which controlled parts
of north-west Syria, arbitrarily detained
individuals who opposed their rule or
ideology, including media activists,
journalists, medical and humanitarian
workers, and others. On 20 August, Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham fighters arbitrarily detained a
doctor, who was also the director of a medical
school, for displaying drawings in an art
exhibition deemed to violate Shari’a (Islamic
law).
On several occasions between April and
June, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham violently
dispersed protests by shooting, beating and
detaining protesters. Protests centred on the
opening of commercial crossings between
Idlib and Aleppo into government-controlled
areas. On 10 June, according to the Syrian
Network for Human Rights, Hay’at Tahrir alSham beat and verbally abused 13 journalists
filming a joint Russian-Turkish patrol on the
M4 highway.

347

ABUSES BY THE PYD-LED AUTONOMOUS
ADMINISTRATION
The PYD-led Autonomous Administration
continued to control some of the
predominantly Kurdish north-east region of
Syria, including Raqqa and Qamishli. It
arbitrarily detained humanitarian workers,
political activists and Arabs.
The Syrian Democratic Forces, the military
branch of the Autonomous Administration,
continued to hold tens of thousands of
people suspected of affiliation to IS in al-Hol
camp in squalid conditions without access to
legal recourse.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Syrian government failed to adequately
protect health workers from COVID-19, or to
provide a robust response to the spread of
the disease and refused to provide
transparent and consistent information about
the country’s outbreak.3
Thousands of lives continued to be at risk
with no transparent and effective information
or testing. Relatives of COVID-19 patients,
medical professionals and humanitarian
workers said that public hospitals had been
forced to turn patients away due to a lack of
beds, oxygen tanks and ventilators. In
desperation, some residents were forced to
rent oxygen tanks and ventilators at
exorbitant fees.
The Syrian government’s inadequate
distribution of PPE endangered the lives of
health workers. The Ministry of Health did not
publish information about the impact of
COVID-19 on health workers; the only
available information is that which the
Ministry reported to the UN. Syria’s doctors’
union reported that at least 61 health workers
had died of the disease as of August, while
official sources reported 15 deaths.

REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
By the end of the year, the number of people
internally displaced in Syria since 2011 had
reached 6.7 million, while 5.5 million people
had sought refuge outside the country. Due

348

to limited resettlement places provided by
western countries, the number of
resettlement submissions by the most
vulnerable Syrian refugees fell to 10,056
compared to 29,562 in 2019, according to
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency.
Worsening humanitarian conditions in
countries neighbouring Syria, with rising
unemployment as well as administrative and
financial obstacles to obtaining or renewing
residency permits, continued to drive
refugees to return to Syria. Between January
and July, according to UNHCR, 21,618
Syrian refugees organized their own return
from Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey.
Displaced people across Syria continued to
live in overcrowded makeshift camps,
schools and mosques that did not provide an
adequate standard of living. They had limited
access to aid, basic services, clean water,
hygiene, food, health care, education and
livelihood opportunities; and were at
increased risk of contracting COVID-19.
Between January and March, the military
offensive in north-west Syria led to nearly one
million people fleeing to other parts of the
country, according to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Between January and June, 204,000 people
had returned to their homes. Thousands
continued to be internally displaced in northeast Syria as a result of the military offensive
launched by Turkey in 2019.
Al-Hol camp in al-Hasake governorate
hosted the largest number of displaced
people where around 65,000 individuals, the
majority of them women and children, lived
in dire conditions. Because of limited access
to medical care in al-Hol, eight children
under the age of five died between 6 and 10
August due to malnutrition-related
complications, dehydration, heart failure,
internal bleeding and other causes,
according to UNICEF. Between January and
August, the water supply from the Alouk
water station in areas under the control of
pro-Turkey armed groups was disrupted 13
times, cutting supply to residents and
internally displaced people in al-Hasake city

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

as well as in Tel Tamer and surrounding
areas, including in al-Hol and other camps.

review of Taiwan’s implementation of the
ICCPR and the ICESCR.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

MASS SURVEILLANCE

In April, the trial of two former officials of the
Syrian government’s security services
charged with crimes against humanity started
at the Higher Regional Court in Koblenz,
Germany. On 18 September, the Netherlands
invoked Syria’s responsibility for gross human
rights violations, particularly for torture under
the UN Convention against Torture. Under
the Convention, unless Syria and
the Netherlands reach an agreement within
six months, either party may refer the dispute
to the International Court of Justice.

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
many offences. The authorities disclosed little
information about death sentences passed,
and provided no information on executions.
1. “Nowhere is safe for us”: Unlawful attacks and mass displacement
in north-west Syria (MDE 24/2089/2020)
2. Syria: Peaceful protesters detained in Sweida must be released
immediately (Press release, 24 June)
3. Syria: Lack of adequate COVID-19 response puts thousands of lives
at risk (Press release, 12 November)

TAIWAN
Taiwan
Head of state: Tsai Ing-wen
Head of government: Su Tseng-chang (replaced
William Lai Ching-te in January)
The government took several measures to
control the spread of the COVID-19 virus,
some of which threatened the right to
privacy. Amendments to the Prison Act
failed to address concerns about rights of
people on death row with psychosocial or
intellectual disabilities. In August, a
National Human Rights Commission was
established. In October, the International
Review Committee received reports from
international organizations ahead of its

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In January, the government introduced a
series of measures aimed at preventing the
spread of COVID-19, some of which
threatened the right to privacy. The
government established a digital framework
of mass surveillance and connected
government databases, such as travel and
health insurance records, for the purposes of
tracking and tracing. Over 35 government
departments were able to constantly monitor
people’s movement and other activities,
including the purchase of surgical masks,
through this platform. The government
provided few details about its use of the
platform, nor specified when the data
collection measures would end.1

DEATH PENALTY
Amendments to the Prison Act in January
resulted in changes to the Regulations for the
Execution of the Death Penalty in July. The
amended regulations still allowed death
sentences for individuals with psychosocial or
intellectual disabilities.2 The authorities made
no progress towards abolition during the year
and continued to carry out executions.3

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The National Human Rights Commission
established as part of the Control Yuan (the
government supervisory agency regulated by
the Constitution) began work in August. The
commission is composed of members
appointed to act independently and
mandated to investigate complaints of human
rights violations, including discrimination, as
well as drafting and publishing a national
human rights report and advising government
agencies.4

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Refugees and asylum-seekers received only
limited assistance.5 Over 200 people from
Hong Kong arrived in Taiwan seeking asylum
after the enactment of a national security law

349

in late June. This highlighted the inadequacy
of Taiwan’s present legal framework regarding
refugees, asylum-seekers and others in need
of international protection (such as nonrefoulement) and led to renewed calls for the
adoption of a Refugee Act.

INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
On 29 June, the government announced it
was inviting national and international experts
to review its implementation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR) and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (ICESCR).6 This International Review
Committee is expected to gather for its third
review from 18 to 22 October 2021.
1. Taiwan: Submission to the International Review Committee on the
domestic implementation of the ICCPR and ICESCR: 3rd reports, (ASA
38/3212/2020)
2. Taiwan: Amendment to the regulations for the execution of the death
penalty: General Comment No. 36 of ICCPR should be included
(Statement, 20 July, Chinese only)
3. Taiwan: Second execution under President Tsai (Statement, 2 April,
English and Chinese)
4. Taiwan: Establishment of National Human Rights Commission (Press
statement, 19 June, Chinese only)
5. Taiwan: World Refugee Day (Press statement, 19 June, Chinese only)
6. Taiwan: Submission to the International Review Committee on the
domestic implementation of the ICCPR and ICESCR (Press release 23
October 2020, in both English and Chinese)

TAJIKISTAN
Republic of Tajikistan
Head of state: Emomali Rahmon
Head of government: Qokhir Rasulzoda
The authorities tightly controlled news and
information around the COVID-19 pandemic
and restricted freedom of expression,
blaming media and civil society for
spreading “false” information. The courts
used counter-terrorism legislation to block
access to some independent media outlets
based abroad. A journalist was imprisoned
for “inciting religious discord”. Personal
protective equipment received by health

350

care workers in hospitals, care homes and
detention facilities was inadequate, as was
protection given to survivors of domestic
and gender-based violence.

BACKGROUND
The authorities long denied the advent and
scope of COVID-19 infections, but imposed
restrictions, including shutting the borders
and closing all detention facilities to visitors.
Remittances (previously comprising a third of
gross domestic product), fell by over 50%
prompting fears of food shortages. In
September, the International Monetary Fund
reported that Tajikistan was experiencing
“severe effects” from the pandemic.
President Emomali Rahmon, effectively
uncontested, was re-elected in October.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Blocking internet-based information
resources and, intermittently, internet access
remained popular tools in the authorities’
campaign against critical voices. The
President signed a new Law on Counteracting
Extremism in January, granting the
authorities wide-ranging powers to restrict
freedom of expression. Thirteen government
agencies were authorized to request the
Communication Service to block websites
without judicial review.
In February, the Supreme Court concluded
that the foreign-based independent news
website Akhbor offered a platform to
“terrorists and extremists” and ruled to block
it. This effectively made journalists working
for Akhbor members of a banned “extremist”
organization and so liable to prosecution. In
November, Akhbor’s editor-in-chief
stated that he was forced to close down the
website due to security risks to all those
associated with it, including its readers.
The authorities continued to use charges
of “incitement to discord” and “terrorism and
extremism” against journalists and bloggers
who published critical material on politically
sensitive topics.
In April, a court in the capital Dushanbe
found independent journalist Daler Sharipov
guilty of “inciting religious discord” for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

publishing and disseminating unofficially his
dissertation on Islam and sentenced him to
one year in prison. The prosecutor argued
that he had published “extremist” articles
and had links to an extremist organization.
Daler Sharipov rejected the charges but
admitted that he might have “made
mistakes” in the dissertation; he did not
appeal his sentence.1

Media restrictions during the pandemic
The authorities tightly controlled the narrative
and messaging around the COVID-19
pandemic and introduced new legislation
against “false” information about coronavirus
infections.
In June, Parliament adopted changes to
the Administrative Code to punish, with
substantial fines, journalists, bloggers, and
others for distributing “inaccurate” and
“untruthful” information about the pandemic
through mass media or social networks.
The amendments exposed users of mobile
messenger apps to prosecution for sharing
“unreliable” information and gave the
security services powers to monitor private
correspondence. Those wishing to share their
experiences of COVID-19 on social media
had to obtain an official certificate confirming
their diagnosis, or risk prosecution for
distributing “false” information.

Prisoners of conscience
In April, the health of human rights lawyer
Buzurgmekhr Yorov sharply deteriorated, with
COVID-19-consistent symptoms. It improved
but anonymous sources reported some
months later that his health continued to be
fragile and that he was facing punishment
from prison authorities for interacting with
fellow prisoners and giving them legal advice.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to UN agencies in Tajikistan, as of
8 June, 1,701 health care workers (36% of
all those infected in the country) had
contracted COVID-19, including 619 doctors
and 548 nurses, while Radio Ozodi published
an official list of 10 medical personnel who
died in Khatlon Region. The lack of adequate

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PPE was the main reason, as confirmed by
health care workers anonymously on social
media, who also complained that authorities
had forbidden them from sharing any
information about COVID-19. Nonetheless,
the authorities insisted in July that not a
single medical doctor had died from
COVID-19.
Anonymous sources also reported a lack of
PPE for health care workers in the military,
the penitentiary system, children’s homes
and care homes for older people. COVID-19
was of particular concern in detention
centres, criticized by the UN Human Rights
Committee in 2019 for chronic overcrowding,
poor sanitary facilities and lack of adequate
medical care. These conditions, which did
not improve in 2020, facilitated the spread of
infectious diseases among prisoners.
After the borders were closed, thousands
of migrant labourers found themselves
stranded in airports, cars or makeshift camps
at the borders, or in quarantine facilities
without access to adequate sanitary and
medical facilities.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The government failed to combat domestic
violence effectively and ensure adequate
protection to survivors.
Crisis centres reported an alarming
increase in cases of domestic and genderbased violence during the pandemic. The
Gulrukhsor Women’s Centre in Khudjand,
northern Tajikistan, received 142 applications
in May alone, a threefold increase from the
previous month.
In October, a court in Dushanbe found a
young fashion designer guilty of defamation.
She had accused her former employer of
physical violence and verbal threats of rape.
The newspaper that had published her story
was also found guilty of defamation. Both
were sentenced to pay financial
compensation. The authorities failed to
investigate the allegations despite compelling
evidence.

351

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people
Without access to already very scarce
community resources and support structures,
LGBTI people, in particular young people,
similarly could not leave their homes and
were forced into cohabitation with
unsupportive, often abusive, families.
1. Tajikistan: Independent journalist imprisoned for a year (EUR
60/2206/2020)

TANZANIA
United Republic of Tanzania
Head of state and government: John Pombe Magufuli
The government restricted the rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly in the run-up to the
October elections. The President declared
Tanzania to be COVID-19-free in June. The
authorities severely restricted media
freedom, claiming they were curbing the
“spread of false news” on the pandemic.
Media outlets were shut down for reporting
on political events. Pregnant schoolgirls
were banned from mainstream schools and
segregated in alternative education centres.

BACKGROUND
On 28 October, Tanzania held its sixth
general election since the reintroduction of
the multi-party system in 1992. In November,
the President began his second term in office
following a controversial election. In the runup to, during and after elections, opposition
politicians and hundreds of their supporters
were arbitrarily arrested and beaten by the
police, and others were killed. Several
politicians, including Tundu Lissu, the
presidential candidate for Chadema, the
main opposition party, and opposition
politicians, Lazaro Nyalandu and Godbless
Lema and his family fled the country after the
elections, fearing persecution.

352

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government withheld information relating
to COVID-19 and disregarded WHO guidance
about how governments, health professionals
and the general public should respond to the
pandemic. There was no reliable or prompt
system of accurate information on the
pandemic at the end of the year. On 29 April,
the government stopped publishing
information on infection rates. On 5 June, the
President announced that the country was
free of COVID-19, making it harder for
Tanzanians to take adequate steps to protect
themselves from infection.

Prison conditions
In April, the President pardoned 3,717
prisoners in line with WHO recommendations
to decongest prisons to limit the spread of
COVID-19. However, prisons remained
overcrowded, putting prisoners’ health at risk.
There were 32,438 prisoners, of which
17,974 were on remand; the prison
population was 9% over capacity.

DISCRIMINATION – WOMEN AND GIRLS
Pregnant girls and young mothers were
discriminated against in the education sector.
The government continued to ban them from
schools and used a World Bank loan –
intended for the improvement of girls’
secondary school education – to maintain
their segregation in alternative learning
centres, where the four-year lower secondary
school curriculum was compressed into two
years.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities used legislation to silence
peaceful dissent and severely restricted the
right to freedom of expression and media
freedom, particularly in the run-up to the
elections.
In April, the Tanzania Communication
Regulatory Authority (TCRA) fined Star Media
Tanzania Limited, Multichoice Tanzania
Limited and Azam Digital Broadcast Limited
TZS5 million (US$2,150), and ordered them
to apologize for “spreading false and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

misleading information” on the government’s
handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, an
offence contrary to the Tanzania
Communications Regulatory Authority Act.
Later that month, the TCRA suspended
Mwananchi, an online newspaper, for six
months and fined it TZS5 million (US$2,150)
for publishing a photo of the President in
which he appeared to breach physical
distancing guidelines. The authorities said
that Mwananchi had violated the 2018
Electronic and Postal (Online Content)
Regulations.
The government penalized newspapers
and broadcasting stations, particularly
between June and October, for reporting on
political events related to the elections. The
Tanzania Daima newspaper was given an
indefinite ban on all print runs and
distribution; the online television network,
Kwanza TV, was suspended for 11 months,
and Clouds TV and Clouds FM Radio were
suspended for seven days.
In August, the TCRA amended the
Electronic and Postal Communications
(Radio and Television Broadcast) Regulations
to limit international media coverage of the
elections. Local broadcasters were obliged to
obtain the regulator’s permission to air
content produced by, or in collaboration with,
foreign media. The amendments also
required that foreign journalists be
accompanied by government officials while
on assignments.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities subjected human rights
defenders to intimidation, harassment,
threats, arbitrary arrests and detention, and
prosecution. Human rights organizations
faced closure or suspension if they did not
meet excessive requirements imposed by
legislation and various regulations.
Human rights lawyer Tito Elia Magoti and
Theodory Giyani remained in detention
following their arbitrary arrests in December
2019. They were held in connection with
their social media activities and charged
under various laws, including the
Cybercrimes Act, of “possessing a computer

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

programme designed for the purpose of
committing an offence”, as well as with
“leading organized crime, and money
laundering”. Their cases were adjourned
more than 10 times by a court in Dar es
Salaam after the prosecution repeatedly
asked for more time to complete their
investigations.
In July, police arrested Sheikh Issa Ponda,
an Islamic cleric, in Ilala, a district of Dar es
Salaam. They held him for 10 days for
circulating an article which they alleged
amounted to incitement and a breach of the
peace during the run-up to an election. In his
article, he had highlighted the need for an
independent electoral body and had claimed
that Muslims faced discrimination, especially
in recruitment to government jobs. After his
release, people he believed to be police
officers threatened to re-arrest him and in
August he went into hiding, where he
remained at the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The government increasingly controlled and
prevented the work of NGOs, severely
restricting the right to freedom of association.
On 24 June, the Registrar of NGOs
suspended the activities of Inclusive
Development for Citizens – Tanzania, an
organization which promoted good
governance. It was accused of failing to
provide details of its 2019 activities, a list of
its members and agreements with donors,
among other things, in violation of the NonGovernmental Organizations Act and NGO
regulations.
On the same day, the Registrar issued
notices to the Tanzania Human Rights
Defenders Coalition (THRDC) and the Legal
and Human Rights Centre (LHRC),
demanding that they explain within seven
days why legal measures, including
deregistration for flouting NGO laws, should
not be taken against them. The Registrar also
ordered the LHRC to suspend any electionrelated activities. Following this, the National
Electoral Commission (NEC) refused both
NGOs’ applications to observe the general
elections.

353

In August, the THRDC, which comprised
more than 160 individuals and organizations,
announced the temporary suspension of its
operations after police ordered the freezing of
its accounts for not complying with the NonGovernmental Organizations Act. The THRDC
was accused of entering agreements with
donors without consulting the Office of the
Treasury Registrar and the Office of the
Registrar of NGOs.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In June, in the Kilwa region, police arrested
Zitto Kabwe, leader of the ACT-Wazalendo
opposition party, along with seven other party
members. The party said the men were
accused of “endangering the peace” while
attending a party meeting which the police
said was illegal. They were released on bail
the following day and were not given any
details of their alleged offences.
In July, police arrested Nusrat Hanje,
Secretary General of Chadema’s youth wing,
and five other party members, in the Singida
region west of Dodoma city, after they had
hoisted the party’s flag while singing the
national anthem. Charges against them
included “illegal assembly, ridiculing the
national flag and the national anthem, and
conduct likely to cause a breach of the
peace.” They were denied bail and detained
at Singida prison on 10 July where they
remained for 133 days, despite the High
Court in Dodoma allowing their appeal
against refusal of bail on 26 August. The
Director of Public Prosecution dropped the
charges against the six on 23 November.
In August, police arrested Joseph Mbilinyi,
who was running as a parliamentary
candidate for the Mbeya Urban constituency
and accused him of holding an unauthorized
demonstration. He was arrested on his way to
collect nomination forms from the regional
NEC offices. He was released the same day
without charge.
In November police arrested and charged
Freeman Mbowe, the chairman of Chadema
and three party members with “terrorism
offences” for calling for countrywide protests
against the conduct of the October elections.

354

Tundu Lissu (see above, Background) was
arrested the following day. They were all
released on bail.

UNFAIR TRIALS
In February, the Resident Magistrate Court of
Dar es Salaam at Kisutu released
investigative journalist Erick Kabendera from
prison after he entered a plea bargain
agreement with the prosecution. He had
been abducted by unidentified men in July
2019. Twenty-four hours later, the police
confirmed he was in their custody. He was
later charged with money laundering and
involvement in organized crime.
Erick Kabendera was subjected to a
prolonged court trial which was adjourned 16
times. He said he was tortured in Segerea
prison in Dar es Salaam. He also suffered
repeated bouts of illness and was refused
permission to visit his sick mother who died
while he was in prison. The court ordered
him to pay the Director of Public Prosecution
over TZS273 million (US$116,000) to cover,
among other things, alleged tax evasion debts
and a fine. He was required to pay within six
months or be re-arrested.
In May, police arrested comedian Idris
Sultan, and released him 10 days later, on
bail of TZS15 million (US$6,550). He was
held in connection with a video he distributed
on social media in which he allegedly
mocked the President. He was charged with
“failure to register a SIM card previously
owned by another person,” and “failure to
report change of ownership of a SIM card.”
His case was adjourned by the Resident
Magistrate Court of Dar es Salaam at Kisutu
at least nine times and remained pending at
the end of the year.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In June, Parliament passed the Written Laws
(Miscellaneous Amendments) Act No. 3 of
2020 which, among other things, required
claimants, under the Basic Rights and Duties
Enforcement Act, to submit affidavits showing
that violations had affected them directly. It
therefore undermined public interest lawsuits

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and government accountability for human
rights violations.

THAILAND
Kingdom of Thailand
Head of state: Maha Vajiralongkorn
Head of government: Prayut Chan-O-Cha
Authorities repressed peaceful protesters,
and detained and launched criminal
proceedings against human rights
defenders, opposition politicians and other
critics for joining peaceful assemblies and
expressing critical views of the government,
the Constitution, and the monarchy. A
series of demonstrations took place in
Bangkok and other cities. Official measures
to control the COVID-19 pandemic left
refugees at heightened risk of refoulement.
The courts handed down death sentences,
including for murder; a number of death
sentences were commuted by royal pardon
to life imprisonment.

BACKGROUND
Under the Organic Law on Political Parties,
the Constitutional Court ruled in February to
dissolve the Future Forward party, a new
opposition party that had won 81 seats in the
2019 elections. The move was widely seen as
politically motivated.1 The dissolution
triggered public criticism of the government
and calls for constitutional reform. Authorities
announced criminal proceedings against the
party leader and other executives, 16 of
whom were prohibited from competing in
elections for 10 years.
Prime Minister Prayut Chan-O-Cha issued
an Emergency Decree in March which gave
government agencies authority to enforce
specific actions meant to curb the spread of
COVID-19. The government also issued a list
of prohibitions accompanying the Emergency
Decree, which included vague and overly
broad restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression.
The Emergency Decree was initially set to
expire after 30 April, but the government

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

extended it until the end of December. The
extensive powers granted to authorities under
the Emergency Decree were used to repress
dissent and prosecute students and activists
who led and took part in peaceful
assemblies. In October, authorities declared a
“severe” state of emergency, granting more
powers to police, before revoking the order
the following week. In November, the
government convened an extraordinary
parliamentary session to discuss cross-party
solutions to ongoing protest gatherings amid
talks of constitutional reform.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In January, the State Prosecutor, citing lack of
evidence, dropped the charges of
premeditated murder and illegal detention
against Kaeng Krachan National Park officials
who had been accused of the enforced
disappearance of environmental activist
Pholachi “Billy” Rakchongcharoen in 2014.2
In June, unknown individuals abducted
Wanchalearm Satsaksit, a Thai blogger who
was exiled in Cambodia.3 Thai authorities did
not reveal whether they had worked with the
Cambodian government to investigate his
enforced disappearance, nor did they
announce whether they took any initiatives to
ascertain his fate and whereabouts. At least
eight other Thai activists who had sought
exile in neighbouring countries were
abducted or disappeared between 2016 and
2019.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In March, Amnesty International reported a
pattern of torture and other ill-treatment,
including sexual violence, against military
conscripts at the hands of their commanding
officers.4 No investigations were known to
have been conducted by the military’s
command structure into such allegations.
The Council of State finalized its latest
review of legislation criminalizing torture and
enforced disappearance in September. The
bill was not tabled by the cabinet for
parliamentary discussion.
People detained in the three southern
provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat,

355

where martial law and the Emergency Decree
remained in force, reported the use of torture
and other ill-treatment amid an ongoing
insurgency against the central government.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
In July, students led protests in the capital,
Bangkok, and across the country to demand
the resignation of the Prime Minister, the
revision of the Constitution, and reform of the
monarchy so that it would be subject to legal,
political and fiscal oversight. The government
responded by enforcing restrictive laws and
using its extensive powers under the
Emergency Decree to unduly restrict peaceful
assemblies.
In October, the government announced
additional emergency measures to address
what it called “illegal public assemblies” and
the alleged obstruction by protesters of the
royal motorcade. An estimated 220
individuals who had participated in the
protests, including children, were detained or
faced criminal proceedings, including for
alleged sedition, lèse majesté, computer
crimes and breaching emergency measures.5
Five activists faced life imprisonment for
charges under Article 110 of the Criminal
Code for “intending to cause harm to the
Queen’s liberty”; they remained free on bail.
The demonstrations were overwhelmingly
peaceful, but there were instances when
police used excessive and unnecessary force
to disperse the protesters. In October and
November, police used water cannons laced
with a chemical irritant and threw tear gas
canisters towards peaceful protesters.
Children attending demonstrations
reported receiving threats of expulsion from
school and other forms of pressure and
harassment from teachers and school
executives to prevent them from joining the
protests. Some reported school authorities
hitting them, confiscating their belongings
and requiring their attendance at meetings
with authorities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
At the beginning of the year, courts acquitted
14 human rights defenders and online

356

commentators in four separate cases after
years of criminal proceedings initiated by
authorities and corporations against them for
alleged online defamation.6 The courts
confirmed that their social media posts on
alleged labour abuses or political comment
were lawful criticisms made in the public
interest.
The authorities continued to charge
dozens of individuals under the broad and
vaguely-worded provisions of the Computer
Crime Act for opinions posted online.7 Among
these, authorities targeted an artist for his
Facebook post about airport screening for
COVID-19, and a social media user for his
tweets about the royal motorcade.
In August, Facebook announced that they
had complied with a request from the
authorities to restrict access to the Royalist
Marketplace, an anti-monarchist Facebook
group, despite deeming that the order
“contravene[s] international human rights
law”.8 Authorities also sought to censor the
media, including by requesting court
permission to shut down five online media
outlets in relation to their coverage of
peaceful demonstrations.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, the civil court granted class action
status to a lawsuit brought by more than 700
Cambodian families who sued Thai sugar
company Mitr Phol after being forcibly
evicted from their homes in north-western
Cambodia from 2008 to 2009.9
Community-based human rights groups
reported experiencing harassment and
threats of criminal proceedings from
authorities for planning or taking part in
peaceful protests.
Despite the adoption of a National Action
Plan on Business and Human Rights, the
government failed to prevent Strategic
Litigation Against Public Participation
(SLAPP) lawsuits filed by corporations and
other business entities to silence human
rights defenders. While courts dismissed
some of these SLAPP lawsuits against human
rights defenders, corporations filed new ones.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
Authorities delayed the implementation of a
National Screening Mechanism for refugees
and asylum-seekers that came into force in
June.
Migrants and refugees were subjected to
indefinite arbitrary detention and
overcrowding in detention facilities,
increasing their risk of COVID-19 infection.
Fifty Uyghur men remained indefinitely
detained in poor conditions in immigration
detention facilities, pending proof of their
nationality from Turkey or China.
During the year boats with hundreds of
Rohingya refugees were stranded at sea for
months with inadequate food, water and
health care. Thai authorities put lives at risk
by preventing disembarkation and by
reportedly pushing boats back to sea.

The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly were restricted. The
police used excessive force, notably while
enforcing COVID-19 restrictions. Health
workers protested against the lack of PPE
and poor conditions, while prisoners were at
risk of COVID-19. Violence against women
persisted.

BACKGROUND

3. Cambodia: Investigate whereabouts of missing Thai dissident (News
story, 5 June)

In February, the President was re-elected for
a fourth term while the opposition denounced
alleged electoral fraud and irregularities. The
presidential contender, Agbéyomé Kodjo,
declared himself President. He was charged
with “disturbing public order” and
“undermining internal state security” after he
called on the army to mobilize against the
government. His parliamentary immunity was
lifted and, in April, he was detained for three
days. Upon release, he was placed under
judicial supervision. His supporters also
faced arrest and prosecution.
The government implemented measures
which restricted the rights to freedom of
movement and peaceful assembly, and
released 1,048 prisoners in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.

4. “We were just toys to them”: Physical, mental and sexual abuse of
conscripts in Thailand’s military (ASA 39/1995/2020)

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS

1. Thailand: Authorities must reverse dissolution of opposition Future
Forward Party (News story, 21 February)
2. Thailand: Six years after Billy disappeared, authorities must provide
justice and protect his community’s rights (ASA 39/2155/2020)

5. Thailand: Drop unjustified charges and release peaceful protesters
(News story, 24 October)
6. Thailand: Oppose defamation charges against human rights
defenders for exposing labour abuses (ASA 39/1846/2020)
7. They are always watching”: Restricting freedom of expression online
in Thailand (ASA 39/2157/2020)
8. Thailand: Facebook caves to abusive censorship requests (News
story, 25 August)
9. Amicus curiae in the case of Hoy Mai & Others vs. Mitr Phol Co. Ltd
(ASA 39/2753/2020)

TOGO
Togolese Republic
Head of state: Faure Gnassingbé
Head of government: Victoire Tomegah Dogbe (replaced
Komi Sélom Klassou in September)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Brigitte Kafui Adjamagbo and Gérard Yaovi
Djossou, members of a coalition of opposition
parties and civil society organizations, were
arrested by police in November and charged
with “criminal conspiracy” and “undermining
the internal security of the state” in
connection with protests against the
presidential election results and harassment
of opponents. They were released
conditionally after around three weeks in
detention.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The use of torture continued in police
detention. On 23 April, police arrested Kokou
Langueh. He said that while he was held at
the Central Directorate of Judicial Police
headquarters in Lomé, police beat him on his
back and buttocks for several hours to extract
a “confession” about his connections with

357

Agbéyomé Kodjo. He was released on 30
April without charge.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to restrict the right
to freedom of expression. In January, the new
Press and Communication Code allowed for
journalists to be punished with hefty fines for
insulting the President, MPs, and
government members.
In February, the internet was shut down on
polling day. Meanwhile, the electronic
communications of human rights defenders,
activists and others were put under
surveillance.
In March, the High Authority of
Audiovisual Communication ordered the
suspension of the Liberté and L’Alternative
newspapers for 15 days and two months
respectively because they had published
“serious, unfounded, and derogatory”
accusations against the French ambassador.
After the Fraternité newspaper published an
article criticizing the suspensions, it was also
suspended for two months.
In April, François Doudji and Béni Okouto
of the Collective of Associations against
Impunity in Togo, and a journalist, TekoAhatefou Aristo, were arrested while they
were monitoring a police intervention at
Agbéyomé Kodjo’s house. They were
interrogated at the Central Intelligence and
Criminal Investigation Service and released
the same day.
In November, L’Alternative newspaper and
its publications director were each fined
XOF2 million (US$3,702) for defamation and
ordered to compensate financially the
complainant in relation to a story about
misappropriation of funds.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The police prevented the Mandela
Consciousness Movement from holding its
official organizational launch in July, without
providing a reason.
The authorities banned peaceful protests
and meetings, including protests related to
the disputed election results, particularly
between August and October.

358

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The security forces used excessive force
while enforcing COVID-19 measures or
dispersing peaceful protesters.
In March, Émile Bousse was shot dead by
a soldier in Agoègan on the Togo/Benin
border. He had refused to comply with orders
when he was arrested for crossing the border
which was closed because of the COVID-19
pandemic. The Security Ministry said the
soldier was arrested.
In April, Gueli Kodjossé died from his
injuries in the Avedji district in Lomé, the
capital. The Minister of Security said that he
died as a result of his epilepsy. However, his
family said he was not epileptic, but was
beaten to death by security forces during the
curfew. Dodji Koutouatsi was beaten to death
in April by security forces when he went out
during the curfew.
In the same month, the authorities opened
investigations into the killings of people at the
hands of law enforcement agents policing the
COVID-19 curfew.
In May, Agbendé Kpessou was shot dead
in Avedji by a police officer for disobeying an
order during an altercation with two soldiers.
The authorities launched an investigation but
there was no further information about its
progress at the end of the year.
Security forces killed one person and
injured several others when they used tear
gas canisters to disperse a traditional
celebration in the Prefecture of Doufelgou in
September.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health workers
Health workers lacked adequate PPE and
denounced the lack of an incentive bonus. In
August, staff at Lomé University Hospital
Centre threatened to go on strike and
demonstrated at the hospital premises calling
for PPE and better sanitary conditions. In
September, the authorities provided all
medical staff with health care insurance. In
November, the government announced a
one-off XOF50,000 (around US$92) bonus
for all health workers.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Prisoners
After 6% of 283 prisoners tested positive for
COVID-19 at Lomé prison, a group of inmates
started a riot demanding their release or
relocation to safer detention facilities. Guards
quelled the protest with tear gas.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The UN Population Fund recorded 839 cases
of gender-based violence, including 13 rapes,
between January and June. Women and girls
were increasingly at risk of domestic violence
when COVID-19 measures restricted their
movement.

TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Head of state: Paula-Mae Weekes
Head of government: Keith Christopher Rowley
The authorities continued to forcibly return
Venezuelans seeking international
protection, in violation of international
human rights law. The government passed
amendments to the law on domestic
violence but failed to extend those
protections to people in same-sex
relationships.

BACKGROUND
In March, in an attempt to curb the spread of
COVID-19, the authorities closed the borders
to all international travellers, including
nationals, many of whom were stranded
overseas. Those who returned were required
to quarantine.
Trinidad and Tobago failed to sign the UN
Convention against Torture or the
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The authorities continued to fail to implement
national refugee legislation or to provide other
ways for Venezuelans in need of international
protection to regularize their status in the
country.
Authorities denied calls for migrants and
asylum-seekers held in immigration detention
solely for irregular entry or while waiting for
their asylum claims to be heard to be
released as a measure to protect them from
COVID-19.1
In July, the Minister of National Security
claimed that “illegal immigrants” and
business people who “trafficked”
Venezuelans into the country presented a
potential health risk due to COVID-19. He
issued a hotline number for reporting
suspected cases and said that Venezuelans
who had registered and were given legal
residency and the right to work under a
government registration process in 2019 and
who were found to be “harbouring” irregular
migrants could have their residency revoked
and face deportation.
During the year, a group of approximately
25 human rights organizations sent two Open
Letters to the Prime Minister urging him to
consider re-opening the registration process
and stop sending people back to danger.
Nevertheless, throughout the year authorities
continued to forcibly return Venezuelans. In
July, the authorities deported approximately
165 Venezuelans, in violation of international
human rights law.2
In September, just days after a UNappointed Independent International FactFinding Mission on Venezuela found
reasonable grounds to believe that the
authorities there had committed grave
human rights violations that could amount to
crimes against humanity, the authorities of
Trinidad and Tobago sent another 93
Venezuelans back to the human rights and
humanitarian situation they were fleeing,
violating their obligations of nonrefoulement.3

359

Similarly, in November, authorities
deported at least 16 children and an
estimated 12 adults to Venezuela, who were
later returned to Trinidad following an outcry.4
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights subsequently granted some of the
children precautionary measures. In
December, according to UNHCR between 14
and 21 children and adults died or were
missing after a boat was shipwrecked
reportedly on its way to Trinidad from
Venezuela.5

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Throughout the year, civil society
organizations and women’s human rights
defenders protested about widespread
gender-based violence.
In January, the Police Service established
a Gender-based Violence Unit as a response
to the ongoing problem of domestic violence.
In June, for the first time in 21 years, the
government passed amendments to the
Domestic Violence Act.
In August, civil society widely condemned
a brutal attack on a Venezuelan teenager and
reiterated calls for the authorities to take
steps to stop all types of gender-based
violence and discrimination.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
The government continued to appeal against
a landmark High Court judgement in 2018
(Jason Jones v. Attorney General of Trinidad
and Tobago) that decriminalized sexual
activity between consenting adults of the
same sex. The government indicated that it
intended to have this case heard by the
country’s highest appellate court, the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council in the UK.
In amending the Domestic Violence Act,
the government failed to extend protections
to same-sex couples, despite proposals from
a Senator and civil society to do so. The
Attorney General, on the floor of Parliament
during a Senate debate on the bill, indicated
that the government was awaiting the
outcome of the appeal of the ruling in the

360

Jason Jones case before taking a position on
providing protections for LGBTI people in
other areas of law.

DEATH PENALTY
Trinidad and Tobago continued to punish
murder with the mandatory death penalty.
1. Americas: Governments must halt dangerous and discriminatory
detention of migrants and asylum seekers (Press release, 2 April)
2. Trinidad and Tobago: Deportation of 165 Venezuelans violates
international law (Press release, 6 August)
3. Open letter to the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago (AMR
49/3188/2020)
4. Trinidad & Tobago: Return of deported children gives government
second chance to do the right thing (Press release, 25 November)
5. Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela: Policies from both governments
put lives at risk (Op ed, 16 December)

TUNISIA
Republic of Tunisia
Head of state: Kaïs Saïed
Head of government: Hichem Mechichi (replaced Elyes
Fakhfakh in September, who replaced Youssef Chahed
in February)
Bloggers and social media users were
investigated or prosecuted for the peaceful
online expression of their views, including
for criticizing the government’s approach to
dealing with COVID-19. Protests were
staged against insufficient government aid
and protection of health workers during the
pandemic. Refugees and asylum-seekers
were detained for irregular entry into
Tunisia. Arbitrary detention of
undocumented migrants in reception
centres continued. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people
were arrested and detained for consensual
same-sex sexual relations. The government
published in the official gazette the final
report of the Truth and Dignity Commission,
and trials continued before specialized
criminal chambers of people accused of
human rights violations committed between
1956 and 2013.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

BACKGROUND
After legislative and presidential elections in
October 2019, a new coalition government
headed by Elyes Fakhfakh took office on 27
February. Following allegations of corruption,
Elyes Fakhfakh resigned on 15 July.
President Kaïs Saïed tasked former Minister
of Interior Hichem Mechichi to form a new
government, which took office on 2
September.
The country was put under a general
lockdown from 22 March to 4 May to control
the spread of COVID-19. The government
allocated TND450 million (US$155 million) in
aid for poor families and people who had lost
their income due to the pandemic, and
adopted other measures to support
businesses and low-income workers.
Protests continued over the lack of
employment opportunities, poor living
conditions and water shortages, particularly
in marginalized and underdeveloped regions.
People financially impacted by the COVID-19
crisis protested in several governorates,
accusing local authorities of corruption and
demanding a more transparent distribution of
government aid.
The Constitutional Court, which was due to
be set up in 2015, was still not established as
Parliament once again failed to elect the first
third of the Court’s members.
The authorities renewed four times the
nationwide state of emergency in place since
November 2015.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
At least nine bloggers and social media users
were investigated or faced criminal
prosecutions for publishing online posts
critical of local authorities, the police or other
state officials under restrictive Penal Code
and Telecommunications Code provisions
that criminalize “insult”. In five of these cases
the people were detained for periods ranging
between a few hours and two weeks. Police
unions openly threatened to press charges
against people for legitimate criticism of
police conduct.1

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In April, police arrested two bloggers, Anis
Mabrouki and Hajer Awadi, after they
criticized on Facebook local authorities’
distribution of aid during lockdown. On 13
April, the prosecution of the Court of First
Instance of El-Kef city charged Hajer Awadi
with “insulting a civil servant” under Article
125 of the Penal Code and “causing noises
and disturbances to the public” under Article
316, in reference to an altercation that took
place between her and a police officer who
tried to stop her from filming live on the
street.2 She was detained until 20 April when
the court sentenced her to a suspended 75day prison term. On 15 April, Anis Mabrouki
was charged with “causing noises and
disturbances to the public” and “accusing
public officials of crimes related to their jobs
without furnishing proof of guilt.” He was
detained until the Court of First Instance in
Manouba city acquitted him on 30 April.
In July, the Court of First Instance of Tunis
sentenced blogger Emna Chargui to six
months in prison after convicting her on
charges relating to a satirical social media
post she shared that was deemed “offensive
to Islam”. The charges were “inciting hatred
between religions through hostile means or
violence” and “offending authorized
religions” under Articles 52 and 53 of the
Press Code, respectively.3 On 8 October
2020, Myriam Bribri, an anti-impunity
activist, appeared before the Court of First
Instance in Sfax after being charged the
same day under Article 86 of the
Telecommunications Code following a
complaint from the Secretary General of a
security forces union in Sfax, accusing her of
“insulting the police”.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In June, police used unnecessary and
excessive force when dispersing a peaceful
three-week protest known as the El-Kamour
sit-in in the southern governorate of
Tataouine. The sit-in blocked all roads to the
El-Kamour oil pump station which stopped all
work at the station. Overnight on 20/21 June,
police fired tear gas recklessly in densely
populated residential areas with some

361

canisters landing inside homes and near to a
hospital. Patients, health workers, hospital
staff and soldiers guarding the hospital were
exposed to tear gas which caused them
breathing difficulties. At least 11 protesters
who were arbitrarily arrested during the
dispersal said they were insulted, kicked,
dragged along the ground, beaten with
batons or firearm butts, even when they did
not resist. Injured protesters were left in
police stations for hours before being taken to
hospital to receive urgent medical care.4

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
On 15 March, the Supreme Judicial Council
postponed all civil case hearings, including
family law cases, on the grounds that all but
“emergency or necessary” court proceedings
were suspended. This hindered women’s
access to justice because “emergency” cases
as specified by the Ministry of Justice and the
Supreme Judicial Council did not take into
account the situation of women as they
excluded matters relating to domestic abuse,
custody of children, alimony and protective
measures dealt with by a family judge.
According to the UN Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
helplines and shelters for survivors of
violence reported a sharp increase in calls for
help and requests for emergency shelter
during the pandemic. Between 23 March
and 31 May, 9,800 calls were recorded on
the Ministry of Family’s toll-free numbers,
nine times more than usual. Of these, 2,700
concerned cases involving violence.
According to women’s rights organizations,
police failed in many cases to provide the
necessary response to women at risk of
domestic violence during lockdown.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 24 June, and after a delay of a year, the
government finally published in the official
gazette the report of the Truth and Dignity
Commission, the entity that looked into
human rights violations perpetrated between
1956 and 2013. The report exposed the
multi-layered and intricate system of

362

oppression and corruption prevalent in
Tunisia for 60 years and made
recommendations for reform.
Trials of people accused of human rights
violations perpetrated between 1956 and
2013, referred by the Commission, continued
before specialized criminal chambers, albeit
at a slow pace with frequent adjournments.
Victims, and relatives of victims who had
died, continued to await implementation of
the reparation programme set up by the Truth
and Dignity Commission. The government
established a reparations fund in June that
was activated on 24 December. The
reparations included financial compensation,
rehabilitation, professional integration or
education, the restitution of rights and official
apologies.
The first hearing in the trial of customs
officials accused of killing Aymen Othmani in
2018 was held on 21 January at the Tunis II
Court of First Instance. The two officials
charged with manslaughter and three others
charged with failure to provide assistance
were not present at the hearing. Aymen
Othmani died in Sidi Hassine neighbourhood
of Tunis, the capital, after customs officials
fired live bullets during a raid on a
contraband warehouse. According to the
forensic report, Aymen Othmani was shot in
the back and upper leg.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Between March and September, health
workers in hospitals in Kasserine, Sfax, Tunis
and other governorates staged protests
against the authorities’ failure to protect them
against COVID-19 at work. The Health
Workers Union protested against the lack of
sufficient personal protective equipment
(PPE) in health facilities and criticized the
government for failing to address their needs.
In response to this, in September, the union
and the Ministry of Health reached an
agreement that included a commitment from
the government to provide PPE for health
workers, consider COVID-19 an occupational
disease and give health workers priority in
COVID-19 testing procedures.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Authorities continued to arrest and detain,
without legal grounds, undocumented
migrants and asylum-seekers. At least 50
migrants from sub-Saharan countries were
detained arbitrarily between March and
September in the Ouardia Reception and
Orientation Centre in Tunis. In June, a group
of 22 migrants detained in the Centre filed an
urgent complaint before the Tunis
Administrative Court challenging their
arbitrary detention. On 10 July, the Court
issued an order to suspend the detention of
the migrants. The Ministry of Interior
gradually released the detainees between
July and September. The Ouardia Centre
continued to receive migrants and asylumseekers, and remained overcrowded with at
least 50 detainees sharing five rooms, two
bathrooms and a communal eating area.
These conditions made it impossible to
prevent the spread of COVID-19, posing a
grave risk to the health of all those who
worked and stayed there.5

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX
(LGBTI) PEOPLE
LGBTI people continued to be arrested and
prosecuted under laws that criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual relations,
“indecency” and acts deemed “offensive to
public morals”. According to DAMJ, the
Tunisian Association for Justice and Equality,
between January and October, courts
convicted at least 15 men and one woman
under Article 230 of the Penal Code, which
criminalizes “sodomy”.
Transgender people faced police
harassment and continued to live with the
risk of arrest under vague “public decency”
articles of the Penal Code, including Article
226bis.
On 5 August, a police officer verbally
abused Rania Amdouni, a feminist LGBTI
rights activist and President of the association
Chouf Minorities, in the centre of downtown
Tunis. This led to a verbal altercation between

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

the police officer and Rania Amdouni which
attracted attention from passers-by who then
attacked her and three of her friends. The
police stood by, failing to intervene to stop the
attack and inciting the violence by using
homophobic and transphobic insults. The
four pressed charges and an investigation
was opened. Although the identity of the
police officers involved was known, they were
not suspended or arrested following the
investigation.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences were handed down; there
were no executions.
In September, President Saïed said he was
in favour of resuming executions during a
National Security Council meeting.
1. Tunisia: Freedom of expression at risk as prosecutions rise (Press
release, 9 November)
2. Tunisia: End prosecution of bloggers for criticizing government's
response to COVID-19 (Press Release, 21 April)
3. Tunisia: Blogger Emna Chargui sentenced to six months in prison for
social media post (Press release, 15 July)
4. Tunisia: Authorities must investigate excessive use of force in
Tataouine (MDE 30/2747/2020)
5. Tunisia: Release immigration detainees amid COVID-19 pandemic
(Press release, 29 April)

TURKEY
Republic of Turkey
Head of state and government: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
The judiciary disregarded fair trial
guarantees and due process and continued
to apply broadly defined anti-terrorism laws
to punish acts protected under international
human rights law. Some members of the
judiciary and legal profession were
subjected to sanctions for the legitimate
exercise of their professional duties. The
judicial harassment of individuals such as
journalists, politicians, activists, social
media users and human rights defenders for
their real or perceived dissent continued.
Four human rights defenders, including
Taner Kılıç, were convicted in the baseless

363

Büyükada trial. Despite his acquittal in the
Gezi trial and a European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) ruling for his release,
Osman Kavala remained in prison.
Comments by a senior state official against
LGBTI people were endorsed by some
government officials, including President
Erdoğan. The ruling party threatened to
withdraw from the Istanbul Convention.
Legal amendments introduced in the
context of COVID-19 excluded from early
release individuals who had been unjustly
convicted under anti-terrorism laws and
those held in pre-trial detention. Credible
reports of torture and other ill-treatment
continued to be made.

BACKGROUND
In February, Turkey launched a military
operation (Spring Shield) against Syrian
forces after Syrian air strikes killed 33 Turkish
soldiers in Idlib, Syria (see Syria entry).
Concurrently, Turkey declared its borders
with the EU open, and encouraged and
facilitated the transportation of thousands of
asylum-seekers and migrants to Greece’s
land borders. Greek forces responded with
violent pushbacks, resulting in at least three
deaths. In April, the government used the
COVID-19 crisis to further crack down on the
opposition, banning several opposition-run
municipal donation campaigns and
launching investigations into pandemic
fundraising efforts by the mayors of Istanbul
and Ankara.
In March and again in October, due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, the Ministry of Health
prohibited health workers from resigning. The
measure was initially foreseen for a threemonth period but was later extended until
further notice.
In November and December, social media
companies, including Facebook, Twitter and
Instagram, were fined 40 million Turkish liras
(more than €4 million) each for failing to
appoint a legal representative in Turkey as
required by the amended law on social
media. Companies failing to meet legal
obligations will face further sanctions,
including reduced bandwidth, making their

364

services unavailable in Turkey. In December,
YouTube announced it was setting up a legal
entity in the country.

STATE OVERREACH
Judiciary and lawyers
A disciplinary investigation initiated by the
Council of Judges and Prosecutors against
the three judges who on 18 February
acquitted the Gezi trial defendants, including
civil society leader Osman Kavala, was
ongoing at the end of the year. The
investigation followed the President’s public
criticism of the acquittal decision.
In July, Parliament passed a law changing
the structure of bar associations. Thousands
of lawyers protested and 78 out of 80 bar
associations signed a statement opposing the
reform. The new law weakens the
associations’ authority and independence.
Criminal investigations targeting lawyers for
representing clients accused of “terrorismrelated offences” continued.
In September, police detained 47 lawyers
on suspicion of “membership of a terrorist
organization”, based solely on their work. At
least 15 lawyers were remanded in pre-trial
detention. Also in September, the Court of
Cassation upheld the prison sentences of 14
lawyers from the Progressive Lawyers
Association, prosecuted under terrorismrelated legislation.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Criminal investigations and prosecutions
under anti-terrorism laws and punitive pretrial detention continued to be used, in the
absence of evidence of criminal wrongdoing,
to silence dissent.
Under the guise of combating “fake
news”, “incitement” or “spreading fear and
panic”, the authorities used criminal law to
target those discussing the COVID-19
pandemic online. The Cyber Crimes Unit of
the Interior Ministry alleged that 1,105 social
media users had made “propaganda for a
terrorist organization”, including by “sharing
provocative COVID-19 posts” between 11
March and 21 May; reportedly 510 were
detained for questioning.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In October, the President targeted the
Turkish Medical Association (TTB) and called
its new chair “a terrorist” after the TTB
repeatedly criticized the government’s
response to COVID-19.
In April, as COVID-19 spread in the
country, the government amended the law on
the execution of sentences, enabling the
early release of up to 90,000 prisoners.
Specifically excluded were prisoners in pretrial detention and those convicted under
terrorism laws.
Abusive investigations and prosecutions
targeting former parliamentarians and
members of opposition parties continued. In
June, an Istanbul Appeals Court upheld the
conviction of Canan Kaftancıoğlu, Istanbul
Provincial Chairperson of the opposition
Republican People’s Party (CHP). She was
sentenced to nine years and eight months in
prison for “insulting the President” and
“insulting a public official”, “inciting enmity
and hatred” and “making propaganda for a
terrorist organization”. The sentence referred
to tweets she had shared seven years earlier.
The case was pending before the Court of
Cassation at year’s end.
In October, 20 former and current
members of the pro-Kurdish Peoples’
Democracy Party (HDP), including the Mayor
of Kars city, Ayhan Bilgen, were remanded in
pre-trial detention for their alleged role in
violent protests in October 2014. The
accusations were largely based on social
media posts from the official HDP twitter
account at the time. Following the remand in
pre-trial detention of Ayhan Bilgen, the
Ministry of Interior on 2 October appointed
the Kars Governor as trustee to Kars
Municipality. Former co-chairs Selahattin
Demirtaş and Figen Yüksekdağ remained in
pre-trial detention as part of the same
investigation since September 2019. A new
indictment was pending at the first instance
court at the end of the year, days after the
ECtHR’s Grand Chamber called for the
immediate release of Selahattin Demirtaş,
finding that his rights to freedom of
expression, liberty and security, free elections

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

and not to be subjected to the misuse of
limitations on rights had been violated.
In December, Parliament passed a new
law ostensibly to prevent the financing of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
with severe consequences for civil society
organizations. The law included allowing the
removal of individuals facing prosecution
under anti-terrorism laws from boards of
NGOs to be replaced with governmentappointed trustees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and other media workers
remained in pre-trial detention or served
custodial sentences. Some prosecuted under
anti-terrorism laws were convicted and
sentenced to years of imprisonment, their
legitimate work presented as evidence of
criminal offences.
In March, police detained at least 12
journalists for their reporting of the COVID-19
pandemic, including journalist and human
rights defender Nurcan Baysal, who
was accused of “inciting the public to enmity
and hatred” for her social media posts. Six
journalists were imprisoned for their reporting
on the funeral of two alleged intelligence
officers from the Turkish National Intelligence
Agency (MIT) killed in Libya. In May, the six
detained and one other journalist were
indicted for “revealing the identities of
intelligence officers”. In September, five of
them received prison sentences for
“publishing intelligence information”.
Journalists Alptekin Dursunoğlu and Rawin
Sterk Yıldız, detained for their social media
posts in March, were released at their first
hearing in March and September
respectively. Their cases continued at the
end of the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Dozens of human rights defenders faced
criminal investigations and prosecutions for
their human rights work.
In July, the Büyükada trial of 11 human
rights defenders concluded with the court
convicting Taner Kılıç of “membership of the
Fethullah Gülen Terrorist Organization

365

(FETÖ)”, sentencing him to six years and
three months’ imprisonment; İdil Eser, Günal
Kurşun and Özlem Dalkıran were sentenced
to “one year and 13 months” for “knowingly
and willingly supporting FETÖ”. The
remaining seven defendants were acquitted.
On 1 December, a regional appeals court
upheld the convictions of the four defenders,
who appealed to the Court of Cassation.
In February, Osman Kavala and eight other
civil society figures were acquitted of all
charges including “attempting to overthrow
the government” and allegedly “directing”
the 2013 Gezi Park protests. However,
Osman Kavala was detained on new charges
just hours after his release. In May, the Grand
Chamber of the ECtHR confirmed its
December 2019 decision calling for his
immediate release, having found his
prolonged pre-trial detention to be unlawful
and serving an “ulterior purpose”. In its
examinations of the case in September and
October and its interim resolution in
December, the Council of Europe’s
Committee of Ministers urged Turkey to
comply with the ECtHR’s ruling.
In October, an Istanbul court accepted a
new indictment against Osman Kavala and
US academic Henri Barkey, charging them
with “attempting to overthrow the
constitutional order” and “espionage”,
despite lack of evidence. In December, the
General Assembly of the Constitutional Court
found no violation in relation to his ongoing
pre-trial detention. Osman Kavala remained
in prison at the end of the year.
In January, the Istanbul prosecutor
requested the conviction of human rights
lawyer Eren Keskin in the main Özgür
Gündem trial, along with others who had
participated in a solidarity campaign. In
February, in an interim ruling, her codefendants Necmiye Alpay and Aslı Erdoğan
were acquitted. The prosecution against Eren
Keskin and three other defendants
continued.
In March, Raci Bilici, former chair of the
Diyarbakır branch of the NGO Human Rights
Association (IHD), was sentenced to six years
and three months’ imprisonment for

366

“membership of a terrorist organization”,
based on his human rights work. An appeal
was pending at the end of the year.
In October, following a 2019 report by the
research group Forensic Architecture, the
trial of three police officers and an alleged
member of the armed Kurdistan Workers
Party (PKK) accused of killing human rights
lawyer Tahir Elçi began almost five years after
his death in Diyarbakır. The officers faced
charges of “causing death by culpable
negligence”.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In April, a senior state official at the Religious
Affairs Directorate (Diyanet) blamed
homosexuality and people in extra-marital
relationships for the spread of HIV/AIDS. He
urged followers to combat this “evil” in a
Friday sermon focusing on the COVID-19
pandemic, a call supported by the President.
Bar associations criticizing the statements
faced criminal investigation under Article
216/3 of the Penal Code that criminalizes
“insulting religious values”.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
In July, the brutal murder of 27-year-old
student Pınar Gültekin led to country-wide
protests. The trial of two men accused of her
murder continued at the end of the year.
In August, suggestions by some politicians
in the ruling Justice and Development Party
(AKP) to withdraw from the Istanbul
Convention sparked country-wide
demonstrations. Women’s rights
organizations criticized the lack of
implementation of the Convention, including
an adequate response to rising domestic
violence during COVID-19 restrictions. The
Ministry of Interior announced that 266
women had died as a result of gender-based
violence in 2020, though the figures provided
by women’s organizations were much higher.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, for the second year running, the
authorities banned the International Women’s

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Day march in Istanbul. Police used tear gas
and plastic bullets to disperse peaceful
protesters who had defied the ban.
The prosecution of six women accused of
“failure to disperse” under Article 32 of the
Law on Meetings and Demonstrations began
in November. The charges related to their
participation in the peaceful December 2019
Las Tesis protest to end femicide.
In June, an Ankara administrative court
ruled that banning the Pride march by
students on campus was unlawful. On 10
December, the trial of 18 students and one
academic of the Middle East Technical
University in Ankara for attending a campusbased Pride march in May 2019 was
postponed to April 2021.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In September, Osman Şiban and Servet
Turgut suffered severe injuries after being
detained and allegedly beaten by a large
group of soldiers in Van province, according
to Osman Şiban’s testimony. Servet Turgut
died in hospital on 30 September. Statements
by the Van Governor’s Office and the Minister
of Interior contradicted eye-witnesses’ and
Osman Şiban’s statements. A criminal
investigation into the allegations of torture
opened by the Van Prosecutor was subjected
to a secrecy order. In October, four journalists
who covered the case were arrested in Van
for being “members of a terrorist
organization” on the grounds of the news
agencies they worked for and of making news
on “public incidents in line with PKK/KCK’s
[Kurdistan Communities Union] perspective
and orders to the detriment of the state”.
In December, a prisoner on pre-trial
detention at Diyarbakır prison, Mehmet
Sıddık Meşe, was denied access to urgent
medical care and to examination by medical
forensic staff after he was allegedly subjected
to severe beating by prison guards. The
prosecuting authorities had not launched an
independent investigation into the allegations
by year’s end.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In February, Gökhan Türkmen, one of seven
men accused of links with the Fethullah
Gülen movement who went missing in 2019,
recounted in court the torture and other illtreatment he had been subjected to during
the 271 days of his enforced disappearance.
The court requested a criminal investigation
to be launched into his allegations.
The whereabouts of Yusuf Bilge Tunç,
disappeared in August 2019, remained
unknown at the end of the year.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
Turkey continued to host the largest refugee
population in the world: around 4 million
people, including 3.6 million Syrians. The
2016 EU-Turkey deal, which provides
European financial assistance to support
refugees in Turkey in exchange for its cooperation on migration control and returns,
continued to operate.
After announcing the opening of the EU
borders on 27 February, Turkey recklessly
encouraged and facilitated the movement of
asylum-seekers and migrants to the Greek
land border, where violent pushbacks led to
deaths and injuries (see Greece entry). At the
end of March, Turkish authorities removed
people from the border area.
According to an NGO report published in
October, Turkey deported more than 16,000
Syrians to Syria during the year. A group of
Syrians reported in May they were forcibly
returned to Syria and had been pressured
into signing documents stating that they
wanted to return.1
As of September, according to UN
numbers, Turkey deported around 6,000
people to Afghanistan, although the situation
in the country still did not allow safe and
dignified returns.
1. Turkey: Halt illegal deportation of people to Syria and ensure their
safety (EUR 44/2429/2020)

367

TURKMENISTAN
Turkmenistan
Head of state and government: Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov
The regime in Turkmenistan remained
deeply authoritarian. Serious human rights
violations were routine. The right to health
was violated in the context of the outbreak
of the COVID-19 pandemic in the country.
The authorities continued to deny that there
were any cases of COVID-19 despite
evidence to the contrary. The right to
freedom of expression was severely
restricted. Consensual sex between men
remained a criminal offence. Conscientious
objectors to military service risked being
imprisoned. The fate and whereabouts of at
least 120 prisoners subjected to enforced
disappearance remained unknown.

BACKGROUND
Turkmenistan remained effectively closed to
human rights and other international
monitors. The media operated under firm
state control, leading to self-censorship and
an inability to report events regarded by the
authorities as negative, including the spread
of COVID-19. The standard of living
continued to fall and shortages of food as well
as cash persisted, with often exceptionally
long queues at the limited number of bank
machines. The extent of the economic
problems was masked by an official
exchange rate which overvalued the local
currency.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities continued to deny the
occurrence of any COVID-19 cases. They
delayed the introduction of WHOrecommended measures such as physical
distancing and masks until July, while
holding mass events requiring mandatory
participation to mark the traditional Novruz
spring holiday in March and World Bicycle
Day in June. In April, Radio Free Europe
reported that those wearing a mask would be

368

fined. The advice changed in July after the
Ministry of Health recommended mask
wearing owing to “increased levels of dust in
the air”.
A WHO mission, following a visit in July,
noted the recent measures to prevent
COVID-19 transmission and called for the
country to further activate critical public
health measures such as test and trace. The
delegation noted that the hospitals they
visited were well equipped without high bed
occupancy rates or a significant number of
patients with respiratory diseases. According
to Radio Free Europe, however, the hospitals
had stopped receiving patients days before
the arrival of the WHO mission, and those
with respiratory diseases had been moved to
other wards not visited by the delegation.
Despite continuing official denial of deaths
from COVID-19, the NGO Analytical Centre
for Central Asia analysed Google Maps to
track the digging of graves in the town of
Balkanabad. They estimated that between 25
March and 16 April alone, 317 new graves
were dug, as opposed to 524 for the entire
period from 31 May 2018 to 25 March 2020.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities continued to stifle peaceful
expression of dissent or criticism. One of the
most sustained protests followed repeated
hurricanes and heavy rains in the eastern
part of the country in April and May, which
destroyed houses and caused dozens of
fatalities. Residents left for weeks in flooded
houses with no electricity blamed the inaction
of the authorities and there were protests by
people at home and abroad. The authorities
attempted to stop the protests abroad by
putting pressure on the demonstrators and
their relatives in Turkmenistan. Turkmenistani
students in Turkey reported being visited by
Turkmenistani secret police who threatened
to have them forcibly returned if they had
taken part in demonstrations. A friend of the
organizer of the protest action in Istanbul,
who was living in Turkmenistan, was
reportedly repeatedly summoned to the local
branch of the Ministry of National Security
where he was beaten and asked to tell the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

organizer not to participate in the protest
movement. Several dozen people were also
detained in Turkmenistan on accusations of
sharing photos and video clips of the
hurricane damage with relatives and other
contacts abroad. One, Pygambergeldy
Allaberdyev, was sentenced in September to
six years’ imprisonment on fabricated
charges of hooliganism and bodily harm for
his links to activists abroad.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained a criminal offence punishable by
up to two years’ imprisonment. In May, a
well-known entertainer was sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment for consensual same-sex
sexual relations. An unknown number of
other men from the entertainment industry
were also reportedly sentenced.
Widespread societal homophobia and
transphobia left LGBTI people, or those
perceived to be, highly vulnerable to torture
and other ill-treatment, sexual abuse, and
extortion at the hands of the police and
others. They also came under severe
pressure from their families who sought “to
protect the family honour” including by
imposing forced marriages.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Conscientious objectors faced criminal
prosecution. Two Jehovah’s Witnesses,
brothers Eldor and Sanjarbek Saburov, were
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment in
August after a previous administrative
sentence for refusing to perform military
service. Myrat Orazgeldiyev was also given a
two-year prison sentence in September. The
NGO Forum 18 reported that four other
Jehovah’s Witnesses were imprisoned as
conscientious objectors during the year, and
that six others sentenced in 2018 and 2019
continued to serve jail terms at the end of the
year.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate and whereabouts of at least 120
prisoners subjected to enforced
disappearance remained unknown. Some
were imprisoned after an alleged
assassination attempt on then President
Saparmurat Niyazov in November 2002. One,
Yazgeldy Gundogdyev, died in detention in
December; he had been serving his sentence
incommunicado.

UGANDA
Republic of Uganda
Head of state and government: Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni
The authorities continued to restrict the
rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association. Security forces
used excessive and unnecessary lethal force
and killed at least 66 people. Courts made
several rulings which promised to protect
human rights. The authorities continued to
carry out forced evictions, including against
Indigenous Peoples. Refugees and asylumseekers were left stranded and in need of
humanitarian aid when borders were closed
in March to contain the spread of
COVID-19.

BACKGROUND
On 22 March, President Yoweri Museveni
issued directives which included lockdown
measures to halt the spread of COVID-19. In
July, after 34 years as President, he
confirmed he would stand for re-election in
the January 2021 general elections.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces, including police, military and
members of the armed civilian defence force
– the Local Defence Unit (LDU) – used
excessive, unnecessary, and in some cases
lethal force while enforcing physical
distancing and other measures introduced to
contain the spread of COVID-19.

369

On 30 March, the Chief of Defence Forces
publicly apologized to a group of women who
were subjected to excessive force by security
agents – mostly LDU members – and said the
military would hold those responsible to
account but did not specify how. Several
videos had emerged showing security agents
beating the women who were selling fruit in
Kampala, for allegedly violating the COVID-19
measures.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Security forces unlawfully killed at least 66
people in the period from March onwards, at
least 12 of whom were killed for violating
lockdown measures.
Since electoral campaigns began on 9
November, dozens of people were killed in
the context of riots or protests, most of them
shot dead by police and other security forces,
including armed individuals in plain clothes.
On 18 and 19 November, 54 people were
killed in protests that followed the arrest of
opposition presidential candidate and
popular musician, Robert Kyagulanyi (also
known as Bobi Wine) while campaigning in
eastern Uganda.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Kakwenza Rukirabashaija, an activist from
the eastern town of Iganga, said he had been
tortured in Mbuya Military Barracks,
Kampala, in April. He was arrested in April
and again in September by military police. On
the first occasion, he was held for 23 days on
trumped-up charges of defamation and
cyber-related crimes before being charged
with “committing negligent acts likely to
spread infectious diseases” and released on
police bond. In September, he was released
on bond after three days, after being charged
with inciting violence and promoting
sectarianism. Both arrests were connected to
books he had written which criticized the
President and his family and the authorities.
On 19 April, the authorities arrested
Francis Zaake, an opposition MP. On 29
April, he was released on police bond after
being charged with disobeying the COVID-19
presidential directives, when he distributed

370

food to needy families during lockdown. On 4
May, he appeared with his face swollen in a
video from Lubaga Hospital in Kampala. He
said he had been tortured over several days
in various detention facilities.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
Political opposition members and activists,
journalists and others were arrested, detained
and faced prosecution for exercising their
rights to freedom of peaceful assembly,
expression and association.
In January, police arrested and charged
five protesters, including Robert Kyagulanyi
for violating the Public Order Management
Act (POMA) during a political rally to protest
the introduction, in 2018, of a social media
tax. They were all released on police bond
the same day. During the arrests, police fired
tear gas to disperse the demonstrators. On
10 September, the Buganda Road Chief
Magistrate Court in Kampala suspended
proceedings against the five protesters,
stating that the Court lacked powers to
interpret such a case and deferred it to the
Constitutional Court. In March, the
Constitutional Court cancelled the provisions
under the POMA which gave police excessive
powers to prohibit public gatherings and
protests.
In February, the Kampala High Court
ordered the release of Stella Nyanzi, an
activist and academic, on the basis that she
had been wrongfully convicted of harassing
the President online, and that her human
rights had been violated. She was released
on 20 February, just days before she was due
to complete the 18-month prison sentence
she had been handed following her
conviction. By the end of the year, she had
been arrested and released at least three
more times for organizing peaceful
assemblies in protest at the government’s
COVID-19 restrictions.
In June, the Electoral Commission of
Uganda launched a revised COVID-19
election road map for the 2021 general
elections, requiring that all political
campaigning be conducted exclusively

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

online, thereby banning public political
gatherings. These regulations were applied
more stringently against opposition
candidates. In September, the Uganda
Communications Commission ordered all
online data communication and broadcast
service providers to obtain licences before
posting information on the internet.
On 27 July, police arrested Bwaddene
Basajjamivule, a broadcast journalist and
charged him with promoting violence and
sectarianism. The charges were connected to
comments he made in a video posted on
Facebook in which he alleged that people
from ethnic groups in western Uganda were
favoured in appointments to the military and
the government. He was released on police
bond on 29 July.
On 10 December, the Media Council of
Uganda cancelled the accreditation of all
foreign journalists. All media outlets and
media workers in Uganda were forced to
apply afresh for accreditation before 31
December.
On 26 December, the Electoral
Commission of Uganda suspended political
gatherings in more than 10 districts citing
COVID–19 prevention but without providing
sufficient details to justify why these localities
should be subject to restrictions.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Between February and August, the
authorities forcibly evicted over 35,000
Maragoli Indigenous people from their homes
in Kiryandongo district in the west to pave
way for industrial farming.
The authorities failed to establish adequate
procedures to protect the rights of those
being evicted, despite a High Court order in
2019 which ruled that the state should
urgently develop and implement protection
guidelines. The Court noted that even when
evictions are inevitable, they must comply
with human rights standards. In at least two
cases, the authorities failed to comply with
the requirements to seek the free, prior and
informed consent of Indigenous Peoples
regarding projects that led to their evictions
from their ancestral lands.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In August, the Permanent Secretary in the
Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban
Development announced that the cabinet
had directed the Ministry to allocate 82.5km2
of land in the Mount Elgon National Park in
the east of the country to the Indigenous
Benet people. Since 1983, the Benet have
suffered multiple forced evictions by various
authorities, including the National Forestry
Authority and the Uganda Wildlife Authority.
These evictions, along with other housing
rights violations over a 12-year period, have
left at least 178 families living in internally
displaced people’s camps.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
On 11 June, the High Court in Kampala
ordered Makerere University to pay damages
of UGX120 million (US$32,600) to Stella
Nyanzi for her wrongful dismissal from her
research post in 2018 and ordered that she
be reinstated.
On 30 June, anti-riot police arrested
lawyers Kaijuka Aaron, Marunga Christine,
Balyerali Joan, Tuwayenga Brian, Bajole Eric,
Muhindo Morgan and Nafula Elizabeth in
Kiryandongo district as they were preparing
submissions for a hearing on the forced
eviction of the Maragoli Indigenous people
(see above, Forced evictions). They were
charged with “negligent acts likely to spread
infectious diseases” and released on police
bond on 1 July.
On 4 September, police arrested eight
human rights defenders in Kiryandongo
district, held them for three days and
charged them with threatening violence and
malicious damage to property before
releasing them on police bond on 8
September. One of them, Pamela Mulongo,
was brutally beaten during her arrest and
detention. The eight were arrested after they
had asked a company – accused of seizing
community land in the area – to return
livestock confiscated for allegedly trespassing
on company property.
On 22 December, the authorities arrested
Nicholas Opiyo, the Executive Director of
Chapter Four Uganda, a human rights
organization, along with four others he was

371

meeting and placed them in incommunicado
detention overnight at the Special
Investigations Unit of the police in Kireka,
Kampala. On 23 December, the authorities
released all the men except Nicholas Opiyo
on police bond. Nicholas Opiyo was held on
fabricated charges of money laundering until
the High Court released him on bail of
UGX15 million (around US$4,050) on 30
December.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
Security forces used directives for the control
of COVID-19 infection as a pretext to
arbitrarily arrest and detain dozens of LGBTI
people. On 23 March, 23 young LGBTI
people living in a shelter were arrested. Four
were released on medical grounds during the
first three days after their arrest; the
remaining 19 were charged with “negligent
acts likely to spread infectious diseases” and
“disobeying legal orders” and were detained
without access to their lawyers or to medical
treatment. Some were denied access to antiretroviral medications. They were released on
18 May, and in June the High Court awarded
each of them compensation of UGX5 million
(US$1,360) for being arbitrarily detained by
the police for 50 days.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS
Uganda was host to around 1,430,000
refugees and asylum-seekers at the end of
the year.
On 20 March, the government closed
country borders in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, as conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC) drove over
10,000 refugees seeking entry to Uganda to
camp near the border. On 1 July, Uganda
temporarily opened the border in Zombo
district in the north, to allow refugees from
the DRC to enter.
The border with South Sudan remained
closed, leaving hundreds of people displaced
by conflict between government forces and
armed groups in South Sudan’s Central
Equatoria state without access to

372

humanitarian aid or protection. They lived in
makeshift camps and were in urgent need of
adequate shelter, food, medical care and
clean water.

UKRAINE
Ukraine
Head of state: Volodymyr Zelensky
Head of government: Denys Shmyhal (replaced Oleksiy
Honcharuk in March)
The right to health was compromised by a
significant shortage of PPE during the
COVID-19 pandemic; families of health
workers who died faced bureaucratic
obstacles to compensation. Allegations of
torture and other ill-treatment, particularly
in police custody, continued. Security
service officials responsible for secret
detention and torture in eastern Ukraine
from 2014 to 2016 continued to enjoy
complete impunity. Attacks by groups
advocating discrimination against activists
and marginalized minorities continued,
often with total impunity. Intimidation and
violence against journalists were regularly
reported. Domestic violence remained
widespread; access to support services was
negatively affected by strict COVID-19
measures. Both sides in the conflict in
eastern Ukraine imposed travel restrictions,
impacting the socioeconomic rights of local
people. In occupied Crimea, the crackdown
on dissent and human rights defenders
continued.

BACKGROUND
COVID-19 restrictions were introduced in
March but failed to effectively prevent its
spread. This was exacerbated by a lack of
PPE and sufficient testing, which in turn
put strain on the health care system.
Local elections in October, marked by low
turnout, showed falling ratings for
mainstream parties in favour of local parties
and political activists. Voting did not take
place in many locations in eastern Ukraine,

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

including some under government control,
ostensibly due to security concerns.
A major reform of the Prosecutor General’s
Office began, with 55% of prosecutors
dismissed following reappraisals, but stalled
after its head was sacked. His replacement
left another key agency in the criminal justice
system, the State Investigations Bureau
which she had headed, without permanent
leadership.
In September, the government made
human rights a compulsory element in the
school curriculum for pupils aged 11 to 15,
effective from 2022.
The ceasefire between government forces
and Russia-backed armed groups in eastern
Ukraine largely held, bar minor flare-ups in
March and May. The territory of Crimea
remained under Russian occupation.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
A significant shortage of PPE for medical
workers, which continued until the end of the
year, and insufficient testing for COVID-19
was reported by the Health Ministry. By midDecember, over 51,731 medical workers
were reported to be infected with COVID-19,
out of a total of 1,055,047 confirmed and a
further 1,214,362 “suspected cases”.
According to the Minister of Social Policy,
over 300 medical workers had died by 19
December but only 53 deaths were
recognized as work-related by a special
commission. Their families had been
promised state compensation but according
to media reports, by 12 November, only 21
had received full and 22 partial
compensation, due to onerous bureaucracy
and the necessity of proving that the
deceased contracted COVID-19 at work.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Allegations of torture and other ill-treatment,
particularly of detainees in police custody,
were regularly reported. The final figures for
2020 published by the Prosecutor General’s
Office indicated that it registered 129 alleged
torture cases, pressed charges in 59 cases
and closed proceedings in 52 cases.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 23 May, a man was taken to Kaharlyk
District police station in Kyiv region as a
criminal suspect along with his wife as a
witness. Their allegations that they were
tortured and the woman repeatedly raped,
were widely reported in the media. In May,
two police officers from Kaharlyk were
detained by the State Investigation Bureau
and remanded as criminal suspects. Other
alleged survivors of torture in Kaharlyk came
forward. Five police officers from Kaharlyk
were subsequently charged with unlawful
deprivation of liberty and torture. The
Minister of the Interior refused to resign, but
promised additional measures for torture
prevention, including better registration and
monitoring systems.

IMPUNITY
No justice, truth or reparation was attained
for any of the victims of enforced
disappearance, secret detention and torture
and other ill-treatment of civilians by the
Security Service of Ukraine (SBU) from 2014
to 2016, and not a single suspected
perpetrator was prosecuted. The new head of
the SBU noted in June that the agency
currently had no secret prisons, but said
nothing of such practices in the past, and
denied torture. The four-year-old investigation
into this practice was handed over by the
Military Prosecutor’s Office to the State
Investigation Bureau in December 2019, but
by year’s end, had yielded no tangible
results.

DISCRIMINATION
Members of groups advocating discrimination
(commonly described in Ukraine as far-right
groups) continued to target civil society
activists, political opponents, journalists and
members of marginalized groups with
harassment, intimidation and violence – often
with total impunity.
On 12 June, members of the Feminist
Workshop NGO attempted to take down
posters with discriminatory messages in the
capital Kyiv and were attacked by some 15
men from a far-right group. The assailants
pushed and verbally demeaned the activists,

373

hit one of them in the face and threatened
further violence. An eyewitness called the
police, but none arrived within 45 minutes.
The activists filed a report with the police and
an investigation was launched, but no
progress was reported by the end of the year.
On 30 August, LGBTI activists in Odessa
were unable to form a human chain of
solidarity at their intended location because it
was occupied by counter-demonstrators. The
police insisted that LGBTI activists move to
another location, but reportedly offered no
protection when the counter-protesters
followed and attacked them. Activists were
pelted with eggs, sprayed with tear gas, and
assaulted; several sustained burns and other
injuries. Police arrested 16 alleged assailants.

Roma
Discrimination against Roma persisted. The
pandemic further affected their livelihoods as
the informal economy, on which many of
them rely, contracted. Those lacking official
identification could not access social
benefits, pensions, or health care.
No progress was reported in the
investigation into the violent attack against an
informal Roma settlement in Lysa Hora park
in Kyiv in April 2018, despite the public
nature of the attack and early identification of
the alleged perpetrators from publicly
available video footage of the incident.
A Roma family camping in the Lysa Hora
vicinity described how they were violently
attacked on 29 April by two men who entered
their makeshift tent in the early hours of the
morning. They pepper-sprayed inside the tent
and beat the young Roma man with a
wooden board. When his wife asked them to
stop and told them that she was pregnant
they verbally abused her and shouted,
“Someone like you should only be raped”.
The tent was burnt, together with the family’s
possessions and documents. On 2 May,
police opened a criminal investigation, but no
outcome had been reported by year’s end.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Media remained pluralistic and largely free,
although harassment of outlets in connection

374

with their editorial policies, and intimidation
and violence against journalists, were
regularly reported.
In July, journalist Katerina Sergatskova, the
co-founder of the web-based media outlet
Zaborona, was targeted in a smear campaign
by a popular blogger, who criticized her work
and published details of her personal life
along with a photo of her young son.
Comments by his readers also contained
Katerina Sergatskova’s home address and
further photos; she also received death
threats and abusive messages. Katerina
Sergatskova reported these to the police, but
no action was taken until she won a court
case complaining about police inaction. In
the meantime, she had left Kyiv for her
personal safety.
The trial of a man and two women
suspected of direct involvement in the killing
of journalist Pavel Sheremet in July 2016
began in September with all three claiming
their innocence. Meanwhile, an investigation
into who ordered the killing was ongoing in
separate proceedings, with no outcome
reported by year’s end.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Domestic violence
Domestic violence remained widespread,
under-reported, and often ineffectively
addressed. Legal and institutional initiatives
of recent years intended to address domestic
violence were often poorly implemented, if at
all. Police were reluctant to issue emergency
protective orders, and unwilling or unable to
enforce them. Military personnel and police
officers remained among those exempt from
provisions under the Administrative Code
which punish domestic violence. In practice,
this can mean that they also avoid
prosecution for domestic violence as a
criminal offence, as the law is often
interpreted as requiring two previous
convictions under the Administrative Code to
meet the threshold of “systematic” abuse
needed for a criminal prosecution.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine continued
to amplify such systemic flaws and erode the
institutional response to systems of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

protection.1 A woman from Donetsk region
reported to police in 2019 at least five
instances of violence by her husband, a
military serviceman, but the police were
unable to apply any administrative measures.
In 2020, criminal proceedings were started
against the man and a restraining order
issued, but no disciplinary or other measures
were taken by his senior officers while the
investigation was ongoing.
In May, a petition signed by 25,000 people
was delivered to President Volodymyr
Zelensky calling for ratification of the Istanbul
Convention, an international treaty against
violence against women and domestic
violence. In September, the President signed
a decree, “on urgent measures for prevention
and combating domestic violence”, which
obliged the government to develop a state
programme lasting until 2025, including
measures to improve inter-agency coordination, further legislative amendments,
and the adoption of rehabilitation
programmes for offenders. However, the
decree made no mention of the Istanbul
Convention, and no steps towards its
ratification were taken during the year.
Access to support services for survivors of
domestic violence was affected by strict
COVID-19 quarantine measures. The
government-funded free legal aid offices
switched to providing only remote
consultations for survivors. This precluded
help to survivors who remained in premises
with their abuser and could not discuss their
situation. Access to shelters was further
complicated as it was conditional on the
survivor first undergoing a medical
examination. Survivors from locations with no
shelters could not travel elsewhere when all
public transport, including buses and trains,
was cancelled from March to May.

Impunity
Progress was manifestly stalled in the
investigation into the allegations by
Lieutenant Valeria Sikal, the first Ukrainian
ex-servicewoman who reported sexual
harassment by a commanding officer in the
Armed Forces in 2018. The Military

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Prosecutor of Rivne Garrison repeatedly
returned the case file to the investigation to
rectify purported irregularities, including for
investigative activities that had already been
undertaken. The case did not reach court by
the year’s end, nor was the officer indicted.

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
(LGBTI) people
On 30 April, a 19-year-old transgender
person from Zhytomyr was badly beaten,
sexually assaulted and robbed by a group of
youths who then tried to take them hostage
and demanded money from their father
before police were called. A criminal
investigation was opened but the transphobic
hate motive of the crime was ignored by the
police. Meanwhile, no restraining measures
were applied against the suspects.
In May, three alternative draft laws were
tabled in Parliament to introduce sexual
orientation and gender identity as specific
hate crime grounds in the Criminal Code.
These initiatives provoked criticism from
religious and other groups, and none were
put to a vote.
LGBTI people subjected to hate crimes
were reluctant to report them, lacking
confidence in the police and for fear of
further reprisals. Where reported, such
crimes were seldom if ever effectively
investigated or qualified as such, with the
perpetrators facing minor or no charges.

DONBAS
Territories in eastern Ukraine controlled by
Russia-backed separatists remained beyond
the reach of many civil society and
humanitarian actors. Suppression of all forms
of dissent persisted, including through arrest,
interrogation and torture and other illtreatment by the de facto authorities, and
imprisonment in often inhumane conditions.
Independent information from these
territories was increasingly sparse, its scarcity
exacerbated by severe pandemic-related
travel restrictions.

375

Freedom of movement
Both sides in the conflict imposed restrictions
on travel across the contact line, often
appearing as reciprocal measures. The UN
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
reported that the number of crossings in both
directions dropped from a monthly average of
one million to tens of thousands by October.
Families were separated and numerous
livelihoods affected. Older people who should
receive pensions from areas of Ukraine under
government control, those in need of
substantive health care including HIV-positive
people, and other marginalized groups, were
most affected by the lack of access to
government-controlled territories.
Travel restrictions were somewhat eased in
June. Restrictions applied by the de facto
authorities in Donetsk appeared arbitrary.
They restricted travel to certain days without
explanation and travel was subject to
advance application for permission, which in
numerous reported cases was rejected, also
without explanation.

CRIMEA
A severe crackdown on human rights work
and all dissent continued, as did restrictions
on the media. Enforced disappearances from
2014, at the start of Russian occupation of
the territory, were not investigated.
The occupying Russian authorities
continued to target human rights defenders,
including members of Crimean Solidarity, a
grassroots self-help group of ethnic Crimean
Tatars. Dozens of its members faced
politically motivated criminal proceedings,
mostly on allegations of purported
membership of Hizb-ut-Tahrir, an Islamist
movement banned as “terrorist” in Russia
but legal in Ukraine. Arbitrary intrusive house
searches, unofficial interrogation by Russian
security forces, and intimidation were also
widely used as reprisals against ethnic
Crimean Tatars.
In March, members of Russian law
enforcement agencies visited the homes of
several Crimean Solidarity members,
including its current co-ordinator Mustafa

376

Seydaliyev, and human rights defender
Abdureshit Dzhepparov, and served them
with an official written warning against taking
part in future “unsanctioned actions” (any
protest or commemorative events). The
previous co-ordinator of Crimean Solidarity,
prisoner of conscience Server Mustafayev,
was convicted on 16 September under
terrorism-related charges alongside his seven
co-defendants and sentenced to 14 years in
prison by a military court in Rostov-on-Don,
in Russia.
Persecution of religious minorities
continued. Two Jehovah’s Witnesses from
Crimea, Serhii Filatov and Artem Herasymov,
were convicted in separate trials for
exercising their right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. They were each
sentenced to six years’ imprisonment, in
March and June respectively.
1. Ukraine: Not a private matter: Domestic and sexual violence against
women in eastern Ukraine (EUR 50/3255/2020)

UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
United Arab Emirates
Head of state: Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan
Head of government: Mohammed bin Rashed Al
Maktoum
Over two dozen prisoners of conscience,
including well-known human rights
defender Ahmed Mansoor, continued to be
detained in the United Arab Emirates
(UAE). The state continued to restrict
freedom of expression, taking measures to
silence citizens and residents who
expressed critical opinions on COVID-19
and other social and political issues. A
number of detainees remained in prison
past the completion of their sentences
without legal justification. A UK court found
that head of government Mohammed bin
Rashed Al Maktoum had abducted and
detained two of his daughters.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

BACKGROUND
Emirati authorities continued to ban political
opposition and to detain prisoners for such
opposition. Scores of Emiratis continued to
serve prison sentences in the UAE-94 case, a
mass trial of 94 defendants that concluded in
2013 with 69 convicted on charges of
seeking to change the system of government.
In February 2020, the UAE announced the
completion of its “phased military
withdrawal” from Yemen after five years of
co-leading the coalition in the armed conflict.
It continued, however, to illicitly divert
weapons and military equipment to militias in
Yemen (see Yemen entry). In Libya, the
Emirati government provided arms to the selfproclaimed Libyan National Army, in violation
of a UN embargo, and operated military
drones in Libyan airspace, in some cases
leading to the killing of people not directly
participating in hostilities (see Libya entry).

ARBITRARY DETENTION
At least 10 people continued to be arbitrarily
detained after completing their prison
sentences. Articles 40 and 48 of the counterterrorism law (Federal Act No. 7 of 2014)
stated that those “adopting extremist or
terrorist thought” may be held indefinitely in
prison for “counselling”. Most such prisoners
were held at al-Razin prison in the desert
south-east of Abu Dhabi city. They included
Omran Ali al-Harithi, a defendant in the
UAE-94 trial, who should have been released
in July 2019; and Abdullah Ebrahim al-Helu,
convicted in June 2016 of belonging to the
charitable arm of al-Islah, the formerly legal
Emirati branch of the Muslim Brotherhood,
who was due for release in May 2017. The
authorities released some prisoners after they
appeared in videos posted to pro-government
social media channels in which they
“confessed” that al-Islah was a “terrorist”
organization and repudiated their affiliation
with it.
In March, the UK High Court of Justice
(Family Division) made public a fact-finding
judgement reached the previous December
that concluded that the head of government

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

had arranged for his daughter Shamsa’s
enforced removal from the UK in 2000 and
the “capture” and detention of another
daughter, Latifa, in a maritime assault
launched when she attempted to escape the
royal family in 2018.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
More than 25 prisoners of conscience
remained in jail on account of their peaceful
political criticism. They included attorneys
Mohamed al-Roken and Mohammed alMansoori, former heads of the UAE Jurists
Association (which the government took over
in 2011 after the Association called for free
national elections), who were convicted in the
UAE-94 trial; Nasser bin Ghaith, a lecturer in
economics at Sorbonne University’s Abu
Dhabi branch, detained since 2015; and
human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor.
Government agencies in Dubai and Ajman
warned that they would prosecute individuals
who spread information about COVID-19
deemed misleading by authorities, later
announcing they had initiated several such
prosecutions.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Emiratis and foreign national residents
continued to face imprisonment following
unfair trials. On 17 February, the State
Security Chamber of the Federal Supreme
Court upheld the conviction and sentencing
of five Lebanese men on charges of planning
violent acts in the UAE. They had faced
unfair trial procedures, including
incommunicado detention for months, denial
of access to lawyers, and use of coerced
“confessions” as evidence.1 In May, Abdallah
Awadh al-Shamsi – an Omani national born
to an Emirati mother and an Omani father
resident in the UAE – was sentenced to life in
prison after proceedings marred by a similar
pattern of violations.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
The estimated 20,000-100,000 stateless
people born in the UAE continued to be
deprived of equal access to rights covered for

377

Emirati citizens at state expense, such as
state-subsidized health care, housing and
higher education, or jobs in the public sector.
Access was dependent on proof of
citizenship and stateless people were denied
recognition as citizens, despite most of them
having roots in the UAE going back
generations.
Stateless Emiratis given Comorian
passports under a 2008 deal between
Comoros and the UAE found it difficult or
impossible to get these passports renewed,
leaving many of them, once again, lacking
basic identity documents.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women remained unequal with men under
Emirati law. Married women were obliged “to
look after the house” as a “right” held by
husbands under Article 56.1 of the Law on
Personal Status. The Article was amended in
late 2019 to remove a line stating that a
husband has the right to “courteous
obedience” from his wife.
Article 72 continued to allow judges to
determine whether a married woman was
permitted to leave the house and to work.
In the past two years Amnesty
International had reported that Article 53.1 of
the Penal Code, recognizing “a husband’s
discipline of his wife” as “an exercise of
rights,” was still in effect, but in 2020 the
organization learned that this clause was
removed in late 2016.
Transmission of nationality continued to be
granted on a gender-preferential basis,
meaning that children of Emirati mothers did
not automatically receive nationality and were
recognized as nationals only at the discretion
of the federal cabinet.
In September, the UAE annulled Article
334 of the Penal Code, which had made
“honour” killings punishable by as little as
one month in jail.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Consensual sexual behaviour continued to be
prosecuted under Article 356 of the Penal
Code, authorizing a minimum of one year in
prison for “consensual violation of honour”, a

378

clause that could be used to punish both
same-sex sexual activity and extramarital sex.
The provision was, in some cases, used to
prosecute migrant labourers who had given
birth out of wedlock, requiring such mothers
to serve prison sentences before being
allowed to leave the country.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The sponsorship (kafala) system for
employing migrant workers in the UAE –
alongside unsanitary living conditions in
overcrowded accommodations, scarce legal
protection and limited access to preventive
health care and treatment – put these
workers in an even more vulnerable position
and at risk of infection during the COVID-19
pandemic.2

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to issue new death
sentences, primarily against foreign nationals
for violent crimes. No executions were
reported.
1. UAE: Supreme Court confirms verdict in an unfair trial (MDE
25/2000/2020)
2. UAE: Ensure protection of migrant workers in COVID-19 response
(MDE 25/2169/2020)

UNITED KINGDOM
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Head of state: Elizabeth II
Head of government: Boris Johnson

The government response to COVID-19
raised human rights concerns, including in
relation to health, immigration policies,
domestic abuse and housing. Instances of
racial discrimination and excessive force
against protesters by the police were
documented. Northern Ireland made
progress on same-sex marriage and
abortion, but full accountability for past
violations remained unrealized. New
licences for military exports to Saudi Arabia
resumed. Bills on counter-terrorism and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

overseas military operations endangered
human rights. Extradition proceedings
against Julian Assange threatened the right
to freedom of expression.

BACKGROUND
On 31 January, the UK left the European
Union and began an 11-month transition
period.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
parliament granted far-reaching emergency
powers to the UK and devolved governments
for up to two years, subject to parliamentary
renewal every six months. Lockdowns
implemented to slow the spread of the virus
severely restricted freedom of movement,
freedom of peaceful assembly and the right
to privacy and family life.
At least 74,570 people died in the UK as a
result of COVID-19 in 2020. The economic
impact of the pandemic caused widespread
hardship, particularly for those in insecure
employment and people subject to
immigration controls.
In May and June, Black Lives Matter
protests drew attention to systemic racism
and discrimination against Black people.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The UK death toll due to COVID-19
represented one of the highest death rates
from the virus in Europe. Health and other
essential workers reported shortages of
adequate personal protective equipment
(PPE) to minimize their risk of contracting
COVID-19. By 25 May, 540 deaths involving
COVID-19 had been registered among social
care and health workers.1 The authorities
violated the right to health and right to life of
older people resident in care homes,
including by failing to provide adequate PPE
and regular testing, discharging infected or
possibly infected patients from hospitals to
care homes and suspending regular oversight
procedures.2
In June, an official investigation found that
people of Black and Asian ethnicity were
disproportionately impacted by COVID-19. In
particular, Black and Asian health workers

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

were significantly over-represented among
COVID-19 related deaths of health workers.
The government resisted calls from over
70 organizations to immediately launch an
independent public inquiry into its handling
of the COVID-19 pandemic, stating that an
inquiry would take place at an unspecified
time in the future.

DISCRIMINATION
In March, a review of the so-called
“Windrush scandal” was published. The
review identified serious failings in the
government’s treatment of the Windrush
generation, who settled in the UK as British
nationals from the Caribbean and other
Commonwealth countries before 1973 but
who, along with some of their descendants,
were later treated as if they had no
permission to be in the UK. Although the
government promised to act on the farreaching recommendations of the review, the
proposed changes failed to address the root
causes of the scandal, including the racism
embedded in nationality and immigration
laws and policies.
Discrimination in the exercise of police
powers continued to be a concern. Data on
fines issued for non-compliance with the
COVID-19 related lockdown revealed that
Black and Asian people were
disproportionately fined. In May, during the
first national lockdown, police in London
conducted a record number of stop and
searches: 43,644, of which 10,000 targeted
young Black men. Racial disproportionality
specifically against Black people continued to
feature heavily across various policing issues,
including the use of force and of Taser. Police
figures published in 2020 showed that Black
people were up to eight times more likely to
have Taser used against them than White
people in 2018/19. High-profile cases of
Taser use against Black people in London
and Manchester, including one case in the
presence of a child, highlighted this issue.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In June, police used excessive force against
Black Lives Matter protesters in London,

379

including the confinement of people to a
narrow space (“kettling”) and the use of
horses to disperse crowds. Police issued
approximately 70 infringements of COVID-19
restrictions to peaceful protesters at Black
Lives Matter demonstrations in Belfast and
Derry-Londonderry and initiated criminal
investigations against the organizers, relying
on COVID-19 related enforcement powers
that came into force on the eve of the protest.
In December, the Northern Ireland Policing
Board found policing of the protests to have
been “potentially unlawful”, while the Police
Ombudsman for Northern Ireland found it to
have been “unfair” and “discriminatory”.

REFUGEES, ASYLUM-SEEKERS AND
MIGRANTS
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the
government failed to adequately modify
immigration policies and practices to
safeguard public health. People continued to
be held in immigration detention for the
purposes of removal from the UK, despite the
heightened risk of infection in detention and
obstacles to effecting removal. Asylum claims
were required to be made in person.
Statutory exclusions or restrictions on
access to employment, welfare,
accommodation and health care for people
subject to immigration control undermined
their ability to protect themselves from the
virus and maintain an adequate standard of
living. The government resisted widespread
calls to suspend the “no recourse to public
funds” policy, which restricts access to
benefits for many migrants, during the
pandemic.
Parliament passed a new immigration law
in November which granted exceptionally
broad legislative powers to the Home
Secretary and ended free movement rights
under EU law. Children entitled to British
citizenship continued to be prevented by
government policy and practice from
registering their entitlement. Children of EU
nationals became particularly at risk because
of their loss of free movement rights in the
UK.

380

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
government introduced some measures,
albeit only short-term, to protect the right to
housing. It suspended court proceedings for
evictions in England and Wales from 27
March until 20 September and temporarily
increased the minimum notice period prior to
eviction for most tenants.
By September, 29,000 rough sleepers and
other vulnerable people had been supported
into accommodation during the pandemic,
according to official figures. Homelessness
charities reported a sharp increase in
demand for their services since the start of
the COVID-19 pandemic.

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
In February, the first same-sex marriages took
place in Northern Ireland after the success in
2019 of a long-running campaign for
marriage equality. Religious same-sex
marriages were permitted from September,
and the conversion of existing civil
partnerships was allowed from December.
Amid growing transphobic rhetoric and
fear-mongering in the media, the
government’s proposed amendments to the
outdated Gender Recognition Act in England
and Wales fell short of human rights
standards. A second consultation to reform
gender recognition law in Scotland ended in
March.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
There was an increase in reported cases of
domestic violence during the COVID-19
pandemic. The government lacked a fully
coordinated plan to tackle the foreseeable
risk of domestic violence during the
pandemic and failed to provide sufficient and
timely emergency funding for frontline
services. None of the additional funding was
ring-fenced for specialist services for ethnic
minority women, despite an increase in
referrals to these services. Migrant women
whose immigration status excludes them

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

from most government benefits faced
compounded challenges in obtaining support
for domestic violence.
The Domestic Abuse Bill lacked provisions
to ensure safety and access to justice for
migrant women. The bill did not meet the
government’s stated intention of bringing
domestic legislation in line with the Istanbul
Convention, which the UK had yet to ratify.
The criminalization of sex work and denial
of sex workers’ labour rights meant that they
were particularly affected by the COVID-19
pandemic and related measures. The
government maintained a five-week waiting
period for social security payments, despite
previously acknowledging that it was a factor
in some women resorting to sex work.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
After the decriminalization of abortion in
2019, regulations governing the provision of
abortion services in Northern Ireland took
effect on 31 March.
The government allowed both abortion pills
to be taken at home during the COVID-19
pandemic in all regions of the UK except
Northern Ireland, where a local temporary
service providing early medical abortions
began in April, allowing one abortion pill to be
taken on health and social care premises,
and the second one at home.
Whilst abortion services in Northern
Ireland were legal and running to varying
degrees, by year’s end the authorities had yet
to formally commission abortion services that
were adequately resourced, sustainable and
fully accessible to all who need them.

NORTHERN IRELAND – LEGACY ISSUES
In March, the government issued proposals
to address the legacy of the conflict in
Northern Ireland which were not compatible
with human rights standards and departed
from commitments made in the 2014
Stormont House Agreement and subsequent
government statements and agreements. The
proposals would limit prosecutions of those
suspected of criminal responsibility for
crimes under international law and human

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

rights violations and abuses during the
decades-long conflict.
The government refused to launch a
public inquiry into the murder of Patrick
Finucane, a Belfast lawyer killed in 1989,
despite a 2019 Supreme Court ruling, which
found that his murder was not effectively
investigated in line with human rights
standards.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The UK resumed issuing licences for military
exports to Saudi Arabia in July, after a court
ruling in June 2019 required the government
to suspend new licensing of military
equipment to Saudi Arabia (see Yemen
entry).
In response to the excessive use of force
against US Black Lives Matter protesters,
members of parliament and several
organizations, including Amnesty
International, called on the UK to suspend
exports of crowd control equipment, such as
tear gas and rubber bullets, to US law
enforcement agencies. In September, the
government stated that it had re-assessed
export licences of such equipment to the
USA in response to these events and
concluded there was “no clear risk” of
misuse.

STATE OVERREACH
The Counter-Terrorism and Sentencing Bill
proposed a major overhaul of the sentencing
regime for counter-terrorism offences,
including the removal of some key
safeguards on the use of already concerning
administrative control measures known as
Terrorism Prevention and Investigation
Measures (TPIMs). The proposed changes
included lowering the standard of proof for
the imposition of a TPIM.

IMPUNITY
In March, the government proposed a new
law which would seriously restrict
prosecutions for offences committed by
British soldiers overseas, including torture
and other ill-treatment as well as other crimes
under international law. The proposed law

381

would create a “presumption against
prosecution” after five years.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Hearings to consider a US extradition request
for Julian Assange began in February and
resumed in September. Assange remained
detained at Belmarsh prison and faced
prosecution in the USA for the publication of
disclosed documents as part of his work with
Wikileaks. Amnesty International called on
the USA to drop the charges and on the UK
to halt his extradition to the USA where he
would face a real risk of serious human rights
violations.
1. Exposed, silenced, attacked: Failures to protect health and essential
workers during the COVID-19 pandemic (POL 40/2572/2020)
2. UK: As if expendable: The UK Government’s failure to protect older
people in care homes during the Covid-19 pandemic (EUR
45/3152/2020)

UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
United States of America
Head of state and government: Donald Trump
The Trump administration’s broadly dismal
human rights record, both at home and
abroad, deteriorated further during 2020.
The USA experienced massive
demonstrations across the country with the
backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic,
contested 2020 general elections and a
widespread racist backlash against the
Black Lives Matter movement. In response
to thousands of public demonstrations
against institutional racism and police
violence, law enforcement authorities
routinely used excessive force against
protesters and human rights defenders and
failed to constrain violent counter-protests
against primarily peaceful assemblies. The
administration also sought to undermine
international human rights protections for
women; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender

382

and intersex (LGBTI) people; and victims of
war crimes, among others. It also exploited
the COVID-19 pandemic to target migrants
and asylum-seekers for further abuses. Joe
Biden was declared the winner of the
November presidential election.

BACKGROUND
Despite confirmation by the Electoral College
that Joe Biden had won the November
presidential election, President Trump
continued to challenge the result, making
repeated unsubstantiated claims of electoral
irregularities. These continued allegations
sparked a number of pro-Trump protests and
raised concerns about the peaceful transfer
of power in January.

DISCRIMINATION
The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated longstanding inequalities in the USA. Inadequate
and uneven government responses to the
pandemic had a disproportionate and
discriminatory impact on many people based
on their race, socioeconomic situations and
other characteristics. Systemic disparities
dictated who served as frontline workers and
who had employment and economic security
and access to housing and health care.1
Incarcerated people were particularly at
risk due to insanitary conditions in prisons
and detention where they were unable to
adequately physically distance and had
inadequate access to hygienic supplies as
facilities became hotspots for infection.
Additionally, racially discriminatory political
speech and violence risked increasing the
number of hate crimes.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Workers in health care, law enforcement,
transportation and other “essential” sectors
faced enormous challenges as the US
government failed to adequately protect them
during the pandemic. Shortages in personal
protective equipment (PPE) meant that
health and other essential workers often had
to perform their jobs without adequate
protection and in unsafe environments. In
April, the National Nurses Union held a

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

physically distanced protest in front of the
White House against the lack of PPE for
health workers. From March to December
2020, more than 2,900 health care workers
died amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. The US
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) acknowledged that available figures
were likely underestimates.
Some health and other essential workers in
the public and private sectors also faced
reprisals, including harassment, disciplinary
procedures and unfair dismissal, if they
spoke out about the inadequate protective
measures.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
At least 1,000 people were reportedly killed
by police using firearms. The limited public
data available suggests that Black people are
disproportionately impacted by police use of
lethal force. The US government’s
programme to track how many such deaths
occur annually was not fully implemented.
No state laws governing the use of lethal
force by police – where such laws exist –
comply with international law and standards
regarding the use of lethal force by law
enforcement officials.2

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Law enforcement across the USA committed
widespread and egregious human rights
violations against people protesting about the
unlawful killings of Black people and calling
for police reform. Amnesty International
documented 125 separate incidents of
unlawful police violence against protesters in
40 states and Washington, D.C., between 26
May and 5 June alone.3 Thousands more
protests took place in the remainder of the
year.
Violations were committed by law
enforcement personnel at the municipal,
county, state and federal levels, including by
National Guard troops who were deployed by
the federal government in some cities. The
violence included beatings with batons or
other devices, the misuse of tear gas and
pepper spray, and the inappropriate and

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

indiscriminate firing of “less lethal”
projectiles.
In numerous incidents, human rights
defenders – including protest organizers,
media representatives, legal observers and
street medics – were specifically targeted
with chemical irritants and kinetic impact
projectiles, arrested and detained, seemingly
on account of their work documenting and
remedying law enforcement agencies’ human
rights abuses.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
The government’s ongoing failure to protect
individuals from persistent gun violence
continued to violate their human rights,
including the right to life, security of the
person and freedom from discrimination,
among others. Unfettered access to firearms,
a lack of comprehensive gun safety laws
(including effective regulation of firearm
acquisition, possession and use) and a failure
to invest in adequate gun violence prevention
and intervention programmes continued to
perpetuate this violence.
In 2018, the most recent year for which
data was available, some 39,740 individuals
died from gunshot injuries while tens of
thousands more are estimated to have
sustained gunshot injuries and survived. In
the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, with
increased gun sales and shootings, the USA
failed in its obligation to prevent deaths from
gun violence, which could have been done
through a range of urgent measures,
including de-listing gun stores as essential
businesses.
As of 2020, expansive “Stand Your
Ground” and “Castle Doctrine” laws, both of
which provide for private individuals to use
lethal force in self-defence against others
when in their homes or feeling threatened,
existed in 34 US states. These laws appeared
to escalate gun violence and the risk of
avoidable deaths or serious injuries, resulting
in violations of the right to life.
As protesters against the killing of Black
people took to the streets in cities across the
USA, there were instances where armed

383

civilians in states where the open carrying of
firearms is permitted engaged protesters,
causing at least four deaths.

approximately half that number were actually
resettled during 2020.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS

The authorities failed to adopt any
accountability measures to remedy misuse of
the law to harass migrant human rights
defenders in 2018 and 2019. In a step
backward, in June the US Supreme Court
vacated a 2018 federal appellate court
decision that found unconstitutional a key
criminal statute that the government had
used to target migrant human rights
defenders for unlawful surveillance, instead
remanding the decision to be reconsidered at
the appellate level.

Despite a serious outbreak of COVID-19 in
civil immigration detention facilities, US
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
refused to release tens of thousands of
migrants and asylum-seekers, over 8,000 of
whom contracted the virus in detention.
Contrary to guidance from the CDC, ICE
failed to adequately provide soap and
sanitizer or introduce physical distancing,
and continued to transfer thousands of
people unnecessarily between immigration
detention facilities.4 This included
approximately 100 families held in detention
centres that a US federal judge deemed “on
fire” because of confirmed COVID-19 cases
and inadequate protection. Instead of
releasing families together, ICE asked parents
in May if they would agree to release their
children without them, while the parents
remained detained.
Simultaneously, the US government
exploited the COVID-19 crisis to halt all
processing of asylum-seekers on the USMexico border and to deny access to asylum
procedures to those who crossed into the
USA irregularly. Instead, the authorities
unlawfully detained and “expelled” over
330,000 migrants and asylum-seekers
between March and November – including
over 13,000 unaccompanied children –
without consideration of their protection
needs or the risks of persecution, death,
torture or other ill-treatment that they faced
upon refoulement to their countries of origin.5
In hundreds of documented cases, these
returnees had contracted COVID-19 in US
custody due to the negligence of authorities
and contributed to the regional outbreak of
the pandemic throughout the Americas.
The resettlement of refugees in the USA
plummeted further. Refugee admissions for
the fiscal year 2020 were set at 18,000, the
lowest in the programme’s history, while

384

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Indigenous women continued to experience
disproportionately high levels of rape and
sexual violence and lacked access to basic
post-rape care. In 2019, President Trump
issued an Executive Order forming the Task
Force on Missing and Murdered American
Indians and Alaska Natives. As of December,
the Task Force had opened seven cold case
offices to investigate cases, but the exact
number of victims remained unknown as the
US government did not collect data or
adequately coordinate with Tribal
governments.
The COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing
lockdowns significantly impacted domestic
and intimate partner violence across the
country, in some cases leading to increases
in reported incidents or the severity of
injuries.
The exponential increase in purchases of
firearms during the pandemic increased the
risks of gun violence for children and
domestic violence survivors as more
unsecured firearms were located in homes
where people were forced to quarantine with
their abusers.6

RIGHTS OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL,
TRANSGENDER AND INTERSEX (LGBTI)
PEOPLE
According to official data released in 2020,
incidents of hate crimes based on sexual

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

orientation or gender identity remained high
in 2019 for a fifth consecutive year. Trans
women of colour were especially targeted for
violent hate crimes and killings.
The administration sought through policy
and the courts to continue to dismantle
protections against discrimination based on
sexual orientation and gender identity in
education, the military, employment and
other areas of federal government.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Federal and state governments intensified
efforts to curtail sexual and reproductive
rights by seeking to criminalize abortion and
limit access to reproductive health services.7
The administration also sought to amend US
foreign policy and development policy to end
support for the protection of sexual and
reproductive rights at the international level.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
A decade after dozens of detainees were held
in a CIA-operated secret detention
programme – authorized from 2001 to 2009
– during which systematic human rights
violations were committed, including
enforced disappearance, torture and other illtreatment, no person suspected of criminal
responsibility had been brought to justice for
these crimes. The limited investigations
conducted into those crimes were closed
without charges being brought against
anyone.

DEATH PENALTY
In March, Colorado became the 22nd US
state to abolish the death penalty.
Six people were exonerated from death
row, bringing the total of such exonerations
since 1977 to 173. Among those released
was Curtis Flowers, who endured six trials
and 23 years on death row in Mississippi.
The state dropped all charges in September,
after the US Supreme Court concluded in
June 2019 that the district attorney violated
Curtis Flowers’ constitutional rights by
intentionally removing African-Americans
from the jury at the sixth trial in 2010.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

The federal government ended a 17-year
hiatus and carried out 10 executions between
July and December. The relentless pursuit of
the executions showed contempt by the
Trump administration for safeguards and
restrictions established under international
law and standards to protect the rights of
those facing the death penalty, including the
prohibition of executions while appeals are
pending and of people with mental
(psychosocial) disabilities.
The federal government carried out more
than three times the number of executions in
2020 than it had between 1977 and 2019
combined. State executions, however, slowed
down, largely due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Since judicial killing resumed in
the USA under revised statutes in 1977, a
total of 1,529 people have been executed.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Forty men remained arbitrarily and
indefinitely detained by the US military in the
detention facility at the US Naval Base in
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, in violation of
international law. Only one person had been
transferred out of the facility since January
2017. Five prisoners cleared for transfer from
Guantánamo since at least 2016 remained
there at the end of 2020 and the Trump
administration eliminated the system
previously created to arrange for their
transfer.
None of the 40 men had access to
adequate medical treatment and those who
survived torture and other ill-treatment by US
agents were not given adequate rehabilitative
services. Seven of them face charges in the
military commission system, in breach of
international law and standards, and could
face the death penalty if convicted. The use
of capital punishment in these cases, after
proceedings that did not meet international
standards for a fair trial, would constitute
arbitrary deprivation of life. The trials of those
accused of crimes related to the 11
September 2001 attacks were scheduled to
begin on 11 January 2021, but were delayed
in 2020 as pre-trial hearings in all cases were
suspended.

385

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS OF CIVILIANS
Under its flawed “global war” doctrine, the
USA repeatedly resorted to lethal force in
countries around the world, including using
armed drones, in violation of its obligations
under international human rights law and,
where applicable, international humanitarian
law. NGOs, UN experts and the news media
documented how such strikes inside and
outside of zones of active armed conflict
arbitrarily deprived protected individuals,
including civilians, of their right to life and
may have resulted in unlawful killings and
injuries, in some cases constituting war
crimes.
The weakening by the US government of
protections for civilians during lethal
operations increased the likelihood of
unlawful killings, impeded the assessment of
the legality of strikes and prevented
accountability and access to justice and
effective remedies for victims of unlawful
killings and civilian harm.8
Despite calls by UN human rights experts
and others for clarifications of the legal and
policy standards and criteria the USA applies
when using lethal force outside of the USA,
the government continued to be neither
transparent nor forthcoming.

INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
MECHANISMS AND TREATIES
In November, the UN Human Rights Council
conducted the third UPR of the USA’s human
rights record.
Since January 2018, the USA has not
responded to communications from Special
Procedures or accepted their requests for
invitations to carry out official visits.9
Following announcements that the ICC
would investigate violations of international
humanitarian law and crimes against
humanity committed on the territory of
Afghanistan since 1 May 2003, the Trump
administration issued an Executive Order on
11 June which declared a “national
emergency” and authorized asset freezes
and family entry bans against certain ICC
officials. The action undermined redress for

386

potential war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by US civilian and
military officials in connection with the armed
conflict in Afghanistan, which the US
authorities have failed to investigate,
prosecute or punish.
In July, the US Department of State
released a report by its advisory panel called
the “Commission on Unalienable Rights”.
The report appeared to unilaterally redefine
what human rights mean, rejecting the
interpretive authority of UN and other
international human rights bodies, and
specifically undermining the human rights
framework by re-evaluating protections from
discrimination for women, LGBTI people and
others.10
In July, as it struggled to contain and
address millions of cases of COVID-19, the
USA initiated its withdrawal from the WHO,
which was due to enter into force in July
2021. Under President Trump, the USA has
also withdrawn from the UN Human Rights
Council, the UN cultural agency (UNESCO)
and the global Paris Agreement to tackle
climate change.
1. USA: Letter to Governors calling for the implementation of Equity Task
Forces (Open letter by Amnesty International USA, 6 May)
2. USA: The World Is Watching: Mass violations by US police of Black
Lives Matter protesters’ rights (AMR 51/2807/2020)
3. USA: Amnesty International documents widespread police violence
against protesters for Black Lives, (Map, launched by Amnesty
International USA in June)
4. USA: ‘We are adrift, about to sink’: The looming COVID-19 disaster in
US immigration detention facilities (AMR 51/2095/2020)
5. Explainer on US deportations and expulsions during the COVID-19
pandemic (Explainer, 21 May)
6. COVID-19 And gun violence: Top ten ways the pandemic intersects
with the crisis of gun violence in the US (Article by Amnesty
International USA, May)
7. USA: Joint submission on reproductive health, rights, and justice to
third Universal Periodic Review of United States (Joint submission,
June)
8. USA: Defense department undercounts civilian casualties in new
reporting (Article by Amnesty International USA, 6 May)
9. USA: Rolling back of human rights obligations: Amnesty International
Submission for the UN Universal Periodic Review, 36th session of the
UPR Working Group, November 2020 (Updated August 2020) (AMR
51/1407/2019)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

10. USA: State department’s flawed ‘unalienable rights’ report
undermines international law (Press release, 16 July)

URUGUAY
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto Lacalle
Pou (replaced Tabaré Vázquez in March)
The crisis caused by COVID-19 deepened
structural inequalities, especially impacting
the rights of those historically marginalized.
The Urgent Consideration Act (LUC)
threatened the rights to peaceful protest
and freedom of expression. Inadequate
prison conditions continued to worsen.
Violence against women increased.
Impunity remained a concern and evidence
emerged indicating key information about
past human rights violations had been
withheld.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The COVID-19 response had an adverse
impact on the access to economic and social
rights of people in marginalized communities.
Confinement measures affected economic
activity, which deepened pre-existing
structural inequalities. The University of the
Republic reported that in April more than
100,000 people fell below the poverty line, a
35% increase compared to December 2019.
Media reported that in August, more than
40,000 people were reliant on food banks.
Access to housing was difficult for sex
workers, domestic workers, migrants and
refugees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Approved in July, the LUC included broadly
worded provisions that restrict freedom of
expression and assembly and could outlaw
demonstrations and social protests.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

DUE PROCESS GUARANTEES AND
DETENTION
Concerns about the LUC included issues
relating to the principle of the presumption of
innocence for police officers and provisions
that allow increased use of pre-trial detention.
The LUC also removed some fair trial
guarantees and introduced longer prison
terms for certain crimes. These measures
risked increasing the prison population in a
prison system where overcrowding and
insanitary conditions were rife. According to
the Public Prosecutor’s Office, in November
there were 13,077 incarcerated adults, of
whom almost 20% were awaiting trial.
Uruguay’s rate of incarceration of 370 per
100,000 inhabitants was one of the highest
in the region.

IMPUNITY
The government expressed its intention to
search for those who disappeared during the
civil-military regime (1973-1985). In
February, the Public Prosecutor’s Office
started criminal proceedings against four
retired military personnel on charges of
torture for acts committed in 1972. On 24
May, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights referred the case of three girls
subjected to enforced disappearance in 1974
and two other cases to the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights.
In August, the notes of a 2006 Military
Tribunal of Honour were published, showing
that the army tortured and executed
Uruguayan detainees in Argentina during the
1970s and confirming that evidence had
been concealed.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
COVID-19 confinement measures led to an
increase in cases of domestic violence
against women and girls. According to the
Ministry of the Interior, 33,004 complaints
were registered between January and
October, 203 more than in the same period
in 2019. The response to the COVID-19
pandemic did not include proper

387

mechanisms to prevent violence against
women.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Despite the lack of official data on child
pregnancy for 2020, it remains a low
visibility-problem in Uruguay. Girls giving
birth under the age of 15 are mostly a
consequence of situations of sexual abuse
and exploitation. According to the National
Committee for the Eradication of Sexual
Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, in
2020 there was a 41% increase in reports of
commercial sexual exploitation of children
and adolescents.
Difficulties in accessing sexual and
reproductive health services increased during
COVID-19 confinement measures, especially
access to abortion, which is legal in the
country but difficult to access due to health
professionals’ refusal to perform this service
on religious grounds and a lack of access to
health centres in rural areas.

UZBEKISTAN
Republic of Uzbekistan
Head of state: Shavkat Mirzioiev
Head of government: Abdulla Aripov
Renewed efforts to improve the country’s
image saw the President prioritize a reform
agenda. However, freedoms of association,
expression and peaceful assembly remained
tightly regulated. Human rights defenders
continued to face targeted surveillance.
Progress in the eradication of forced labour
in the cotton sector was marred by
harassment of independent monitors. A
significant increase in domestic and
gender-based violence during the COVID-19
pandemic was exacerbated by the closure of
virtually all crisis centres during lockdown.
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained a criminal offence. A draft bill
was introduced on an independent torture
complaints mechanism, although reports of
torture and other ill-treatment, including
deaths in custody, continued.

388

BACKGROUND
The President’s reform agenda included
setting up a National Council on International
Ratings to undertake a systematic review of
reforms, and a National Human Rights
Strategy setting out monitoring mechanisms
including on the prevention of torture.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In March, for the first time since 2003, the
authorities granted registration to Huquqiy
Tayanch (Legal Support), an independent
NGO. However, they continued to reject or
obstruct the applications of other
independent human rights organizations.
Human rights defenders and journalists,
including those in exile, continued to be
under secret surveillance and were the target
of sophisticated phishing and spyware
attacks. The legal framework for such
surveillance provided insufficient safeguards
against abuse. The security services were
able to bypass some security tools that
activists use to protect themselves against
surveillance and carried out a campaign of
malicious emails using fake websites, along
with spyware embedded in legitimate
software.1

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Draft legislation on public meetings,
published in August, severely restricted the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly. It
barred NGOs without official registration from
organizing or holding public meetings,
required organizers to apply for permission
15 days in advance, limited the duration of
any public meeting to two hours during
daytime, and proscribed meetings from
taking place within 300m of various
premises. A public meeting would include
flash mobs and single person protests,
making it virtually impossible for anyone to
exercise their right to freedom of peaceful
assembly.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the
Prosecutor General’s Office set up an inter-

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

agency working group to monitor social
media for “fake news” or misleading
information on the spread of the virus.
Amendments to the Criminal Code at the end
of March introduced stricter punishment for
the dissemination of false information on the
spread of the virus, increasing sentences
from five to a maximum of 10 years in prison.
In May, a young blogger from Margilan was
briefly detained by police for allegedly not
wearing a face mask in public after he had
posted a comment on his Facebook account
endorsing an article critical of the local
authorities’ handling of the pandemic.2

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Significant progress in the eradication of
forced labour in the cotton sector was marred
by continued harassment of human rights
defenders monitoring the implementation of
ILO reforms during the cotton harvest. Police
in Namangan detained and beat four
independent monitors in June as they were
recording adolescents working in the cotton
fields. Police confiscated cameras, mobile
phones and notes, forcibly tested the activists
for COVID-19 and placed them under
supervised quarantine. In April, the
authorities had cited economic hardship
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to put
pressure on the Cotton Campaign to endorse
lifting the boycott of Uzbekistani cotton.

DISCRIMINATION
Rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) people
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained a criminal offence despite promises
by the authorities to revise the criminal code.
A member of the Uzbekistani UN delegation
stated in September that non-heterosexual
relations were contrary to “traditional” values
and that the public was not ready to endorse
decriminalization. Programmes on national
television stigmatized LGBTI people and
declared them a “dangerous foreign
influence”.
LGBTI people faced increased
discrimination in accessing health care

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

during the COVID-19 pandemic. LGBTI youth
were at particular risk of domestic and
gender-based violence during lockdown; they
were without access to community resources
and support structures since they could not
leave their homes and were forced into
cohabitation with unsupportive and/or
abusive families.

Women’s rights
Domestic and gender-based violence
increased significantly during the pandemic
and human rights activists said that the
problem was exacerbated by the fact that
only five out of the 197 national crisis shelters
were able to operate during lockdowns and
other restrictive measures.
In July, a group of young female activists
faced a backlash on social media, including
online abuse and threats of violence, when
they organized a flash mob action to protest
gender-based violence and discrimination
following a highly publicized assault on a 17year-old girl. In August, a programme on
national television denounced their protest
action as dangerous and criticized them for
not respecting “traditional” values.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, the authorities signalled their
intention to set up independent mechanisms
to investigate complaints of torture; provide
effective redress and compensation to victims
and their families; and monitor places of
detention to prevent torture and other illtreatment. The announcement followed a
Presidential Resolution on additional
measures to improve the prevention of
torture.
Reports of torture, however, continued. In
July, the authorities launched investigations
into the deaths in January, June and July of
three men in prison and police custody and
charged the alleged perpetrators with torture.
In September, five police officers were found
guilty and sentenced to up to nine years in
prison for the torture of Yusuf
Abdurakhmanov in January. A forensic
investigation found blood that matched Yusuf
Abdurakhmanov’s on the inside of a

389

gas mask. In November Andijan Regional
Court sentenced five police officers to 10
years in prison for the torture of Alijon
Abdukarimov.

Impunity
In March, in a retrial, a court in Kashkadaria
acquitted human rights defender and torture
survivor Chuyan Mamatkulov of all charges
and quashed his sentence. In October, the
Supreme Court granted him financial
compensation. Other human rights activists,
however, have not been granted the right to
challenge their convictions, despite
compelling evidence that the charges against
them were fabricated and that they were
tortured to “confess”.
1. Targeted surveillance attacks in Uzbekistan: An old threat with new
techniques (Blog, 12 March)
2. Blogging in Uzbekistan: welcoming tourism, silencing criticism (Blog,
25 June)

VENEZUELA
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Head of state and government: Nicolás Maduro Moros

The continuing human rights crisis in
Venezuela saw further reports of
extrajudicial executions, excessive use of
force and unlawful killings by the security
forces during the year. People expressing
criticism of government policies – including
political activists, journalists and health
workers – were subjected to repressive
measures including criminalization, unfair
trials and arbitrary detention. There were
reports of torture and other ill-treatment
and enforced disappearance of those
arbitrarily detained. Human rights
defenders were stigmatized and faced
obstacles in carrying out their work. The
humanitarian crisis worsened with
widespread shortages of services and high
levels of extreme poverty. These and the
ongoing undermining of health service
infrastructure were exacerbated by the

390

COVID-19 pandemic. People returning to
the country were held in state-run
quarantine centres in conditions and for
lengths of time that may have constituted
arbitrary detention and ill-treatment. The
UN Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) on
Venezuela established there were
reasonable grounds to believe that crimes
against humanity have been committed in
Venezuela since 2014 and that President
Maduro and senior military and ministerial
figures ordered or contributed to the crimes
documented in its report.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Reports of extrajudicial executions by the
Special Action Forces of the Bolivarian
National Police (FAES) and the Criminal
Investigative Police (CICPC) continued.
According to the OHCHR at least 2,000
people were reportedly killed in the country in
the context of security operations between 1
January and September. As of June, the Zulia
state Human Rights Committee had recorded
377 deaths, allegedly resulting from violence
by these police forces in Zulia state. Those
targeted were primarily young men living in
low-income neighbourhoods who were
arbitrarily detained in circumstances which
the authorities claimed involved clashes with
police.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Arbitrary detentions continued to be used as
part of the policy of repression targeting
dissidents.
The Venezuelan human rights organization
Penal Forum reported that, as of October,
there had been 413 arbitrary, politically
motivated arrests; these increased following
the declaration of a state of emergency in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic in
March.
In addition to political activists, 12 health
workers who made critical public statements
about the government’s response to the
pandemic faced short-term detention and
subsequent restrictions.
The COVID-19 pandemic was used to
restrict notification of arrests, obliging

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

relatives to rely on unofficial information
about the whereabouts of detainees. This
uncertainty and the vulnerability of detainees
was exacerbated by the suspension of
activities by the courts and the Public
Prosecutor’s Office as part of the measures to
contain the pandemic.
Enforced disappearances, periods of
incommunicado detention and isolation
during the early stages of detention
continued, increasing the risk of torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
of detainees.
Congressmen Renzo Prieto and Gilber
Caro, detained in March 2020 and December
2019 respectively by the FAES, were
subjected to long periods of isolation and
incommunicado detention. Both were held in
police stations that did not meet minimum
standards for the treatment of prisoners.
Maury Carrero, an accountant, was
arbitrarily detained in April, allegedly over
links to an adviser to the President of the
National Assembly, Juan Guaidó. She was
charged by a court dealing with “terrorism”
cases and transferred to the National Institute
for Women’s Guidance and held
incommunicado for five months, during
which time no official information was
provided about her.
On 31 August, 110 people who had been
criminalized were pardoned by President
Nicolás Maduro. Renzo Prieto, Gilber Caro
and Maury Carrero were among those
pardoned. Further arbitrary arrests took place
within days and during the rest of the year.
Among those detained was Roland Carreño,
a journalist and member of the Popular Will
party, who was arrested in October.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of the use of torture to extract
confessions or incriminating testimony
continued. The OHCHR documented 16
cases, reporting the use of methods including
beatings, electric shocks, asphyxiation and
sexual violence. The UN Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) on Venezuela reported the use
of increasingly violent methods of torture by
the Bolivarian National Intelligence Service

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

(SEBIN) and Military Counter-Intelligence
General Directorate (DGCIM) and the use of
clandestine facilities by the DGCIM.
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment
were not investigated by the authorities and
went unpunished.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Excessive and illegal use of force by the
police, military and armed groups against
demonstrators remained widespread. The
authorities did not take any meaningful steps
to prevent this.
There were numerous reports of the
indiscriminate use of force during law
enforcement operations. During May in
Petare, a low-income neighbourhood in
Caracas, an armed confrontation between
alleged criminal gangs led to a joint police
and military operation that lasted over a
week, during which there were several
reports of sustained bouts of indiscriminate
shootings and allegations of extrajudicial
executions.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for human rights violations and
crimes under international law remained the
norm.
An OHCHR report on judicial
independence and access to justice,
published in July, found that victims of
human rights violations could not access
justice because of structural obstacles,
including lack of judicial independence.
In September, the Public Prosecutor’s
Office announced that 565 law enforcement
officials had been charged for human rights
violations committed since August 2017.
In September, new evidence emerged
regarding the arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearance, torture and death of Rafael
Acosta Arévalo in June 2019 by the DGCIM.
Contradictions and gaps in the criminal
investigation highlighted the need for this and
similar cases to be investigated
independently.1 The Public Prosecutor’s
Office reopened the case.

391

UNFAIR TRIALS
Unfair trials continued to be used to
criminalize those with opinions that differed
from those of the Maduro government. The
use of military jurisdiction to prosecute
civilians or retired military personnel
continued.
Rubén González, a prisoner of conscience
and trade union leader detained in 2018
serving a sentence imposed following an
unfair trial by a military court, was released
as part of the 31 August pardon.
The OHCHR highlighted major
shortcomings in the justice system, courts
and the Public Prosecutor’s Office,
emphasizing cases of lack of independence
and interference by other public authorities.
From 15 March onwards, most judicial
circuits suspended their activities due to
COVID-19 restrictions; only those courts with
in flagrante jurisdiction continued
functioning.

INTERNATIONAL SCRUTINY
Despite efforts by Nicolás Maduro’s
government to elude scrutiny by the InterAmerican human rights system, the InterAmerican Commission issued seven
precautionary measures during the year in
favour of individuals in Venezuela.
Monitoring of the situation in the country
continued through the Special Follow-Up
Mechanism for Venezuela (MESEVE) created
by the Inter-American Commission.
The OHCHR maintained a team of two
officers on the ground and in September
announced the strengthening of its presence
in the country and committed to the visit of
three Special Procedures to Venezuela in
2021.
The FFM on Venezuela issued its first
report in September. This stated that since
2014, the Venezuelan authorities and
security forces had planned and carried out
serious human rights violations, some of
which – including arbitrary killings and the
systematic use of torture – amounted to
crimes against humanity, with reasonable
grounds to believe that President Maduro

392

and ministers in his government ordered or
contributed to the crimes documented in the
report.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The policy of repression to silence dissent
and control the population continued and
intensified during the COVID-19 pandemic
and in the run-up to parliamentary elections
in December.
Members of the National Assembly were
subjected to a pattern of repression including
arbitrary detention, misuse of the justice
system and smear campaigns.
Prisoners of conscience remained subject
to severe restrictions and prosecution.
The justice system continued to be
politically instrumentalized against dissent,
including ruling against political parties
critical of the government.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Restrictions on freedom of peaceful assembly
and association remained common.
According to the NGO Venezuelan
Observatory of Social Conflict, by November
there had been more than 9,000 protests.
These were sparked by a variety of issues,
such as lack of health care during the
COVID-19 pandemic, low wages, high food
prices, delays in the distribution of food aid
funds and lack of basic services, including
fuel. Some 402 of these protests were
attacked by the police, military or progovernment armed groups, resulting in the
deaths of six protesters and the injury of 149
others.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The civil society organization Public Space
reported that between January and August
there were more than 747 attacks on the
press and journalists, including intimidation,
digital attacks, censorship, arbitrary
detentions and physical assaults. Many of
these attacks took place after the state of
emergency was declared in March in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On 21 August, journalists Andrés Eloy
Nieves Zacarías and Víctor Torres were killed

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

in an FAES security operation in Zulia state.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office launched an
investigation into their possible extrajudicial
execution and an arrest warrant was issued
for six FAES officers.
Darvinson Rojas, a journalist and prisoner
of conscience, was arbitrarily detained for
disseminating information about COVID-19.
He was released after 12 days but remained
subject to restrictions and criminal
proceedings.
Journalist and prisoner of conscience Luis
Carlos Díaz also remained subject to severe
restrictions and prosecution.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Women human rights defenders continued to
face threats and stigmatization when carrying
out their work. The Centre for Defenders and
Justice reported that as of June, there had
been more than 100 attacks against women
human rights defenders, including
criminalization, harassment, digital attacks
and arbitrary detention.
In August, the humanitarian organization
Solidarity Action was raided by FAES officials
and eight people were detained for several
hours.
In October, Vannesa Rosales, a human
rights defender in Merida state, was arbitrary
detained for providing a 13-year-old girl who
was pregnant as a result of rape with
information on procedures for the termination
of the pregnancy.
Health workers and journalists reporting on
the COVID-19 pandemic were harassed and
threatened. Some were charged with inciting
hatred.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, ASYLUMSEEKERS AND MIGRANTS
The number of Venezuelan refugees and
migrants fleeing to other countries seeking
international protection continued to
increase, reaching 5.4 million by the end of
the year.
The authorities restricted entry to
Venezuela during the COVID-19 pandemic to
a maximum of 100-300 people per day,
limiting the entry and departure of

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Venezuelan nationals; many of those seeking
to return had been excluded from care
measures during the pandemic in host
countries. People who sought to enter
Venezuela through informal channels were
criminalized and stigmatized.
Mandatory quarantine in state custody was
one example of the repressive response to
COVID-19. Officially, 90,000 people were
reported to have passed through the staterun centres known as Comprehensive Social
Service Points (PASI) by August in order to
comply with the mandatory quarantine on
their return to Venezuela. However, the
centres adopted arbitrary and militarized
procedures that resulted in punitive and
repressive measures and failed to prioritize
health care and infection prevention. The
conditions in the PASI were precarious and,
in many cases, ignored WHO protocols. For
example, lack of clean water, adequate food
and access to medical care were reported.
The length of time for which people were
held was in many cases arbitrary and not
based on objective criteria. This, combined
with inadequate conditions in state-run
quarantine centres, may have constituted illtreatment and arbitrary detention.

HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCY
The humanitarian emergency continued and
deepened. Prevailing conditions, including
the continued shortage of basic services such
as water, electricity and fuel; a weakened
health infrastructure; and difficulty in
accessing medicines and food, were
aggravated by COVID-19 and seriously
hampered people’s ability to cope with the
containment measures imposed to curb the
pandemic.
In July, the UN Humanitarian Response
Plan noted that US$762.5 million was
needed to provide humanitarian assistance to
4.5 million people.
Solidarity Action estimated that 10 million
people did not receive medical care for
conditions and diseases such as
hypertension, diabetes, Parkinson’s, cancer
and malaria, among others.

393

Despite the recommendation of the
OHCHR and the insistence of civil society,
the UN World Food Programme (WFP) was
not allowed access to the country.
Economic measures, such as the limited
increase in minimum wages to US$1.71 a
month, deepened the pressing economic
situation and hyper-inflation was rampant at
the end of the year.
Over-compliance with sanctions imposed
by the USA led to obstacles in accessing
goods and services in Venezuela.

authorities regarding testing, rates of infection
and deaths due to COVID-19.
There were reports that pregnant women
suspected of having COVID-19 were denied
adequate care by public health services.

RIGHT TO FOOD

According to a coalition of NGOs in
Venezuela, existing gender gaps, already
aggravated by the complex humanitarian
emergency, were further exacerbated by
COVID-19. The OHCHR and the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
highlighted impacts on women, including
lack of access to maternal and sexual and
reproductive health services and health
services in general.
Although no official information on
femicide rates has been issued since 2013,
NGOs reported a steady increase in violence
against women in the country. NGOs also
reported that no shelter for women survivors
of violence was operational during 2020.
The FFM on Venezuela documented
gender-based crimes against humanity,
including torture and sexual violence against
women detained by the DGCIM and SEBIN
and in the context of protests.

In May, the Centre for Documentation and
Social Analysis of the Venezuelan Federation
of Teachers (CENDAS-FVM) reported that the
basic monthly family food basket – a list of
basic foodstuffs deemed necessary for an
average family in Venezuela – cost
US$513.77. In August CENDAS-FVM
reported that it would require an income 184
times the minimum wage to purchase a basic
monthly basket.
In July, the National Survey of Living
Conditions (ENCOVI) reported that 96% of
households in Venezuela were in income
poverty and 79% in extreme income poverty
and unable to purchase the basic food
basket.
In February, the WFP reported that 7.9%
of the Venezuelan population was severely
food insecure, 24% (7 million people) were
moderately food insecure and one in three
people were food insecure and needed
assistance, classifying the situation as one of
the 10 worst food crises globally.
Food distribution systems, such as the
Local Supply and Production Committees
(CLAPs), continued to fail to meet nutritional
needs and operated according to politically
discriminatory criteria.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

RIGHT TO WATER

Health services continued to deteriorate.
Shortages of basic medicines, which were
unaffordable for most people, intensified.
Lack of access to adequate health services
seriously impacted the state’s response to
COVID-19.
Medical and health personnel were not
provided with personal protective equipment
(PPE) or adequate protection measures
against COVID-19. Many of those who voiced
concerns about this were arrested and
criminalized. There were also concerns about
the lack of transparency on the part of the

Problems with the supply of drinking water
and sanitation continued and deepened,
adversely affecting living conditions and
heightening the risk of COVID-19 infection.
ENCOVI stated that only one in four
households had running water every day,
while the majority had access to running
water in their homes only on certain days of
the week (59%) or several days a month
(15%). The most vulnerable sectors of the
population continued to be forced to look for
sources of water supply from water trucks,
wells and springs.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

394

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

PRISON CONDITIONS
Deaths in custody and the lack of
investigations into them persisted. The NGO
Window to Freedom reported 118 deaths in
custody between January and June.
Serious overcrowding and insalubrious
conditions in prisons put detainees at
heightened risk of COVID-19 infection.
The Venezuelan Prison Observatory
reported in May that 46 detainees died in
violence in the Los Llanos Penitentiary Centre
(CEPELLA) in the city of Guanare,
Portuguesa state. An investigation was
opened by the Public Prosecutor’s Office, but
no progress had been reported in the
investigation by the end of the year.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In the Orinoco Mining Arc and other parts of
the country, illegal mining continued to
seriously affect the rights of Indigenous
Peoples. The OHCHR reported that levels of
labour exploitation, trafficking and violence
were high because of corruption and bribery
by criminal groups who controlled the mines
and operated a system of bribes to military
commanders.
According to Penal Forum, 13 Pemón
Indigenous men were held in pre-trial
detention over 1,200km from their
community, without adequate measures
being taken to protect their cultural identity or
ensure a fair trial.
In April, the Indigenous Wayuu community
in Zulia state held a protest to demand basic
conditions, including access to clean water, a
long-standing issue that acquired even
greater urgency with the need to combat
COVID-19. Military officials responded with
excessive use of force, injuring a Wayuu
woman.
1. Venezuela: Dying before a judge: The arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearance, torture and death of Rafael Acosta Arévalo (AMR
53/2909/2020)

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

VIET NAM
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
Head of state: Nguyễn Phú Trọng
Head of government: Nguyễn Xuân Phúc
Arbitrary arrests and prosecutions of human
rights defenders significantly increased,
with a record number of prisoners of
conscience documented. Individuals who
expressed themselves online were
particularly targeted. Pro-democracy
activists, independent journalists, authors
and publishers faced sustained harassment,
physical assault, arbitrary prosecution and
torture and other ill-treatment in police
custody. Authorities issued death sentences
and executions were carried out. Violence
against women remained a persistent and
widespread concern. Viet Nam won praise
for its COVID-19 response, effectively
containing the spread of the virus. However,
the authorities’ punishment for distributing
“disinformation” on the pandemic often
amounted to arbitrary restrictions on the
right to freedom of expression.

BACKGROUND
Ahead of the 13th National Congress of the
Communist Party of Viet Nam (CPV),
scheduled for January 2021, the government
initiated a major crackdown on all forms of
dissent as rival politicians and factions within
the CPV competed for positions of power. Viet
Nam ratified the EU-Viet Nam Free Trade
Agreement in June, which included
obligations to abide by international human
rights and labour standards.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities engaged in a wide-ranging
crackdown on freedom of expression,
particularly targeting individuals who
expressed themselves online. There was a
major increase in censorship of online
speech, in addition to a significant rise in
arbitrary arrests, detentions and prosecutions
of individuals in connection with their right to
exercise freedom of expression both online

395

and offline. Journalists and authors were also
targeted, with a string of arrests and
prosecutions targeting the Liberal Publishing
House and the Viet Nam Independent
Journalists Association. Two members of the
Liberal Publishing House ̶ a local
independent publisher selling books
considered sensitive by the government
̶ were tortured by police in detention in Ho
Chi Minh City.1
In April, Facebook announced its decision
to significantly increase its compliance with
the authorities’ demands for the censorship
of so-called “anti-state” content on its
platform, which often amounted to
censorship of legitimate expression in
violation of international human rights law.2
Facebook’s decision reportedly came after
the authorities pressured the company by
slowing down its services in the country.
Human rights defenders and other
activists raised alarm at the content
restrictions they faced from both Facebook
and YouTube at the behest of the authorities,
including widespread geo-blocking of
sensitive content, profile blocking and
account suspensions. These measures
marked a significant deterioration in the
space for freedom of expression in the
country.3
On 3 February, the authorities introduced
Decree 15/2020/ND-CP on penalties for
administrative violations against regulations
on postal services, telecommunications, radio
frequencies, information technology and
electronic transactions (“Decree 15”), further
adding to a legal framework that severely
undermined the right to freedom of
expression. Decree 15 provides for a wide
range of administrative offences for both
internet users and internet service providers
and contains a range of severe penalties
which threaten freedom of expression and
access to information. Technology companies
that violate the decree can have their
operating licences suspended for up to two
years. Decree 15 also introduced penalties
for users who post or share “fake news” on
social networks, which can be imposed in
addition to any civil or criminal punishments.

396

Government-sponsored “cyber-troops” and
“public opinion shapers” targeted
government critics with online abuse,
harassment, trolling and mass reporting
campaigns, often leading to restrictions on
the accounts and content of human rights
defenders. Human rights defenders also
faced physical attacks and other forms of
offline threats and violence in relation to their
online activism.

PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE
As of December, at least 173 known
prisoners of conscience were imprisoned in
Viet Nam, the highest recorded number since
Amnesty International began publishing
these figures in 1996. Among those, 72 were
held for expressing their opinions online, a
marked increase on previous years. Of the 30
prisoners of conscience newly detained
during the year, 24 (80%) were detained for
online expression. Most were held under
either Article 331 of the Criminal Code, which
prohibits “abusing democratic freedoms to
infringe the interests of the State”, carrying
penalties of up to seven years’ imprisonment,
or Article 117, which criminalizes “making,
storing or spreading information, materials or
items for the purpose of opposing the State of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam” and
carries a sentence of up to 20 years’
imprisonment.
Prison conditions remained generally
harsh, but prisoners of conscience in
particular were subjected to discrimination,
harassment and ill-treatment. Family
members reported incidents of prisoners of
conscience being subjected to torture or
other ill-treatment in detention, including
Nguyen Van Hoa, Nguyen Van Tuc, Huynh
Truong Ca, Nguyen Ngoc Anh and Le Dinh
Luong.

DEATH PENALTY
The courts continued to impose death
sentences and executions were carried out
during the year. The government continued
the policy of classifying information related to
the death penalty as a state secret. Details
about those sentenced to death remained

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

unavailable, including their gender, age,
ethnicity or the types of crime for which they
were sentenced. In December, Viet Nam
abstained in a vote at the UN General
Assembly calling for a moratorium on the use
of the death penalty.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Violence against women remained a
widespread and persistent problem. A joint
study by the government and the UN
revealed that nearly two in three married
women experienced physical, sexual,
emotional or economic violence and
controlling behaviours by their husbands in
their lifetime, and almost one-third reported
such treatment in the preceding 12 months.
Reporting of domestic violence or
mistreatment remained extremely low, with
very few women seeking support from the
authorities or service providers.
Women human rights defenders continued
to face harassment, discrimination and
gender-based violence. Pham Doan Trang, a
celebrated author and human rights
defender, was arbitrarily arrested on 6
October and charged under Article 117 of the
Criminal Code. Amnesty International
recognizes her as a prisoner of conscience.4
If convicted, she could be imprisoned for up
to 20 years.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
According to government statistics, the
percentage of households living in poverty
had dropped to 2.75% in 2020, a significant
decrease from 9.88% in 2015, reflecting a
trend whereby growing numbers of the
population realized their right to an adequate
standard of living. However, rising economic
inequality threatened the country’s
sustainable development.

Right to health
Viet Nam reported its first COVID-19 case on
23 January and the authorities applied strict
measures to contain the spread of the virus.
They reported a total of 1,465 cases of
COVID-19 and 35 deaths at year’s end. While

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

some virus suppression measures were
largely successful at protecting the right to
health, there were multiple instances when
the authorities repressed the right to freedom
of expression as part of their response. At
least two women ̶ Dinh Thi Thu Thuy and
Ma Phung Ngoc Phu – were arbitrarily
arrested and charged for expressing their
views on the government’s COVID-19
response, and hundreds more people were
fined for expressing their opinion on the
COVID-19 response on social media.
1. Viet Nam: Independent booksellers tortured by police (ASA
41/2325/2020)
2. Viet Nam: Facebook must cease complicity with government
censorship (News story, 22 April)
3. Viet Nam: Let us breathe! Censorship and criminalization of online
expression in Viet Nam (ASA 41/3243/2020)
4. Viet Nam: Human rights champion arrested, at grave risk of torture
(News story, 7 October)

YEMEN
Republic of Yemen
Head of state: Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi
Head of government: Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed
All parties to the conflict in Yemen
continued to commit violations of
international humanitarian law and human
rights abuses with impunity. The Saudi
Arabia-led coalition, supporting the
internationally recognized Yemeni
government, and Huthi forces continued to
carry out attacks that unlawfully killed and
injured civilians and destroyed civilian
objects. All parties to the conflict carried
out arbitrary detentions, enforced
disappearances, harassment, torture and
other ill-treatment, and unfair trials of
individuals, targeted solely for their
political, religious or professional
affiliations, or for their peaceful activism.
The parties to the conflict impeded the flow
of life-saving goods, including food,
medicine and fuel, and Huthi forces
continued to impose arbitrary restrictions on
humanitarian aid agencies. The outbreak of

397

the COVID-19 pandemic put further
pressure on an already depleted health care
system, which had only 50% of its hospitals
and health care facilities still operating, as
compared to 2016. Additionally, a 50%
drop in the humanitarian response fund
compared to 2019 further compounded the
effects of the pandemic on what was left of
the health system, increased food insecurity
and limited access to clean water,
sanitation and public health. People with
disabilities and migrant workers were
impacted disproportionately by the
combined effects of the conflict and the
pandemic. Death sentences were handed
down for a wide range of crimes, and
executions were carried out.

BACKGROUND
In December, the internationally recognized
Yemeni government reported that the
number of COVID-19 cases had reached
2,078, namely in Hadramawt, Aden, Ta’iz,
Lahij, Abyan, Almahra, Aldal’a, Ma’arib and
Shabwa governorates. Meanwhile, the Huthi
de facto authorities reported only a handful of
cases in northern Yemen. The UN UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator estimated
in June that there were possibly up to 1
million people affected by the virus in the
country, with a fatality rate as high as 25%,
five times the global average. According to
the UN, health workers, including those
working on the front line responding to
COVID-19, were significantly impacted by the
almost 50% reduction in aid. The UN
estimated that this would result in: the
closure of water and sanitation programmes
serving 4 million people; 5 million children
going without routine vaccinations; and the
closure of malnutrition programmes and
other wider health programmes serving 19
million people.
The armed conflict continued throughout
2020, with attacks by parties to the conflict
escalating, including in Ma’arib, al-Jawf, alBayda, Dahle’, Hodeidah, Abyan and Shabwa
governorates.

398

The UN Secretary-General’s call in March
for an immediate global and humanitarian
ceasefire to end hostilities and counter
COVID-19 was welcomed by all parties to the
conflict except the Huthi forces, who refused
to participate. The UN Special Envoy for
Yemen pursued negotiations with parties to
the conflict, and in September a draft joint
declaration was submitted, including
guidelines for a nationwide ceasefire,
humanitarian measures and engagement in
the political process.
In April, the Southern Transitional Council
(STC), backed by the United Arab Emirates
(UAE), declared “self-rule” in areas under its
control in the south of the country, after
withdrawing from the Saudi-brokered peace
deal reached in 2019 between the STC and
the internationally recognized Yemeni
government. Talks subsequently resumed,
during which the STC abandoned its
declaration of self-administration. On 18
December, a new power-sharing cabinet was
formed as part of the Riyadh agreement
headed by Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed.
The UAE announced the completion of its
phased military withdrawal from Yemen.
However, it continued to illicitly divert
weapons and military equipment to militias in
Yemen and carried out air strikes.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
All parties to the conflict continued to commit
serious violations of international
humanitarian law with impunity, including
indiscriminate attacks which killed and
injured civilians and destroyed and damaged
civilian objects.
Huthi forces used imprecise weapons in
populated areas, placed internationally
banned anti-personnel mines in farmland,
wells and villages, and shelled
indiscriminately, causing hundreds of civilian
casualties. In March, indiscriminate attacks
by Huthi forces hit al-Thawra hospital, the
largest public hospital in Ta’iz city and in
April, the Central Prison in Ta’iz, killing five
women and a child, and injuring at least 11
civilians.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 30 December, Aden’s airport was
attacked shortly after members of the new
government from Riyadh arrived in the city of
Aden. The attack killed 26 individuals,
including aid workers, and injured 50 others
but there were no casualties among cabinet
members. The Huthi de facto authority did
not claim responsibility.
The Saudi-led coalition carried out multiple
air strikes in the north, killing at least 49
civilians, including six children, between
June and August. The UN Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts on Yemen
determined that these incidents warranted
further investigation, noting that the high
number of civilian casualties raised questions
around the proportionality of the attacks and
whether the Saudi Arabia-led coalition took
all necessary measures to protect civilians
and minimize casualties. In August, an air
strike hit a community college used by Huthi
forces as a detention facility and killed 134
detainees and injured 40 others.
In July, the UK government resumed
issuing licences for arms sales to Saudi
Arabia, reversing a 2019 decision, saying
“there is not a clear risk that the export of
arms and military equipment to Saudi Arabia
might be used in the commission of a serious
violation of international humanitarian law.”

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
All parties to the conflict continued to
suppress freedom of expression and
association through arbitrary detention,
enforced disappearance, harassment, torture
and other ill-treatment, and unfair trials. In
October the UN Special Envoy for Yemen
reported the release of 1,000 prisoners, a
very low number given the scale and pattern
of enforced disappearance and detention
cases in the country.
In March, Mahdi al-Mashat, head of the
Sana’a-based Supreme Political Council of
Yemen, the executive body set up by the
Huthis, announced the release of all Baha’i
political prisoners.1 Four months later, six
people of the Baha’i faith, including Hamid

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Haydara, who had been detained since
2013, were released.
In April, the Huthi-run Specialized Criminal
Court sentenced four journalists to death
after a deeply flawed trial based on trumpedup charges. The same month, the Court
announced the release of six other
journalists, including Salah al-Qaedi, who had
been sentenced to three years of house
arrest. The 10 journalists had been detained
for five years without charge or trial.2

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
PUNISHMENT
Conditions in prisons and detention centres,
including overcrowding, lack of access to
health care and poor sanitation and hygiene,
combined with the spread of COVID-19,
exposed detainees to substantial health risks.
The Yemeni authorities failed to take
measures to protect detainees and curb the
spread of the virus in prisons and detention
centres by providing masks or other hygiene
products.
Tawfiq al-Mansouri remained on death row
as one of four journalists sentenced to death
in 2020. He suffers from chronic illness
including diabetes, kidney failure, heart
problems, prostate inflammation and asthma,
and in June he contracted COVID-19. The
Huthi de facto authorities continued to deny
him life-saving medical treatment despite his
critical health condition.3
All parties to the conflict continued to
detain and torture hundreds of individuals
targeted solely for their political, religious or
professional affiliations or for their peaceful
activism. Parties to the conflict also targeted
journalists and human rights defenders,
many since 2016. Detainees were held in
unofficial detention centres and in dangerous
conditions. For example, in Aden, the UAEbacked STC held detainees in a tin building
and an underground cellar in Al Jala camp.
According to the organization Mwatana for
Human Rights, at least 13 people were
arbitrarily detained in Al Jala camp and 17
were tortured between May 2016 and April
2020.

399

According to the Group of Eminent
International and Regional Experts on Yemen,
the internationally recognized Yemeni
government was responsible for ill-treatment,
sometimes amounting to torture, of detainees
in Ma’rib political security prison, including
beatings, electric shocks and burning of
genitals, threats of sterilization, and forcing
detainees to crawl on broken glass.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
The COVID-19 pandemic in Yemen
challenged an already fragile health care
system. Compounded by a funding shortage,
a blockade, obstruction of aid and a fuel
crisis, hospitals lacked the means to respond
to the COVID-19 outbreak leading to the
resignation of health workers, hospital
closures and the wide spread of the disease
among the population. The UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs warned
that the response to the pandemic and other
diseases would cease in several
governorates, affecting 18 million people,
including 6 million children.
All parties to the conflict impeded access
to humanitarian aid. According to the UN, in
2020 approximately 80% of the population
were in need of humanitarian aid and
protection – with limited access to health
care or clean water – and 20 million people
were food insecure.
Parties to the conflict increased
bureaucratic restrictions and interfered in aid
projects, including blocking needs
assessments. The escalation of fighting
further restricted freedom of movement,
impeding the delivery of aid.
In March, the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID),
suspended US$73 million of the US$85
million pledged to NGOs who were delivering
aid to Huthi-controlled areas.
In May, Huthi forces blocked containers
belonging to the WHO and shipments of
personal protective equipment (PPE) for the
COVID-19 response.
In September, the UN Special Envoy for
Yemen warned that FSO Safer, an oil tanker
moored near the port of Hodeidah, could

400

explode or spill more than 1 million barrels of
oil into the Red Sea, threatening an
environmental, economic and humanitarian
catastrophe. An agreement was reached in
November between the Huthi de facto
authorities and UN. The de facto authorities
allowed access to UN experts to assess the
oil tanker and the UN mission team was
expected to arrive on site by midFebruary 2021.

DISCRIMINATION
people with disabilities
People with disabilities continued to face
exclusion, inequality and violence, largely
arising from the systematic failure of the
Yemeni authorities, humanitarian
organizations and donor states to guarantee
their rights and respond to their needs.
The conflict further impoverished people
with disabilities, and resulted in the complete
loss of the limited social security support they
once received. People with disabilities also
lacked access to information on the
prevention of and protection from COVID-19,
but no data specific to people with disabilities
was gathered to determine the scale.

Migrants
The COVID-19 pandemic worsened the
already precarious situation of migrants in
Yemen, who faced ongoing discrimination,
stigmatization, forcible expulsion and abuse,
including sexual violence.
Huthi forces detained migrants in poor
conditions and denied them access to
protection and asylum processes. When the
pandemic spread, the Huthi authorities
expelled thousands of migrants to Saudi
Arabia, where they were detained in lifethreatening conditions pending their
repatriation.4

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
many offences, and the authorities continued
to use it as a way to silence dissent.
Executions were carried out by all parties to
the conflict. The Huthi-run Specialized

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

Criminal Court sentenced individuals to death
in their absence for treason.
1. Yemen: Huthi authorities’ decision to release Baha’i prisoners is
‘positive signal’ (Press release, 26 March)
2. Yemen: Huthis must end use of judicial system to silence dissent
(Public statement, 25 March)
3. Yemen: Journalist on death row denied medical treatment (Press
release 7 December)
4. Saudi Arabia: ‘This is worse than COVID-19’: Ethiopians abandoned
and abused in Saudi prisons (MDE 23/3125/2020)

ZAMBIA
Republic of Zambia
Head of state and government: Edgar Chagwa Lungu
The authorities repressed the rights to
freedom of expression, assembly and
association. Journalists, media workers and
lawyers were harassed. The police used
intimidation to enforce COVID-19
movement restrictions. Children were
denied their right to information about
reproductive and sexual health and rights.

BACKGROUND
The national debt reached over ZMK228
billion (US$11 billion) and was expected to
increase as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic. Zambia defaulted on its debt after
failing to pay a US$42.5 million coupon on
one of its Eurobonds in November.
In August, the Health Minister was
acquitted of corruption charges in relation to
the misuse of public funds which had been
allocated to COVID-19 health care.
Tensions between the ruling Patriotic Front
(PF) party and the opposition United Party for
National Development (UPND) were
heightened in advance of the 2021 general
elections.
The authorities took steps to amend the
2016 Constitution with the introduction of
Amendment Bill 10, which failed to pass with
the required two-thirds threshold of 111
votes. Both civil society organizations and
individual citizens had challenged the

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

amendments on grounds that they would
undermine the democratic process.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Police continued to use the Public Order Act,
and other provisions, as well as threats and
intimidation to clamp down on freedom of
expression.
In March, police officers in the Central
Province arrested and charged a 15-year-old
boy with defaming the President under Penal
Code provisions after he allegedly mocked
him on social media.
Chella Tukuta, a photographer, was
arrested by police in June after he spoke
publicly about official corruption. He was
charged with criminal libel for allegedly
making derogatory remarks about the
Minister of Information and other government
officials, and detained in various police
stations in Lusaka, the capital, and Ndola
over a 10-day period.

Human rights defenders
Fumba Chama, Laura Miti and Bornwell
Mwewa were acquitted in a trial before the
Livingstone Magistrates Court in September
on charges under the Public Order Act.
Fumba Chama was charged with unlawful
assembly after he hosted a youth forum on
good governance. Laura Miti and Bornwell
Mwewa were charged, in connection with the
same event, with disorderly conduct and
assaulting a police officer. The three had
been arrested in December 2019 and held at
Livingstone Central Police Station before
being released on bail.

Journalists
Authorities continued to hinder journalists in
their work and to clamp down on the
independent media.
Jubilee Malambo, a journalist for Prime
Television, was prevented from doing his job
on 21 March in Samfya when PF cadres
threatened to break his camera if he took
photographs of people whose homes had
been destroyed in heavy rainfall.
On 9 April, the Independent Broadcasting
Authority (IBA) cancelled Prime Television’s

401

licence “in the interests of public safety,
security, peace, welfare or good order”. The
same day, police went to Prime Television’s
office in Lusaka and forced staff from the
building. The incident followed the media
outlet’s having run stories about COVID-19
and Bill 10.
The authorities also tried to restrict online
broadcasting. Having said publicly that it did
not regulate broadcast content online, in July
the IBA forced Spring TV to obtain an
operating licence before broadcasting on the
internet.
PF members used violence to prevent the
media from airing programmes which
featured opposition leaders. In May, they
fired tear gas into the Isoka Community Radio
and Muchinga FM stations to prevent them
from broadcasting interviews with Hakainde
Hichilema, the UPND leader.

Lawyers
Lawyers continued to be subjected to
intimidation and violent attacks by the
authorities. In March, the Acting Chief
Registrar barred constitutional lawyer John
Sangwa from appearing before courts after
he criticized Bill 10 which could, among
other things, give the President excessive
powers, and the Constitutional Court’s failure
to allow a petition to challenge Bill 10.
In February, participants at a Law
Association of Zambia public meeting about
Bill 10, which took place at the
Intercontinental Hotel in Lusaka, were
physically assaulted and had their belongings
stolen by a mob, thought to be members of
PF cadres.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Legislation, intimidation and harassment
were used by the authorities to repress the
right to freedom of assembly. In June, the
President issued threats against members of
civil society organizations and anyone else
who planned to protest against infringements
of their right to freedom of expression. He
called on the Minister of Home Affairs to
“deal with these boys” whom he said
promoted “anarchy”. On 30 September, the

402

Inspector-General of Police said civil society
members and traditional leadership were
“inciting anarchy”.
Meanwhile, the ruling party deployed
cadres, made up of its supporters, to carry
out acts of violence and other intimidatory
tactics against UPND supporters and others
as a means of preventing and disrupting
peaceful assemblies, beating them and
destroying their property.
In July, they attacked mourners at a UPND
supporter’s funeral in Mutumbi Cemetery in
Lusaka.
While, generally speaking, the perpetrators
of such attacks enjoyed impunity, one cadre
was sentenced in August to two years’
imprisonment for assaulting the Justice
Minister at Kabwata Market in 2019.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The police employed tactics of intimidation,
harassment and arbitrary detention to
enforce movement restrictions under
COVID-19 regulations and, on some
occasions, to prevent peaceful protests. In
April, a police spokesperson announced on
national television that they had adopted a
strategy to “whip” and “detain” anyone found
on the streets.
In December, police killed two protesters
when they opened fire on UPND activists
who had gathered in central Lusaka in
support of Hakainde Hichilema, who had
been summoned to the police headquarters.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities failed to provide adequate
public health protection from COVID-19
infection. PPE was available within Zambia
but did not reach the places where it was
most needed. Some health workers in high
risk regions that did not receive PPE
contracted the virus.
In May, a laboratory technician was
delegated to transport COVID-19 samples for
testing using public transport. After the bus
he was travelling on crashed, the Health
Minister claimed that this mode of transport
did not pose a threat to other passengers and
that it was a method normally used for

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

transporting samples. Road traffic accidents
are the third main cause of death in Zambia,
claiming about 2,000 lives annually and risks
of accidents are higher when using public
vehicles.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In October, the National Assembly
suspended the Comprehensive Sexuality
Education (CSE) programme, following a
review by a working group under the Minister
of National Guidance and Religious Affairs,
on the basis that it was “graphic,
inappropriate and offensive to cultural,
religious and family values”. The CSE was
introduced into the school curriculum in
2013 for primary and secondary school
learners. The African Charter on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child Articles 11 and 27
protect young people from exploitation and
provide for their right to education and
information. Suspension of CSE would be
regressive to the realization of these articles.

DISCRIMINATION - PEOPLE WITH
ALBINISM
People with albinism continued to be
subjected to violent attacks. On 24 March,
Emmanuel Phiri’s dismembered body was
found in a field a few kilometres from his
home in Chipata in the Eastern Province. His
eyes, tongue and arms had been removed in
what appeared to be a ritual killing. In April,
the body of Josephat Mutenda was exhumed
from his grave and his body parts stolen from
the Likolwa burial site in the Kankomba area.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 30 April, the High Court of Zambia ruled
that the forced eviction of Serenje rural
communities from their ancestral land in the
Central Province violated their rights to life,
freedom of movement and association,
dignity and equal protection under the law;
and that the conversion of their customary
land was illegal. The communities had been
forcibly evicted in 2013 to make way for
commercial farming projects, since when
they had lived in makeshift tents in a forest
reserve. The Serenje community was not

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

consulted about the seizure of their
traditional land or compensated for the
destruction of their properties and assets.

ZIMBABWE
Republic of Zimbabwe
Head of state and government: Emmerson Dambudzo
Mnangagwa
The authorities used COVID-19 regulations
to justify severe restrictions on the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. They deployed security forces to
abduct, assault and torture perceived
critics, and opposition members and
leaders. Police and security agents killed at
least 10 people. Women were denied
access to essential maternal health care,
and violence against women and girls was
widespread.

BACKGROUND
In January, a constitutional amendment was
published in the official gazette giving the
President powers to hand-pick judges to
higher courts and weakening Parliament’s
oversight of financial agreements entered into
by the government.
On 30 March, the government introduced
measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19,
imposing punitive movement restrictions,
initially for three weeks but periodically
extending throughout the year. Information
about lockdown rules was unclear, and their
implementation appeared to be arbitrary. On
21 July, a national curfew between 6pm and
6am was imposed.
The pandemic exacerbated the economic
crisis and the authorities were unable to
provide social security to vulnerable people.
According to the UN, 7 million people were in
need of humanitarian assistance and 4.3
million people were severely food insecure.
In July, opposition members called on
people to participate in the nationwide “July
31” protests against alleged state corruption,
economic hardship, and to demand the
President’s resignation. The country

403

remained in political turmoil: in August, the
South African government appointed two
special envoys to visit Zimbabwe and identify
possible resolutions to ongoing violence by
security forces against the population.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces frequently used excessive
force to prevent or crackdown on peaceful
protests and to impose lockdown restrictions,
killing at least 10 people. Security forces also
arbitrarily arrested and detained protesters
and others in the context of enforcing
COVID-19 measures. In the first four months
of lockdown, 116,000 people were arrested
for violating COVID-19 regulations. Many
were subjected to violence, including a
significant number of women. Two sisters,
Nokuthula and Ntombizodwa Mpofu, were
severely beaten by police on 16 April in
Bulawayo when they went out during curfew
to buy food for their children.
A joint team comprised of agents of the
police, military, the Central Intelligence
Organisation, and the Office of the President,
known as the “Ferret Team”, terrorized
government critics, opposition leaders and
activists, and their family members. Many,
including several members of the main
opposition party, Movement for Democratic
Change-Alliance (MDC-A), were abducted
from police custody, tortured and dumped far
from their homes.
In May, Joana Mamombe, a politician,
Cecilia Chimbiri and Netsai Marova were
arrested at a police roadblock in the capital,
Harare, while they were leading a
demonstration against inadequate protection
for the poor. They were abducted the same
day from Harare Central Police Station by a
group of men believed to be from the Ferret
Team, who physically and sexually assaulted
them and dumped them 87km from their
homes in Harare three days later. In June,
the State charged the women with faking
their abductions and “tarnishing the country’s
image”. On 31 July, they were re-arrested at
a checkpoint. While they were being held, a
soldier whipped Cecilia Chimbiri for allegedly
insulting him. In December, in the case

404

relating to the charges connected to their
abduction in May, the Harare Regional
Magistrate ordered that Joana Mamombe be
tried separately from Cecilia Chimbiri and
Netsai Marova on grounds that she had been
declared unfit to stand trial. An application by
their lawyers for this order to be reviewed was
pending at the end of the year.
In the days running up to the July 31
protests, security forces raided the homes of
those suspected of supporting the initiative,
in some cases vandalizing property.
On 30 July, Tawanda Muchehiwa was
arrested by police in a shop in Bulawayo. On
the way to the police station, the officers
handed him over to the Ferret Team, who
tortured him to reveal the whereabouts of his
uncle, Mduduzi Mathuthu, the editor of
online newspaper ZimLive.com. They
released him far from his home four days
later.
The same day, security forces raided
Mduduzi Mathuthu’s home, and, when they
failed to find him, took away his sister and
two of his nephews who were later released
after the Media Institute of Southern Africa
intervened.
The violence continued after July, and on
7 August, four unidentified men abducted
Noxolo Maphosa in the street. She was
sexually assaulted to force her to reveal the
whereabouts of her uncle, Josphat Ngulube,
an MDC-A member who had been accused
of distributing face masks bearing the slogan
“#ZANUPFMustGo” (referring to the ruling
party).
On 12 August, Tamuka Denhere, another
member of the MDC-A, was taken from his
home in Gweru city by unidentified men and
tortured over several hours. They then
handed him over to Harare Central Police
Station. Police also arrested his wife after she
reported his abduction.

Unlawful killings
Police and state security agents unlawfully
killed at least 10 people. No meaningful
investigations were carried out into these
crimes.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

On 15 March, police went to the home of
Bhekani Moyo in Silobela village, in
connection with assault allegations, and shot
him dead. On 30 March, Levison Moyo was
beaten by police in Bulawayo for allegedly
violating lockdown restrictions and died four
days later from a brain haemorrhage. In May,
police, travelling in an unmarked vehicle,
shot and killed Paul Munakopa in Hillside,
Bulawayo.
At least two opposition activists were
unlawfully killed. In July, Mazwi Ndlovu, from
Bulilima, was killed by agents suspected to
be affiliated with ZANU-PF after he raised
concerns about the way food was distributed
to those in need. A man suspected of killing
him was later arrested but released without
appearing in court or applying for bail. Also in
July, state security agents in Hurungwe
abducted, murdered and dumped the naked
body of Lavender Chiwaya, an MDC-A
councillor, near his home.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities used COVID-19 restrictions as
a pretext to limit civic space and restrict
human rights. Section 14 of Statutory
Instrument 83 of 2020 on Public Health
(COVID-19 Prevention, Containment and
Treatment) Regulations, 2020 criminalized
the “spreading of false news” about
COVID-19 and imposed a 20-year prison
sentence and/or a hefty fine. Lovemore
Zvokusekwa, from Chitungwiza, a town on
the outskirts of Harare, was arrested in April,
and accused of circulating a fabricated press
statement purporting to be from the
President, announcing a lockdown extension.
Later that month, the President said he
should receive a 20-year prison sentence as
an “example” to others. On 30 April, he was
released from detention on remand although
he faced trial pending possible further
investigations by the prosecution. The
authorities used further provisions which
criminalized people solely for peacefully
exercising their right to freedom of
expression, including “undermining the
authority of the President” or “insulting” him,
to discourage criticism on social media.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

In March, the Commander of the
Zimbabwe National Army said that social
media was proving a threat to national
security and that the military would put
private electronic communications under
surveillance to “guard against subversion”.
Christian Rambu was arrested in Chipinge
town in April for distributing a WhatsApp
message accusing the President of
incompetence. Rujeko Hither Mpambwa,
from Kariba, was arrested in August for
criticizing on social media the President’s
address to the nation.

Journalists
Police and military officers used the
COVID-19 restrictions as a pretext to justify
the harassment and intimidation of journalists
and other media workers, at least 25 of
whom were assaulted and arbitrarily arrested
and detained while working, or on their way
to and from work. They were accused of
violating lockdown restrictions, disorderly
conduct or using expired accreditation
documents which, under the COVID-19
regulations, should have been considered
valid during lockdown. Journalists were
frequently ordered to delete their videos or
photographs without a valid reason.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities used Section 14 of Statutory
Instrument 83 of 2020 on Public Health to
prohibit demonstrations during lockdown.
Between March and August, security
forces locked down roads to Harare’s central
business district to prevent protests in
support of prominent activists facing trial.
In townships in Harare, officers robbed
some people at gunpoint, demanded bribes
or severely beat them for breaking lockdown
regulations.
Dozens of people were arrested for
organizing or participating in peaceful
demonstrations, including activists Namatai
Kwekweza and Vongai Zimudzi, arrested in
June for demonstrating against constitutional
amendments.
In July, at least 17 nurses were prosecuted
for violating lockdown regulations after they

405

protested against low wages and poor
working conditions at the Sally Mugabe
Central Hospital in Harare. They were
acquitted of all charges.
In the same month, the authorities
launched a brutal crackdown on opposition
leaders involved in organizing the July 31
protests (see above, Excessive use of force)
and on trade unionists who had called for
strike action. Throughout July, security forces
arrested at least 60 people.
On 12 July, unidentified men tried to
abduct the brother and nephew of Peter
Mutasa – the leader of the Zimbabwe
Congress of Trade Unions – from his home.
On 16 July, a group of men broke into the
house of Obert Masaraure, President of the
Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of
Zimbabwe (ARTUZ), in the early hours,
taking his wife into custody for several hours
to try to force her to reveal his whereabouts.
Three days earlier ARTUZ had organized a
demonstration to protest about low wages.
An overnight curfew was imposed on 21
July, ostensibly to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 infection, but which critics
interpreted as a clampdown on protests. On
27 July, a ZANU-PF spokesperson called on
supporters to use all necessary means to
defend themselves ahead of the nationwide
July 31 demonstrations. When the protests
went ahead, police arrested at least 20
people, who were charged with various
offences including “public nuisance”,
“intention to incite public violence”, and
breaking COVID-19 regulations. They were
later released on bail. On 4 August, the
President said the protest supporters were
“bad apples” who would be “flushed out”.

early, ostensibly to allow staff to get home
before the curfew. Consequently, hearings
were repeatedly adjourned, and critics and
activists were unable to get bail and were
kept in prolonged pre-trial detention. Jacob
Ngarivhume, a politician, who was arrested in
connection with the July 31 protests, and
Hopewell Chin’ono, a journalist who was
arrested for exposing allegations of corruption
among government officials, spent around six
weeks in pre-trial detention, having been
denied bail three times. Godfrey Kurauone,
an MDC-A councillor in Masvingo, spent over
five weeks in jail for “insulting” the President.
At least 10 lawyers were harassed in
connection with cases they represented,
some of them facing prosecution on
trumped-up charges. In June, Thabani
Mpofu was arrested and bailed, on
allegations of obstructing justice by filing an
affidavit from a fictitious person in a case
which challenged the appointment of the
Prosecutor General. The author of the
affidavit later presented himself to the police,
but the case against the Thabani Mpofu
continued at the end of the year.
In July, the Chief Justice directed that all
court judgements be “approved” by the head
of the court or division before being handed
down. The directive was withdrawn following
strong objections from lawyers and civil
society activists.
In August, a magistrate barred Beatrice
Mtetwa, a human rights lawyer, from
representing her client and recommended
that her licence be revoked after she was
falsely accused of running a Facebook page
which criticized the justice system.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

Between March and June, a total of 106
maternal deaths were recorded, largely as a
result of movement restrictions which
prevented many pregnant women from
accessing services. In July, a woman from
Chitungwiza was forced to pay a bribe to get
through a police roadblock to reach hospital
when she was in labour.
The government did not release
information on the number of health workers

Opposition and civil society members,
activists and lawyers accused the authorities
of using the judicial system to harass and
penalize opponents or perceived critics of the
government.
Statutory instruments were used to
suspend constitutional rights. For example,
COVID-19 restrictions led to courts closing

406

RIGHT TO HEALTH

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

who had tested positive for COVID-19 until
August, when they announced there were
more than 480 cases. In September, the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported a decrease in access to
essential health care facilities as a
consequence of COVID-19 infection among
health workers and a lack of PPE, among
other things. Calls from front-line health
workers for adequate PPE and essential
drugs went unheeded, and in April the
Zimbabwe Association of Doctors for Human
Rights took a case to the High Court which
ordered the government to, among other
things, provide PPE to front-line health
workers.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Within the first 11 days of lockdown, 764
cases of violence against women and girls
were recorded, rising to 2,768 by mid-June.
The authorities failed to prioritize services to
protect women and girls from such attacks.
Meanwhile, victims were denied prompt
access to justice.

Amnesty International Report 2020/21

407

