THE YEAR IN REVIEW, 2011
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME

WFP/Yohannes Zirotti Oriste

All over the world, WFP keeps food
safe in warehouses, like this one in
Ethiopia, before delivering it to
those most in need.

CONTENTS
3

From the Executive Director

5

2011: THE YEAR IN REVIEW

9

RESPONDING
Horn of Africa
Asia Region
Japan

15

CHANGING LIVES
The Arab World
Food and Hope via Vouchers in Afghanistan

19

INNOVATING
Almond Power in Afghanistan
It Takes a Village in Laos
Super Nutritious Super Cereals
Wawa Mum and Acha Mum

25

SECURING PARTNERS
Governments
The Private Sector
The Online Audience

33

EXPANDING OUR REACH
Brazil
Republic of Korea
South Sudan

36

WFP in Numbers 2011

All figures in this document are in U.S. dollars

COVER:
In drought-stricken Turkana, Kenya, WFP paid particular
attention to the nutritional needs of children under the age
of five and pregnant and nursing mothers. These activities are
funded by the European Union, EU member countries
or ECHO, the EU’s humanitarian arm.
WFP/Rose Ogola

WFP/Juan Montes

WFP’s school meals programme
in Honduras supports more
than 1.4 million children in
20,000 schools, like this
classroom at Policarpo Bonilla
school in Valle de Angeles.

2

FROM EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ERTHARIN COUSIN

Dear Supporters,
When I stepped into the leadership role at the World Food Programme in April,
I was already an advocate and supporter of WFP.
Several months later, I am astonished at the passion, skill and talent that surround
me as I write this letter. With these traits, every day WFP’s dedicated workforce
quietly works to feed the world’s hungry poor. I am proud to now lead this team.

I want to thank former Executive Director Josette Sheeran because her leadership
directed the organization’s 2011 accomplishments. I inherited a terrific organization, and I look forward to making it even better.
I invite you to celebrate these stories of success with me — and to continue
supporting the important work that made them happen. Truly, without your
support, we could not carry out this work.

3

WFP/Rein Skullerud

In the pages that follow, you will read about the life-saving work performed by
WFP in 2011. This work ranged from the drought in the Horn of Africa to the
floods in Asia, and the lives we saved in the process. You will read about our most
recent innovative programmes, such as a school meals centre of excellence in
Brazil and a donor outreach post in South Korea. You will read about how the
political headlines in the Middle East shaped our work, and about how new
partnerships with the private sector helped fuel that work.

WFP/Lindsey Horton

Working alongside the government
of Cambodia and other humanitarian
organizations, WFP helped families
rebuild their lives after the worst
floods Cambodia has seen in more
than a decade.

4

2011 IN REVIEW

Natural catastrophes and political upheaval defined
2011, as parts of East Africa and South Asia buckled
under the worst climate disasters in decades and
unprecedented anti-government protests in the Arab
world deepened poverty and sparked massive human
migrations.

WFP made strides last year in six areas that are part of
the answer: emergency food relief, nutrition for children
under two, school meals, small-scale farming, and
training and voucher programmes.
Some of these strategies were put to the test in the
Horn of Africa, as one of the worst droughts in decades
blistered the region. WFP delivered food relief to
millions of desperate people and responded to a rare
and complex catastrophe in parts of southern Somalia:
full-blown famine.

Throughout the year, the United Nations World Food
Programme reached out to help some of the world’s
most destitute and fragile communities cope with
short-term calamities and the longer-term ravages of
poverty. At the same time, we helped a donor nation,
Japan, as it recovered from a triple catastrophe —
a colossal earthquake, followed by a tsunami and
nuclear crisis that carved a path of misery across parts
of the island nation.

We are also preparing communities to be more resilient
in future weather-related disasters that will likely
intensify with changes in global climate conditions. In
Ethiopia, farmers in a WFP-assisted land-rehabilitation
programme emerged from the 2011 drought relatively
unscathed. In Somalia, too, we turned from emergency
assistance to longer-term mitigation projects like
building reservoirs and roads.

Overall, WFP’s 2011 food assistance reached nearly
100 million people in 75 countries around the world.
The vast majority — nearly 83 million — were women
and children.

A continent away, WFP again came to the aid of millions
of people battered by torrential floods and storms that
swept across a string of East Asian nations. In the
hardest-hit country, Pakistan, WFP’s food assistance
reached 3.5 million people still recovering from the
flooding of 2010.

Our work remains unfinished. Today, hunger preys
on nearly a billion people, stunting children and
national economies. Hunger is the world’s greatest
solvable problem but it does not require a scientific
breakthrough. We have the money, technology
and knowledge to do it.

5

And in Egypt, Libya, Syria, Tunisia and Yemen, WFP
offered emergency food assistance to hundreds of
people caught in political unrest that spilled across
borders and, in some cases, into 2012.

And we deepened our collaboration with small farmers
in Afghanistan and other developing countries through
the Purchase for Progress (P4) initiative, which boosts
small-scale agricultural production and marketing
capacity to buffer the poor against volatile food prices.

Other watersheds marked the year, as WFP opened
a pioneering Centre of Excellence Against Hunger
in Brazil and offices in the Republic of Korea and
South Sudan, the world’s newest nation.

The year also saw research strides in our line of Super
Cereals and new, locally produced spinoffs of nourishing,
Ready-to-Use Supplementary Foods. More than
14 million women and children received nutrition
support from WFP – up from 11.2 million in 2010.

WFP also expanded its arsenal of innovative tools
to fight malnutrition and hunger, from nutrition
training programmes in remote Laotian villages
to vouchers for food and cash that reached 4.4 million
people worldwide last year.

WFP/Laura Melo

Farmers in San Esteban Catarina,
El Salvador, have dried, cleaned and
bagged their maize, enabling them
to sell to WFP’s Purchase for Progress
programme for the first time.

None of these achievements came single-handedly. WFP
broadened partnerships with national governments and
transnational organizations on work ranging from school
meals programmes to a drought insurance plan being
developed by the African Union. The European Union,
our second-largest donor and leading cash contributor
in 2011, worked closely with WFP towards reaching
the UN Millennium Development Goals.
The private sector remained a prominent partner in 2011,
contributing nearly $94 million to WFP’s activities. More
than a quarter of these funds supported our emergency
operation in the Horn of Africa.
Many of these partnerships focus on the longer term,
as we help communities build a better future. In
Ethiopia, we are working with the PepsiCo Foundation
and the U.S. Agency for International Development
to develop a novel chickpea-based meal supplement
for malnourished children. Partners are working with
chickpea farmers there to increase yield for the hummuslike supplementary food for local use and for export.
The public also responded massively to WFP’s work.
School children ate more than 900,000 school meals last
year funded by an online charity drive launched by a new
partner, the Chinese internet company Tencent. Overall,
WFP’s online fundraising netted a record US$12 million
last year and our subscriber base more than doubled to
reach nearly 800,000 supporters.

6

WFP/Rein Skullerud

In the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, WFP feeds
primary school children like this
young girl, who enjoys a
specially fortified biscuit
(produced in country) and
later a lunch of rice with
maize and a few vegetables.

7

WFP/David Orr

In the Dadaab refugee
camps in Kenya, moderately
malnourished children and
pregnant and nursing
mothers receive special
attention from WFP.

8

RESPONDING

HORN OF AFRICA
It took three weeks for Adan Kulo and his family
of seven to walk across the parched moonscape of
southern Somalia to the sprawling Dadaab refugee
camps in northeastern Kenya. But the herdsman
had little choice. Three years of failed rain had
decimated his livestock, leaving him destitute.

WFP began sounding the alarm as early as November,
2010. Months later, at the height of the crisis, more than
1,500 people arrived daily to Dadaab, swelling the camp’s
population to roughly 460,000 in a matter of months.
Mothers described abandoning weak children by the
wayside to save the rest of their family. There was a
similar influx at the Dolo Ado refugee camps in Ethiopia
and in the informal settlements of Somalia’s battered
capital, Mogadishu, where makeshift shelters filled every
open space amid the rubble of ruined buildings.

“It was a very difficult journey,” Kulo recalls of the
long and dangerous trek last July with a pregnant
wife and sick young child. Bandits stole the family’s
meagre savings. Two days before arriving in Dadaab,
they ran out of food. “I was so afraid that they would
die,” he said.

In Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia, WFP faced a dual
challenge of helping both local, drought-affected
communities and the masses of refugees and internally
displaced people (IDPs). All our operations in the region
were already seriously underfunded when the crisis
began, making it difficult to scale-up relief efforts quickly.
In Somalia, our efforts were further complicated by the
country’s precarious politics.

As profound drought seared the Horn of Africa last
year, shrivelling plants and killing animals, it
sparked a massive exodus of exhausted, sick and
hungry people. WFP was there. Our food assistance
reached millions of people from the five droughtaffected East African countries: Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Somalia and the Karamoja region of Uganda.
In parts of southern Somalia, humanitarian agencies
faced a catastrophe of appalling dimensions—fullblown famine, a phenomenon we dedicate our
lives to preventing. A mix of drought, conflict
and restricted humanitarian access contributed
to the crisis.

Despite the insecurity, WFP managed to work in the
capital, Mogadishu, where our general food distributions
and hot meal centres helped roughly a quarter of a million
people. WFP also provided food assistance to tens of
thousands of displaced people and local residents near
the western borders with Ethiopia and Kenya, as well as
to hundreds of thousands in Somalia’s central and
northern regions.
9

In the central Somali village of Docol, WFP food
distributions offered a lifeline for displaced pastoralists
like Nadifa and her family. “My sons have no jobs,
I can’t work, my husband can’t work and we only have
ten goats left,” said Nadifa, whose nomadic existence
was torn apart by the drought.

WHAT IS HUNGER?
Hunger is the body’s way of signaling that it is
running short of food and needs to eat something.
Hunger can lead to malnutrition, a state in which
the body can no longer maintain natural functions
such as growth, pregnancy, lactation, learning
abilities, physical work and disease resistance.
The term covers a range of problems, including
being dangerously thin (underweight), too short
for one’s age (stunting) or deficient in vitamins
and minerals.

In Kenya, WFP offered cash-based assistance to local
communities and distributed food rations to the floods
of new arrivals to Dadaab, as they awaited a registration
process that sometimes took weeks. “Al-Hamdulillah
(thanks to the almighty)!” exclaimed Saruuro Mohamud,
after receiving rations of maize, pulses, oil and other
staples.
Along with hunger, malnutrition was shockingly high
across the region, particularly among young children.
WFP sharply expanded nutrition and supplementary
feeding programmes across the region, bringing in
special nutrition products by air, sea and road to
reach hundreds of thousands of malnourished
mothers and children.

Our efforts made a difference. In Kenya’s northwestern
Turkana region, sickly, underweight Stephen Akai
improved within weeks, echoing a pattern we saw among
the legions of malnourished children we helped. “He’s
now healthier and quite playful,” mother Esther said
of her seven-month-old.

WFP/David Orr

Droughts and other natural disasters are certain to return
to the Horn of Africa, and WFP is helping vulnerable
communities to better cope with them. Through our
MERET land rehabilitation programme with the
Ethiopian government, for example, farmer Dadij Yedete
emerged from the drought relatively unscathed, thanks
to the apple trees and other cash crops that he grows.
Neighbours just a few kilometres away were struggling.
In Somalia, too, WFP has shifted from emergency
assistance to longer-term programmes like building
reservoirs, wells and roads to strengthen local resilience.
Towards the year’s end, relatively good rainfall brought
relief to many drought-affected regions. Once again,
herds of goats and sheep grazed in areas where just
a few months earlier nothing stirred. Malnutrition
and hunger receded.

Tens of thousands of
residents and displaced
people received WFP
food that was cooked
daily at centres in
Mogadishu, Somalia.

But these victories are fragile. The year closed with
millions of people still needing support—and with grim
forecasts for the next rainy season.
10

WFP/Amjad Jamal

WFP provided
life-saving food rations
to people in Pakistan’s
Sindh Province, including
delivery by boat in areas
inaccessible by roads.

ASIA REGION
typhoons and tropical storms in 2011. From Sindh to
the Philippine island of Mindanao, the natural disasters
— in some cases the worst in living memory — killed
hundreds of people, displaced millions and dealt
a heavy blow to agriculture and industry.

A year after the worst floods in Pakistan’s history
unleashed a humanitarian crisis, the South Asian nation
was hit by another wall of water in 2011. Pounding rains
again turned vast swathes of Sindh and Balochistan
provinces into murky lakes, leaving millions of people
in desperate need.

As always, WFP reached desperate communities
by trucks, motorcycles, planes and boats to deliver
staples like oil, wheat and rice, along with fortified
foods to protect young children and other vulnerable
people against malnutrition. But we are also thinking
long term, as we help communities adapt to weather
calamities that experts predict will increase with global
warming and exact a devastating toll on those living
on the edge.

Pakistani authorities initially believed they could meet
the challenge without outside help. But as the rains kept
falling and floodwaters swallowed more and more
territory, it became clear that another massive intervention
would be necessary. WFP was ready. Days after the
government appealed for international assistance in
early September, the first emergency food distributions
began. By the year’s end, WFP had reached some
3.5 million flood-affected people with assistance from
the United States, Germany, ECHO (the European
Commission’s Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection
office) and others.

The misery was particularly acute in Sindh, where
nearly a quarter of the population already suffered from
malnutrition. Laying waste to fields and villages, flood
waters displaced more than five million people, leaving
them entirely dependent on whatever aid came their way.
As part of a broader, community-based strategy to tackle

While Pakistan was hardest hit, it was one among many
Asian nations battered by torrential monsoon rains,
11

moderate acute malnutrition, our special nutritious food
products reached tens of thousands of the most vulnerable
people — children and pregnant and breastfeeding women
— in both Balochistan and Sindh. More than eight out of
ten completing treatment had fully recovered by year’s end.

income as a day labourer to keep her children in school,
instead of sending them out to earn money. “The food
helped me make ends meet,” said the mother of six,
whose family was among thousands who fled flooding.
“I really did not want to pull my children out of school,
because I know if they are educated, they can have better
jobs and a bright future.”

Like Pakistan, Sri Lanka was battered by the worst
floods in decades. Between December 2010 and
February 2011, monsoon rains and powerful tropical
thunderstorms unleashed torrential floodwaters that
killed 62 people and displaced another 1.2 million.
The muddy onslaught destroyed houses, bridges, roads
and crops, driving up food prices.

In the Philippines’ Central Luzon region, Noel
Quiambao is also grateful for the high-energy biscuits
WFP distributed in October, after Typhoons Nesat
and Nalgae blasted through the archipelago. “This is
a big help to us, and especially important for our kids,”
said Quiambao, whose family sought temporary shelter
in a school. With support from Australia, Canada,
ECHO, Japan and the UN’s Central Emergency
Response Fund, our food assistance reached nearly
1.7 million Filipinos reeling from a year of natural
calamities.

Moving quickly, WFP launched an emergency operation
reaching half a million people over six months. “How
else could I have fed my children without your help?”
asked Mary Ramasamy, who received WFP food rations
after water inundated her home in eastern Sri Lanka
and washed away her few bags of rice.

With an eye to the future, WFP is partnering with the
government and other humanitarian agencies to launch
disaster preparedness and mitigation programmes
targeting vulnerable communities, like Galidan in
Mindanao’s North Cotobato province. Here, villagers like
Norodin Ulankaya have planted 4,000 trees to protect
against erosion, flooding and siltation, receiving WFP
food for their work. “The trees will help us regain our
livelihood,” Ulankaya said of a project that also helps
restore one of the country’s largest wetlands.

Further east, torrential rains starting at the end of July
also lashed Cambodia and Laos, turning chunks of land
into giant lakes. In both countries, WFP helped tens
of thousands of people recover.
As the flood waters ebbed, WFP moved to longer-term
disaster recovery and mitigation. After Pakistan’s
government determined the relief phase was over,
we launched food- and cash-for-work activities in early
2012, while continuing the nutrition programmes.

WFP/Philipp Herzog

In Cambodia, WFP rolled out a year-long recovery
initiative in November targeting nine hard-hit provinces.
Our food assistance has helped some 150,000 people
rebuild flood-damaged roads and rehabilitate dikes,
dams and irrigation canals to better link them
to markets and better cope with future disasters.
WFP distributed
high-energy biscuits to
support government relief
efforts after Typhoon Nesat
in the Philippines.

Rations of rice, canned fish, oil and fortified foods like
high-energy biscuits are also helping those who cannot
participate in the projects. In Siem Reap province, those
rations mean widow Kang Ny can now use her tiny
12

JAPAN
On 11 March 2011, the northeast coast of Japan
shuddered under a colossal earthquake and tsunami that
swallowed thousands of homes, fields, schools, hospitals
— and people. Coupled with the nuclear crisis at the
Fukushima Daiichi power plant, the disaster left an
estimated 19,000 people dead or missing and nearly
half-a-million homeless.

to serve as storage space and offices for Japanese
authorities and aid organizations.
“I was deeply moved just seeing that WFP warehouse
being erected,” said Masami Chiba, a community leader
in the town of Minamisanriku. “With your help, we will
never give up. I promise you that we will build a great
town once again.”

Japan is among the countries best prepared for coping
with disasters, but the scale of the devastation called
for WFP’s expertise as the UN’s lead logistics agency.
At the request of the Japanese government, we launched
a four-month logistics operation, dispatching a
27-member team that included 15 Japanese who came
from operations around the world.

Indeed, WFP structures helped in ways we had not
imagined. Some devastated communities used the
warehouses to display mementos retrieved from the
rubble. One warehouse was converted into a temporary
shopping mall — complete with grocery and book
stores and even a cake shop — to help revive the area’s
crippled commerce and restore a sense of normality.
Yet another served as a makeshift dental clinic.

Our emergency response was a watershed in many ways.
We came to the assistance of a donor nation — in this case
not to lead, but to support Japan’s well-developed disaster
response. The entire US$4.8 million cost for the operation
was funded by the private sector within Japan and
globally – an historic first, as companies and the general
public responded generously to WFP’s appeal.

“I was very surprised to hear the requests to use our
warehouses and prefabs in such ways,” said Logistics
Officer Atsushi Kondo. “But WFP’s job is to help people,
in ways they need the most.”

WFP/Yuko Yasuda

The catastrophe left hundreds of thousands of Japanese
homeless and hungry, with many huddled in unheated
emergency shelters. On behalf of the Japanese
government, WFP rushed in 900 metric tons of
emergency supplies from overseas, including blankets,
water and food. We also delivered 620,000 packs of food
and beverages donated by Japanese companies and
collected by the Japan Association for WFP, our official
supporting organization.
But WFP’s operation went beyond delivering food
assistance. Members of our earthquake team offered
technical advice and support to a consortium of
Japanese organizations involved in the relief effort.
As supplies poured in, it became increasingly hard to
find storage space, since the tsunami had washed away
many public buildings. So WFP erected 45 large
mobile warehouses and 36 pre-fabricated structures

After Japan’s devastating
earthquake and tsunami, a WFP
base camp in Minamisanriku
Town, Miyagi Prefecture, helped
coordinate volunteers.
13

WFP/Abeer Etefa

In Tokura, Libya, WFP distributed
food to vulnerable families and other
people displaced by the violence
sweeping through the country.

14

CHANGING LIVES

THE ARAB WORLD
Throughout the Libyan conflict, we reached civilians
“irrespective of their adherence to warring factions,”
said Regional Director Daly Belgasmi.

Nobody expected that a single act of political defiance
would lead the Arab world into a critical turn in its
history. But Mohamed Bouazizi’s fiery death in tiny
Tunisia helped trigger an unprecedented popular
uprising in 2011 that resonated across the region. While
Tunisia’s 14 January revolution was largely peaceful,
many of the revolts that spread across North Africa
and the Middle East were seared by bloodshed
and massive human migrations.

WFP was among the first humanitarian agencies to
reach Tunisia’s desolate Ras Ajdir border with Libya
on February 28, shortly after demonstrations against
Moammar Ghaddafi’s regime flared into a full-fledged
revolt. Almost immediately, we began distributing highenergy biscuits to tens of thousands of desperate people
pouring across the Tunisian frontier. Many were migrant
workers and their families from North and
sub-Saharan Africa, along with terrified Libyan families.

WFP responded to the violent fallout — and to the
particularly complex nature of Libya’s conflict. In Egypt,
Libya, Syria, Tunisia and Yemen, we offered
emergency food assistance to hundreds of thousands
caught up in political unrest that spilled across borders.

When the Choucha refugee camp was established a few
kilometres from Ras Ajdir in early March, WFP set up
mobile kitchens. The roughly 2.6 million hot meals that
we fed stranded people at Choucha and other camps in
Tunisia and Egypt marked the first time WFP offered
cooked food on such a large scale.

As Egypt and Tunisia opened new chapters in their
histories, WFP launched recovery programmes for
the most vulnerable, including hundreds of thousands
of migrant workers who returned home from
conflict-torn Libya.

On another front, our logistics unit scrambled to deliver
food aid to conflict-torn Libya, where fighting between
government forces and rebels had depleted stocks and
disrupted supply chains. The first WFP-chartered vessel
sailed into the rebel-held port of Benghazi in early
March, carrying enough wheat flour to feed more than
90,000 people for a month. It was the first of nearly a

Our response in North Africa began in late February,
as fighting between rebels and government forces in
Libya sparked a massive exodus into neighbouring Egypt
and Tunisia, countries still struggling with the aftermath
of their own popular revolts. Over the year, our regional
operation helped 1.5 million people in all three countries.
15

dozen WFP-chartered ships carrying food, water,
medical supplies and even ambulances to Libya on
behalf of the humanitarian community. By the year’s
end, these vessels reached more than one million
Libyans in areas cut off by the conflict. Some narrowly
escaped shelling and sea mines.

rural areas of Greater Damascus and in flash points
like Hama, Dar’a and Deir Ezzor. In April, 2012, we
scaled up our assistance to reach a quarter of a million
hungry people.
Relying on a voucher system through mobile phones,
WFP continued delivering food aid to 95,000 Iraqi
refugees in Syria. “At first I was expecting the worst –
we would not be able to receive our food because
of the security situation,” said Ibrahim, who lives in
Lattakia, home to thousands of Iraqi refugees. “But
then we received an SMS from WFP with the voucher
and address of the new shop — and Hamdulilla,
we got our food!”

“I’d look around to see if there was anything that
should not be there,” recalls Captain Andreas Krossa,
returning to Alexandria, Egypt, after a perilous journey
to Libya’s besieged city of Misrata. Like many Libyans,
Misrata’s residents were overwhelmed by the deliveries.
“They asked me, ‘is this all for me?’” Krossa said.
“They couldn’t believe they would get a ship-load
of assistance.”

Political upheaval also swept across Yemen, the poorest
country in the Middle East. The uprising, along with
soaring food and fuel prices and a breakdown in public
services, deepened hunger in this country of 24 million.
WFP has worked in Yemen for years, providing food to
the poorest, helping children recover from malnutrition
and supporting girls’ education. As the country’s
economic crisis deepened, WFP began distributing
cash vouchers to the poorest families.

As the lead logistics agency for the relief community,
WFP coordinated the movement of vital supplies and
workers by air, sea and road, and built a humanitarian
communications network inside the country. In another
first, we also operated a regular ferry service to areas
otherwise out of reach.
Along with saving lives inside Libya, WFP helped
rebuild the futures of those who left. Tens of thousands
of Tunisian and Egyptian workers returned home to
countries struggling to build new democracies and
overcome enormous economic problems. In Egypt,
WFP helped some 350,000 of the returnees through
retraining programmes for migrant workers and by
helping women set up small businesses.

In the western Yemen governorate of Hajjah, the
vouchers, worth about $50, allow Mariam Jaber Shuei to
buy food, medicines and other necessities. “It’s enough,”
said the mother of six. “At least it’s something that helps
us get by.”

FOOD AND HOPE VIA VOUCHERS IN AFGHANISTAN

In Tunisia, we partnered with the government and
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) to launch a two-year initiative offering
agricultural jobs and training to tens of thousands of
Tunisians in the poorest rural areas.

For the first time in her life last February, Balqisa
entered a Jalalabad food shop as a customer and not
a beggar — free to choose what she and her children will
eat. “I’ve never had money to buy food before,” said
Balqisa, who uses only one name. “I usually have to go
from shop to shop, begging for each piece of bread.”

As the political violence abated in North Africa,
it escalated in Syria, where a prolonged drought
increased economic hardship. In December,
WFP launched an emergency operation to serve
100,000 Syrians most affected by the violence in

That changed in 2011, when this mother of three became
among the first to enrol in a new WFP voucher
programme in this eastern Afghan city, aimed to provide
16

WFP/Abeer Etefa

WFP began moving life-saving food
supplies into Libya by road and sea soon
after the conflict erupted, helping hungry
people like this man and child at a
distribution site in Tokura.

a safety net for some of country’s poorest, including the
disabled and widows like Balqisa.

assistance reached nearly seven million Afghans in 2011,
making the country one of our top beneficiaries.

“I have no family to help me,” said Balqisa, who now
receives a monthly voucher worth about 1,250 afghani,
or $25. She can exchange it for food items in selected
shops, helping to boost the local economy.

“Working in a country as complex as Afghanistan
means there is never room for complacency — we are
constantly trying out new things,” said Country Director
Louis Imbleau. “First, so we can work more efficiently.
And second, to build local capacity, striving for the day
WFP will no longer be needed here.”

First piloted in the capital Kabul in 2009, the voucher
programme has taken off — reaching 36,000 people
last year in Jalalabad and the northern city of
Mazar-e-Sharif. Today, Afghanistan’s voucher initiative
is WFP’s only large-scale programme of its kind in Asia,
and we are expanding. In early 2012, we launched
another voucher programme in Kabul and in the north,
where a severe drought in 2011 left many Afghans
facing food shortages.

The vouchers illustrate both the challenges and the
rewards of WFP’s operation in Afghanistan. The urban
and semi-urban populations who received them are
dispersed and therefore difficult to reach.
The country’s high illiteracy rates, fragile banking system
and lack of basic infrastructure demand spending large
amounts of energy on training government counterparts,
shopkeepers and bank employees — and thinking up
solutions to seemingly simple operational problems.

In a country where one-third of the population is foodinsecure, the vouchers are an innovative way that WFP
brings food assistance to the most vulnerable Afghans.
Recurring floods, droughts and earthquakes, coupled
with decades of conflict, have left large swathes of the
population unable to meet their food or nutritional
needs. Despite these challenges, WFP’s food

But today pride is written across Balqisa’s wrinkled
face. With the vouchers, she knows her three children
will not go hungry. She enters shops with her head
held high.
17

WFP/Amjad Jamal

After severe flooding in
Pakistan, WFP food rations
were the only means of survival
for many. This baby has
received Wawa Mum, a
locally-produced chick pea
paste that is vital to preventing
malnutrition in children.

18

INNOVATING

Winning the hunger battle is not just about filling
empty stomachs. Just ask 23-year-old La, a pregnant
mother of two who lives in a remote province of
northern Laos. “I want my child to grow up strong
and healthy,” she said of the third child she will
soon have.

Ranging from nutrient-packed, Ready-to-Use
Supplementary Foods to micronutrient powders and
fortified blended mixes of corn, wheat and soya,
we are crafting cutting-edge solutions for people battered
by natural calamities and the ravaging effects of
malnutrition

WFP will help make that happen. La’s infant will get
a head start with special, ready-to-use food
supplements and other special interventions that
bolster WFP’s nutritional arsenal to build healthy
minds and bodies.

All are tailored to meet WFP’s basic premise of the right
foods at the right time — and place. They aim to turn
around alarming rates of malnutrition, a leading
contributor to child and maternal mortality.
In Pakistan, we ramped up production of our popular,
locally produced Wawa Mum and Acha Mum brands
of chickpea-based soft food designed to prevent and treat
child malnutrition. We also launched other countryspecific products, like WFP’s Myanmar Mix, a fortified
Super Cereal produced in Myanmar’s southern city of
Yangon. Like Wawa and Acha, Myanmar Mix uses locally
available raw ingredients, boosts local manufacturing and
suits local tastes.

Amid growing international awareness of nutrition’s
pivotal role in human development, WFP is rapidly
expanding the numbers of children and pregnant and
lactating women who receive our special,
nutritionally enhanced food products. Inadequate
nutrition during the first years of life can irreversibly
cripple mental and physical development, reducing
both educational achievement and earning potential.
On a national scale, malnutrition drives up health
care costs and slows economic prosperity.

Improving mothers’ knowledge and demand for the right
nutritious foods is essential. In Laos, where child
malnutrition is among the world’s highest, a WFPsponsored nutrition programme is teaching mothers
like La the basics about good diets. The programme is
among several examples of our 2011 nutrition initiatives
outlined below.

Our coverage of the critical under-two age group
witnessed a stunning rise last year, reaching nearly
3.2 million children in 2011, compared to 55,000 in
2008 — a nearly 60-fold increase.

19

ALMOND POWER IN AFGHANISTAN
Afghanistan will soon be producing a home-grown
response to one of the world’s highest rates of child
malnutrition, a creamy, fortified nut paste featuring
a key cash crop — almonds.

and vitamin E-rich almonds, it will help to slash pervasive
malnutrition in Afghanistan that causes stunting in six out
of ten children.
The local supplement will be similar to Plumpy’Sup, an
imported fortified food that is currently used to treat child
malnutrition in Afghanistan. “This will be much cheaper
than importing from abroad, so we can distribute more
for less money,” Meaux said.

With funding from the Canadian government, WFP
is partnering with the Geneva-based Global Alliance
for Improved Nutrition (GAIN) to produce the
nutrient-rich paste in Kabul. The goal is to end
imported nutritional supplements and revive local
agriculture and industry ravaged by years of civil
conflict. A few decades ago, Afghanistan was a
leading producer of dried fruits and nuts.
“It’s sort of like peanut butter but tastes of almonds.
It’s really good,” said Project Manager Stephane Meaux
of the paste that will also blend in locally grown
mulberries, soybean and wheat.

WFP is partnering with a Kabul-based entrepreneur
to produce the supplement. We plan to buy nearly
3,000 metric tons of the almond-based product over
an initial two-year period. Manufacturing locally also
means offering a new market for almond, wheat and
mulberry growers who will supply half the needed raw
ingredients — along with soybean farmers enrolled in
WFP’s Purchase for Progress (P4P) initiative.

Almonds are high in protein, lipids and essential
fatty acids. When we roll out the product in 2013, the
paste will expand WFP’s toolkit of nourishing
Ready-to-Use Supplementary Foods. With protein-

The ultimate goal is for Afghanistan to take ownership
of the project. “When the government is ready to take the
lead, everything will be in place — the processing network,
the local producer and the local product,” he said.

20

WFP/Teresa Ha

WFP/Teresa Ha

Amidst the Afghanistan drought, WFP and partners
like Action Contre la Faim distribute Eezee Paste,
a nutritional product that is used to prevent and
help fight malnutrition for children under two.

WFP/Annika Harald

WFP/Bounmee Maokhamphiou

WFP’s nutrition
education
programmes in
Laos help reach
rural villages.

WFP’s Mother and Child
Health and Nutrition
Programme in Laos helps
young children during
the critical first 1,000 days
of life, when a lack of
nutrients can permanently
impair physical and mental
development.

IT TAKES A VILLAGE IN LAOS
It’s time for the sugarcane harvest in northern Laos,
but village chief Phiyer knows what’s most important.

chronically malnourished, thwarting their physical and
mental development for a lifetime.

“For many generations, our people have worked very
hard in the fields. But we are still no better off,” said
Phiyer, who goes by only one name. “It is education that
will help us advance and build better lives in the future.
For two days, it is more important to sit inside and learn
rather than to cut sugarcane,” he tells residents of Ban
Phiyer, a remote, mountain village, who are attending
a refresher course on nutrition.

The trainers share their knowledge and skills with local
communities. The focus is on women and other family
members who take care of small children. Villagers
learn about the dangers of malnutrition and how
cooking foods from local forests, gardens and markets
can maximise nutrition and make their diets more
diverse. The training sessions are tailored to different
ethnic groups and delivered in ethnic languages through
colourful visual materials, role playing, nutrition games
and cooking sessions.

Ban Phiyer is a testing ground for a nutrition education
programme that WFP rolled out in more than
100 villages across Laos in 2011 with support from
AusAID and Yum! Brands. The “teachers” are local
government officials and NGO staff who graduated from
a WFP-designed and -sponsored nutrition training
course. Now, they are on the front lines of this southeast
Asian nation’s struggle to overcome some of the world’s
highest malnutrition rates. It is in villages like Ban
Phiyer where chronic malnutrition is at its worst. In
rural areas of Laos, one in two children under five is

The change is tangible. Six months after their first
training, most villagers can recognise signs of
malnutrition and identify the causes. They feel
confident, they say, in making good nutrition decisions
for themselves and their families. “The training
gradually helps change the individual’s cooking
and eating,” said Phetdavanh Xayasouk, one of
60 graduates of the course.

21

World Health Organization recommends for treating
child malnutrition.
In early 2012, WFP conducted its first taste tests of both
improved mixes in Cambodia. We wanted to find out not
only if Cambodian children liked them, but just how
much they would eat. “They could be really sweet, but
if children stop eating after a couple of spoonfuls,
that’s not interesting for us,” said WFP food
technologist Charles Jelensperger. Based on taste tests
in Cambodia as well as Burkina Faso, the improved
mix will be rolled out in various countries over 2012.
With demand for Super Cereals expected to triple —
to an expected 50,000 metric tons in 2012, compared
to 16,500 last year — WFP is now looking for local
producers that can meet WFP’s strict standards in the
countries where we work. Our goal is to develop
domestic production of the mixes, which will cut costs,
boost local economies and improve the products’
nutritional value.

WFP/ Rein Skullerud

With funding from
ECHO, the
humanitarian arm of
the European Union,
WFP implemented
nutritional support
programmes for more
than 100,000 people
in Turkana, Kenya.

SUPER NUTRITIOUS SUPER CEREALS

WAWA MUM AND ACHA MUM

We call them Super Cereals. They are fortified
corn, wheat or rice-soya blends that help
malnourished children, pregnant and lactating
women and other vulnerable people regain weight
and health. A more powerful variation, Super
Cereals plus, packs soya oil and dried milk into the
mix to treat malnourished children from six
months to two years old.

When record floods tore across Pakistan in 2010,
three-year-old Shahid lost his home. He became
so malnourished he could no longer walk. Like
thousands of other destitute children, Shahid began
receiving small white packets of Wawa Mum, a
nourishing chickpea paste produced by factories in his
own country. When the floodwaters roared back last
year, Wawa Mum was again added to WFP’s relief
basket as we helped hundreds of thousands hit by the
latest devastation, especially among tens of thousands
of conflict-displaced children in Pakistan’s restive
northern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas.

During last year’s Horn of Africa hunger crisis,
WFP rushed Super Cereals to the region to help
drought and famine victims. Super Cereals were
also produced in Myanmar in 2011, where they
feature in a new, local product called Myanmar
Mix that is being distributed to mothers and HIV
patients. The year also saw major research strides
to improve the stability of the “plus” variety and
perfect the Super Cereals recipe — to achieve the
right balance of vitamins and minerals that the

Wawa and sister product Acha Mum are among our
newest additions to a rapidly expanding line of
Ready-to-Use Supplementary Foods, nutritious
pastes that can be eaten directly from their packet.

22

WFP/ Rein Skullerud

At Kenya’s Kakuma Refugee Camp,
over 80,000 refugees from Somalia,
the Sudan and elsewhere depend on
WFP for essential food support, such
as this gift of maize flour from the
government of Germany.

Wawa and Acha are cheaper alternatives that WFP rolled
out just before the 2010 floods. Wrapping a day’s worth of
vitamins and nutrients into a single serving, Wawa
Mum — Pashtun for “that’s good, Mom!” — helps
children suffering from acute malnutrition. Acha Mum
helps prevent malnutrition developing in emergencies.

distributed last year as part of a larger malnutrition
programme, recipients registered 77 percent or higher
recovery rates.
Pakistani manufacturers are now scrambling to meet the
growing demand. With the introduction of new packaging
machines, they more than doubled production of both
pastes in 2011 to reach 1,000 metric tons a month —
enough to assist 300,000 malnourished children on a
monthly basis. In partnership with other organizations,
we are also rolling out local adaptations of Acha Mum in
Bangladesh and Ethiopia.

Both therapeutic foods have delivered positive results.
Malnourished children receiving Ready-to-Use
Supplementary Foods in Pakistan generally recover
within three months of treatment, rather than six months
with other products. In flood-torn areas where Acha was
23

WFP/Juan Montes

Partnering with WFP has
helped the government of
Honduras provide school
meals to more than 1.4 million
children.
24

SECURING PARTNERS

GOVERNMENTS
Similar alliances are boosting school meals around the
globe. In Lesotho and Malawi, for example, WFP has
worked closely with national governments to design
and implement the programmes. Lesotho plans to fully
finance its school meals by 2013.

At Simon Bolivar primary school in southern Honduras,
children sit down to savoury breakfasts of beans, tortillas
and rice made with fortified oil, fresh cheese and locally
grown ingredients.
They are the faces of the future — and of the government’s
commitment to provide school meals to 1.4 million
primary-school youngsters in this central American
nation, where one child in four suffers from chronic
malnutrition.

“I’m a good example of what school meals can achieve,”
said Lesotho Education Minister Dr. Mamphono
Khaketla, who benefited from them as a child. The food
helps Lesotho boost school attendance, she said, because
“children know that at least they will have one decent
meal a day.”

Honduras’ school meals programme, WFP’s third largest
worldwide, highlights WFP’s effective collaboration with
foreign donors, small farmers and community members.
It is just one snapshot of our broad and deepening publicsector partnerships with both national governments and
transnational organizations like the African Union.

WFP also offers governments the technical training
and support needed to design long-term solutions.
That’s the case in Peru, where we teamed up with the
University of Peru to review the country’s food security
and nutrition programmes. Following WFP’s advice, the
government now issues ID cards to beneficiaries in a
bid to reduce fraud and error.

In Honduras, the government finances nearly 80 percent
of its school meals programme. With Canadian and
private-sector support, WFP covers the rest and helps
oversee procurement, logistics and programme
monitoring. The country’s school meals are truly a
national effort, since almost all the food is locally grown
or produced. More than a third of the raw ingredients
are supplied by small farmers enrolled in our Purchase
for Progress (P4P) initiative, supported by the
European Union.

As the Horn of Africa struggled with a devastating
drought last year, WFP and the African Union
launched the African Risk Capacity initiative —
a groundbreaking, multi-partner drought insurance
fund to help governments better respond to extreme
weather patterns.

25

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS

WFP provides funding and technical support for yet
another AU project that gathered momentum in 2011
— a 12-nation study that looks at the economic and
social impact of child under-nutrition in Africa.
Findings will likely empower myriad nutrition
initiatives, including school meals that will nourish
Africa’s next generation of leaders.

With donations reaching nearly $94 million, the private
sector emerged as WFP’s tenth largest contributor in
2011, underscoring a growing commitment by
corporations, foundations and individuals to help the
planet’s poorest.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the Horn of
Africa, where the private sector mobilized more than
$24 million for victims of one of the worst humanitarian
crises in decades. Private companies also funded the
entirety of WFP’s emergency operation in Japan, as we
helped the nation recover from a devastating
earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis.

THE ONLINE AUDIENCE
WFP’s online fundraising netted a record $11.9 million
in 2011, as thousands of new supporters and partners
continued to join our fight against hunger. During
the first two months of 2011 alone, more than
40,000 people donated to our emergency operation
in the Horn of Africa region, following WFP’s call to
action through banner ads and media coverage.

“Our collaboration with the private sector continues
to enrich our work in new and exciting ways, even as
the budgets of traditional donors tighten,” said
Nancy Roman, director of Communications and Private
Partnerships. “We know that hunger is solvable, and with
the knowledge and resources of our partners, the private
sector is helping us to implement hunger-fighting
solutions that help us reach millions more people.”

Social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter,
along with higher web traffic and our outreach to nonEnglish speakers help WFP spread the word. WFP’s
website is now available in 16 languages.
Our partnerships with internet companies like
GroupOn, Tumblr and YouTube help us raise funds
and brand awareness, positioning WFP as one of the
world’s most popular and effective humanitarian
agencies.

The reach and impact of our partnerships extends well
beyond the dollars. Life sciences specialists like Dutch
company DSM and Kemin Industries are improving
the quality and safety of the foods we distribute.

Numbers tell the story. Our global online subscriber
base more than doubled last year to reach 795,000,
compared to 291,000 in 2010 — putting us on a path
to exceed one million in 2012.

The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is funding our
pilot projects in nearly a dozen African countries that
boost the harvests and earnings of small farmers. And as
a drought and food crisis gripped the Horn of Africa,
global logistics company TNT donated an airlift of
nutrient-packed food product Plumpy’Sup, enough
to feed almost 16,500 malnourished children for
a month.

“WFP, for such a large organization, seems to find a
way to connect with its supporters and make each one
of us feel important,” said one Russian donor,
Katerina, in an email.

Our work with corporations featured in this year’s report
— Korea’s LG Electronics, China’s Tencent and U.S.headquartered PepsiCo — illustrates the new directions
our private-sector partnerships are taking.

26

DSM/Ingrid Vanegmond

Assuring the quality and safety of
the food we deliver is a WFP priority.
In Mombasa, Kenya, volunteers from
private partner DSM assess the
quality of the salt production
process at a potential salt supplier.

27

WFP/Stephanie Savariaud

Nairobi schoolchildren
benefit from a WFP school
meals programme funded
by WFP’s first Asian
corporate partner, LG
Electronics.

28

LG ELECTRONICS

CELEBRITY PERFORMERS

Trees dot the hilly scrubland around Wukro in
northern Ethiopia, casting a splash of green in a
country devastated by drought. The saplings are part
of a WFP food-for-work project that is returning
barren, rocky soil into the rich, productive land
that older residents remember.

As WFP’s first Ambassadors Against Hunger for the
European Union, Malian singing duo Amadou and
Mariam use their powerful voices to raise public
awareness in Europe about the scourge of global hunger
and our vital partnership with the EU. As our secondlargest donor — and leading cash contributor in 2011 —
the EU is partnering with WFP to attain the
UN Millennium Development Goals through its
humanitarian and development mandates. Throughout
last year, Amadou and Mariam mobilized and energised
listeners. At a June 2011 concert in Rome, the duo sang
“Labendela,” an ode to children’s future which they
dedicated to the fight against hunger.

The tree-planting initiative offers just one example
of an ambitious “Partnership of Hope” between WFP
and Korean company LG Electronics (LGE) to tackle
poverty, hunger and climate change at the grassroots.
Our partnership with LGE enables WFP to tackle
hunger better by harnessing the power of employees,
customers and cutting-edge technology.
WFP/Rein Skullerud

Launched in 2009 in Ethiopia and Kenya, our
collaboration expanded last year to include Bangladesh
and Cambodia. So far, LGE has committed nearly
$6 million for projects ranging from school meals
and health education to flood mitigation and incomegenerating activities.
In Kenya, LGE supports WFP school meals targeting
more than 8,000 children in impoverished Nairobi
neighbourhoods. LGE also funds WFP food-for-work
and food-for-asset programmes to help communities
improve farming, infrastructure and climate-change
mitigation strategies in Bangladesh’s southwestern
Barisal region and Cambodia’s southeastern Prey Veng
province.
Through employee fundraising and public awareness
campaigns, LGE is also challenging its staff and
customers to invest personally in the fight against
hunger. In October, the company rolled out a new
application for its line of Smart TVs featuring WFP’s
“WeFeedback” online fundraising campaign. The social
media tool fosters direct engagement with global efforts
to meet the first UN Millennium Development Goal —
eradicating extreme poverty and hunger.

29

WORKING WITH PEPSICO AND THE ETHIOPIAN
GOVERNMENT
Packed with protein, iron and calcium, chickpeas
have long been a dietary staple in Ethiopia. One of
the world’s leading producers of the legume, this East
African nation eats its chickpeas fried or cooked into
thick stews to be scooped up with injera, the
traditional spongy bread.

Realized in collaboration with local partners, the
initiative will train small farmers in central and northern
Ethiopia to produce higher-yielding chickpea crops
through better seeds and growing practices. Their
harvests will provide the raw ingredients for the
supplement’s Ethiopian manufacturers; in the process,
PepsiCo is helping to build the manufacturers’
processing capacity.

But Ethiopian children will soon eat them in another
form; as a nutrient-rich, ready-to-eat meal
supplement, thanks to a 2011 partnership between
WFP, the PepsiCo Foundation and the U.S. Agency
for International Development.

“By having it manufactured locally, we hope to cut
costs and reduce the product’s delivery time in case of
an emergency,” Project Manager Melanie Jacq said.
“It’s also part of building the country’s capacity, since
we are supporting manufacturers in managing food
safety and quality.”

The chickpea project aims to boost the diets of
an initial 40,000 malnourished children under five,
offering a powerful new weapon against malnutrition,
a leading cause of child mortality. The project is a
model that could be scaled across the greater Horn
of Africa.

Besides being good for the body, chickpeas are also
good for the soil. Participating farmers are rotating
in other crops like wheat, teff and barley, maximising
the output on their tiny plots.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

WFP’s partnership with PepsiCo, the Ethiopian government and
USAID aims to develop a chickpea-based nutrition supplement
in Ethiopia, creating greater opportunities for strong, healthy
children like these in Atsbi Womberta.
30

WFP/Shen Yuanyuan

The Chinese Ambassador
to Cambodia helps distribute
take-home rations in Cambodia’s
Siem Reap province, where WFP
provided rations to children in
grades 4 to 6. School meals are a
longstanding staple of WFP
operations. Thanks to a new
collaboration with one of the
world’s largest internet
companies, Tencent, breakfasts
at some schools are funded by
Chinese internet users, or
“netizens,” thousands of miles
away. Tencent made an initial
donation to support school
meals for thousands of children
in Cambodia and China, then
reached out to its massive online
community through an internet
fundraising campaign.

31

WFP/Aboubacar Guindo

WFP and the government of
Brazil have launched the Centre
of Excellence Against Hunger,
which helps countries expand
school meal programmes to
improve the food security of
children like these.
32

EXPANDING OUR REACH

BRAZIL
There are powerful arguments for school meals beyond
simply filling young stomachs. They help children
develop healthy eating habits and improve their
nutrition. They are also an incentive for children
to remain in schools, giving girls in particular access
to education they may not otherwise have. And they

Acclaimed for its rich cultural and ecological diversity,
Brazil is gaining international kudos for another asset,
a decade-old development drive known as Fome Zero
or “Zero Hunger” that has lifted nearly 25 million
Brazilians out of poverty.

WFP/Illuminati Fimes/Mariana Raphael

Now, Latin America’s largest nation is sharing its
experience with other developing countries through
WFP’s new Centre of Excellence Against Hunger.
Launched in November 2011 in capital Brasilia, the centre
aims to leverage Brazil’s success to other nations seeking
to end hunger and malnutrition — and in the process
become a global reference point on school meals,
nutrition and food security.
The centre began by concentrating on school meals,
tapping WFP’s longstanding expertise, as well as Brazil’s
own model, which reaches 47 million children. It focuses
on an initial 18 countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the Caribbean, hosting study tours showing how Brazil’s
network of local authorities, small farmers, teachers, cooks
and students collectively make school meals possible.

A Brazilian boy waits
for his daytime meal at
school, perhaps the
only one he will
receive this day.

“They will come to Brazil, see the Brazilian experience
and then we will plan together programs in these
countries against hunger,” said the centre’s head,
Daniel Balaban, who previously helped oversee Brazil’s
school meals initiative.
33

build community ties, connecting children, parents,
teachers and producers.

and Tanzania. In the coming years, Korea plans to
further expand the programme, which helps rural
communities develop infrastructure and climate-change
mitigation strategies.

Zalia Toure, director of Mali’s National Centre for School
Canteens, took these lessons to heart during a December
visit to community schools in the eastern state of Bahia.
“The government invests the maximum for Brazil’s
children to go and study,” Toure said. “Brazil has linked
school to life — meaning to agriculture.” Mali now plans
to host a series of workshops in 2012 on implementing
its own school meals programme, in a country where
malnutrition is a leading cause of death.

Closer to home, Korean lawmakers are supporting
WFP through a “WFP Forum” at the country’s National
Assembly, the second only of its kind, after Japan. And
our Ambassador Against Hunger, Korean movie star
Jan Dong Gun, invested both time and money in WFP’s
humanitarian work last year. The Seoul office is also
forging close ties with Korea’s private sector, building
on our development partnership with international
giant LG Electronics.

“The most important thing we see from these missions
from other African countries is they have commitment,”
Balaban said. “When they see the Brazilian experience,
they think they’re looking in a mirror – and they know
they can do it.”

SOUTH SUDAN
The world’s newest country was born on 9 July, 2011,
and with it our newest operation: WFP South Sudan.
Overnight, the cluster of off-white containers in WFP’s
Juba compound turned from “sub-office”, to a proper
“country office” in its own right.

REPUBLIC OF KOREA
September 2011 marked a new direction in WFP’s
Asia operations, as we opened our first office in Seoul,
the Republic of Korea, with a single team focused on
government relations and private-sector fundraising.

WFP’s team in South Sudan faced the daunting task
of building a new operation in a fledgling country where
decades of civil war had left enormous development
challenges, little or no infrastructure, some of the worst
socioeconomic indicators in the world, and a raft
of humanitarian emergencies.

“Such an integrated office is probably the future way
to do effective and enhanced fundraising,” said regional
representative Mohamed Saleheen.
The office underscores Korea’s remarkable
transformation from a food aid recipient just a
generation ago to a thriving economy that serves as
inspiration for others. By 2015, Korea plans to triple
its development assistance, providing WFP with new
opportunities for collaboration.

WFP’s existing Republic of Sudan emergency operation
continued to cover both countries during an interim
period while we finalised new operations. All of WFP’s
existing resources — food, equipment, vehicles, staff
and budgets — would now be divided.
“Before I arrived in Juba I knew that it was going to be
a tremendous challenge,” said WFP’s new country
director, Chris Nikoi. “But I also realized that WFP was
in a unique position to help this young nation achieve
food security through projects that let communities
develop their infrastructure, or help families earn
a better living.”

Last May, WFP forged a new strategic partnership that
aims to export the success of Korea’s “New Village”
movement, which lifted millions out of poverty and
hunger during the 1970s and ‘80s. So far, we have rolled
out “Food for New Villages” pilot projects in Nepal and
Rwanda, and Korea will launch others in Bangladesh
34

WFP/Challiss McDonough

WFP is providing emergency assistance to hungry
and conflict-affected people in South Sudan, where
grain prices doubled or tripled, partly because the
border between Sudan and South Sudan has been
largely closed. Here, a trader scoops sorghum in a
market in Doleib Hill, Upper Nile State.

It quickly became clear that South Sudan’s humanitarian
needs would be greater than expected — with root causes
every bit as complicated as a nation’s birth implies. Food
security remained precarious. Erratic rainfall caused the
staple sorghum crop to fail. Market prices of basic foods
and fuel were troublingly high. And the border between
Sudan and South Sudan largely remained closed,
allowing only sporadic passage of WFP commodities.

and Blue Nile states and people displaced by conflict in
the disputed Abyei area. “Back home I was a farmer —
I had a garden with dura, maize and okra,” said
Achok Ajou Cyer, who fled her home in Abyei after
violence erupted. “Without my garden I have nothing.”
WFP provided food assistance to South Sudan as the
country worked not just to meet the immediate
humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable, but also to
expanding communities’ resilience in the medium-term,
so the vicious cycle of hunger and violence can be broken
for good.

South Sudan also struggled with massive population
flows; totalling nearly 500,000, they included returnees
from the north, refugees from Sudan’s South Kordofan
35

IN 2011, WFP DELIVERED
3.6 MILLION METRIC TONS OF FOOD ASSISTANCE
TO 99.1 MILLION PEOPLE
IN 75 COUNTRIES
BENEFICIARIES INCLUDED:
82.9 million women and children
15.1 million internally displaced people
2.6 million refugees
63.2 million children were assisted in WFP operations
23.2 million schoolchildren received school meals
and/or take-home rations
11.1 million malnourished children received special nutritional support
2.3 million people affected by HIV and AIDS received WFP support
4.4 million people were assisted through cash
and vouchers programmes
21.3 million people received WFP food as an incentive
to build assets, attend training, strengthen resilience
to shocks and preserve livelihoods

36

WFP/Hukomat Khan

A convoy of 18 WFP vehicles braved mountain
passes, precarious road conditions, rain and
mud for nearly a week to deliver food to
schools in remote villages in central
Afghanistan that had been cut off during the
harsh winter. The trucks were donated by the
government of Japan more than 20 years ago,
and still help WFP serve the hungry in
Afghanistan.

To stay informed via email updates, sign up at wfp.org/join

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships
Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-0665131 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
Email: wfpinfo@wfp.org

Printed by Artigrafiche Tilligraf – Rome, Italy – July 2012

To support our work, please go to wfp.org/donate

