THE YEAR IN REVIEW, 2012
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME

WFP uses barges to move vital food supplies from the
town of Mopti into the northern regions of Mali, as
waterways are the fastest and safest way to enter areas
controlled by armed groups.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Contents
3

From the executive Director

5

2012 in RevieW

9

ResPonDinG to CRises
Syria
Sahel
Democratic Republic of Congo
Yemen
Myanmar

19

CHAnGinG Lives
School Meals
Winning the Battle Against Stunting

23

BUiLDinG ResiLienCe
P4P: A Pilot Programme Goes Mainstream
Focus on Bangladesh

27

innovAtinG
Empowering Local Communities: Cash and Vouchers
Forward Purchasing: Planning to Avoid the Worst
Molly's World
WFP Launches Ramadan Campaign
After the Oceans, Conquering Hunger

33

WoRKinG WitH otHeRs: DonoRs AnD
PARtneRs
Strategic Partnerships Come of Age
South-South: Focus on African Union and Pakistan
Australia, Norway Give WFP High Marks for
Effectiveness
WFP and Danida: 50 Years On
Private Partners
Visibility: Crystal Palace

40

WFP in numbers 2012

All figures in this document are in US dollars

Cover: Eight-year-old Nora from Deraa, Syria, peers from her new
temporary home, a tent in a refugee transit centre in Jordan. WFP/Abeer Etefa
Produced by the Graphic Design and Publishing Unit, with text written by Elizabeth Bryant

2

WFP/Abeer Etefa

FROM EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ERTHARIN COUSIN

Dear Supporters,

I have just completed my first year directing the UN’s World Food Programme, and I am proud to share
some of our accomplishments in the pages that follow. From Bangladesh to Niger to Syria, WFP's
committed staff, donors and partners made an enormous difference in lives around the world in 2012.

Working against tremendous challenges in a conflict setting, we brought life-saving food to Syrians
fleeing violence. In the drought-stricken Sahel region of Africa, WFP equipped communities with the
capacity to be more resilient to future shocks. Using innovative cash and voucher programmes, we
increased access to food in many places, like Tanzania.

In the process, WFP assisted more than 97 million people across 80 countries in 2012. Throughout our
work, we continue to adapt our direct food assistance, nutrition programmes, and safety nets in ways
that make access to food more immediate and more sustainable.
But 100 million children in developing countries are still underweight, 66 million primary school-age
children still attend classes hungry across the developing world, and too many women do not receive
enough food to lead productive lives or care for their families. We have a lot more work to do to before
we end hunger for all people – and, with your help, we are making that happen.

Together we can meet the zero hunger challenge!

Left: executive Director ertharin Cousin visits Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan,
where WFP provides food assistance to syrian refugees.

3

WFP/Rein Skullerud

During the lean season, WFP provides food and cash to
the hungry in food-insecure parts of Burkina Faso, such as
these women in sebba.

4

2012 IN REVIEW

particularly grim note. A civil conflict deepened in Syria,
displacing hundreds of thousands of people and
battering the country's economic fabric. Our food
distributions kept pace with the deteriorating situation,
reaching 1.5 million people inside Syria by the year's
end, along with 300,000 refugees in neighbouring
countries — numbers that rose further in 2013.

From the scorched fields of West Africa's Sahel region to
the tin shacks in Myanmar's Rakhine state, 2012 brought
stories of adversity and loss from many corners of the
globe. But last year also wove another, more hopeful
narrative for the millions of people the United Nations
World Food Programme assists.
We saw a mother's joy in Haiti as her young son
recovered from acute malnourishment; the pride of
women farmers and entrepreneurs in El Salvador and
Bangladesh; the resourcefulness of villagers in Niger
who grew vegetables during a punishing drought.

A continent away, we averted a catastrophe of another
nature, as a drought in Africa's Sahel threatened to
become a major crisis. WFP and other humanitarian
partners worked alongside affected governments in eight
West African countries to develop a rapid,
comprehensive and hard-hitting response. Timing was
key. By quickly identifying, buying and moving into
place massive quantities of food through our “forward
purchasing” mechanism, WFP was better prepared to
assist more than five million people in the region.
Throughout the year, we worked closely with
communities in developing home-grown ways to
anticipate and resist droughts in a region projected to
grow ever drier.

These are some of the payoffs from the many
partnerships WFP has built with governments,
humanitarian agencies, private companies and the
communities we work with.

Altogether, WFP assisted more than 97 million people
across 80 countries in 2012. Women and children were
by far the biggest beneficiaries, comprising 85 percent of
the total. And while traditional food distributions still
account for the bulk of our assistance, WFP 's vouchers
for food and cash reached more than six million people
in 2012, underscoring their growing importance in
building local economies and giving choice and dignity
to the poor.

As the months went by, we saw this resiliency take root
in ways big and small. In the village of Goure Guinde,
Niger, residents expanded their irrigated vegetable
gardens, thanks to a WFP-supported pond-dredging
project. In Burkina Faso, farmers enrolled in a WFP
project worked to rehabilitate depleted soils.

In two regions of the world, the year began on a

5

In countries like Bhutan, Iraq, Kenya and Liberia, WFP
solidified collaborations with governments that are
taking increasing ownership of national school meals
programmes. And we strengthened alliances with donors
such as Norway through strategic partnerships that
guarantee WFP reliable and flexible funding over the
longer term.

WFP also broadened our "digital food assistance" to
reach new countries and communities. We launched
mobile-phone cash transfer programmes in Malawi, Mali
and Tanzania, and electronic food cards for Syrian
refugees in Turkey. These initiatives also boosted local
economies and, in the case of Tanzania, encouraged
better nutritional practices.

Sometimes there is no way to prepare for disasters or
soften their blow. The year ended with ever more Syrians
grieving their dead, with many living on the edge in
Yemen, and with tens of thousands of displaced people
in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and
Myanmar's western Rakhine state longing for home.

Donors, too, are shifting to new forms of support.
Roughly one-fifth of the US government's total
contribution to WFP in 2012 came in the form of cash,
improving the flexibility and timeliness of our response.

The year was also about building connections. After we
gave Nairobi teenager Molly Atieno a small video
camera, she shared her life in one of Africa's largest
slums with tens of thousands of internet viewers. We
broadened our outreach through a new partnership with
financial services giant MasterCard and our first-ever
Ramadan fundraising campaign.
WFP/Laure Chadraoui

In these countries and elsewhere, WFP is helping them
live through the hard times until better ones arrive.

in Kilis camp, turkey, syrian refugees
use e-vouchers from WFP and the
turkish Red Crescent society to buy
fresh food from supermarkets.

6

WFP/Abeer Etefa

through partners like the syrian Arab Red Crescent and the
el Bir Association for Charity, WFP provides food assistance
in Homs, syria, to people sheltering in mosques, churches,
schools and the homes of friends and relatives.

7

WFP/Abeer Etefa

Using WFP dry rations, local communities
provide cooked meals to people displaced
from their homes in Homs, syria.
8

RESPONDING TO CRISES

sYRiA

WFP/Jonathan Dumont

The year 2012 left a bloody footprint across Syria,
closing with little hope for a speedy end to the violence
as it began. By March 2013, the country had marked two
years of civil conflict that has killed tens of thousands of
people and left more than one million refugees.
Those refugees include widow Feryal, who fled to
Jordan's Zaatari camp with her two small children after
her husband was killed by rocket fire. The fighting also
displaced close to four million Syrians inside their
country — people like 27-year-old Souad, now living
without water or electricity in the northeastern city of
Qamishly.

At Zaatari refugee camp, hot meals of WFP-provided
rice, bulgur wheat and pulses, along with daily bread
distributions, took the edge off a bitter winter. But they
cannot take away Feryal's pain. She fled the Syrian city
of Daraa after her husband was killed.

In most cases, WFP assistance is their only weapon
against hunger, as the conflict continues to destroy
Syria's economic fabric, triggering soaring
unemployment along with food and fuel prices. In early
2013, we ramped up our food distributions to reach 2.5
million people in both government and opposition-held
areas of Syria, working with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and other NGOs.

"We walked in fear in the heart of the night, knowing
that some people died taking the very same route," she
says, recalling the dangerous, unpaved road leading to
Jordan. Feryal's mother is also at the camp, but her
brother died in the clashes. "He was brought home in
pieces," she says. Today, the family is living on hope that
the conflict ends so they can go back home.

"We are determined to help the Syrian people, stand by
them and make sure that none of them goes hungry,"
says Muhannad Hani, WFP's Regional Emergency
Coordinator for the Syria crisis.

9

WFP/Anthony Chase-Lim

So is Souad, who fled heavy shelling that pounded the
governorate of Deir Ezzor. "We had a good life. My
husband was making good money working in a bakery,"
Souad says. Home today is many kilometres away, in an
empty, half-finished building with no doors or windows.
Like Feryal's, her family also receives monthly WFP
rations. "We're physically safe here, but I feel as if my
spirit is gone," says Souad, who looks far older than her
27 years.

But at refugee camps in neighbouring Iraq, Egypt,
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, WFP is increasingly
moving to vouchers and electronic food cards. Not only
do they allow Syrians to buy the food they want and
need, but also they boost local economies.

PHiLiPPines
In the Philippines' flood-prone municipality of
Juban, village official Antonio dela Cruz has a
better understanding of how to save lives during
disasters, thanks to WFP-sponsored search and
rescue training. These new skills will certainly be
tested. In his village of Binanuahan, floods have
historically risen as high as 20 feet, with currents
powerful enough to wash away houses.

The year ahead is fraught with challenges. With security
around Syria rapidly deteriorating, WFP cannot always
reach those who need assistance. Donations have failed
to keep pace with the escalating crisis. As of April 2013,
WFP faced a severe funding shortfall, threatening our
efforts to reach 3.5 million people inside and outside
Syria who desperately need our assistance.

WFP has also provided communities with
motorized rubber boats for their rescue
operations, replacing small, wooden craft that
were difficult to manoeuvre in strong currents.
“Now, we can efficiently evacuate people in times
of emergencies and ensure the safety of our
community members,” dela Cruz says.

sAHeL

Gambian farmer Fatou Gaye began 2012 hungry. Patchy
and late rains withered her groundnut harvest, leaving
husks only good enough for her livestock. "In the
morning, we left hungry children behind at home to go
in search of daily sustenance," says Gaye, remembering
days scraping by doing odd jobs and burning wood to
make charcoal.

Juban is one example of where WFP
complements government efforts to implement its
disaster preparedness and response programme
in provinces prone to natural calamities. We also
work closely with NGOs, UN partners and the
academic community to strengthen local capacity.
Over the next two years, we plan to grow our
programme both geographically and in scope, by
emphasizing issues like climate change
adaptation and public-private collaborations.

For the third time in less than a decade, drought seared
the Sahel, a belt of semi-arid grassland spanning Africa
from the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea. In a region that
is experiencing deepening cycles of drought, last year's
was particularly devastating.

Failed harvests, high food prices, shrinking remittances
from migrant workers and conflict in Mali created a
lethal cocktail that left millions of people perched on the

edge of catastrophe. "We saw desperation, particularly in
Niger — people who would wake up in the morning with
literally not a grain of food in the house, and absolutely
10

no idea of where the next meal would come from" says
Niger Country Director Denise Brown. Last May, the
UN's top relief official, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos, called on the
humanitarian community to create a joint and
comprehensive response to avert a catastrophe.

peas, fortified cereal and cooking oil over the lean
season.

The situation was also dire in neighbouring Senegal.
Failed harvests left rural granaries dry months before
the normal lean season. In desperation, people headed
to the bush, hunting for wild fruits and other plants to
feed their families. "We boiled dried leaves in water to
make them into a sauce," recalls 60-year-old Cisao
Danso, from Neteboulou commune in central Senegal.
"Normally, we would use them to feed our animals."

And we did. After governments in the Sahel region
developed national action plans, WFP partnered with
other agencies to help them realize them. Our food
assistance, cash and vouchers helped more than five
million people in eight West African countries endure
the drought and develop new ways to cope with future
weather disasters.

But soon after, Danso and his family were eating rice.
The reason: in hundreds of villages like Neteboulou,
WFP restocked cereal banks — community warehouses
where farmers can store grain from their harvests and
borrow from during hard times.

"It is not a matter of ‘if' there will be (another) drought,
but 'when,'" says Executive Director Ertharin Cousin,
who this year visited one of the hardest hit countries,
Burkina Faso, to see our response.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

In tiny Gambia, Fatou Gay counted among more than
200,000 people who received WFP distributions of rice,

WFP/Rein Skullerud

The restocking demonstrates how WFP acts quickly and
early. Months before the crisis, we purchased hundreds
of thousands of metric tons of food from local and
overseas markets and pre-positioned them in the most

Plumpy’Sup helps prevent
malnutrition among the
hungry, such as this girl in
Ambidedi, Mali.

With support from the European Union,
WFP partner Orange Mali trains women to
receive cash transfers by phone.

11

Our programmes not only helped people eat during the
lean season, but in some cases fuelled local economies.
In Niger's northwestern town of Tillaberi, a new WFP
mobile cash programme allowed residents like Fatima
Mamaudou to buy food in local markets. "This is what
my family needs," she says of the monthly distributions
that amounted to about $65.

A woman prepares a mid-day meal with food
from WFP in Mugunga3 camp on the outskirts
of Goma, DRC.

WFP/Djaounsede Pardon

vulnerable locations. We also launched food- and cashfor-work programmes ahead of and during the drought
to buffer its effects and build local resilience. Fearing a
spike in already high regional malnutrition rates, WFP
offered special nutrition treatment and prevention
activities that reached close to 1.5 million children and
women.

DeMoCRAtiC RePUBLiC oF ConGo

In Mali, where an armed uprising in the north triggered
massive displacements, WFP delivered food assistance
to 1.2 million people, including Malian refugees in
neighbouring countries. Our food supported uprooted
fisher folk, who crossed the Niger River in long, narrow
boats to receive WFP rations in the central town of
Mopti. "I know how important the WFP food is for my
new baby," said one heavily pregnant mother,
Rokiyatou, who fled her home near Timbuktu after
armed groups beat and detained her husband. "This food
assistance is my only hope."

Josiane Matchirucha shouted and danced as she
welcomed the first WFP trucks loaded with maize meal
as they rolled into Cifunzi, a village in Democratic
Republic of Congo's South Kivu province. "My children
will enjoy maize fufu today," says the mother of nine,
referring to the thick balls of dough that are a staple in
this region. But 45-year-old Matchirucha has plenty of
other mouths to feed; she is sheltering five conflictdisplaced families under her roof.

Last April's long drive on muddy roads to reach her
remote village was one of many hazardous journeys our
truck drivers braved in 2012, as we provided food
assistance to hundreds of thousands of people swept up
in the latest bout of violence rolling across eastern DRC.

We also reached drought-hit areas in the south, rolling
out the country's first cash transfer programme to help
farmers prepare for the planting season. "I will go
straight to the market and buy millet and rice," said
82-year-old Gori Naman, as he picked up his money,
worth about $50, for his family of seven.

Some 2.6 million people have been displaced in eastern
Congo since 2009, according to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Most are
in North and South Kivu and in northern Katanga
provinces, where an array of armed groups has long
fought for power and economic control over the mineralrich land.

WFP plans to assist 5.5 million people in the region this
year, pairing our emergency response with support for
longer-term initiatives like education and development.
"We cannot stop," Executive Director Cousin says,
"because resilience building is not a one-year activity.
We must continue to work together."

Last year was particularly grim for the restive region.
Two major outbreaks of fighting, in April and November,
pitted the M23 rebel group against government forces

12

and an array of militia groups. Once again, WFP reached
out to the most vulnerable civilians, providing food
assistance to some 3.6 million people, including 850,000
internally displaced people in DRC's five eastern
provinces.

soUtH sUDAn AiRDRoPs

The ramp of an Ilyushin Il-76 cargo plane snaps
open above South Sudan's remote Yida refugee
camp. Suddenly, hundreds of white bags of
sorghum are hurtling down, landing with a thunk
on a mud airstrip.

Our rations of maize meal, oil, sugar and pulses not only
fed those fleeing the fighting, but also villagers who
sheltered them like Matchirucha. WFP also distributed
food to tens of thousands of Congolese refugees — many
of them recent arrivals — in camps and transit centres in
Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda.

The airdrop over Yida was among dozens WFP
conducted between August and November 2012
to reach hungry refugees in the country's Unity
and Upper Nile states during the rainy season.
"This was a vital operation which enabled us to
provide much-needed assistance to people who
could not be reached otherwise, because roads
were impassible," says South Sudan Country
Director Chris Nikoi.

And when the M23 marched into North Kivu's capital of
Goma in November, we took on new responsibilities,
flying some humanitarian workers to safety via the WFPoperated United Nations Humanitarian Air Service. We
sheltered hundreds of others — including our own staff
— in WFP's area office.

Airdrops are expensive. But when no alternatives
exist, they allow us to help desperate people in
some of the most inaccessible corners of the
globe.

Today, we are looking beyond the conflict, as we help
people re-stitch their lives. "It's incredibly important to
get people home," says American philanthropist Howard
G. Buffett, who visited WFP's operations around Goma
in December. "And the only way to get them home is
with some food support."

With support from donors like Canada and the
US, we dropped more than 5,000 metric tons of
food in refugee settlements in both states during
that period — reaching 175,000 people who had
fled flighting in neighbouring Sudan.

In early 2013, WFP began distributing food rations to
80,000 returnees in North Kivu's Rutshuru territory,
thanks to a $1 million contribution from The Howard G.
Buffett Foundation, one of several donors supporting
our operations there.
WFP's food assistance in Rutshuru is being combined
with seeds and farming equipment from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
and other partners to help residents of this lush,
agricultural region get back on their feet.

WFP/George Fominyen

Among them: 50-year-old Ernest Barimeya, who
returned from five months in a camp for displaced
people to find his home and fields stripped bare by
looters.
13

And in a worrying sign for Yemen's future, nearly half of
all children under five, or about two million young
Yemenis, are stunted, or chronically malnourished.
Another one million are acutely malnourished.

But as he rolls up his pants and treks up a hill near his
village one recent morning, Barimeya is thinking about
farming again. "This light rain in the morning means the
planting season has started," he says.

“The crisis in Yemen is of such a scale that it has
demanded that we deploy all the resources we can
muster,” says Country Director Lubna Alaman. “We
managed to achieve some small victories in 2012, such
as lowering the percentage of severely food-insecure
households from 31 to 27 percent. But we still have a
long way to go before we can claim any lasting victories
in this struggle.”

YeMen

High in the hills of western Yemen, Fatima Mohamed Al
Jammadi knows she will eat this month. That is no small
feat. The WFP food she has come to fetch at a village
primary school — a big bag of wheat and a plastic jug of
vegetable oil — is hard to come by these days.
"There is no work, so there is no money," says the
30-year-old mother of five, wrapped head to foot in a
traditional black abaya and face-covering niqab. Her
husband, a farm worker, has been out of a job for
months. "We live day by day," she says.

To keep pace with the deteriorating situation, WFP more
than tripled the numbers of people receiving our
"emergency safety net" of food rations, from an initial
1.2 million to 4 million by the year's end. Altogether,
WFP food distributions reached nearly five million
Yemenis last year in some of the country's poorest
regions. With support from donors like Japan, we plan
to reach as many in 2013 as well.

The poorest country in the Arab world, Yemen faced a
particularly brutal year in 2012. A lethal mix of armed
conflict, political turmoil and high food and fuel prices
fed a deepening humanitarian crisis in this country of
rugged mountains, humid plains and vast stretches of
desert. Today, more than 10 million people — almost
half the country's population — are either hungry or on
the brink.

They include more than half-a-million displaced people
like Mariam Ali, who fled the conflict-torn governorate
of Saada three years ago. Today, Ali lives near a desolate,
wind-swept tent camp that is packed with people. "Our
homes are destroyed," she says. "There are no jobs, no
money. The land mines are everywhere."

A family in Yemen’s makeshift
Al-Mazraq camp prepares its
meal with food from WFP.

Our 2012 distributions also reached hundreds of
thousands of school girls and their families, along with
refugees from the Horn of Africa. In a bid to curb soaring
malnutrition rates, we teamed up with UNICEF and
other partners to distribute highly-enriched food
products to 675,000 young mothers and children.

WFP/Abeer Etefa

Yemen faces the same grim mix of problems in 2013,
even as the country moves with faltering steps toward a
political resolution of its complex difficulties. For Fatima
Al Jammadi and others living on the edge, that means
bringing home more bags of WFP wheat to get through
the year.
14

UnHAs: PRoviDinG A GAteWAY to
tHe WoRLD’s Most vULneRABLe
PoPULAtions

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Reaching some of the world's most destitute and
conflict-weary people in vast, forested Democratic
Republic of Congo — where roads and other
infrastructure are sketchy or non-existent — is a
major feat. For many humanitarian workers, the
answer lies in the skies: the WFP-run United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS).

In 2012 alone, UNHAS flew roughly 370,000 aid
workers, government officials and UN staff — along
with 1,100 metric tons of cargo — across 13 countries,
including Mauritania, Somalia and Yemen.

In November, as thousands fled a rebel advance on
the eastern DRC town of Goma, UNHAS provided
another essential service. Working around the clock,
our crew flew aid workers to safety, thanks to a yearold emergency response initiative funded by the
European Commission's humanitarian office, ECHO.

UNHAS operations are confronted with funding
challenges, but WFP continues to engage existing and
new donors. Because UNHAS is a lifeline for many,
sustaining its operations is crucial for the entire
humanitarian community.

"We provide access to the most remote places in the
world when an emergency is going on," says WFP
Chief of Aviation Cesar Arroyo. "We're around when
there are no other ways to reach people in need."

"WFP was able to mount a rapid response and scale up
distributions quickly, thanks in large part to having
established a logistics hub in the region prior to the
outbreak of violence," says Country Director Carlos
Veloso.

MYAnMAR
They huddled in squalid camps, boats, islands and
hilltops — tens of thousands of people uprooted last year
when long-simmering ethnic tensions boiled over in
Myanmar's western Rakhine state.

For many, like 55-year-old Daw Thin Mya, the rations
offered a lone ray of hope. "I used to have electricity,
running water, everything — even a television with a
satellite," says the once-successful businesswoman and
mother of four who now shares a tin shack with nine
families. When the clashes neared her home in Rakhine's
capital Sittwe, Mya fled to Thet Kae Pyin, a 20-minute
drive away. Her 23-year-old son died in the unrest. "I
don't even know if my home is still there," she says.

Rolling waves of violence in June and October drove
largely Muslim minority Rohingyas but also nonMuslims from their homes. The first displacements
coincided with the rainy season, sharpening the misery.

Often using small wooden boats — the most practical
way to reach remote areas — WFP distributed rations of
rice, pulses, oil and salt to the most destitute, along with
nutrient-packed blended food to prevent malnutrition.
By year's end, our food reached more than 110,000
people, a number that swelled to 125,000 in early 2013.
15

The violence has touched every community in one of
Myanmar's poorest regions. "I can't imagine going home
— everything is burnt. I have nothing left," says 63-yearold Ma Phyu, who found refuge in a camp for displaced
people in Sittwe.

2013, but is expected to extend beyond this date. "While
WFP will continue to assist the displaced, we will also
have to find a way to continue the important work we
were already doing to ensure the poorest have nutritious
food on the family table," Veloso says.

WFP/Phil McKinney

WFP distributes rice during the
2012 floods in Myanmar, where
waters reached their highest levels
since 2004.

WFP/Phil McKinney

As the year drew to a close, WFP looked ahead, drafting
a food assistance operation that initially lasts until June

in tHe Line oF FiRe: A WFP stAFFeR ReCALLs KiDnAPPinG
A ten-minute drive changed Patrick Noonan's life
forever. As the WFP logistics officer and his driver
rounded a corner near his office in South Darfur,
Sudan, six armed men cut off their path and hustled
them into a waiting pickup.

WFP staff receive mandatory UN security training,
and we take every precaution to stay safe in our
travels. But sometimes danger cannot be avoided.

Noonan's own experience veered from being kindly
treated at first to being chained naked for more than
a month, living on oranges and sometimes fearing
death. Kidnappers released his driver, Ahmed Muez,
hours after the kidnapping.

"It was always at the back of my mind that one day I
could or would be kidnapped," Noonan says. He was
right. Noonan spent nearly three months in captivity
in 2012, one of hundreds of humanitarian workers
who have risked their lives to do their job. Last year
alone, roughly 187 aid workers were killed,
kidnapped or faced other forms of attack, according
to The Aid Worker Security Database.

In late May, Noonan was finally freed as well. The
time at that moment — 2:15 a.m. — "will stay with me
as long as I live," Noonan says.

16

in 2012, WFP WAs PRoUD to
seRve As GLoBAL LeAD oF seveRAL
HUMAnitARiAn CLUsteRs:
• The Emergency Telecommunications Cluster
• The Logistics Cluster
• The Food Security Cluster ( jointly led with FAO)

17

WFP/Phil McKinney

these bags of rice seed from WFP
are being docked under the eaves
of a house in thabaung, Myanmar.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

At the valley view Academy in nairobi,
Kenya, a daily meal from WFP helps keep
children in school, especially girls.

18

CHANGING LIVES

sCHooL MeALs

Fatima and her classmates at Al-Makarim Mixed School
receive mid-morning snacks of WFP biscuits packed
with micronutrients and vitamins. "Now, I am healthy
because the breakfast I get in school is very tasty and
helps me during the day," she says.

Operating in more than 60 countries around the world,
WFP's school feeding programme is grounded on a
simple principle: nurturing the next generation of
farmers, teachers, doctors and presidents means feeding
bodies as well as minds. Today, local buy-in is greater
than ever. Indeed, in a growing number of countries,
WFP is beginning to hand over school meals
programmes to the governments and communities we
partner with.

Liberian school children receive a
mid-day meal from WFP.

WFP/Liberia

Poverty in central Iraq's Al-Noamaniya district means
going to school on an empty stomach and returning
home even hungrier. But today, fifth grader Fatima
Abdelrazaq no longer experiences these hunger pangs.

A continent away in Liberia, residents of the small town
of Old Lady are also taking an active role in educating
their children. Last year, they opened a primary school
in town — ending an hour-long walk to the nearest
institution — and successfully lobbied for WFP school
meals. Within months, school enrolment had more than
tripled, to almost 170 students. The numbers are no
mystery: In a country where one in six people lives below
the poverty line, a wholesome meal of bulgur wheat and
pulses is a powerful draw.

In 2010, the Iraqi government asked WFP not just to
help it implement school meals, but build its capacity to
manage the programme. Two years later, Fatima is just
one of 650,000 primary school students in Iraq receiving
daily nutritious snacks, in a larger effort to restore
attendance rates and educational opportunities in a
country recovering from civil conflict.

Liberia's programme, which reaches roughly 234,000
children, also focuses on levelling a gender learning gap
that invariably favours boys. So we are also giving extra
take-home rations to 6,000 girls in places like Karyea
19

handover expected in 2018. A similar handover is
expected in 2016 for the tiny island of Sao Tome and
Principe. Even the world's newest nation, South Sudan,
is working with WFP to develop a national school meals
programme.

Public School, in north-central Nimba County. Those
targeted are in the critical fourth to sixth grades of
primary school, where female dropout rates are highest.

Parents aren't the only ones investing in the programme.
Nationally, school feeding accounts for more than a third
of the Liberian government's social protection spending.
Together, we are discussing a gradual handover of school
meals at some future point.

These countries are thinking big. So is Fatima, who
wants to become a doctor. "By the will of God," she says,
"I will achieve my ambition one day."

There are many similar stories. In Kenya, WFP began in
2009 to gradually transfer the school meals programme
to national ownership, recognizing that the
government’s leadership and financial commitment was
vital to ensuring that future generations will get the
same support. Today, roughly 1.9 million Kenyan
students receive nutritious, government-provided
lunches of maize and beans — with plans to add another
50,000 children to the list each year.

WinninG tHe BAttLe AGAinst stUntinG

What does it take for children — and maybe nations — to
realize their full potential? For 2-year-old Michael, it
begins with nutrient-packed foods provided by WFP and
UNICEF in Haiti, as we help the island nation emerge
from its devastating 2010 earthquake.
When Michael began treatment for severe malnutrition,
he was so weak his mother Jeanita feared he would die.
"Now, he's normal!" she exclaims, as she hears the good
news at a village health clinic in western Haiti. Michael
has gained four kilos in as many months. His
malnutrition has receded from severe to moderate.

In Asia, the tiny landlocked country of Bhutan is
gradually taking over school meals altogether, with a

Children await their lunch-time meal from WFP
at the École st. Joseph in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.

Michael's treatment is not over. After receiving UNICEF
rations to recover from severe malnourishment, he is
now eating packets of nutritious, peanut-based
supplementary food under WFP's programme for Haiti's
moderately malnourished children.
More than 100,000 Haitian children and 38,000
pregnant women and nursing mothers received
treatment to fight malnutrition in 2012, under a wider
nutrition initiative spearheaded by the government, UN
agencies and non-governmental organizations.

WFP/Marcela Ossandon

The joint effort underscores a new and dramatic change
in how we combat malnutrition — and, particularly, the
importance of fighting stunting, or chronic malnutrition,
early on. For WFP Nutrition Chief Martin Bloem, access
to good nutrition is nothing less than a basic human
right. "Children who are stunted at the age of two are

20

WFP/Rein Skullerud

In Niger’s Mangaize Refugee camp,
WFP launched an emergency
operation to support 3.9 million
people facing severe food
insecurity, with a special focus on
children under age two.

deprived of their potential," Bloem says. "They will have
smaller IQs and less productivity because of physical
constraints. There's also a higher risk of obesity and
diseases like diabetes."

"Stunting is hidden," Bloem says. "If you ask a mother if
her child is stunted and she lives in a community where
many children are stunted, she will not recognize it."

Those lessons are reflected in WFP's mother and child
nutrition programmes. In Haiti, one out of three
children was stunted in 2005. Seven years later, a 2012
UNICEF survey found our joint battle against
malnutrition is paying off. Stunting had shrunk to
23 percent among children from six to 59 months, a
dramatic decrease “because of a combination of doing a
lot of things right," Bloem says.

Stunting cannot be treated, only prevented. Its
devastating effects became crystal clear in 2008, when
The Lancet medical journal published a landmark series
on maternal and child nutrition. Among the findings:
inadequate nutrition during the first 1,000 days leads to
irreversible damage and impairments in physical growth
and cognitive development.

21

A WFP food- and cash-for-work project in
Dosso, niger, focuses on de-weeding and
water conservation to enable planting of fruit
trees and other crops.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

opposite: A participant in Dosso's foodand cash-for-work project benefits from cash
transfers.

22

Resiliency not only means being able to recover from
shocks like the Sahel drought but to anticipate and resist
them — and bounce back stronger than before. It means
governments, communities and humanitarian and
development agencies finding solutions together.

A pond saved the Nigerien farming community of Goure
Guinde from the immediate and harshest effects of last
year's punishing drought. That was because 350 families
shovelled out the silt and weeds, tripling the volume of
water it could store.

With cash from their labour, villagers at Goure Guinde
could buy food at local markets. But that wasn't all.
Because they had expanded the size of their irrigated
gardens, they had more cabbage, carrots and potatoes to
eat and to sell. Their profits paid for clothes, medicine
and school fees.

As other parts of the West African country lay parched,
Goure Guinde's residents had more water for their
homes and livestock. Irrigated vegetable gardens
increased fivefold in this village, located some 150
kilometres northeast of the capital Niamey.
"We have the opportunity to meet our food needs with
respect and dignity," says resident Fatouma Souley.

P4P: A PiLot PRoGRAMMe Goes
MAinstReAM

In Goure Guinde, and thousands of villages like it, WFP
has been providing food or cash and nutritional
assistance in times of need. These projects are helping to
turn around communities in some of the world's poorest
countries

Four years after being launched in 2008, WFP's
Purchase for Progress initiative (P4P) has helped
hundreds of thousands of small farmers improve the way
they grow, harvest and market their crops. The
programme also helps us share best practices and test
new ways of buying food that guarantee timely and
reliable supplies. What follows are some of P4P's 2012
success stories — in Rwanda and Central America — that
were realized thanks to the collective efforts of farmers,
governments and humanitarian agencies.

Complementing a major government irrigation initiative,
this WFP cash-for-work programme in Goure Guinde is
part of a broader strategy to develop home-grown
hunger solutions for several million of the most
vulnerable Nigeriens. It illustrates our dual role of
responding to emergencies, while also building local
resilience to withstand future ones.

Woman power in Rwanda
Jacqueline Nyiransabimana's husband left her with

23

WFP/Rein Skullerud

WFP/Rein Skullerud

BUILDING
RESILIENCE

Located in El Salvador's fertile Ahuachapan department,
the cooperative's 65 members are among nearly 28,000
family farmers in Central America now plugged into
mainstream markets, thanks to business and production
skills acquired through P4P.

seven children, a tiny plot of land and not much else.
Today, Nyiransabimana is ahead by two oxen, two milk
cows and a plough, major achievements in this tiny,
African nation of small-scale farmers — particularly in
the dry Nyagatare District of Rwanda where she lives.
Call it “women power,” the drive to succeed by her
female-dominated cooperative, one of nearly 60 enrolled
in the P4P initiative in Rwanda.

Gone are the days of selling poor-quality harvests to
small traders at rock-bottom prices. Today, these P4P
graduates count governments and institutional buyers
like the World Food Programme among their clients.
Others include private sector heavyweights like
Salvadoran flour company Harisa and, in the case of
Guatemalan farmers, American supermarket giant
Walmart.

"At first, I didn't have the confidence to approach the
cooperative for support, but eventually a friend
encouraged me," Nyiransabimana says, adding her latest
achievement — buying the cows — is "unbelievable."
Maybe not. Nyiransabimana counts among thousands of
Rwandan farmers who benefit from a government
programme that is boosting production through better
seeds and fertilizers and by consolidating plots to
intensify land use.

"Thanks to P4P, we have learned not just to survive but
farming to commercialize," says El Garucho's female
president, Karla Trujillo.

Partnering with governments and regional institutions in
four Central American countries, WFP helps P4P
farmers increase production and overcome difficulties
accessing credit that prevent them from fetching
competitive market prices. By sometimes acting as a
large-scale buyer, WFP has stimulated growers to invest
more in their production to attract more business.

Our P4P initiative complements this effort by helping
selected cooperatives improve post-harvest management,
storage and marketing skills. Participating farmers say
profits from their maize and bean harvests have helped
pay for school fees, health insurance and livestock.

The 25,000 small growers who learned P4P techniques
have trained others, doubling the programme's reach. So
effective is the P4P approach that Rwanda's government
has extended it to every cooperative.
Nyiransabimana's cooperative has gone further, using
profits from sales, mostly to WFP and the government,
to hire a teacher. The women are learning to read and
write.

Thinking big in Central America
For generations, Central American farmers have eked
out a living growing the local staples of maize and beans,
their harvests barely covering food and production costs.
But today, the small rainfed plots that dot the region are
generating serious money. Just ask farmers at ElGarucho cooperative.

Women at the el
Garucho cooperative
in el salvador pack
beans.

24

WFP/Rosa Vargas

With more money coming in, the farmers are sinking
their profits into health care, education and better living
conditions. They have also learned better ways to store

their grain for home consumption and sale. And by
cultivating more land and investing in no-till farming
and other sustainable practices, they are buffering the
impact of future shocks in a region prone to natural
disasters.

business plans for activities like cattle rearing and
weaving that matched their skills and local demand.
They received a cash grant to invest, and a monthly
allowance to help support their families as they grew
their businesses.

FOCUS ON BANGLADESH

Khatun used her grant to buy a bull to fatten and sell,
investing the profit in a second animal. “I learned that I
should spread my income over many sources, so after
the second bull, I also bought a sewing machine and the
rickshaw for my husband," she says.

Today, their monthly incomes are five times higher on
average, and their savings have quadrupled. So
impressive are the results that WFP is integrating the
project's strategy into other initiatives — and is working
with the government and other development partners to
integrate it into a national social protection plan.

At El Garucho and elsewhere, these P4P growers are
learning that small can be powerful. "As a cooperative,"
Trujillo says, "we understand our strength as small
entrepreneurs."

Hazira Khatun has a lot to smile about. Now 25, she runs
a small tailoring business and raises bulls for sale. Her
husband earns good money pulling a rickshaw
bought with her profits, and her children go to school
and eat three nutritious meals a day.

What a change from just two years ago, when Khatun
remembers “we skipped meals a lot." That was before
she joined an EU-funded food security project, along
with 30,000 other women in northwestern Bangladesh.
In this low-income Asian nation, they count among the
most destitute: landless, jobless and often confined to
their homes.

The project has brought other dividends. The women
formed groups for mutual support, saving and risksharing. As they prospered, they completed trainings in
nutrition, health, hygiene and disaster preparedness,
and raised community awareness about these important
issues.
Today, they are respected as leaders; several women
have since been elected to local government councils.

WFP worked with local NGOs to train the women in
entrepreneurship, helping them identify and develop

25

WFP/Cornelia Paetz

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Thanks to cash grants from WFP, these women in
Bangladesh are now entrepreneurs – making towels
and fattening bulls.

WFP/Jennifer Kunz

in a WFP pilot programme, pregnant
women and new mothers in tanzania’s
Mtwara region receive a monthly cash
transfer, along with nutritional and
health education.

26

INNOVATING

messages when a transfer has arrived — cash they use to
buy food at local markets. "After the first rains... it
wasn't long before we had a drought which burned the
whole crop," Chikaloni says. "We ran out of food and we
had no help until WFP came in."

eMPoWeRinG LoCAL CoMMUnities: CAsH
AnD voUCHeRs

Her tiny daughter snugly wrapped on her back, Zena
Buwisa describes the eggs, fish, dried beans and fruits
she dreams of — rare additions to the starch-based diet
in her home village of thatched houses and palm trees in
southeastern Tanzania. "If I have the money, I will buy
the food I couldn't buy before," Buwisa says, "so my baby
will have proper nutrition."

Two stories from two parts of Africa with the same
message — cash transfers and vouchers, two of our most
innovative hunger-fighting tools — are empowering
farmers, housewives and refugees, and lifting local
economies in the process.

Buwisa's dreams are now a reality, thanks to a new cashtransfer initiative launched last October in Tanzania's
impoverished Mtwara region.

While WFP still distributes hundreds of thousands of
tons of food yearly to the hungry, we are increasingly
using cash or vouchers where there is food in markets, so
people can choose for themselves. By 2015, WFP expects
to deliver about 30 percent of our assistance this way.

A collaboration between WFP and Vodacom Tanzania,
the pilot targeting more than 2,000 pregnant women
and mothers aims to reverse high rates of chronic
malnutrition among women and infants by teaching
communities the importance of eating the right foods
and providing mobile money transfers to buy them.

During last year's Sahel crisis, for example, we
distributed cash or vouchers to 2.1 million people, our
biggest emergency cash distribution to date. That
includes those living in Mali's drought-hit regions of
Kayes and Koulikoro who received mobile fund cash
transfers, in an initiative funded by the European
Commission's humanitarian arm, ECHO.

Across the border, WFP's UKAID-funded cash transfer
project helps more than 100,000 Malawians cope with
soaring food prices after a year of failed harvests. This
time we are partnering with mobile phone provider
Airtel, in collaboration with the Malawian government
and NGO Save the Children.

We also rolled out cash vouchers in parts of Senegal last
year, to build the resilience of households hard hit by
poor harvests and high food prices.

Farmers like 41-year-old Hannah Chikaloni receive texts
27

Red Crescent in implementing the "e-vouchers." To
handle the extra business, Polat has hired some refugees
to work at his store.
In Tanzania, the Mtwara pilot is also spinning off other
benefits — offering women like Buwisa nutrition
education and new spending power in communities
where men typically manage the finances.

WFP/Laure Chadraoui

"It will improve the health of the mother and thereby of
her children," says Mohamed Selemi, a community
health worker for Tanzania's government, which is
collaborating in the project. Even after the pilot ends,
"we will continue to use the knowledge to educate the
community."

FoRWARD PURCHAsinG: PLAnninG to
AvoiD tHe WoRst

The warnings piled up in late 2011: Failed rains.
Normally verdant fields brown and barren. Fragile
communities living off the land facing a bleak year
ahead. "By October or November, it became apparent
there was a crisis looming in the Sahel," recalls Ndeley
Agbaw, WFP’s regional procurement coordinator for
West Africa.

WFP/Laure Chadraoui

Agbaw and his team knew they had no time to lose.
Massive quantities of food had to be found, purchased
and moved into place immediately to avoid a major
catastrophe in the months to come.

The answer: WFP's Forward Purchase Facility, or FPF.
Behind the pilot initiative lies a basic calculation: by
planning ahead and purchasing staples like wheat,
sorghum, maize and beans before things deteriorate, we
are guaranteed timely and reliable supplies during times
of need — often at competitive prices. "The key element
is reliability," Agbaw says. "It helps us plan and
programme efficiently."

in the Kilis camp in turkey, syrian refugees buy
food with e-vouchers from WFP

In the Middle East, WFP vouchers in Lebanon and
electronic banking cards in Turkey are not just helping
tens of thousands of Syrian refugees buy the foods they
like, but bringing more business to store owners like
Abdi Polat. "We used to close our supermarket at seven
in the evening but now we are open until midnight,” says
Polat, who owns a supermarket inside Kilis refugee camp
in Turkey, where WFP is partnering with the Turkish

WFP launched the pilot in 2008, earmarking an initial
$60 million for forward purchases targeting southern

28

Africa and the Horn of Africa. Last year, we increased to
$300 million the amount country offices can tap into —
and they have. Globally, our 2012 FPF purchases nearly
doubled in tonnage over the previous year, reaching
nearly 375,000 metric tons. Developing countries
account for a large chunk of our suppliers.

WFP's procurement division in Rome also purchased
internationally, knowing the deliveries would arrive
when households had eaten their last reserves from the
lean season. "We knew that March through August was
the deadly season," Agbaw says. "So we were contracting
for the food to arrive during that period. We don't hope
for the worst, but we prepare for it."

In 2011, the facility helped WFP respond to a devastating
drought in the Horn of Africa. When drought loomed
again last year — this time in the Sahel region of West
Africa — we tapped the facility anew.

MoLLY's WoRLD

My name is Molly. So begins our discovery of a 12-yearold Kenyan girl living in one of Africa's biggest slums.

Agbaw's team scouted for markets near and far. They
purchased 30,000 metric tons of sorghum from Nigeria;
10,300 tons of maize from Togo; 5,000 tons of white
beans from Niger and Burkina Faso. This would meet
the short-term needs of the region's hungry people.

In 2011, WFP gave Molly Atieno a small video camera
and asked her to capture daily life in Nairobi's sprawling
Mathare slum. What she produced is building bridges.
Molly introduces us to her small cousin whom she is

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Molly (centre), a 13-year-old from
nairobi’s valley view Academy,
helped the world understand what
it’s like to eat, play and dream in one
of the poorest places in the world.

29

WFP/Rose Ogola

global hunger and poverty. Tens of thousands of people
have also watched and shared Molly's video, which is
posted on YouTube.

Molly is now 13. She has new shoes, a reward from her
teacher for her good performance at school.

WFP LAUNCHES RAMADAN CAMPAIGN

WFP reached out to Muslims around the world in a new
way last year, launching our first-ever online Ramadan
campaign to raise funds and awareness for school
feeding in the Middle East.
Teaming up with the UAE Red Crescent and the Rotary,
our drive capitalized on the traditional sadaqah, or
alms-giving, associated with the Muslim fasting month.

teaching to count, to the sprawl of tin shacks that is
home, and to her life, lugging home buckets of water
after school and the roasted groundnuts and simsim
sesame balls her parents sell for a living.

The Rotary Club of Dubai and its youth arm Dubai
Rotaract pledged matching grants, a corporate strategy
that is still new to the Middle East. And WFP's
Ambassador Against Hunger, Tunisian actress Hend
Sabry, along with our celebrity partner, British musician
Sami Yusuf, lent star power in video messages urging
people to seize the chance to double their donations.
"Please remember that while we break our fast today,
nearly a billion people still remain hungry around the
world," says Yusuf, as the camera pans to windswept
desert camps.

We see Molly studying by candlelight and making do
with torn sneakers, the only shoes she has. And we meet
her classmates at Valley View Academy, who count
among 20 million kids worldwide eating WFP school
meals.

WFP uses the same kind of digital camera we gave Molly
to capture the lives of war refugees and displaced people,
small farmers and school children, to name just a few of
the people we assist every day. Donated by networking
giant Cisco, these simple Flipcams are connecting our
worlds — and we are responding.

The Ramadan campaign, in English and Arabic,
reinforces both the importance of regional outreach and
innovative ways WFP is spreading its hunger-fighting
message.

So how do we judge success? Perhaps by the more than
$100,000 in funds from the Ramadan drive — half
through individual contributions — which exceeded our
expectations. The money supported 400,000 school
meals for needy children in the Middle East, with a focus
on Egypt, the State of Palestine, and Yemen.

School children in Rome, where WFP is based, sent
Molly and her classmates a video of their own lives. The
two groups met last March via live video link. Molly's
video also inspired students outside London to raise
nearly $500 for WFP school lunches, while another
group of WFP supporters raised money for an additional
50,000 school lunches by World Food Day last October.
Both drives were paired with lessons or quizzes about

30

AFteR tHe oCeAns, ConQUeRinG HUnGeR

Why would a young sailor who has conquered the
world’s oceans choose a mountainous, land-locked
country as her next challenge? The reason Australia's
Jessica Watson is now focusing on Laos is simple: school
meals.

HUnGeR GAMes
The movie is fictional; the reality is deadly serious. Last
year, the producers and cast of the award-winning action
movie The Hunger Games teamed up with WFP and
Feeding America to raise awareness about hunger in the
United States and around the world.

“I wanted to be involved with programmes that directly
improve the lives of children," says Watson, who has
been promoting school meals in Laos as a WFP youth
representative. "And WFP's school meals programme
does just that — it keeps more children in school for
longer.”

By taking a hunger quiz or making a
donation, fans of the best-selling book
and film are directly engaging in the
battle against hunger through our
website wfp.org/hungergames.

American teenagers Savannah and
Michaela are among them. The
fundraising campaign they launched at
their Texas school paid for more than
2,600 WFP meals for hungry people
around the world.

WFP works closely with the Laotian government to
provide a nutritious, mid-morning snack to nearly
200,000 primary and pre-school children in some of the
country's most vulnerable provinces. Laos government
statistics show school meals have dramatically improved
attendance rates in participating schools
Watson joined forces with WFP in 2011, a year after
becoming the youngest person to sail around the world

solo, nonstop and unassisted at the age of 16. In
championing our fight against hunger, she has zeroed in
on one of the world's least developed countries, where
inadequate nutrition remains a major development
challenge.

WFP Youth Representative
Jessica Watson visits a school in
Laos where WFP provides the
mid-day meal.

WFP/Bart Verweij

Now 20, Watson has visited a number of schools in
southern Laos to see first-hand the benefits of school
meals. In her native Australia, she works hard to
promote the benefits of school meals through TV
appearances and by engaging with corporate partners.
“Providing meals to school kids in Laos is so critical, it
has a positive impact across the whole community,"
Watson says. "The kids go to school to get a meal, then
they are able to concentrate and, in turn, get an
education, which goes such a long way towards breaking
the poverty cycle."

31

WFP/P4P

WFP’s Purchase for Progress initiative helps
small-holder farmers in 20 countries.

32

WORKING WITH OTHERS:
DONORS AND PARTNERS

in the Sahel and Horn of Africa — and support the
recovery of communities facing recurrent crises," says
Executive Director Ertharin Cousin.

stRAteGiC PARtneRsHiPs CoMe oF AGe

Habiba Aden Keyrow still shivers as she recalls the
random attacks by armed groups in her southern Somali
hometown of Bardere. The frightened 39-year-old fled to
neighbouring Ethiopia last year with her husband and
four children. "I was arrested twice for no reason and
beaten very hard with sticks," she says. "We were always
so scared these men were going to kill us."

Meeting the needs of Dolo Ado's refugees is just one
example of the growing importance of strategic
partnerships in shaping our future operations. Besides
Norway, WFP has signed similar partnerships with
Australia, Canada and Luxembourg.

Today, Keyrow and her family are among more than
230,000 Somali refugees in Ethiopia, most of them
staying in the world's second largest refugee complex in
the border town of Dolo Ado.

Because they are flexible, predictable and long term,
these partnerships allow WFP to respond effectively and
rapidly to humanitarian needs as they evolve. With
upfront funding, we can buy large quantities of food in
advance, reducing the delivery time from months to
weeks while taking advantage of preferential market
conditions.

WFP has been providing Somali refugees with rations of
cereals, pulses and special fortified foods. When they
expressed a preference for rice, a staple in their
homeland, we were able to quickly add it to our food
basket.

Donors also use the framework to focus on their strategic
themes, such as WFP's P4P programme, emergency
preparedness and response, or school feeding.
WFP's five-year strategic partnership with Australia, for
example, has helped us mobilize thousands of metric
tons of fortified foods to prevent and treat malnutrition,
and supported school meals for tens of thousands of
Bangladeshi children.

The reason: a new Strategic Partnership Agreement with
key WFP donor Norway, that allows us reliable and
flexible funding through 2015. Under the partnership
signed in September, Norway has pledged the equivalent
of nearly $170 million for WFP's humanitarian and
resilience-building activities through 2015.

Support from Canada is helping WFP meet the needs of
Syrians uprooted by their country's brutal civil conflict.

"Model donors like Norway help us provide
humanitarian assistance quickly — for example to people
33

And Norway has donated millions of dollars toward our
humanitarian response to the Sahel and Horn of Africa
droughts, along with longer-term efforts like building
our capacity in areas like nutrition and climate change
adaptation.

not only by sharing expertise and experience, but also
giving food and funds to those in need. WFP received a
record $172 million for our activities last year from 40
governments hosting our operations. Many, like
Pakistan, targeted programmes in their own countries,
underscoring their increasing ownership of relief and
development programmes.

At Dolo Ado, the rice is finally giving Keyrow something
to smile about. "We eat a lot of rice in Somalia," she says.
"Now I am not feeling any danger either. Thank God we
are here."

For their part, emerging countries like Brazil, which
earmarks roughly $1 billion annually in overseas
assistance, are lifting up fellow southern nations through
such institutions as WFP's Centre of Excellence Against
Hunger.

soUtH-soUtH: FoCUs on AFRiCAn Union
AnD PAKistAn

As drought and then flooding ravaged parts of the Sahel
last year, the African Union reached out in July with its
first ever, $450,000 contribution to WFP's operations in
seven of the hardest hit countries.

In the Sahel, the African Union Commission helped us
reach out to the most vulnerable, including refugees and
internally displaced people. Last August, AU officials
travelled to Niger to see their dollars at work first-hand.
They officially handed over the food purchased with
their donation, visited distribution sites and met with
flood-displaced families.

In Pakistan, the federal and provincial governments
bolstered WFP food distributions to millions of
displaced and flood-affected people in Sindh and
Balochistan provinces by donating more than 70,000
metric tons of wheat in 2012.

In Pakistan, the government announced yet another
wheat donation of 75,000 tons for the northwest region
in early 2013, making it one of WFP Pakistan's biggest
contributors so far this year.

In Africa, Asia and beyond, institutions and
governments are buying into WFP's work in a big way,

AUstRALiA, noRWAY Give WFP HiGH
MARKs FoR eFFeCtiveness

WFP/Amjad Jamal

WFP ranked among the most effective multilateral aid
agencies receiving Australian aid, in a 2012 government
assessment of 42 humanitarian organizations — and one
of two positive studies by donors last year about our
work.

Based on an independent review, the report funded by
the Australian Agency for International Development
(AusAID) found WFP highly effective in delivering food
assistance in both emergencies and post-emergency
recovery under the most difficult circumstances. “When
we work with the World Food Programme we can be
sure Australian funds are saving lives and fighting the
34

called WFP's performance "impressive," noting
particularly our cost controls, the transparency of our
accounting system, and the way we are meeting an
increasing share of the needs of the hungry people we
help.

in Cambodia, this woman is
preparing meals for school
children with food from WFP.

WFP AnD DAniDA: 50 YeARs on

WFP/David Longstreath

Food reserves were scarce when Maria Ouédraogo
arrived at northern Burkina Faso's Kongoussi health
clinic with her 18-month-old daughter. It was January
2012, and a massive crisis was looming across the
parched Sahel region. Ouédraogo's daughter, Ange
Mireille, was already showing signs of acute
malnutrition.

But from the very onset of the Sahel emergency, WFP
provided nutritional support to Ange Mireille and
millions of other vulnerable and hungry residents. That
early assistance — instrumental in avoiding a full-scale
humanitarian catastrophe — was realized thanks to
generous and swift action by donors like Denmark.

impact of hunger and under-nutrition,” says AusAID
Director-General Peter Baxter.

Indeed, the Danish government was among the first to
respond to WFP's funding appeals, testament to shared
goals and the close partnership with aid agency Danida
that stretches back to our respective 1960s origins. For
half a century, WFP and Denmark have worked together
to battle hunger and malnutrition, especially among
women and children.

WFP Executive Director Ertharin Cousin has welcomed
the findings, describing Australia as "one of WFP's most
valuable partners" and praising its leadership in offering
flexible, multi-year funding that allows us to deliver food
when and where it is most needed. "As disasters are
often unpredictable, WFP has to respond quickly,"
Cousin says. "With funding we can rely on, we know we
can get on with the job of feeding the most vulnerable in
the most efficient way.”

Denmark's funding is particularly helpful because it is
not earmarked, therefore allowing WFP to respond
quickly to emergencies like the Sahel drought. Last year,
Denmark ranked as WFP's third largest flexible donor,
providing more than $32 million in un-earmarked
funds.

As our sixth largest government donor, Australia
provided more than $121 million in assistance in 2012,
including for emergency operations in Niger and South
Sudan, as well as for other programmes in Afghanistan,
Myanmar and Kenya. Over the past two years alone,
Australian funds have helped WFP feed more than
5.5 million hungry people.

But sometimes we need support for particular
operations. And in early January 2013, Danida again
came through, pledging just over $5 million for WFP's
humanitarian response in Syria, one of our largest
donations for the operation to date.

Norway's development agency NORAD also praised our
work. In a 2012 study of five UN agencies, NORAD
35

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Collaborating with Croix Rouge Burkina, WFP
provides food assistance to women like these
in Dori, Burkina Faso.

36

PRivAte PARtneRs

MasterCard
In rural Nepal, Dilsara Thapa buys lentils, rice and other
staples for her family of six with help from a WFP
electronic-cash-transfer programme. The new smart card
she uses to withdraw money is a big step for the young
farmer — and for WFP, as we shift to a new era of "digital
food" assistance in places where markets are functioning.

UsAiD: eMPoWeRinG tHe PooR
tHRoUGH CAsH ContRiBUtions
When Fatima buys vegetables in Lebanon's Bekaa
valley, she is buying into a larger empowerment
strategy. The Syrian refugee uses WFP vouchers
to purchase her food, vouchers funded with cash
contributions from donors like the US Agency for
International Development (USAID).

Now, financial services giant MasterCard is lending its
expertise in electronic payment systems to support this
transformation, under a wide-ranging partnership
launched last September.

Along with giving Fatima the freedom to choose
the staples she needs, the vouchers bring more
revenue to neighbourhood stores. Those are just
two reasons why our largest donor, the US
government, is increasing the percentage of its
support that is provided in cash versus in-kind
donations — mirroring a similar shift by our other
donors.

While traditional food distribution remains a central part
of our operations, WFP vouchers and e-cards are
increasingly bringing business to local merchants and
dignity and choice to the poor. MasterCard is using its
knowledge of technology and payment systems to help us
scale-up and standardize these programmes.

Indeed, cash-based donations accounted for
roughly one-fifth of the US government's total
$1.46-billion contribution in 2012. That includes
$77 million in cash the US earmarked for our
response to the Syrian crisis.

“Our vision of a world beyond cash perfectly
complements WFP’s vision of a world beyond hunger,
and our Digital Food initiative will go on to meet the
needs of those who need it most,” said Ann Cairns,
MasterCard President of International Markets in
London.

In-kind donations remain vital to our work. But
combining them with timely and flexible cashbased assistance like USAID's allows us to
prepare and act quickly when emergencies strike.
Cash allows WFP to purchase food locally and
more cheaply, and to launch programmes like
vouchers, so Fatima can cook the Syrian meals
her family misses.

Under our alliance, MasterCard is also creating
opportunities and incentives for businesses and
customers to help hungry people like Dilsara Thapa. By
developing new tools for customers to make giving
simple, safe and rewarding — for example, by donating
when they shop online — MasterCard is helping WFP
expand our reach to new audiences and potential donors.

Our partnership is already reaping rewards. Through
campaigns launched in participating stores and banks in
the Netherlands, Poland and Sweden, MasterCard and its
network raised enough funds in 2012 alone for WFP to
provide more than 550,000 school meals to children in
Africa.

37

WFP’s logo was featured on the shirts of Crystal Palace
players, capturing the attention of almost 20,000
spectators at London's Selhurst Park Stadium and an
estimated 200,000 television viewers. Opportunities for
sponsorship agreements with football clubs are quite
rare. We replaced the team's usual sponsor, global
logistics company GAC, which offered WFP the chance
to raise visibility and awareness of our work. WFP uses
GAC to ship humanitarian food aid around the world.

Wilfried Zaha
celebrates his goal.

Courtesy of Neil Everitt

GAC’s generosity allowed us to broadcast public service
announcements during the match and place a print
advertisement in the match-day programme, free of
charge.
Moreover, a stroke of luck gave us more exposure from
the London match than anticipated. In the days that
followed, star Crystal Palace player Wilfried Zaha
became the subject of transfer rumours — which
ultimately proved true — with almost every story in the
media accompanied by a photo featuring Zaha wearing
WFP’s logo.

visiBiLitY: CRYstAL PALACe

It ended in a draw, but for WFP, the televised match
between British football clubs Crystal Palace and
Huddersfield Town in December 2012 scored a clear
victory in the fight against hunger.

LARGest DonoRs in 2012
1. UsA

1,456,561,885

2. eURoPeAn CoMMission

386,136,255

3. CAnADA

367,148,725

4. UniteD KinGDoM

200,539,681

5. JAPAn

190,748,732

6. GeRMAnY

150,054,838

11. Un CoMMon FUnDs AnD
AGenCies (eXCL CeRF)

79,798,706

12. netHeRLAnDs

75,235,772

13. PRivAte DonoRs

63,987,033

14. sWitZeRLAnD

60,827,998

15. noRWAY

57,561,556

16. DenMARK

43,510,342

7. Un CentRAL eMeRGenCY
ResPonse FUnD

136,788,354

17. RUssiAn FeDeRAtion

38,000,000

8. AUstRALiA

121,728,747

18. FRAnCe

30,747,496

95,181,160

19. FinLAnD

25,990,383

82,547,956

20. PAKistAn

22,162,114

9. sWeDen
10. BRAZiL

38

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Preparing the school lunch at the Dalaweye
Primary school, one of 700 selected for WFP’s
school feeding programme in niger.

39

IN 2012, WFP DISTRIBUTED
3.5 MILLION METRIC TONS OF FOOD ASSISTANCE
TO 97.2 MILLION PEOPLE
IN 80 COUNTRIES
INCLUDING:

82.1 million women and children
6.5 million internally displaced people
2.4 million refugees

63.7 million children were assisted in WFP operations
24.7 million schoolchildren received school meals
and/or take-home rations
9.8 million malnourished children received special nutritional support
1.6 million people affected by HIV and AIDS received WFP support
6.0 million people were assisted through cash
and vouchers programmes
15.1 million people received WFP food as an incentive
to build assets, attend training, strengthen resilience
to shocks and preserve livelihoods

40

WFP/Rein Skullerud

In a food- and cash-for-work project in Bangladesh, some 1,140 people helped
re-construct a dozen kilometres of embankment and five kilometres of road. In
return, each day they received rice, pulses and cooking oil from WFP and wages
in cash from the government. The project saved more than 2,000 hectares of
land from flooding during the rainy season.

To stay informed via email updates, sign up at wfp.org/join

Division of Communications
via Cesare Giulio viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, italy
tel.: +39-0665131 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
email: wfpinfo@wfp.org

Printed by Quintily SpA — Rome, Italy — May 2013

To support our work, please go to wfp.org/donate

