Report

VOLUME 1

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme has coordinated the
development and production of the WWDR 2014, and has prepared the chapters
in Part 1 and Part 4.

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater-related issues, including sanitation. It was formally
established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UN-Water is comprised of UN entities with a focus on, or
interest in, water-related issues as Members and other non-UN international organizations as Partners.
The work of UN-Water is organized around Thematic Priority Areas and Task Forces as well as awareness-raising campaigns such as World
Water Day (22 March) and World Toilet Day (19 November).

The following agencies and regional commissions led and prepared the chapters
in Part 2, Thematic Focus, and Part 3, Regional Aspects:

The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating synergies and joint efforts,
so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. By doing so, UN-Water seeks to increase the effectiveness of the support
provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving international agreements on water.

World Water Development Report (WWDR)
UNECA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP,
UNESCWA

We wish to thank the other UN-Water Members for their intellectual guidance,
useful revisions and timely endorsements:
CBD
IAEA
IFAD
ILO
OHCHR
UN Women
UNCCD
UNCTAD
UNDESA
UNDP
UNESCO
UNFCCC
UNHCR
UNICEF
UNISDR
UNITAR
UNU
UNWTO
WFP
WHO
WMO

Preparation of this report was made possible thanks to the generous financial support of
the Italian Government to UNESCO for the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme

is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater resource. The Report
is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water Members and Partners and it represents
the coherent and integrated response of the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging
challenges. The Report’s production is coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme and the
theme is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day (22 March). From 2003 to 2012, the WWDR was
released every three years and from 2014 the Report is released annually to provide the most up to date
and factual information of how water-related challenges are addressed around the world.

Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS)
is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) on behalf of UN-Water. It provides a global
update on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements, human resource base, and international
and national finance streams in support of sanitation and drinking water. It is a substantive input into
the activities of Sanitation and Water for All (SWA).

The progress report of the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)
is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring of progress towards MDG 7
target C: to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinkingwater and basic sanitation. Monitoring draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually
supported by national statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria.

 Strategic outlook
 State, uses and management
of water resources
 Global
 Regional assessments
 Triennial (2003–2012)
 Annual (from 2014)
 Links to the theme of World
Water Day (22 March)

 Strategic outlook
 Water supply and sanitation
 Global
 Regional assessments
 Biennial (since 2008)

 Status and trends
 Water supply and sanitation
 Global
 Regional and national
assessments
 Biennial (1990–2012)
 Annual updates (since 2013)

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2014–2015
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

UN-Water Technical Advice on a Possible Post-2015 Global Goal for Water
UN-Water Analytical Brief on Wastewater Management
UN-Water Report on the International Year of Water Cooperation
UN-Water Report on the International Decade for Action ‘Water for Life’ 2005–2015
UN-Water Country Briefs
UN-Water Policy Brief on Discrimination and the Right to Water and Sanitation
UN-Water Policy Brief on Water Security

More information on UN-Water Reports at: http://www.unwater.org/publications

Cover_Vol1.indd 2

27/02/14 17.53

VOLUME 1

Published in 2014 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07
SP, France
© UNESCO 2014
Chapter 5, ‘Infrastructure’, © by International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.
ISBN 978-92-3-104259-1
ePub ISBN 978-92-3-904259-3
Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme).
2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014:
Water and Energy. Paris, UNESCO.

This publication is available in Open Access under the
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound
by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository
(http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
----The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those
of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do
not commit the Organization.
The contents of Parts 2 and 3 were contributed by the UNWater Members and Partners listed on the title pages of the
chapters therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors
in the content provided or for discrepancies in data and content
between contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as
authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in Parts 2 and 3.
WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.
The views expressed in Chapter 6, ‘Food and agriculture’ are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
----Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid
A/S, an ISO 14001 (environmental management) and a DS 49001
(corporate social responsibility) certified and approved carbon
neutral company.
Printed by UNESCO CLD, Paris.
This publication is printed with vegetable inks on FSC Mixed
Sources paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves. This
is a carbon neutral print product. UNESCO Printing will contribute
funds to a project replanting trees in Europe or Africa for this
publication.
Printed in France

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014 has
been published on behalf of the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme by UNESCO with the support of the
following organizations:
United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN Women)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner
(OHCHR)
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
United Nations University (UNU)
Specialized United Nations Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
World Food Programme (WFP)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(UNESCAP)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA)
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR)
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword
by Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations

iv

Foreword
by Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO

v

Foreword
by Michel Jarraud, Chair of UN-Water and Secretary-General of WMO

vii

Preface
by Michela Miletto, WWAP Coordinator a.i. and Richard Connor, WWDR 2014 Lead Author

viii

Acknowledgements

x

Photo credits

xii

Executive Summary

1

Introduction

8

PART

1

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES
1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

The water–energy nexus
Interlocking risks and uncertainties
Differences and divergences
An economic comparison
Interconnections

12

2.
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

Water: Demands, energy requirements and availability
External pressures that drive the demand for water
Current global water demand and projected increases
Energy requirements for water provision
Water availability

22

3.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Energy’s thirst for water
Global energy demand
Primary energy
Electrical power generation
Energy policy implications for water

28

4. Data challenges and opportunities
4.1 Key indicators relating to water and energy

WWDR 2014

15
17
18
20

22
23
24
26

28
29
33
42
44

45

i

i

PART
PART

2

PART

3

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THEMATIC FOCUS
5.
5.1
5.2
5.3

Infrastructure
Infrastructure and development
Opportunities for synergies in water and energy infrastructure
Moving forward

48

6.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7

Food and agriculture
The water–energy–food nexus
The effects of increasing food demand on water and energy
Water for energy and the linkages to food security
Energy use in agrifood systems
Biofuels, water and food security linkages
Energy-smart agriculture
Towards a nexus approach

54

7.
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4

Cities
Global urbanization trends
Urban water ansd energy demands
The water–energy nexus in the urban context
Re-thinking urban development in terms of water and energy

62

8.
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5

Industry
The relationship of water and energy with industry
The status of water and energy in industry
Water and energy metrics in industry
Forces influencing the use of water and energy in industry
Opportunities and trade-offs

69

9.
9.1
9.2
9.3

Ecosystems
Ecosystems as the foundation of the water–energy nexus
Energy, water and ecosystems: Dependencies and impacts
An ecosystems approach to the water–energy nexus

77

48
50
53

54
54
55
56
57
59
61

62
63
64
65

69
69
71
72
75

77
78
81

REGIONAL ASPECTS
10.
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5

Europe and North America
Hydropower
Conflicts over water use between energy and other sectors, and across borders
Coping with water scarcity
Climate change outlook and effects of water scarcity on thermoelectric power plants
Extraction of natural gas and oil from unconventional sources

85

11.
11.1
11.2
11.3

Asia and the Pacific
Hydropower
Coal
Biofuels

89

85
86
87
87
88

89
90
90

PART

4

12.
12.1
12.2
12.3

The Arab region
Increasing knowledge and awareness-raising for policy coherence
Informing technology choice and renewable energy options
Addressing climate change and natural disasters

92

13.
13.1
13.2
13.3

Latin America and the Caribbean
Water use for hydropower generation
Energy consumption in the provision of water services
The way forward

95

14.
14.1
14.2
14.3

Africa
Energy use
Hydropower
Access to services

98

92
93
94

95
96
97

98
99
100

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS
15.
15.1
15.2
15.3

Creating an enabling environment for change
Breaking down barriers – and building bridges
Economic instruments
Role of the United Nations system and the international community

103

16.
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5

Responses in practice
Energy-smart and water efficient agriculture
Innovating cities
Enhancing the role of industry
Prioritizing ecosystem services
Power generation

109

105
106
107

109
110
112
113
114

Bibliography			
116
Abbreviations, acronyms and units			

131

Boxes, tables and figures			

132

WWDR 2014

iii

FOREWORD
by Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

Water and energy are inextricably linked. Water is essential for the production, distribution and use of energy. Energy is
crucial for the extraction and delivery of safe drinking water – and for the very safety of water itself. People everywhere –
but especially the most vulnerable and marginalized – face great risks when access to either is limited or compromised.
This World Water Development Report provides detailed analysis of these connections and their implications for the
world’s pursuit of sustainable development and the Millennium Development Goals. It is the fruit of collaboration by
UN-Water, the UN inter-agency coordination mechanism dedicated to all freshwater-related issues.
The Report addresses a wide range of key issues, including agriculture, cities, industry, infrastructure and the
environment. Its message is clear: the ‘water–energy nexus’ is about substantially more than hydropower and biofuels.
Water and energy can drive economic growth and improvements in human health. They are enablers for poverty
reduction, job creation, women’s empowerment and human well-being in general. This was also a central lesson that
emerged from last year’s observance of the International Year for Water Cooperation. It is also a fundamental premise of
my ‘Sustainable Energy for All’ initiative.
In order to provide modern, affordable and environmentally sound energy and drinking water services for all, we need
a sustainable approach to the management of both freshwater and energy resources. This calls, in turn, for far greater
coordination. The two key mechanisms of the United Nations system – UN-Water and UN-Energy – will play a critical
role in this regard. These issues will also be fundamental elements in shaping the post-2015 development agenda.
The World Water Development Report is aimed at policy-makers and the water and energy communities, including
scientists across the world. My hope is that it will point the way towards a more integrated approach to these challenges
and towards water and energy solutions that work for all the world’s people.

Ban Ki-moon

iv

FOREWORD

FOREWORD
by Irina Bokova
Director-General of UNESCO

The World Water Development Report 2014 shines light on the interdependence between the management of water and
energy. Thanks to its clarity and relevance, this important document reminds us that the linkages between freshwater and
energy are crucial to human well-being and sustainable socio-economic development. Water is essential throughout the
production, transportation and use of energy, which, in turn, affects the water cycle. This interdependence calls for an
improved cooperation between all actors, given the importance of freshwater and energy for sustainable development.
Ensuring access to freshwater and energy for all, especially the poor and most disadvantaged, is our key challenge. The
fundamental right to freshwater is not exercised by some 3.5 billion women and men – who often also lack access to
reliable energy, especially electricity. As the 2013 International Year for Water Cooperation showed, there is enough water
on earth – we need to manage it better together.
This challenge is becoming steeper as demands increase, especially in emerging economies, where agriculture, industry
and urban development are evolving quickly. We must find sustainable ways to ensure access to quality freshwater and
energy for all.
Rising pressure on resources calls for new production and consumption models. We need to better understand the
connections between water and energy, because choices made in one area impact – positively or negatively – the other.
Every production model in energy has consequences on the quantity and quality of available water. In the past, these
resources were managed by competition. In the future, we must choose cooperation, and make choices to craft just
compromises for all. Public policies have a key role to play in mobilizing and in directing change, and, for this, they must
draw on reliable data and strong scientific research.
This Report depicts the complexity of challenges and provides directions to guide decision-makers in tackling them.
Clearly, technical solutions will not be enough to address stakes that are, above all, political, economic and educational.
Education for sustainable development is essential to help new generations create win–win equations for water and
energy. Private sector engagement and government support to research and development are crucial for the development
of renewable – and less water intensive – energy sources.
Looking to the future, this Report shows the unequal weight of each sector. Energy has always been seen as ‘big business’
compared to water, benefitting from strategic investment, while water remains still too often perceived as a ‘gift of nature’,
as a public good and human right. Currently, 90% of energy production relies on intensive and non-reusable water
models that are not sustainable. Sustainability calls on us to bridge human rights and dignity with economic and social
growth, and this must start with getting right the interdependence between energy and water.

WWDR 2014

v

As the intellectual agency of the United Nations, UNESCO is bringing its mandate and experience to help reach this goal.
From now on a comprehensive report will be published every year, on a specific theme, and I wish to highlight the scale
of work mobilized to produce this one. It draws on the joint efforts of all members of UN-Water and our partners. I am
convinced that this Report will make a unique contribution to shaping a new post-2015 sustainable development agenda,
and I call on all readers, professional and general, to share its messages as widely as possible.

Irina Bokova

vi

FOREWORD

FOREWORD
by Michel Jarraud
Chair of UN-Water and Secretary-General of WMO

In my capacity as Chair of UN-Water, I am pleased to present this year’s edition of the World Water Development Report
(WWDR).
As the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater resource, the WWDR is a praiseworthy
example of the UN system working and delivering as one. Indeed, the Report is a flagship publication of UN-Water – the
UN inter-agency coordination mechanism on all freshwater-related issues, including sanitation – and the 31 UN-Water
Members and 36 other international Partners have worked together to deliver the coherent and integrated response of the
UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging challenges.
The WWDR 2014 is the fifth report in the series and it marks a milestone as the first annual edition. The WWDR was
originally a triennial report which provided an overall picture of the state, uses and management of the world's freshwater
resources. In late 2011 and early 2012, an extensive survey was carried out to assess the expectations on the Report and
the needs of the global community. The consensus from the immense number of responses from all parts of the world
indicated that an annual, factual and more concise publication with a specific thematic focus was needed. The structure
of the Report was therefore redesigned and it is UN-Water’s hope that the findings and conclusions will serve to provide
a broad public – from politicians and decision-makers to practitioners – with the latest information and examples of how
water-related challenges are addressed around the world.
In addition to this, starting from this year 2014, the theme of the WWDR and that of World Water Day will be harmonized
to provide a deeper focus and an enhanced attention. This harmony, by design, will help putting the important World
Water Day topics high on the international agenda. In this year’s edition, the WWDR highlights that water and energy are
highly interdependent and lie at the core of sustainable development. It is clear that choices made in one domain can have
significant impacts on the other – with both positive and negative repercussions. Increasing demand for freshwater and
energy over the coming decades will greatly amplify existing challenges worldwide. This calls for innovative and pragmatic
policies prioritizing more efficient and cost effective management of water and energy services in an integrated way.
I highly commend all my UN-Water colleagues who took active part in development of this Report. I would also like to
express my profound appreciation to the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) for hosting the
World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), which has been coordinating the production and publication of the UNWater WWDR. Finally, I would also like to thank the Government of Italy for its commitment and support to WWAP.
I sincerely believe that the findings and messages presented in this Report will inform the discussions around the
Post-2015 Development Agenda and help the international community commit to poverty eradication and sustainable
development beyond 2015.

Michel Jarraud

WWDR 2014

vii

PREFACE
by Michela Miletto, WWAP Coordinator a.i.
and Richard Connor, WWDR 2014 Lead Author

As the first of a new series of theme-oriented reports to be released on an annual basis, this fifth edition of the United
Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR) marks a pivotal new direction for the WWDR series, the World
Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), and the many partner agencies that work with us in the production of the
flagship report of UN-Water.
In preparing this report, we quickly became quite amazed at just how deep the interlinkages between water and energy
actually run. The interconnections do not boil down to a handful of issues such as hydropower, biofuels and pumping
groundwater for irrigation. The fact is that nearly all forms of energy production require a certain amount of water – in
some cases a very large amount – which has critical implications for water resources, and by extension to other users and
the environment. Furthermore, the most pressing water-related challenges often have a significant energy component,
which can be a positive or a negative determining factor in the provision of water-related services to people and industry.
The complex and sometimes veiled interlinkages between water and energy are presented using the most recent data and
information available at the time the Report was prepared. This proved to be a challenge on its own given that there is no official
repository for statistics pertaining to both water and energy. For example, it proved quite difficult to obtain and compare data
on several water and energy metrics over a single recent year, and the time horizons for water and energy demand projections,
or infrastructure financing requirements, do not always overlap. Nonetheless, the Report’s Data and Indicators Annex offers
a wealth of complementary quantitative information that we hope will contribute to meeting the need for a compendium of
water and energy related data. The Report also provides decision-makers and practitioners with specific examples of measures,
actions and approaches to addressing interconnected challenges, ranging from issues of sustainable resource management
financing to the efficiency of service delivery. Many of these are further detailed in the case studies found in Volume 2.
Like its predecessors, the WWDR 2014 is primarily targeted at national level decision-makers and water resources
managers. However, it is hoped the Report will also be well received by academics, the energy community and the
broader developmental community as well by those who, as described throughout the Report, play key roles in
determining our common water future in an era when the need to produce ever increasing amounts of energy, and in
particular clean energy, has become one of the greatest challenges to humankind.
This latest edition of the WWDR is the result of a concerted effort between WWAP, the five lead agencies (FAO, UNEP,
UN-Habitat, UNIDO and the World Bank) responsible for the thematic part of the report, and the five United Nations
regional commissions (UNECA, UNECE, UNECLAC, UNESCAP, UNESCWA) who provided a geographically focused
perspective of the water and energy challenge.
The Report has also benefited to a great extent from the inputs and contributions of several UN-Water Members and
Partners, as well as from dozens of scientists, professionals and non-governmental organizations who provided a variety
of excellent material. The members of WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee were particularly active and generous
in providing their guidance and knowledge to the production team. In line with WWAP’s publications strategy, the
Report is gender-mainstreamed thanks to the support of UN Women, WWAP’s Advisory Group on Gender, and the
UNESCO Division for Gender Equality. It has to be noted, however, that an in depth analysis of gender, water and energy
interconnections will be possible only when gender-disaggregated data are widely available.

viiiviii

PREFACE

Water and energy meet at a crossroads where views and opinions can vary. We have endeavoured to present a fact-based,
balanced and neutral report that presents the current state of knowledge and covers the most recent developments
pertaining to water and energy. As we move towards a new paradigm of sustainable development, whether via a new set
of development goals, the decoupling of water and economic growth or the ‘greening’ of economies, it is our sincere hope
that all parties to the current and forthcoming debates concerning water and energy will find this factual report to be a
useful, informative and credible tool which can serve as the knowledge base for open, transparent discussions pertaining
to our common future.
On behalf of the staff of WWAP, we extend our deepest appreciation to the UN-Water lead agencies and regional
commissions, to the Members and Partners of UN-Water, and to the authors, writers, editors and other contributors in
producing this unique and authoritative report.
A particular thanks goes to Ms Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, for her critical support for WWAP and the
production of the WWDR.
We deeply appreciate the Italian Government for funding the Programme and the Umbria Region for hosting the WWAP
Secretariat in the prestigious premises of Villa La Colombella in Perugia. Their contribution has been instrumental for
the production of the Report.
We extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues of the WWAP Secretariat, whose names are listed in the
Acknowledgements. Without them the Report would not have been completed. A special thanks goes to Alice Franek for
her outstanding contributions in editing, design and coordination of the publication process, and to Simone Grego for his
excellent work in coordinating the overall process.
Last but not least, special recognition goes to Olcay Ünver, who was WWAP Coordinator from 2007 to September 2013,
and who played a key role in the design and development of this report up to his very last day in the office.

Michela Miletto		

WWDR 2014

		

Richard Connor

CHAPTER TITLE

ix ix

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report would not have been possible without the essential and varied contribution of many organizations,
institutions and individuals around the world.
The generous financial support from the Italian Government as well as the premises made available by the Umbria Region
has been instrumental for the preparation of this report.
We would like to express our gratitude to the Director-General of UNESCO, Ms Irina Bokova, for her crucial support for
the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP).
Special thanks go to the higher management of the UNESCO Natural Sciences Sector, and in particular to Ms Blanca
Jiménez Cisneros, Director of the Division of Water Sciences and Secretary of the International Hydrological Programme
(IHP), and the professionals and general staff of the Division for their support and assistance.
We wish to thank UN-Water Members and Partners for their contributions, intellectual guidance, useful revisions and
timely endorsements. Special thanks go to UNIDO for hosting the WWDR 2014 developmental workshop.
We acknowledge the guidance and valuable contributions provided by David Coates, Alan Hall and Jack Moss, and
thank the Global Water Partnership (GWP), the World Water Council, and the International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre (IGRAC) for their support.
A special acknowledgement goes to all of the case study partners who volunteered their efforts, without which Volume 2
would not be complete.
We extend our gratitude to all the individuals who provided comments on drafts of the report, and to their host
institutions for allowing them to do so.
Finally, we wish to thank Olcay Ünver, WWAP Coordinator until September 2013.

––––
All those whom we have inadvertently omitted from the list please accept our sincere apologies along with our thanks.

x

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

WWDR 2014 Team
Content Coordinator
Michela Miletto/Olcay Ünver
Lead Author
Richard Connor
Process Coordinator
Simone Grego
Case Studies and Indicators Coordinator and
Volume 2 Author
Engin Koncagül
Publication Coordinator
Alice Franek
Copy-editing
Pica Publishing
Design and layout
Phoenix Design Aid

WWDR 2014

United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme
Donors
Government of Italy
WWAP Technical Advisory Committee
Uri Shamir (Chair), Dipak Gyawali (Deputy Chair), Fatma
Abdel Rahman Attia, Anders Berntell, Elias Fereres,
Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, Daniel P. Loucks, Henk van
Schaik, Laszlo Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini and Albert Wright
WWAP Advisory Group on Gender Equality
Gülser Çorat and Kusum Athukorala (Co-Chairs), Marcia
Brewster, Joanna Corzo, Irene Dankelman, Manal Eid,
Atef Hamdy, Deepa Joshi, Barbara van Koppen, Vasudha
Pangare, Kenza Robinson, Buyelwa Sonjica and Theresa
Wasike
WWAP Secretariat
Michela Miletto (Coordinator a.i.)
Assistants: Barbara Bracaglia and Adriana Fusco
Administration: Arturo Frascani and Lisa Gastaldin
Programmes: Richard Connor, Simone Grego, Engin
Koncagül, Daniel Perna and Léna Salamé
Communications, Networking and Gender: Hannah
Edwards, Simona Gallese and Francesca Greco
Publications: Alice Franek
Security: Fabio Bianchi, Michele Brensacchi and
Francesco Gioffredi
Interns: Stefania Schiavinato and Emma Schiavon

xi

PHOTO CREDITS

Table of Contents: Part 1: © Evgeny Bashta/iStock/Thinkstock; Part 2: © xubingruo/iStock/Thinkstock; Part 3: © Kim Steele/
Photodisc/Thinkstock; Part 4: © International Rivers.
Executive Summary: page 1 (clockwise from top-left): © Dominic Chavez/World Bank, © xyno6/iStock/Thinkstock,
© Ingram Publishing/Thinkstock, © leungchopan/iStock/Thinkstock, © FAO/Sean Gallagher; page 1 (centre): © UN Photo/
Kibae Park; page 2: © DAJ/Thinkstock; page 3 (left): © Dominic Sansoni/World Bank; page 3 (right): © fred goldstein/
iStock/Thinkstock; page 4 (left): © Richard Goodrich/iStock/Thinkstock; page 4 (right): © FAO/Ousseynou Ndoye;
page 7: © Peter Prokosch/UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://www.grida.no/photolib).
Introduction: page 8 (clockwise from top-left): © Borislav Toskov/iStock/Thinkstock, © mmmxx/iStock/Thinkstock,
© Mark Yuill/Hemera/Thinkstock, © UN Photo/Paulo Filgueiras, © FAO/Andrea Perlis; page 8 (centre): © Radu Razvan/
iStock/Thinkstock.
Part 1: page 11 (clockwise from top-left): © Dana Smillie/World Bank, © IAEA/Petr Pavlicek, © FAO/P. Johnson,
© Karl Kehm/iStock/Thinkstock, © luoman/iStock/Thinkstock, © jsolem/iStock/Thinkstock.
Part 2: page 47 (clockwise from top-left): © allensima/iStock/Thinkstock, © Anvar Ilyasov/World Bank, © Danilo Pinzon/
World Bank, © Digital Vision/Photodisc/Thinkstock, © Peter Prokosch/UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://www.grida.no/
photolib), © UN Photo/Kibae Park.
Part 3: page 84 (clockwise from top-left): © FAO/Alberto Conti, © jvdwolf/iStock/Thinkstock, © FAO/Miguel Trossero,
© Beat Bieler/iStock/Thinkstock, © luoman/iStock/Thinkstock, © Tanuki Photography/iStock/Thinkstock.
Part 4: page 101 (clockwise from top-left): © yellatdr/iStock/Thinkstock, © FAO/Giulio Napolitano, © FAO/Korea Forest
Service, © loraks/iStock/Thinkstock, © UN Photo/Mark Garten.

xii

PHOTO CREDITS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

WWDR 2014

CHAPTER TITLE

1

Water and energy are tightly interlinked and highly
interdependent. Choices made in one domain have
direct and indirect consequences on the other, positive or
negative. The form of energy production being pursued
determines the amount of water required to produce that
energy. At the same time, the availability and allocation of
freshwater resources determine how much (or how little)
water can be secured for energy production. Decisions
made for water use and management and for energy
production can have significant, multifaceted and broadreaching impacts on each other – and these impacts often
carry a mix of both positive and negative repercussions.

Global water demand (in terms of water withdrawals) is
projected to increase by some 55% by 2050, mainly because
of growing demands from manufacturing (400%), thermal
electricity generation (140%) and domestic use (130%). As
a result, freshwater availability will be increasingly strained
over this time period, and more than 40% of the global
population is projected to be living in areas of severe
water stress through 2050. There is clear evidence that
groundwater supplies are diminishing, with an estimated
20% of the world’s aquifers being over-exploited, some
critically so. Deterioration of wetlands worldwide is
reducing the capacity of ecosystems to purify water.

The challenge today:
Extending services to the unserved

Global energy demand is expected to grow by more than
one-third over the period to 2035, with China, India and
the Middle Eastern countries accounting for about 60%
of the increase. Electricity demand is expected to grow by
approximately 70% by 2035. This growth will be almost
entirely in non-Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development countries, with India and China
accounting for more than half that growth.

Freshwater and energy are crucial for human well-being
and sustainable socio-economic development. Their
essential roles in achieving progress under every category
of development goal are now widely recognized. Major
regional and global crises – of climate, poverty, hunger,
health and finance – that threaten the livelihood of many,
especially the three billion people living on less than
US$2.50 per day, are interconnected through water and
energy.

Worldwide, an estimated 768 million people remain
without access to an improved source of water – although
by some estimates, the number of people whose right
to water is not satisfied could be as high as 3.5 billion
– and 2.5 billion remain without access to improved
sanitation. More than 1.3 billion people still lack access to
electricity, and roughly 2.6 billion use solid fuels (mainly
biomass) for cooking. The fact that these figures are often
representative of the same people is evidenced by a close
association between respiratory diseases caused by indoor
air pollution, and diarrhoea and related waterborne
diseases caused by a lack of safe drinking water and
sanitation.

The challenge to come:
Meeting growing demands

Demands for freshwater and energy will continue to
increase significantly over the coming decades to meet the
needs of growing populations and economies, changing
lifestyles and evolving consumption patterns, greatly
amplifying existing pressures on limited natural resources
and on ecosystems. The resulting challenges will be most
acute in countries undergoing accelerated transformation
and rapid economic growth, or those in which a large
segment of the population lacks access to modern services.

2

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

What rising energy demand means for water

Energy comes in different forms and can be produced
in several ways, each having a distinct requirement for –
and impact on – water resources. Thus, as a country’s or
region’s energy mix evolves, from fossil fuels to renewables
for example, so too do the implications on water and its
supporting ecosystem services evolve. Approximately 90%
of global power generation is water intensive.

The International Energy Agency estimated global
water withdrawals for energy production in 2010 at
583 billion m3 (representing some 15% of the world’s total
withdrawals), of which 66 billion m3 was consumed. By
2035, withdrawals could increase by 20% and consumption
by 85%, driven via a shift towards higher efficiency power
plants with more advanced cooling systems (that reduce
water withdrawals but increase consumption) and increased
production of biofuel. Local and regional impacts of
biofuels could be substantial, as their production is among
the most water intensive types of fuel production.
Despite ongoing progress in the development of
renewables, the overall evolution of the global energy
mix appears to remain on a relatively fixed path: that of
continued reliance on fossil fuels. Oil and gas extraction
yields high volumes of ‘produced water’, which comes
out of the well along with the oil and gas. Produced
water is usually very difficult and expensive to treat.
Unconventional oil and gas production is generally more
water intensive than conventional oil and gas production.
Thermal power plants are responsible for roughly 80% of
global electricity production, and as a sector they are a
large user of water. Power plant cooling is responsible for
43% of total freshwater withdrawals in Europe (more than
50% in several countries), nearly 50% in the United States
of America, and more than 10% of the national water cap
in China.

Similarities, differences and divergences:
Beyond the water–energy nexus

The decisions that determine how water resources are used
(or abused) stem from broader policy circles concerned
primarily with industrial and economic development,
public health, investment and financing, food security and,
most relevant to this report, energy security. The challenge

WWDR 2014

for twenty-first century governance is to embrace the
multiple aspects, roles and benefits of water, and to
place water at the heart of decision-making in all waterdependent sectors, including energy.
Energy is big business compared to water and can
command a great many more resources of all kinds.
Market forces have tended to play a much more important
role in energy sector development compared with the
management of water resources and the improvement of
water-related services (water supply and sanitation), which
have historically been more of a public health and welfare
issue. Water resources have been considered by some to be
a public good (though the economic definition of ‘public
good’ does not apply to freshwater) – with access to safe
water and sanitation recognized as a human right. Neither
concept ordinarily applies to energy. Reflecting this
economic, commercial and social disparity, energy attracts
greater political attention than water in most countries.
Growing demand for limited water supplies places
increasing pressure on water intensive energy producers
to seek alternative approaches, especially in areas where
energy is competing with other major water users
(agriculture, manufacturing, drinking water and sanitation
services for cities) and where water uses may be restricted
to maintain healthy ecosystems. Uncertainties related to
the growth and evolution of global energy production,
for example via growth in unconventional sources of
gas and oil or in biofuels, can pose significant risks to
water resources and other users. Policies that benefit one
domain can translate to increased risks and detrimental
effects in another, but they can also generate co-benefits.
The need to manage trade-offs and maximize co-benefits
across multiple sectors has become an urgent and a
critical issue.

3

Water planners and decision-makers involved in assessing
the water needs of the energy sector require a suitable
level of knowledge about electricity generation and fuel
extraction technologies and their potential impact on
the resource. Energy planners and investors must take
into account the complexities of the hydrological cycle
and competing water uses when assessing plans and
investments.

Thematic challenges and responses

There are many opportunities for the joint development
and management of water and energy infrastructure and
technologies that maximize co-benefits and minimize
negative trade-offs. An array of opportunities exists to
co-produce energy and water services and to exploit
the benefits of synergies, such as combined power and
desalination plants, combined heat and power plants,
using alternative water sources for thermal power plant
cooling, and even energy recovery from sewerage water.
Besides the pursuit of new technical solutions, new
political and economic frameworks need to be designed
to promote cooperation and integrated planning among
sectors. Innovative approaches to spending efficiency,
such as cross-sector cooperation to leverage possible
synergies, integrated planning for water and energy to
decrease costs and ensure sustainability, assessing tradeoffs at the national level, demand-side interventions,
and decentralized services, can help overcome the
infrastructure financing gap which, although significant
for energy, is far greater for water.

4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

In the context of thermal power generation, there is an
increasing potential for serious conflict between power,
other water users and environmental considerations.
Trade-offs can sometimes be reduced by technological
advances, but these advances may carry trade-offs of their
own. From a water perspective, solar photovoltaic and
wind are clearly the most sustainable sources for power
generation. However, in most cases, the intermittent
service provided by solar photovoltaic and wind needs to
be compensated for by other sources of power which, with
the exception of geothermal, do require water to maintain
load balances. Support for the development of renewable
energy, which remains far below that for fossil fuels, will
need to increase dramatically before it makes a significant
change in the global energy mix, and by association,
in water demand. Use of geothermal energy for power
generation is underdeveloped and its potential is greatly
underappreciated. It is climate independent, produces
minimal or near-zero greenhouse gas emissions, does not
consume water, and its availability is infinite at human
time scales.
Agriculture is currently the largest user of water at the
global level, accounting for some 70% of total withdrawals.
The food production and supply chain accounts for about
one-third of total global energy consumption. The demand
for agricultural feedstocks for biofuels is the largest source
of new demand for agricultural production in decades,

and was a driving factor behind the 2007–2008 spike in
world commodity prices. As biofuels also require water
for their processing stages, the water requirements of
biofuels produced from irrigated crops can be much larger
than for fossil fuels. Energy subsidies allowing farmers
to pump aquifers at unsustainable rates of extraction
have led to the depletion of groundwater reserves.
Applying energy efficiency measures at the farm and at
all subsequent stages along the agrifood chain can bring
direct savings, through technological and behavioural
changes, or indirect savings, through co-benefits derived
from the adoption of agro-ecological farming practices.
Knowledge-based precision irrigation can provide flexible,
reliable and efficient water application, which can be
complemented by deficit irrigation and wastewater reuse.
Many rapidly growing cities in developing countries
already face problems related to water and energy and
have limited capacity to respond. As energy cost is
usually the greatest expenditure for water and wastewater
utilities, audits to identify and reduce water and energy
losses and enhance efficiency can result in substantial
energy and financial savings. The future water and energy
consumption of a new or an expanding city can be
reduced during the early stages of urban planning through
the development of compact settlements and investment
in systems for integrated urban water management. Such
systems and practices include the conservation of water
sources, the use of multiple water sources – including
rainwater harvesting, stormwater management and
wastewater reuse – and the treatment of water to the
quality needed for its use rather than treating all water
to a potable standard. The chemically bound energy in
wastewater can be used for domestic cooking and heating,
as fuel for vehicles and power plants, or for operating
the treatment plant itself. This biogas replaces fossil
fuels, reduces the amount of sludge to be disposed of and
achieves financial savings for the plant.
Industry seeks both water and energy efficiency though
the two are not always compatible, and though a
programme of water and energy efficiency can diverge
from industry’s primary focus: to secure water and energy
at the lowest prices. Individually and together water
and energy efficiency involve varied trade-offs, which
frequently involve short-term cost increases against
long-term savings, the balance between water and energy
use, and a compromise with other factors such as labour,
transportation, raw material costs and market location.
Large companies and multinationals, particularly in the

WWDR 2014

food and beverage sector, have been engaged for some
time in improving water and energy efficiencies. Such
companies see the value of efficiencies in both monetary
and societal terms. Small and medium-sized enterprises
(with 20 or fewer employees) comprise more than 70% of
enterprises in most economies, and although as a group
they have the potential for making a significant impact on
water and energy efficiencies, they have fewer resources
and are commonly in need of equity capital to do so.
The availability of adequate quantities of water, of
sufficient quality, depends on healthy ecosystems and can
be considered an ecosystem service. The maintenance of
environmental flows enables this and other ecosystem
services that are fundamental to sustainable economic
growth and human well-being. Ecosystem services are
being compromised worldwide, and energy production
is one of the drivers of this process. Natural or green
infrastructure can complement, augment or replace the
services provided by traditional engineered infrastructure,
creating additional benefits in terms of cost-effectiveness,
risk management and sustainable development overall.
The economic value of ecosystems for downstream water
users is formally recognized and monetized in payments
for environmental services schemes, in which downstream
users provide farmers with payments or green water
credits for good management practices that support and
regulate ecosystem services, thereby conserving water and
preserving its availability and quality.

Regional priorities

The expansion of hydropower as a key source of renewable
energy is a critical issue across nearly all of the world’s
regions due to concerns of growing conflicts between
various interests over limited water resources.
In Europe and North America, water scarcity, hydrological
variability and the impacts of climate change on water
availability and energy production are increasingly
recognized as critical – and related – issues. Targets set
to increase the share of renewable energies have led to
renewed interest in developing pumped storage while
part of the region – notably Central Asia and SouthEastern Europe – are still developing new hydropower
capacity, not always compatibly with other water uses.
Uncertainties persist over the potential risks to water
quality, human health and long-term environmental
sustainability from the development of unconventional
sources of gas (‘fracking’) and oil (‘tar sands’), both of
which require large quantities of water.

5

With its demand for energy increasing exponentially, the
Asia-Pacific region faces major supply challenges. Coal,
the most prevalent energy product within the region, will
continue to be the main source of energy, despite serious
concerns about water quality degradation as an effect of
coal mining and the water quantity required for cooling
thermal power plants. The potential for Asia to develop
into a significant market for and exporter of biofuels is
being increasingly recognized, and there is a hope that
it will provide new employment opportunities in several
developing nations.
In the Arab region, the low to middle income countries are
struggling to meet growing demands for water and energy
services. Limited understanding of the interdependencies
affecting the management of water and energy resources
has stymied coordination between water and energy
policy-makers, and limited coordination between the
water, energy, electricity and agriculture sectors has led
to conflicting policies and development objectives. Solardriven desalination and energy recovery from wastewater
are two promising technologies particularly well suited to
the region.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, there is an increasing
interest in biofuels and in how more water efficient (and
more energy intensive) irrigation methods and electricity
subsidies to farmers impact on aquifer sustainability. The
vast majority of water utilities in the region are struggling
to attain self-financing and, as energy is often the greatest
component (30–40%) of operational costs, increasing
energy costs have direct implications for service
affordability and for sector financing.
The majority of the rural population in sub-Saharan Africa
relies on traditional energy supplies, mainly unprocessed
biomass, the burning of which causes significant pollution
and health concerns. It is the only region in the world
where the absolute number of people without access to
electricity is increasing. As Africa has not yet tapped in
to its rich potential for hydropower development to a
substantial degree, it has the opportunity of learning from
the positive as well as the negative aspects of hydropower
implementation practices that other nations have
undergone.

Enabling environments

Recognition of the interconnectedness between water and
energy has led some observers to call for a greater level
of integration of the two domains. Although this may

6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

be possible and beneficial under certain circumstances,
an increased level of collaboration and coordination
would create favourable outcomes in nearly all situations.
Effective collaboration does not necessarily require that
responsibilities for water and energy are combined into
the same institutional portfolio, nor does doing so assure
coherent cooperation.
Water and energy practitioners need to engage with and
fully understand one another. Both domains have been
traditionally expected to focus on a narrow mandate in
meeting their own aims and fulfilling their own targeted
responsibilities. There is often little or no incentive to
initiate and pursue coordination or integration of policies
across sectoral institutions. Policy-makers, planners and
practitioners in water and energy need to take steps to
identify and overcome the barriers that exist between their
domains.
The most common responses to the dilemmas, risks and
opportunities presented in this fifth edition of the United
Nations World Water Development Report are related to
improving the efficiency and sustainability with which
water and energy are used and finding win–win options
that create savings of both, which can become mutually
reinforcing (creating synergy). But not every situation
offers such opportunities. There are situations in which
competition for resources can arise or there is genuine
conflict between water and energy aims, meaning some
degree of trade-off will be necessary. Dealing with
trade-offs may require and benefit from negotiation,
especially where international issues are involved. Where
competition between different resource domains is likely
to increase, the requirement to make deliberate tradeoffs arises and these trade-offs will need to be managed
and contained, preferably through collaboration and in a
coordinated manner. To do this, better (and sometimes
new) data are required.
The incentives to increase efficiency facing the two
domains are asymmetrical: energy users have little or
no incentive to conserve water due to zero or low prices,
but water users normally do pay for energy, even though
prices may be subsidized. Water and energy prices are
strongly affected by political decisions and subsidies that
support major sectors such as agriculture and industry,
and these subsidies often distort the true economic
relationship between water and energy. Particularly for
water, price is rarely a true reflection of cost – it is often
even less than the cost of supply.

A coherent policy – which is to say an adequate public
response to the interconnectedness of the water, energy
and related domains – requires a hierarchy of actions.
These include:

· Developing coherent national policies affecting the

sustainable and mutually compatible development of water
and energy. The international community can bring actors
together and catalyse support for national, subnational
and local governments as well as utility providers, who
have a major role in how the water–energy nexus plays out
at the national and local levels.

different domains

· Creating legal and institutional frameworks to
promote this coherence

· Ensuring reliable data and statistics to make and
monitor decisions

· Encouraging awareness through education, training
and public information media

· Supporting innovation and research into technological
development

· Ensuring availability of finance
· Allowing markets and businesses to develop
Together these actions make up the enabling environment
necessary to bring about the changes needed for the

WWDR 2014

The different political economies of water and energy
should be recognized, as these affect the scope, speed
and direction of change in each domain. While energy
generally carries great political clout, water most often
does not. Partly as a result, there is a marked difference
in the pace of change in the domains; a pace which is
driven also by the evolution of markets and technologies.
Unless those responsible for water step up their own
governance reform efforts, the pressures emanating
from developments in the energy sphere will become
increasingly restrictive and make the tasks facing water
planners, and the objective of a secure water future, much
more difficult to achieve. And failures in water can lead
directly to failures in energy and other sectors critical for
development.

7

INTRODUCTION

8

INTRODUCTION

Water and energy are closely interconnected and highly
interdependent. Choices made and actions taken in
one domain can greatly affect the other, positively or
negatively. Trade-offs need to be managed to limit
negative impacts and foster opportunities for synergy.
Water and energy have crucial impacts on poverty
alleviation both directly, as a number of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) depend on major
improvements in access to water, sanitation, power and
energy sources, and indirectly, as water and energy can be
binding constraints on economic growth – the ultimate
hope for widespread poverty reduction.
In view of the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals,
likely to include increased access to water and energy
services, this fifth edition of the United Nations World
Water Development Report seeks to inform decisionmakers (inside and outside the water and energy domains),
stakeholders and practitioners about the interlinkages,
potential synergies and trade-offs, and to highlight the
need for appropriate responses and regulatory frameworks
that account for both water and energy priorities. The
Report provides a comprehensive overview of major and
emerging trends from around the world, with examples
of how some of the trend-related challenges have been
addressed, their implications for policy-makers, and
further actions that can be taken by stakeholders and the
international community.
Part 1 of the Report, ‘Status, trends and challenges’,
explores current and future challenges of sustainable
development in the context of ever-increasing demands
for water and energy. Chapter 1 describes many of the
complex interlinkages between the water and energy
domains from varied perspectives, highlighting their
interdependencies and differences, as well as their
relationships to other developmental sectors. Chapter 2
focuses on water, examining current and future demand
and the pressures that drive demand as well as the energy
requirements for the provision of water services. The
chapter also provides a snapshot of the state of water
resources using the latest information available. Chapter
3 examines sources of energy, both renewable and nonrenewable, and existing means of power generation in
terms of their current and future contribution to the
global energy mix and their impact on water. Chapter 4
focuses on data and knowledge issues directly related to
the water–energy nexus, highlighting the need to generate
and harmonize data concerning the supply and use of
water and energy production.

WWDR 2014

In the future, growing demands on water resources
resulting from population growth, economic development
and urban expansion will create additional pressure on
water intensive energy production. Climate change will
add to the pressure. Droughts, heatwaves and local water
scarcities of the past decade have interrupted electricity
generation, with serious economic consequences. At
the same time, limitations on energy availability have
constrained the delivery of water services. Growing
demand for finite water resources is also leading to
increased competition between the energy sector and
other water-using sectors of the economy, principally
agriculture and industry. A very important aspect of
the burgeoning global demand for water services is the
resulting pressure on water resources and the degradation
of freshwater ecosystems.
Part 2, the ‘Thematic focus’, narrows the examination
of water and energy into five specific themes. Chapter 5
looks into the economic aspects of water and energy
infrastructure in developed and developing countries,
highlighting some opportunities for synergies in
infrastructure development, operation and maintenance.
The challenges and response options faced by food and
agriculture, including biofuels, in relation to water and
energy are presented in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 focuses
on the particular difficulties facing the large and rapidly
expanding cities in developing countries. Chapter 8
describes the role of industry as both a user of water and
energy but also a potential leader in the development
of innovative approaches to efficiency. Part 2 concludes
with Chapter 9, which argues that ecosystems are the
foundation of the water–energy nexus and that an
ecosystem approach is vital for green growth.
‘Regional aspects’ of water and energy are provided in
Part 3. Issues of concern for Europe and North America,
from expanding hydropower and its related conflicts to
the development of unconventional sources of oil and
gas, are presented in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 describes
how increasing reliance on coal and the development of
biofuel in the Asia-Pacific region will impact on water
resources and other users. The need to increase knowledge
and raise awareness for policy coherence and the potential
of certain water supply and treatment technologies in
the Arab region are addressed in Chapter 12. Chapter 13
examines hydropower development and the energy
requirements for water services in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Hydropower is also the focus of Chapter 14,
which highlights the urgent need to increase access to

9

electricity in sub-Saharan Africa where the undeveloped
potential for hydropower is the greatest of any region.
Where competition between different resource domains
is likely to increase, the requirement to make deliberate
trade-offs arises, and these trade-offs will need to be
managed and contained, preferably through collaboration
and in a coordinated manner. There are, fortunately,
already good examples of policies and actions that benefit
both water and energy domains, such as win–win projects
and optimized trade-offs.
Part 4, ‘Responses: Fostering synergies and managing
trade-offs’, describes how policy-makers, decision-makers
and practitioners can respond to the dilemmas, risks

10

and opportunities presented in the first three parts of the
Report. Chapter 15 proposes a hierarchy of actions that
together make up the enabling environment necessary to
bring about the changes needed for the sustainable and
mutually compatible development of water and energy.
These actions include overcoming the barriers that exist
between the two domains, using economic instruments
appropriately, and optimizing the role of the United
Nations system and the international community. The
Report concludes with Chapter 16, in which the interplay
of water and energy, and the scope for fostering synergies
and managing trade-offs between them, is illustrated in
the contexts of agriculture, industry, cities, ecosystems
and power generation.

PART 1

STATUS,
TRENDS AND
CHALLENGES
CHAPTERS
1. The water–energy nexus
2. W
 ater: Demands, energy
requirements and availability
3. Energy’s thirst for water
4. D
 ata challenges and
opportunities

WWDR 2014

CHAPTER TITLE

11

CHAPTER

1

The water–energy nexus
WWAP | Richard Connor and James Winpenny

Freshwater and energy are critical to human well-being
and sustainable socio-economic development. Although
initially overlooked by many, their essential roles in
achieving progress towards every one of the MDGs are
now widely recognized. Globally, demand for freshwater
and energy will continue to increase significantly over
the coming decades to meet the needs of increasing
populations, growing economies, changing lifestyles and
evolving consumption patterns. This will greatly amplify
pressures on limited natural resources and ecosystems.
The challenge will be most acute in countries undergoing

Water and energy are strongly interlinked: water is
required to produce, transport and use all forms of
energy to some degree; and energy is required for the
extraction, treatment and distribution of water, as well as
its collection and treatment after use. Water and energy

Global physical and economic surface water scarcity

FIGURE

1.1

accelerated transformation and rapid economic growth,
especially where water resources are scarce or where
water-related infrastructure and services are inadequate
(Figure 1.1), and where modern energy services remain
largely underdeveloped (Figure 1.2).

Little or no
water scarcity

Physical
water scarcity

Approaching physical
water scarcity

Economic
water scarcity

Not estimated

• Little or no water scarcity. Abundant water resources relative to use, with less than 25% of water from rivers withdrawn for human purposes.
• Physical water scarcity (water resources development is approaching or has exceeded sustainable limits). More than 75% of river flows are
withdrawn for agriculture, industry and domestic purposes (accounting for recycling of return flows). This definition  relating water availability
to water demand  implies that dry areas are not necessarily water scarce.
• Approaching physical water scarcity. More than 60% of river flows are withdrawn. These basins will experience physical water scarcity in the near future.
• Economic water scarcity (human, institutional and financial capital limit access to water even though water in nature is available locally to meet human
demands). Water resources are abundant relative to water use, with less than 25% of water from rivers withdrawn for human purposes, but malnutrition exists.

Source: Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture (2007, map 2, p. 11). © IWMI, used under licence.

12

CHAPTER 1

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

are also highly interdependent, with choices made in
one domain having direct and indirect consequences on
the other. The quantities of water required to produce
energy are determined by the forms of energy production
pursued; the allocation, use and management of freshwater
resources can determine how much (or little) water is
available for energy production. The choices made for
water and energy can also impact other sectors, and vice
versa. These interlinkages and interdependencies, along
with their negative and positive externalities, lie at the
heart of what has become known as the ‘water–energy
nexus’.
Major regional and global crises – climate, food, energy,
financial – threatening the livelihood of many, including
the three billion people living on less than US$2.50 per
day, are interlinked through the water–energy nexus. The
case of access to basic water and energy services illustrates
this point. The same people who lack access to improved
water and sanitation are also likely to lack access to
electricity and rely on solid fuel for cooking (Table 1.1).
Women and children represent a disproportional fraction
of the unserved and underserved.
Many people in the world still lack access to basic water
and energy services. A 2013 report by WHO and UNICEF
concluded that 768 million remain without access to an

More than 1.3 billion people worldwide still lack access
to electricity, with more than 95% of them located in
sub-Saharan Africa and developing Asia, and roughly
2.6 billion people rely on the traditional use of biomass
for cooking (IEA, 2012a). Another estimated 400 million
people rely on coal for cooking and heating purposes,
which, like wood, charcoal, peat or other biomass, causes
air pollution and has serious potential health implications
when used in traditional stoves. It is no coincidence that
the figures concerning access to water services and energy
align so well; it is often the same people who are missing
out on both. The close association between respiratory
diseases caused by indoor air pollution and waterborne
diseases like diarrhoea caused by lack of safe drinking
water and sanitation is a point of evidence for this.
Decisions made for water use and management and the
production of energy can have significant, multifaceted

Energy consumption per capita by country, 2010

FIGURE

1.2

improved source of water and 2.5 billion people remain
without access to improved sanitation, respectively
(WHO/UNICEF, 2013a). The High-level Panel on the
Post-2015 Development Agenda has indicated that 2 billion
people do not have access to safe water (UN, 2013). The
number of people whose right to water is not satisfied is
even greater, probably in the order of 3.5 billion (Onda
et al., 2012).

Note: BTU, British Thermal Unit. One million BTU approximately equals the energy derived from 30 litres of petrol.
Source: Burn: An Energy Journal (http://burnanenergyjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/WorldMap_EnergyConsumptionPerCapita2010_v4_
BargraphKey.jpg, from sources cited therein) (Accessed Oct 2013). Produced by Anrica Deb for SoundVision Productions®, used with permission.

WWDR 2014

THE WATER–ENERGY NEXUS

13

and broad-reaching impacts on each other – often with
a mix of both positive and negative repercussions. For
example, drought exacerbates energy crises; energy price
volatility contributes to food crises; the expansion of
irrigation networks increases water and energy demand;
and access to unreasonably inexpensive supplies of
energy can lead to the depletion of water resources,

TABLE

1.1

further intensifying the impacts of droughts. Although
integrated water resources management (IWRM) and the
water–energy nexus have led to a growing recognition
of such interdependencies, the complex direct and
indirect interactions of this relationship are rarely fully
appreciated, let alone incorporated into decision-making
processes.

Population using solid fuel for cooking and without access to electricity, improved water and sanitation
in a selection of countries
Electricity
(national)

Water
(national)

Sanitation
(national)

Cooking fuel
(national)

Population
(2011)a
(million)

Population
without access
to electricity
(2011)b (%)

Population
without access
to improved
water
(2011)a (%)

Population
without access
to improved
sanitation
(2011)a (%)

Population
using solid fuel
for cooking*, c
(%)

Burkina Faso

17.0

86.9

20.0

82.0

93.0 (2007)

Cameroon

20.0

46.3

25.6

52.2

75.0 (2005)

DR Congo

67.8

91.0

53.8

69.3

95.0 (2007)

Ethiopia

84.7

76.7

51.0

79.3

95.0 (2005)

Ghana

25.0

28.0

13.7

86.5

83.0 (2008)

Kenya

41.6

80.8

39.1

70.6

82.0 (2006)

Malawi

15.4

93.0

16.3

47.1

99.0 (2005)

Nigeria

162.5

52.0

38.9

69.4

75.0 (2007)

Senegal

12.8

43.5

26.6

48.6

56.0 (2006)

South Africa

50.5

15.3

8.5

26.0

17.0 (2007)

Togo

6.2

73.5

41.0

88.6

98.0 (2005)

Uganda

34.5

85.4

25.2

65.0

96.0 (2006)

Bangladesh

150.5

40.4

16.8

45.3

91.0 (2007)

Cambodia

14.3

66.0

32.9

66.9

92.0 (2005)

China

1 347.6

0.2

8.3

34.9

55.0 (2000)

India

1 241.5

24.7

8.4

64.9

57.0 (2006)

Indonesia

242.3

27.1

15.7

41.3

55.0 (2007)

Mongolia

2.8

11.8

14.7

47.0

77.0 (2005)

Myanmar

48.3

51.2

15.9

22.7

95.0 (2004)

Nepal

30.5

23.7

12.4

64.6

83.0 (2006)

Pakistan

176.7

31.4

8.6

52.6

67.0 (2006)

Sri Lanka

21.0

14.6

7.4

8.9

78.0 (2006)

Thailand

69.5

1.0

4.2

6.6

34.0 (2005)

Africa

Asia

>>
14

CHAPTER 1

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

The decisions that determine how water resources are
used (or abused) are not made by water managers alone,
but stem from broader policy circles primarily concerned
with food security, industrial and economic development,
public health, financing and energy security, among
others (WWAP, 2009, 2012). The challenge for twentyfirst century governance is to take account of the multiple
aspects and roles of water, and of the benefits derived
from it, and to place water at the heart of decision-making.
This report addresses this challenge by probing into the
complex inter-relationships between water, energy and
development, and by describing strategies and approaches
to managing trade-offs and maximizing the benefits for
the betterment of all.

TABLE

1.1

1.1 Interlocking risks and uncertainties

Risks to water resources lead to energy risks. Growing
demand for limited water supplies increases pressure
on water intensive energy producers to seek alternative
approaches, especially in areas where energy is
competing with other major water users (e.g. agriculture,
manufacturing, drinking water and sanitation services for
cities) and where water uses may be restricted to maintain
healthy ecosystems. As growing water demand leads to
increasing scarcity, it also leads to increasing urgency
to manage trade-offs and maximize co-benefits across
multiple sectors, including energy.

The power sector’s dependence on water introduces
vulnerabilities. Periods of water scarcity and elevated
temperatures can force power plants to turn off or
diminish their performance. As climate change induces

Population using solid fuel for cooking and without access to electricity, improved water and sanitation
in a selection of countries (continued from p. 14)
Electricity
(national)

Water
(national)

Sanitation
(national)

Cooking fuel
(national)

Population
(2011)a
(million)

Population
without access
to electricity
(2011)b (%)

Population
without access
to improved
water
(2011)a (%)

Population
without access
to improved
sanitation
(2011)a (%)

Population
using solid fuel
for cooking*, c
(%)

Argentina

40.8

2.8

0.8

3.7

5.0 (2001)

Bolivia

10.1

13.2

12.0

53.7

29.0 (2007)

Brazil

196.7

0.7

2.8

19.2

13.0 (2003)

Colombia

46.9

2.6

7.1

21.9

15.0 (2005)

Guatemala

14.8

18.1

6.2

19.8

62.0 (2003)

Haiti

10.1

72.1

36.0

73.9

94.0 (2005)

Nicaragua

5.9

22.3

15.0

47.9

57.0 (2006)

Peru

29.4

10.3

14.7

28.4

37.0 (2007)

Iraq

32.7

2.0

15.1

16.1

5.0 (2005)

Syrian Arab Republic

20.8

7.2

10.1

4.8

0.3 (2005)

Yemen

24.8

60.1

45.2

47.0

36.0 (2006)

World

6 950.7

18.1

11.1

35.9

38.0 (2012) **

Latin America

Middle East

Note: * The reference year for the data is given in parentheses. ** Excludes coal.
Source: Compiled by Engin Koncagül and Sisira Saddhamangala Withanachchi (WWAP), with data from a WHO/UNICEF (2013b, see http://www.
wssinfo.org/data-estimates/table/); b OECD/IEA (World Energy Outlook 2013 Electricity Access Database at http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/
media/weowebsite/energydevelopment/WEO2013Electricitydatabase.xlsx); and c WHO Global Health Observatory Data Repository – Solid cooking
fuels by country at http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.136?lang=en.

WWDR 2014

THE WATER–ENERGY NEXUS

15

more extreme weather events, the power sector might
be exposed to higher levels of risk. Those impacts have
already occurred in the energy sector globally, with many
examples on all continents. Water constraints are among
the determinants of where power plants are built and the
choice of cooling systems. As water-related risks grow,
these choices may become more limited and more critical.
Conversely, projected climate change may also lower
certain risks to electricity generation from hydropower in
some areas (Hydro-Quebec, 2006; see also Section 13.1).
Equally, uncertainties related to the growth and evolution
of global energy production can introduce new and
significant risks to water resources and other users. The
emergence of unconventional sources of gas and oil (e.g.
shale gas and bitumen), recurrent concerns about nuclear
power generation, and policy shifts towards renewable
forms of energy will have significant implications on the
state, demand for, use and management of freshwater
resources (Box 1.1).

The response to growing energy demand can come at the
expense of water resources sustainability, as in the case
of shale oil and gas, biofuel and dewatering of aquifers
to exploit coal seam gas, and vice versa desalination,
expansion of pumped irrigation systems, or long-distance
pumping of water for cities can increase energy needs. In
terms of climate change mitigation, leading technologies
for carbon capture and storage (CCS) are highly water
intensive (Hussey et al., 2013).
Sustainability of water resources is becoming a business
risk for some energy managers. Multinationals and other
large corporations are increasingly interested in their
water footprints and how to minimize them.1 In its 2013
Global Risks Report, the World Economic Forum ranks
the ‘water supply crisis’ as the fourth crisis in likelihood
and second in impact, a marked elevation from its rank in
previous reports (WEF, 2013).

1	For example, in the Water Footprint Network.

BOX

1.1

The evolution of the global energy mix and its implications for water
Global efforts to mitigate climate change and address energy security concerns, including the United Nations SecretaryGeneral’s ‘Sustainable Energy for All’ initiative (http://www.sustainableenergyforall.org), are driving the expansion of renewables
in the aggregated global energy mix. Many nations have subscribed to this agenda with ambitious targets to double the
share of renewables in the mix by 2030. Certain types of renewable energy, such as wind and solar photovoltaic (PV) power,
have very low carbon footprints and consume little water. Other types of renewable energy, such as concentrated solar power
and biofuels, can consume large quantities of water. Geothermal energy holds much promise in certain places but it remains
grossly underdeveloped. Hydropower is in a class of its own because of the large quantities of water required to be stored and
uncertainties regarding the amounts of water consumed as evaporative losses from reservoirs, not to mention hydropower’s
unique environmental and social impacts. Meeting ever-growing energy demands will require seeking coherence between
water use and climate change mitigation.
In terms of electrical power generation, the intermittency of the two most rapidly expanding renewable sources, wind
and solar PV, poses a challenge: How will secure load balances on larger grids be maintained against the backdrop of everincreasing demand? Two options are currently more feasible and cost-effective than others: hydropower and thermal power
(natural gas in particular). Both options have their advantages and disadvantages from water resource and climate change
perspectives, as well as broader social, environmental and economic implications. Hydropower is arguably the best option
in terms of energy storage and quick dispatch power required for counterbalancing the intermittency of other renewables.
Yet, in several places, including the European Union, where nuclear power has come under disfavour and potential exists
for expanding hydropower, tendencies are that these gaps are increasingly filled by (imported) natural gas. This trend is
counterbalancing aspirations for energy security and self-sufficiency as well as climate change mitigation.
Sub-Saharan Africa, which has not yet tapped in to its rich potential for hydropower development to a substantial degree
(Chapter 14) is in a prime position to benefit from the current drive towards renewable energy. Exploring the African potential
of developing and enhancing regional power-pools, integrating grid networks, and enabling benefit sharing and trading to
meet water and energy security and regional economic growth could also bring the add-on effects of increased peace and
political and economic stability.
Source: Andreas Lindström, SIWI, and Richard Connor, WWAP.

16

CHAPTER 1

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

1.2 Differences and divergences

In the simplest of terms, water is a renewable natural
resource that is unique, irreplaceable and difficult (as well
as costly) to move, beyond the pull of gravity. Energy, in
contrast, comes in different forms, which can be derived
from a variety of sources. It is typically a market-driven
commodity and can be distributed across vast distances (e.g.
via transmission lines for electricity or pipelines for fuels).

When considering water’s role in the nexus, it is necessary
to distinguish between water resources and water services,
and how both are managed. Water resources management
is about managing the water cycle, in which water
flows as a natural resource through the environment
(i.e. rivers, lakes, estuaries and other water bodies, soils
and aquifers), in terms of quantity and quality. Water
services management is about developing and managing
infrastructure to capture, treat as necessary, transport and
deliver water to the end user, and to capture the waste
streams via reticulation for treatment and safe onwards
discharge or reuse. Whereas energy is required mainly
for the provision of water services, water resources are
required in the production of energy.
Unlike water, energy can come in different forms and
can be produced in several ways, each having a
distinct requirement for – and impact on – water
resources. Thus, as a country’s or region’s energy mix
evolves, say from fossil fuels to renewables, so do the
implications for water and its supporting ecosystem
services.

In addition to a mismatch in the regulatory and policy
systems of water and energy, there is also a mismatch
in the size of infrastructure. With the exception of large
dams, reservoirs and inter-basin water diversion schemes,
water infrastructure systems are usually at the community
or city scale (for piped drinking water and sewerage
systems). Energy infrastructure, including pipeline
networks and the power grid, usually spans the entire
nation or several nations. This mismatch can introduce
vulnerabilities to both systems.
Water resources and water services systems span several
geographic scales. While the piped water system is
usually at the municipal scale, surface water can span
thousands of kilometres, threading through many cities
and crossing many political and national boundaries.
The transboundary character of natural surface water
systems complicates allocation decisions, as multiple
government bodies might need to coordinate their
actions across different regulatory frameworks and

Whereas energy is required
mainly for the provision of water
services, water resources are required
in the production of energy

In general, regulation and legislation regarding
energy focuses on production and distribution,
whereas for water the focus is mainly on extraction,
use and discharge (Section 8.4.5). In most countries,
approaches to energy decision-making and regulation are
top-down, with strong national/federal or provincial/state
governmental policies and central administration of many
standards and funding. Water management is usually a
combination of bottom-up and top-down approaches.
National/federal water management can be responsible
for managing large infrastructure such as major reservoir
projects that serve as storage for irrigation and power
generation as well as ensuring water allotments across
international/interjurisdictional boundaries. However,
the uses of that water are often determined locally, and
local water management can be very powerful (for more
on the governance of water, see WWAP, 2003 [ch. 15],
2006 [ch. 2], 2009 [chs. 14, 15], 2012 [pt. 2]). In most

WWDR 2014

countries, local farmers make day-to-day decisions about
well pumping for irrigation and national/federal control
over water uses is weak, while centrally managed power
systems are used for distributing electricity.

political systems. Because the original source of water
might be far away, significant energy investments are
typically required to deliver water resources and services
to consumers. Groundwater can also span large regions,
further complicating matters. In some regions, laws and
international agreements governing groundwater (when
they exist) can be different than those for surface water.
In contrast, the power grid and pipeline network does
not follow natural boundaries such as river basins.
Energy can be moved relatively easily: electricity is
transmitted readily via power lines, and dense fossil
fuels such as petroleum, coal and liquefied natural
gas are shipped across oceans or transported across
continents by pipelines or railways. While water can be
moved via inter-basin transfer, because of water’s high

THE WATER–ENERGY NEXUS

17

density and lower price points,2 this approach requires
significant investments of energy (Section 2.3) and is not
economically feasible for bulk water.
In terms of infrastructure and operation, the most significant
costs for energy services are related to capital investment in
generating capacity and fuel. The cost for water provision is
generally relatively low, but the risk arising from interruption
of supplies can be significant. For water, the most significant
costs are investment in networks and operation (including
energy) and maintenance. In many critical installations the
risk of energy supply interruption is also important, hence
the existence of standby generation plants in many systems.
An additional challenge is that the water and energy
communities have significantly different fundamental
views and conceptual approaches. There is a need to create
consistent frameworks for analysis, vocabularies and datasets
that enable the two domains to understand each other and to
communicate coherently with one another’s decision-makers.

1.3 An economic comparison

The highly varied nature of both energy and water means
that comparisons and differences have to be discussed
at a high level of generality. The obvious similarities of
networked urban supply in both do not mean that other
aspects of the two domains can be treated alike. It is
particularly important to differentiate water as a service
and water as a resource, and similar considerations apply
to energy as raw materials and as services (or primary and
secondary energy). Also, the ‘market for water services’
should not be confused with ‘water trading markets’3 in
the sense of trading rights to use raw water.

1.3.1 Economic similarities
Energy and water services are often (though by no means
universally) structured as national, regional or local
monopolies and are frequently publicly owned (though
this is becoming less true of energy). Both energy and
water have large fixed costs of supply in extraction,
transmission and distribution, typically with heavy ‘sunk
costs’ in facilities that have no alternative uses. These fixed
costs form a large proportion of the total cost of supply.
The ‘marginal cost’ of supplying extra units from existing
capacity, particularly for networked services, is relatively
low; conversely, the marginal cost of extra output once
capacity is fully taken up is high, because new capacity
has to be created. This implies that tariffs should (a) be
flexible, reflecting the amount and timing of consumption;
and (b) contain both fixed and variable elements, to

18

CHAPTER 1

ensure that fixed costs are covered whatever the level of
demand.
For users not connected to a network, self-supply is
necessary, frequently at a high cost compared to that of
the public networked service. Thus there are large benefits
from connection. However, the option of self-provision,
whether for heat (wood), water (own sources), or sewerage
and household sanitation, affects what the public supplier
can charge. Large businesses and institutions have the
economic resources to support options to provide their
own services, which limits how much they can be asked to
subsidize other users.
The recurrent operating costs of both water and energy
comprise administrative overheads, labour, raw materials,
power (in the case of water) and water (in the case of power
and other forms of energy). In publicly owned utilities,
administrative and labour costs tend to be proportionately
higher than in privately owned utilities. In certain instances
this may be due to political patronage, which inflates
headcount and can impede reforms. Relatively high staff
costs often leaves insufficient budget for materials, spare
parts, electricity and other consumables. In Africa, and to
varying degrees in other developing countries, maintenance
is often insufficient or deferred, resulting in frequent
outages, leakage and poor service. Power and water can
have high levels of losses and inefficiency (AICD, 2012, for
power p. 187, for water p. 309).
Due to the high public profile of both services there is
often serious political interference with tariff setting,
resulting in a high proportion of power and water utilities
charging uneconomic tariffs (or failing to collect them)
and posting financial losses. Farmers typically benefit
from low charges for both power and irrigation water.
Another way of describing this situation is that the energy
and water domains both attract large perverse subsidies
(Box 16.1), in the sense that they encourage greater
consumption of natural resources that are, in different
ways, scarce and costly (Komives et al., 2005).
The operation of services allows for involvement of the
private sector to varying degrees in both energy and
water, subject to regulation due to the monopoly element

2	Price points are prices at which demand for a given product is supposed
to stay relatively high.
3	Water trading is a voluntary exchange or transfer of a quantifiable water
allocation between a willing buyer and seller.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

in supply and the essential nature of the service. Private
ownership of infrastructure entailed in public services
is rarer than private operation of publicly owned assets.
In both domains, public–private partnership (PPP)
examples are increasing. In build-own-operate-transfer
(BOOT) and build-operate-transfer (BOT) contracts,
private concessionaires build and finance projects in
the first instance, then operate them for the contract
period to recoup outlays and earn a profit, and finally
transfer the assets to public ownership. This is becoming
a commonplace arrangement, mainly in wastewater
treatment plants and independent power projects.
For both power and water, regulators are confronted
with the conundrum of encouraging demand restraint
in sectors where private companies earn their profits by
expanding sales. There is interest in exploring ways of
remunerating service providers according to their success
in reducing demand, following use of this model in the
California power sector as a substitute for linking rewards
to expanding sales volumes (World Bank, 2010a).

1.3.2 Economic differences
The scale of the energy and water domains, measured
in economic and commercial terms, differs widely. The
global size of the water ‘market’ (for services, equipment
and supplies) was estimated to be US$365 billion in 2005
and the market for water treatment and distribution
plant and equipment for domestic and industrial use is
currently (2013) valued at $557 billion (Goldman Sachs,
2005; GWI, 2013). Even allowing for market growth since
this estimate, the annual global energy market (estimated
at around $6 trillion4) dwarfs this sum: the International
Energy Agency (IEA) (2012a) estimates that $37 trillion
of investment will be needed over the period 2012–2035
in global energy supply infrastructure alone, equivalent to
$1.6 trillion annually.
Energy dwarfs water not only in market size but in many
other areas. The sheer sophistication and global girth of
the energy supply chain lies in stark contrast to that of the
water supply chain. The energy sector is synonymous with
‘big business’, and organization within the sector is well
funded and represented (Hussey et al., 2013). Consistent
with its economic and commercial scale, energy attracts
greatly more political attention than water in most
countries: as the Camdessus Report noted of water,
‘some aspects of this sector are unglamorous, practically
invisible in electoral terms’ (Winpenny, 2003, p. 9).

WWDR 2014

Whereas energy is often managed nationally, water is
managed regionally and locally. Decisions in water tend
to be more highly delegated; water tariffs, for instance, are
commonly decided at the municipal level. The level of
private sector involvement also differs. While the drinking
water and sanitation sector remains largely public, the
involvement of private companies in the power sector
remains at a relatively high level.
Access to safe water and sanitation is recognized as a human
right (United Nations Resolution 64/292, 28 July 2010),
neither of which generally applies to energy. Certain water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services are ‘merit goods’,5
which may need active promotion (including subsidy) to
convince users to take up what is on offer. Viewing water as
a gift of nature (ignoring the economic cost of providing it
as a service) impedes its economic pricing. No such attitude
prevails in the markets for energy services.
Because of its low value-to-bulk ratio and high cost of
transport, water is not commonly traded internationally
or over long distances. Consequently water has no
international price, unlike oil, while gas and coal
are widely traded but with regional price differences,
reflecting their transport and distribution systems.
Although ‘virtual water’ – water embedded in goods and
services – is implicitly traded on a large scale, the concept
does not include any cost or price factorization and thus
remains a theoretical tool with little economic influence.
In a few countries, raw water (or the right to it) is traded
in water markets on a seasonal or permanent basis, with
prices subject to local supply and demand.
The sale of energy services (mainly electricity and some
forms of heating) is predominately on a metered basis. In
water services, metering is not nearly so widespread for
households, and unusual for irrigation. The demand for
household and industrial water is commonly considered
to be ‘price inelastic’, where demand does not vary much
with changes in price. The price elasticity of demand for
irrigation water is less obvious, due to the very low price
(often zero) charged for such water and the fact that this
is often combined with subsidized energy for pumping
(Molle and Berkoff, 2008). In contrast, the demand for

4	’Energy is a $6 trillion global market’, quote attributed to then US
Commerce Secretary Gary Locke on a visit to China in May 2010 (Shirouzu,
2010).
5	Those which governments supply to citizens as basic needs, which
recipients may or may not be able or willing to pay for.

THE WATER–ENERGY NEXUS

19

energy tends to have a higher price elasticity, making
pricing a more cogent management instrument for this
domain, as illustrated by the tariff differential between
peak and off-peak consumption in certain countries. This

BOX

1.2

Climate change adaptation and mitigation
Climate change adaptation is primarily about water, as
stated for example by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), which identifies water as the
fundamental link through which climate change will
impact humans and the environment (IPCC, 2008). In
addition, water is critical for climate change mitigation,
as many efforts to reduce carbon emissions such as
carbon capture and storage rely on water availability
for long-term success. Providing sufficient energy
for all while radically reducing greenhouse gas
emissions will require a paramount shift towards
fossil-free energy use, very high energy efficiency, and
equity. These goals may limit the availability of water
resources for communities and ecosystems and result
in a reduction of adaptive capacity for future change.
For example, biofuels need vast quantities of water to
grow the biofuel crop and process it into bioenergy,
while large hydropower plants need to store vast
quantities of water, especially during dry seasons,
which could in certain instances hamper irrigated
agriculture as an adaptation measure to combat
climate-driven drought. In this case adaptation and
mitigation measures are competing for water.
Another urgent mitigation challenge intimately
linked to water is terrestrial carbon sequestration.
Water in vegetation, soils and wetlands is the lock
that seals carbon reservoirs, for example in peatlands,
and provides necessary water for sustaining or
restoring carbon storage by forests.
Climate change mitigation requires effective
adaptation to succeed. The water cycle is sensitive
to climate change and water is vital to energy
generation and carbon storage. Water can also
serve as a bridge to support both adaptation and
mitigation. For instance, reforestation can reduce or
prevent destructive surface runoff and debris flows
from intensifying precipitation events by stabilizing
hill slopes and promoting recharge. Strategic
decisions should ideally acknowledge the turnover
periods of technical systems, such as approximately
40 years for energy systems, in order to recognize
the risks for technical lock-in in systems that lack
robustness in coping with changes in climatic
conditions and demand (IEA, 2012a).
Source: Karin Lexén, SIWI.

20

CHAPTER 1

implies that water tariff increases are likely to be more
effective at raising revenues than in limiting demand.

1.4 Interconnections

Interconnections between water, energy and other sectors
means that policies that benefit one domain can translate
to increased risks and detrimental effects in another; yet
they can help generate co-benefits as well. The 2011/2012
European Report on Development summarized it this way:
A drop of water, a piece of land, or a kilojoule of
renewable energy cannot be seen through the single lens
of one sectoral policy or management system. What might
appear to be an efficient policy in one dimension can be
harmful for the others, and different ways of exploiting
water and land or producing renewable energy place
different stresses on the other resources. An adequate
response to emerging challenges, and specifically the
linkages between water, energy and land, make it
imperative to examine and manage the trade-offs not only
among users and uses of the same resource, but also of
other related resources (EU, 2012, p. 5).

The well-documented case of how government-subsidized
energy drove the expansion of irrigation in parts of
India provides one example of such interconnections. In
the western Indus-Ganges basin, a single line provided
electrical power to both the irrigation and the domestic
sectors, which meant the electricity utility was unable to
charge a separate electricity tariff to groundwater irrigators
(Box 16.1). Several decades of cheap energy, combined
with the construction of millions of private wells, new
pump technologies and water-inefficient irrigation
practices, led to phenomenal growth in the exploitation
of groundwater (World Bank, 2010b). This perverse link
between energy subsidy policy and groundwater overdraft
has left the state with a bankrupt electricity utility (Shah
et al., 2008). By shielding farmers from the full cost of
pumping, government electricity subsidies have established
a pattern of groundwater use that has proved to be resistant
to change. As a result, 29% of the country’s groundwater
assessment blocks are classified as semi-critical, critical
or over-exploited, with the situation deteriorating rapidly
(Garduno et al., 2011; Mukherji et al., 2009).
Similar experiences have been documented in Latin America
and elsewhere (e.g. Oman and Yemen). With energy
subsidies in place that reduce the cost of pumping, once
irrigation reaches a certain level of profitability or there are
limitations in surface water availability, regulatory measures

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

become virtually ineffective in controlling groundwater
extraction. The results are declining groundwater tables
and, eventually, aquifer depletion. However, there are also
counter-examples such as in Bangladesh, where subsidizing
energy has benefited smallholder farmers without overexploiting water resources (Section 6.6).
Climate change and variability further complicate the
situation (Box 1.2). Major droughts and high temperatures
can hinder the ability of the power sector to achieve sufficient
cooling, leading to power outages. When the monsoon
rains arrived late in 2012, leaving much of northern India
in drought and extreme heat, farmers turned to electrical
pumps to bring groundwater to the surface for irrigation.
Electricity demand peaked at the same time that hydropower
reservoirs were at their lowest, resulting in numerous
blackouts. The reverse scenario can also occur: a problem
with a power grid far away might become a local power
outage that inhibits water production and treatment.
Other examples of water and energy interconnections
include policies supporting the development of biofuels
that have had negative impacts on land, water and food
prices (Section 9.2.2). Replacing fossil fuels with biofuels
in transport will measurably reduce the carbon footprint,
but will also enlarge the water footprint of transport

BOX

1.3

(UNEP, 2011a). Desalination of salt water and pumping of
freshwater supplies over large distances may help reduce
freshwater scarcity in certain places, but will also increase
energy use. Conflicts over water between irrigation and
hydropower (Section 6.2) provide yet another example.
Interconnections, however, need not necessarily have
negative repercussions. In France, for example, under
the RT 2020 sustainable energy framework all buildings
by 2020 will produce more energy than they consume,
and they will also purify and recycle water naturally.
Such policies are driving the development of innovative
technologies; for example, a system that filters wastewater
for use as grey water while at the same time harnessing
the energy-generating potential of the algae present in
the wastewater. An added benefit of this approach is that
it reduces the volume of wastewater returning to the
treatment plant, ultimately resulting in energy savings.
Women and children represent a disproportionately large
fraction of the bottom billion, the poorest one billion
people on Earth, and, as such, have the most to gain from
poverty reduction measures centred on improving access
to water supply and energy services (Box 1.3). In most
cases, service provision to the poor would not significantly
affect access to other users.

Gender and equity dimensions
The term ‘bottom billion’ refers to the world’s population living on less than US$1.25 per day. Most of these people suffer from
malnutrition and lack access to safe water supplies and electricity (or other forms of upgraded energy). Providing these basic
services is a key factor in lifting these and other poor people out of poverty and helps create opportunities for generating
income. In Lima, Peru, the experience of the Water for All Programme suggests that providing urban families in extreme
poverty with a connection to piped water services, without any additional (permanent) subsidy, resulted in a total increase in
disposable family income of 14% per month (CEPAL, 2011).
In developing countries, women and girls bear most of the work burden associated with managing water and energy
scarcity, fetching water for the 780 million people lacking access to improved sources of drinking water (WHO/UNICEF, 2012)
and collecting firewood for the 2.7 billion depending on traditional biomass for cooking (UNEP, 2011b). This adds to their
time and work burdens and seriously compromises their educational and employment opportunities, perpetuating the
intergenerational transfer of poverty and disempowerment. Available statistics often fail to recognize or measure their real
contributions to their economies and communities as unpaid water and energy providers.
Water and firewood collection can place women and girls at increased risk of sexual or physical assault, especially at night
in the absence of adequate street lighting. The over-reliance on wood, straw, charcoal or dung for cooking and heating is
detrimental to women and children’s health – they account for more than 85% of the two million deaths each year attributed
to cancer, respiratory infection and lung disease due to indoor air pollution (UNDP/WHO, 2009). It is estimated that by 2030
more than 4,000 people will die prematurely each day from household air pollution (IEA, 2010). Women and girls are also the
most exposed to waterborne diseases (WWAP, 2012).
Source: UN Women.

WWDR 2014

THE WATER–ENERGY NEXUS

21

CHAPTER

2

Water: Demands, energy requirements and
availability
WWAP | Richard Connor and Michael Webber

2.1 External pressures that drive the demand
for water

Alongside natural forces affecting the world’s water
systems, human activities interact and unite to create
pressures on water resources, for which there are no
substitutes. These pressures are in turn affected by a
range of factors such as technological development,
political, institutional and financial conditions, and
climate change.

Global population is projected to reach 9.3 billion in 2050
(UNDESA, 2012). Population growth leads to increased
water demand, reflecting growing needs for drinking
water, health and sanitation, as well as for energy, food
and other goods and services that require water for
their production and delivery. Urban areas of the world,
particularly those in developing countries, are expected
to absorb all this population growth, at the same time
drawing in some of the rural population. This intense
urbanization will increase demand for water supply,
sanitation services and electricity for domestic purposes
(Chapter 7).
In the absence of sustainable resource management
practices for limiting the impact of wasteful consumption
and unsustainable resource use, economic development
can negatively impact water supplies in terms of quality
and quantity. Consumer demand and increasing standards
of living are driving increased demand for water, most
notably by middle income households in developing and
emerging economies through their greater demand for
food, energy and other goods, the production of which
can require significant quantities of water.
Water of acceptable quality and in adequate quantity is
needed to meet food production demands. At the same
time, food production and supply have a negative impact
on the sustainability and quality of water resources.
Agriculture is the biggest water user, with irrigation
accounting for 70% of global water withdrawals (Chapter
6). With increasing demand for food, competition for
water is rising. Specialized crops and livestock products

22

CHAPTER 2

often require more water (and in most cases more energy)
to produce and lead to higher levels of water pollution. In
the pursuit of food security, technological advancements
in the agricultural sector could have significant impacts,
both positive and negative, on water demand, supply and
quality.
Paradoxically, technical progress aimed at improving
resource use efficiency may not always serve the intended
goal of decreasing resource consumption. In terms of
water (as for energy), the implementation of resourcesaving technologies may indeed decrease per unit
consumption, but the savings are often immediately
‘reinvested’ to increase production and thus do not lead
to an overall decrease in demand. This has often been the
case for agriculture and industry (Chapter 8). Technology
can also create rapid, dramatic and unexpected changes
(both in terms of pressures and solutions), making it
the most unpredictable driver (WWAP, 2009). This is
particularly true in the context of water and energy, where
technologies to improve the efficiency or productivity in
one domain can have an opposing effect on the other. For
example, the rapid dispersion of energy technologies, such
as the combination of horizontal drilling and hydraulic
fracturing in areas with scarce or variable water supplies,
can lead to significant localized water stress (Section 3.2.1).
Climate change impacts the hydrological cycle and
consequently impacts water resources. It is an additional
stressor through its effects on other external pressures
and thus acts as an amplifier of the already intense
competition for water resources. For example, higher
temperatures and an increase in the rate of evaporation
may affect water supplies directly and potentially
increase the water demand for agriculture and energy.
Significant levels of uncertainty exist with respect to
climate change projections, and these uncertainties
increase greatly when focusing on local scales. Water
resources management is in a difficult transition phase,
trying to accommodate large uncertainties associated
with climate change while struggling to implement
a difficult set of principles and institutional changes

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

associated with integrated water resources
management (Stakhiv, 2011).
Government policies concerning water and
water-related sectors, including agriculture and
energy, as well as environmental protection, can
obviously exacerbate or alleviate pressures on water
resources. The challenge facing government lies in
better coordinated planning and assessing tradeoffs at the national level (Chapter 5). Investment
by both the public and the private sectors will be
a determining factor for the levels to which the
provision of water and water-related services will
increase.

Consumer demand and increasing
standards of living are driving
increased demand for water, most
notably by middle income households
in developing and emerging economies
through their greater demand for food,
energy and other goods, the production
of which can require significant
quantities of water

2.2 Current global water demand and
projected increases

Data on water use (withdrawals and consumption)6 and
quality are very often outdated, limited or unavailable.
When available, they are often based on estimates rather
than actual measurements. Globally, total freshwater
withdrawals are believed to have increased by about 1%
per year between 1987 and 2000, based on data obtained
from FAO AQUASTAT. It is reasonable to assume this
trend overall has continued since then at a similar rate
to the present. Annual freshwater withdrawals appear
to have stabilized or even declined in the majority of
the world’s most highly developed countries, suggesting
improvements in efficiency and increasing reliance on
the importation of water intensive goods, including food
(Gleick and Palaniappan, 2010). This also suggests that
the 1% annual global increase has been occurring almost
exclusively in developing countries.
Agriculture accounts for roughly 70% of total freshwater
withdrawals globally, with the industrial and domestic
sectors accounting for the remaining 20% and 10%,
respectively, although these figures vary considerably
across countries. More-developed countries have a much
larger proportion of freshwater withdrawals for industry
than less-developed countries, where agriculture
dominates. Agriculture accounts for more than 90%
of freshwater withdrawals in most of the world’s leastdeveloped countries (LDCs) (FAO, 2011a). Historically,
‘energy’ (fuel and power generation) has not normally
been considered as a stand-alone sector when reporting
on water use. Water use for energy has most often been
embedded in ‘industry’. However, the IEA has estimated
global water withdrawals for energy production in
2010 accounted for roughly 15% of the world total

WWDR 2014

(IEA 2012a), or roughly 75% of all industrial water
withdrawals.
While there is wide recognition for the need to allocate
water to ecosystems (WWAP, 2009), and significant
progress has been made on methodologies to quantify
ecosystem requirements (Poff et al., 2010), there is less
systematic information on where and to what extent the
maintenance of environmental flows has actually been
applied.
The global demand for water is expected to grow
significantly for all major water use sectors, with the
largest proportion of this growth occurring in countries
with developing or emerging economies. However,
quantifying potential increases in water demand is
extremely difficult, as ‘there are major uncertainties about
the amount of water required to meet the [growing]
demand for food, energy and other human uses, and
to sustain ecosystems’ (WWAP, 2012, p. 2). Without
improved efficiencies, agricultural water consumption
is expected to increase by about 20% globally by 2050
(WWAP, 2012). Domestic and industrial water demands
are also expected to increase, especially in cities and
countries undergoing accelerated economic growth
and social development. Water demand for energy will
certainly increase as energy demand is expected to
increase by more than one-third in the period 2010–2035,
with countries outside the Organisation for Economic

6	
Withdrawal is the total amount of water taken from a lake, river or aquifer
for any purpose. Consumption is the fraction of withdrawn water that is
lost in transmission, evaporation, absorption or chemical transformation,
or otherwise made unavailable for other purposes as a result of human
use.

WATER: DEMANDS, ENERGY REQUIREMENTS AND AVAILABILITY

23

The global demand for water
is expected to grow significantly
for all major water use sectors,
with the largest proportion of this
growth occurring in countries
with developing or emerging
economies.
Co-operation and Development (OECD) accounting for
90% of demand (IEA, 2012a) (Chapter 3).
According to the OECD, in the absence of new policies
(i.e. the Baseline Scenario), freshwater availability will be
increasingly strained through 2050, with 2.3 billion more
people than today (in total more than 40% of the global
population) projected to be living in areas subjected to
severe water stress, especially in North and South Africa
and South and Central Asia. Global water demand in terms
of water withdrawals is projected to increase by some 55%
due to growing demands from manufacturing (400%),
thermal electricity generation (140%) and domestic use
(130%) (OECD, 2012a) (Figure 2.1). It should be noted that

FIGURE

2.1

Global water demand (freshwater
withdrawals): Baseline Scenario,
2000 and 2050
6 000

these calculations do not take environmental flows into
account, necessary for the future delivery of water supply
and water-based ecosystem services.

2.3 Energy requirements for water provision

Energy is required for two components of water provision:
pumping and treatment. The energy needed for pumping
water depends on elevation change (including depth in
the case of groundwater), distance, pipe diameter and
friction. Pumping water requires a lot of energy because
of its high density. The amount of energy needed in water
and wastewater treatment processes varies greatly and is
dependent upon factors such as the quality of the source
water, the nature of any contamination, and the types of
treatment used by the facility (Section 7.3).

Different levels of treatment are required for different uses.
Drinking water typically requires extensive treatment, and
once used, it needs to be treated again to reach a standard
safe for return to the environment. Many of these steps
are highly energy intensive. Some treatment processes,
such as ultraviolet (UV), consume relatively little energy
(0.01–0.04 kWh/m3). More sophisticated techniques,
such as reverse osmosis, require larger amounts
(1.5–3.5 kWh/m3). Water for agriculture generally requires
little or no treatment, so energy requirements are mainly for
pumping (Section 6.4). Globally, the amount of energy used
for irrigation is directly related to the enormous quantities
of water required for irrigation and the irrigation methods
used.

2.2
FIGURE

5 000

km3

4 000
3 000

Lake or river: 0.37 kWh/m3

2 000
1 000

0

Groundwater: 0.48 kWh/m3
2000 2050 2000 2050 2000 2050 2000 2050
OECD
BRIICS
ROW
World
Irrigation

Domestic

Manufacturing

Livestock
Electricity

Note: BRIICS, Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa;
OECD, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
ROW, rest of the world. This graph only measures ‘blue water’
demand and does not consider rainfed agriculture.
Source: OECD (2012a, fig. 5.4, p. 217, output from IMAGE). OECD
Environmental Outlook to 2050 © OECD.

24

CHAPTER 2

Amount of energy required to provide 1 m3
water safe for human consumption from
various water sources

Wastewater treatment: 0.62–0.87 kWh/m3
Wastewater reuse: 1.0–2.5 kWh/m3
Seawater: 2.58–8.5 kWh/m3

Note: This diagram does not incorporate critical elements such as
the distance the water is transported or the level of efficiency, which
vary greatly from site to site.
Source: WBSCD (2009, fig. 5, p. 14, based on source cited therein).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Growth in desalination has increased significantly over
the past 20 years as countries seek to augment natural
water supplies and as the combined energy and industrial
costs have reportedly dropped to below US$0.50/m3
(IRENA, 2012a). There are currently more than 16,000
desalination plants worldwide, with a total global
operating capacity of roughly 70 million m3/day (IDA,
n.d.). Some industry observers have suggested operating
capacity could nearly double by 2020. Desalinated water
involves the use of at least 75.2 TWh/year, which is
about 0.4% of global electricity consumption (IRENA,
2012a). Although this technology may be appropriate
for supplementing water supplies for some domestic and
industrial users in middle and high income regions near
the coast, it is currently not an affordable alternative for
the poorest countries, for large water consuming sectors
such as agriculture, or for consumption at a distance from
the plant due to transportation costs. There are promising
advances in desalination (Section 5.2.1; Box 12.2) though
at the same time it is recognized that increased salinity
levels in seawater caused by desalination can have negative
impacts on local marine ecosystems.
Groundwater is the primary source of drinking water
worldwide, and in countries such as Denmark and Mexico
comprises a significant portion of water supply (99% and
95%, respectively) while the same ratio is 38% for the
United States of America (USA) (Chilton, 2002; Kenny
et al., 2009). Groundwater pumping typically requires
around 0.1 kWh/m3 at 36.5 m depth to 0.5 kWh/m3 at
122 m depth (US GAO, 2011). Groundwater is often cited
as a high quality source that requires less treatment than
surface water. When groundwater is relatively free of
microbial contamination and any chemical contamination
is localized, its treatments costs can be much lower than
surface water. For example, in Canada, operation and
maintenance costs (including energy and labour) of plants
treating groundwater are approximately half on average

WWDR 2014

An interesting and notable flip
side of the water–energy nexus
is that wastewater is becoming
recognized as a potential source of
energy rather than as a mere waste
stream. In several countries, water
supply companies are working
towards becoming energy neutral.
of those treating surface water (Statistics Canada, 2011).
More than 17% of Canadian groundwater requires no
treatment and nearly 30% requires only disinfection.
Given that the depth of wells, and therefore pumping
costs, are dependent on groundwater level, ensuring
adequate recharge rates can result in long-term cost and
energy savings. In this regard, sustainable groundwater
management, including managing aquifer recharge
(Box 2.1), can lead to positive benefits.

2.1
BOX

Surface water, when located near delivery points, is
usually the least energy intensive to distribute, but can
be highly polluted. Groundwater generally requires little
treatment, but more energy to pump it to the surface.
Brackish groundwater requires significant energy for
treatment, depending on the level of total dissolved
solids in the water (the more salts to be removed, the
more energy required). Seawater desalination is at the
high end of the energy intensity scale, with energy
requirements being a function of water temperature and
salinity (Figure 2.2).

Aquifer recharge
Managed aquifer recharge (MAR) is the process of
intentionally banking, and in some cases treating,
water in aquifers. MAR is used both to prevent
degradation of groundwater resources and to
generate additional sources of drinking water via
storage or bioremediation of wastewater. There are
several types of MAR, some of which require energy
(e.g. aquifer storage and recovery) and some of which
do not (e.g. infiltration ponds) (Dillon, 2005; Tuinhof et
al., 2012). Energy consumptive MAR are used mostly in
the USA and in Australia, while non-consumptive MAR
are used in nearly every region of the world (Tuinhof
et al., 2012).
The use of MAR to create or augment existing water
supplies could have measurable energy savings and
carbon emission reductions. For example, a study
examining parts of the San Francisco Bay Area showed
that creating local water supplies could save 637
million kWh/year. Given that the energy required to
pump groundwater increases with depth, preventing
groundwater depletion also results in long-term
energy savings (US DOE, 2006).
Source: Kirstin I. Conti, IGRAC and University of Amsterdam.

WATER: DEMANDS, ENERGY REQUIREMENTS AND AVAILABILITY

25

An interesting and notable flip side of the water–energy
nexus is that wastewater is becoming recognized as a
potential source of energy (Sections 5.2.4, 7.4.3; Box 16.4)
rather than as a mere waste stream. In several countries,
water supply companies are working towards becoming
energy neutral; they intend to generate an amount of
energy from wastewater that equals the amount of energy
consumed in their other operations.

In the absence of flow regulation by artificial storage
infrastructure, the availability of surface water varies from
place to place across days, seasons, years and decades as
a function of climate variability. Climate change means
past hydrological trends are no longer indicative of future
water availability. According to the most recent climate
projections from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) (2008), dry regions are to a large extent
expected to get drier and wet regions are expected to
get wetter, and overall variability will increase. There is
mounting evidence that this is indeed happening as a
result of an intensification of the water cycle (Durack
et al., 2012) and it is affecting local regional water supplies,
including those available for energy production.

[ See Chapters 17 and 24 (Volume 2) for the case
studies ‘Green energy generation in Vienna, Austria’
and ‘Green energy production from municipal
sewage sludge in Japan’, respectively. ]

2.4 Water availability

While data on precipitation – which can be measured with
relative ease – are generally available for most countries,
river runoff and groundwater levels are generally much
more difficult and costly to monitor. As a result, trends
regarding changes in the overall availability of freshwater
supplies are difficult to determine in all but a few places in
the world. However, it is clear that several countries face
varying degrees of water scarcity, stress or vulnerability
(Figure 2.3).7

7	For more detailed information on water availability, stress and scarcity, see
WWAP (2012, section 4.6, ‘In or out of balance?’).

Total renewable water resources, 2011 (m3 per capita per year)

FIGURE

2.3

There is clear evidence that groundwater supplies are
diminishing, with an estimated 20% of the world’s aquifers
being over-exploited, some massively so (Gleeson et
al., 2012). Globally, the rate of groundwater abstraction
is increasing by 1% to 2% per year (WWAP, 2012),

Absolute
scarcity

0

Stress

Scarcity

500

1 000

Vulnerability

1 700

2 500

7 500

15 000

50 000

Source: WWAP, prepared with data from FAO AQUASTAT (aggregate data for all countries except Andorra and Serbia, external data) (website accessed
Oct 2013), and using UN-Water category thresholds.

26

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Water stress of aquifers important for farming

FIGURE

2.4

Increasing
groundwater
stress

Source: Gleeson et al. (2012, fig. 1, as appears in Nature News, http://www.nature.com/news/demand-for-water-outstrips-supply-1.11143#/ref-link-1).

adding to water stress in several areas (Figure 2.4) and
compromising the availability of groundwater to serve as
a buffer against local supply shortages.
Water quality is also a key determinant of water
availability, although potable water is not required
for all purposes. Polluted (or saline) water cannot be
used for several crucial purposes such as drinking and
hygiene. However, for other purposes such as agriculture
and certain industries, use of slightly polluted water
or partially treated wastewater can be considered. This
provides an opportunity to use reclaimed wastewater and
stormwater, reducing the cost and energy consumption
associated with water treatment (Section 7.4.2).
Although there have been some local successes in
improving water quality (mainly in developed countries),
there are no data to suggest an overall improvement in
water quality at the global scale. Deterioration of wetlands

WWDR 2014

There is clear evidence that
groundwater supplies are
diminishing, with an estimated
20% of the world’s aquifers being
over-exploited, some massively so.
Globally, the rate of groundwater
abstraction is increasing by
1% to 2% per year.
worldwide further contributes to reduced potential in
ecosystems’ capacity to purify water. It is estimated that
more than 80% of used water worldwide – and up to 90%
in developing countries – is neither collected nor treated
(WWAP, 2012), threatening human and environmental
health.

WATER: DEMANDS, ENERGY REQUIREMENTS AND AVAILABILITY

27

CHAPTER

3

Energy’s thirst for water
WWAP | Richard Connor, Ingvar B. Fridleifsson, Michael Webber and James WInpenny

3.1 Global energy demand

Many of the external pressures that drive the increasing
demands for water (Section 2.1) also play influential
roles in the growing demand for energy. Both are
fundamentally driven by (and drivers of) social
development and economic growth, and both are
strongly influenced by economic forces, increasing
living standards, technological development and
government policy. One of the main differences, as
detailed in Chapter 1, is that market forces have tended
to play a much more important role with respect to
energy sector development, whereas the management of
water resources and the improvement of water-related
services have historically been more of a socio-political
prerogative.

Progressive energy access programmes, accelerated
urbanization and rapid economic development in some
developing countries have provided access to modern
energy services for hundreds of millions of people over
the past two decades, especially in China and India.
However, nearly one-fifth of the global population, close
to 1.3 billion people, did not have access to electricity
in 2010, and roughly 2.6 billion people relied on the
traditional use of biomass for cooking (IEA, 2012a)
(Table 1.1).

BOX

3.1

Global energy demand is expected to grow by more than
one-third over the period to 2035, with China, India and
the Middle East accounting for about 60% of the increase,
according to the IEA’s New Policies Scenario (IEA, 2012a)
(see Box 3.1 for a description of IEA scenarios).
The IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2012 estimates global
water withdrawals for energy production in 2010 at
583 billion m3 (representing some 15% of the world’s total
withdrawals), of which 66 billion m3 was consumed (IEA,
2012a). By 2035, according to its New Policies Scenario
(Box 3.1), withdrawals would increase by 20%, whereas
consumption would increase by 85%, driven by a shift
towards higher efficiency power plants with more advanced
cooling systems (that reduce withdrawals but increase
consumption) and due to increased production of biofuel.

3.1.1 Water’s role in meeting the growing energy
demand
Water is crucial for energy. Water is used in the extractive
industries for producing fuels such as coal, uranium, oil
and gas. Water is an input for energy crops such as corn and
sugar cane for ethanol and biomass for fuel pellets. Water
is also crucial for cooling purposes in most power plants
and the driving force for hydroelectric and steam turbines.

Scenarios of the International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook 2012
The Current Policies Scenario exclusively considers the effects of those government policies and measures that had been enacted
or adopted by mid-2012. This scenario does not take into account any possible, potential or even likely future policy actions.
The New Policies Scenario is the central scenario of the IEA’s world energy model. This scenario takes into account broad policy
commitments and plans that have been announced, even where the specific measures to implement these commitments
have yet to be introduced, in addition to those that have already been implemented to address energy-related challenges.
The 450 Scenario deliberately selects a plausible energy pathway consistent with actions having about a 50% chance of
meeting the goal of limiting the global increase in average temperature to 2°C in the long term, compared with pre-industrial
levels. To meet this goal, the long-term concentration of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere needs to be limited to around
450 p.p.m. CO2-eq – hence the scenario’s name.
Source: WWAP, from IEA (2012a).

28

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Energy accounts for a significant fraction of a country’s
water use (both consumptive and non-consumptive). In
developing countries, 10% to 20% of withdrawals are used
to meet industrial needs, including energy (Boberg, 2005).
In some developed countries, where a smaller fraction is
used for agriculture, more than 50% of water withdrawals
are used for power plant cooling alone (Section 3.3.1).
The following sections describe the potential implications
and impacts of energy production on water and examine
supply and demand trends for different forms of primary
energy8 and electrical power generation.

3.2 Primary energy

Water is used to produce fuels in the extractive industries
in a variety of ways, each requiring different quantities of
water (Figure 3.1). For example, many coal seams need to
be dewatered before mining can commence. That water
use is often classed as consumptive because the water
might not subsequently be available for other uses. Water
is also used for leaching minerals in uranium mining,
with significant impacts on the downstream environment.
Significant volumes of water are used for oil and gas
production. Generally, biofuels require more water per
unit energy than extracted fuels because of the water
needed for photosynthesis, and unconventional fossil fuels
require more water than conventional fossil fuels.
There is evidence that demand for all types of primary
energy will increase over the period 2010–2035 (IEA,
2012a) (Figure 3.2). Despite the ongoing progress of ‘clean’
technology policies promoting renewables, the world’s
global energy system appears to remain on a relatively
fixed path with respect to its continued reliance on
fossil fuels. A shift away from oil and coal (and, in some

8	The term ‘primary energy’ is associated with any energy source that is
extracted from a stock of natural resources or captured from a flow of
resources and that has not undergone any transformation or conversion
other than separation and cleaning. Examples include coal, crude oil,
natural gas, solar power and nuclear power.
‘Secondary energy’ refers to any energy that is obtained from a primary
energy source by a transformation or conversion process. Thus oil
products or electricity are secondary energies as these require refining or
electric generators to produce them (IEA, 2004).

WWDR 2014

countries, nuclear power) is expected in OECD countries,
where energy demand is not expected to rise appreciably.
Despite the growth in low carbon sources of energy,
however, fossil fuels are expected to remain dominant in
the global energy mix (IEA, 2012a).

3.1
FIGURE

In some places, water is used for transporting fuels, such
as waterways throughout Europe and many parts of Asia
that float barges carrying coal from mines to power plants.
In other places water is used to permit coal slurry to be
transported from coal mines to power plants through
pipelines.

Water withdrawals and consumption vary for
fuel production

Conventional
gas
Coal
Shale
gas
Refined oil
(conventional)*
Refined oil
(oil sands)**

Gas-to-liquids
Coal-to-liquids
Refined oil
(EOR)***
Lignocellulosic
ethanol****
Palm oil
biodiesel
Rapeseed
biodiesel
Soybean
biodiesel
Corn
ethanol
Sugar cane
ethanol
<1

101 102

103

104

105 106 107
Litres per toe

Withdrawal
Consumption

* The minimum is for primary recovery; the maximum is for
secondary recovery. ** The minimum is for in-situ production,
the maximum is for surface mining. *** Includes carbon dioxide
injection, steam injection and alkaline injection and in-situ
combustion. **** Excludes water use for crop residues allocated to
food production.
Note: toe, tonne of oil equivalent (1 toe = 11.63 MWh = 41.9 GJ).
Ranges shown are for ‘source-to-carrier’ primary energy
production, which includes withdrawals and consumption
for extraction, processing and transport. Water use for biofuels
production varies considerably because of differences in irrigation
needs among regions and crops; the minimum for each crop
represents non-irrigated crops whose only water requirements are
for processing into fuels. EOR, enhanced oil recovery. For numeric
ranges, see http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org.
Source: IEA (2012a, fig. 17.3, p. 507, based on sources cited
therein). World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

29

There is evidence that demand
for all types of primary energy
will increase over the period
2010–2035
3.2.1 Fossil fuels
Coal mining uses large volumes of water for various
processes (Figure 3.1), and discharges to natural water
bodies may be contaminated, while underground
operations may disrupt and contaminate aquifers.
For conventional oil and gas production, water injection
(sometimes referred to as waterflooding) is used to
pressurize fields, increasing productivity. Oil and gas
extraction yields high volumes of ‘produced water’, which
is water that comes out of the well along with the oil and
gas. Produced water usually has very high salinity and is
difficult to treat (Section 9.2.3). Underground injection
into saline aquifers is one disposal method, although the
water can also be treated and reused. In many cases, the
volume of produced water far exceeds the volume of fuel
produced.

FIGURE

3.2

World primary energy demand by fuel in the
New Policies Scenario
5 000

Mtoe

3 000
2 000
1 000
0

Oil

Coal
2010

For hydraulic fracturing, typical water injection volumes
are 8–30 million litres per well. Approximately 250 tonnes
of proppant, such as sand, is injected to hold the cracks
open to increase the gas flows. The typical composition of
fracking fluids is 98% sand and water and 2% chemicals
(acids, surfactants, biocides and scaling inhibitors),
which are added to increase productivity. As producers
become more water efficient, using less water per well, the
relative proportion of chemicals increases. A significant
fraction of the injected fluid comes back out of the wells
as wastewater (including drilling muds, flowback water
and produced water). The volume of produced water that
is returned varies greatly, depending on the geological
characteristics of the formation; it can be as low as 15%
and as high as 300%10 of the injected volume.

Gas Renewables Nuclear
2035

Note: ‘Renewables’ includes bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower,
solar photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar power (CSP), wind and
marine (tide and wave) energy for electricity and heat generation.
See Box 3.1 for an explanation of the New Policies Scenario.
Source: IEA (2012a, fig. 2.3, p. 54). World Energy Outlook 2012
© OECD/IEA.

CHAPTER 3

Unconventional oil and gas production is generally more
water intensive than conventional oil and gas production.
For oil sands production in Canada and heavy oil
production in Venezuela, water is used to make steam to
reduce the viscosity of the fuel, easing production. Water
is also a critical input for hydraulic fracturing, or ‘fracking’
(Box 3.2).

The water intensive process produces large volumes of
wastewater with high salinity and potential for containing
naturally occurring radioactive materials. Further risks
to water quality can occur from storage pits that are not
properly lined (allowing the wastewater to trickle down
into the groundwater), from spills by trucks that carry
the wastewater, or by injection into waterways from
wastewater treatment plants that do not adequately treat
the produced water.

4 000

30

Water is used as a process input and a feedstock for
process steam at refineries to upgrade crude into higher
value products. Typical volumes of water needed end-toend (from extraction through refining) for petroleumbased fuels are 7–15 litres water per litre fuel (Beal, 2012;
Sanders and Webber, 2012). For natural gas, the volumes
of water are approximately 20–50 litres water per barrel
equivalent of oil (Lutz et al., 2013).9

9	For more on the water intensity of transportation fuels, see WWAP (2012,
fig. 19.5).
10	Some wells yield higher volumes of produced water than the amount of
original water that was injected.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

3.2
BOX

Hydraulic fracturing: Prospects and limitations of the natural gas future
Increasing energy demands and decreasing availability of conventional fuels has quickly transformed natural gas extraction
from shale formations into a potentially significant energy solution for the coming decades. The controversy generated by
its potential environmental impacts has arisen equally fast, especially due to risks affecting groundwater resources used for
drinking water supply.
Drilling towers

Schematic representation of infrastructures and potential impacts

Drilling towers

1

Water storages

1

Water storages
Drilling
towers
Drilling
towers

2

11

2
7

3

7

Emissions
Emissions
9
GHG
emissions

7

1
9

Well

Well
4

Cement
casing

Well
Well

5

4
4

5
5

Cement Steel pipe
casing
Cement
casing
Steel pipe Shale
Steel pipe

Steel pipe
Water table
Water table

9

1

6

2
3

8

6
6

8

6

4

8

5
6

Fissures

Shale

Water table 9

5

Cement
casingWater table

Shale
ShaleFissures

Fissures
Fissures

Potential sources of pollution

Power station

1 GHG emissions
Potential sources of pollution

3
3

4

Emissions

Emissions
Power
station

22

3

Power station

Power station
Water
storages
Water
storages
7

7
8
9

2

Land footprint (on natural and crop land)

Risk of explosion (wells, pipelines,
Potential sources of pollution
3 and crop land)
Land footprint
natural
sources(on
of pollution
2 Potential
transport)
GHG emissions
Risk of leakage from wells into the
Risk emissions
of explosion (wells,4pipelines,
13 GHG
Land transport)
footprint (on natural and crop water
land) table
Land
footprint
(on
natural
and
cropofland)
2 8 Risk of leakage from wells
Risk
theleakage from fracking fluid or from
5 into
4Risk of explosion (wells, pipelines,
produced water into the water table
Risk
of
explosion
(wells,
pipelines,
water
table
3transport)
Risk of leakage from improperly treated
transport)
of leakage
from
fracking
leakage
from wells
into
6the fluid or from
5Risk ofRisk
produced
Risk
of leakage
from
wells
the table water and fracking fluids from
water
into
theinto
water
table
4waterproduced
into the soil and water table
water
Risk of
leakage
from fracking
fluid orflowback
fromtreated
Risk
oftable
leakage
from improperly
Similar
to point 6, but into surface water
7table
6 Risk ofwater
leakage
from
fracking
fluid
or from
into
theand
water
5produced
produced
water
fracking
fluids
from
Risk
of Infiltration of fracking fluid into the
produced
waterimproperly
into the 8water
table
Risk of
leakage from
treated
flowback
into the soil and
water table
table; risk of migration of naturally
Risk ofwater
leakage
improperly
treated
produced
andfrom
fracking
fluids water
from
Similar to point 6, but into surface
water
67flowback
occurring
into the
soil and water
table
produced
water
fracking
fluids
fromtoxic substances
Risk
of
Infiltration
of
fracking
fluid
into the
Impacts
flowback
theinto
soilsurface
and9 water
table from improperly treated
to pointinto
6, but
water
8Similar
water
table;ofrisk
of migration
ofthe
naturally
produced
Infiltration
fracking
fluidsurface
into
Similar
to point
6, but into
water water in crops
7Risk of
occurring
toxic
substances
waterRisk
table;
risk of
migration
of naturally
of Infiltration
of fracking
fluid into the
8occurring
Impacts
from
toxic
substances
table;
riskimproperly
of migrationtreated
of naturally
9 water
Impacts
from improperly
produced
water
intreated
crops
occurring
toxic
substances
produced
water
in improperly
crops
Impacts
from
treated
9
Source:
Peduzzi
(2012,
fig. 4, p. 6).
produced
water
in crops

The total amount of the world’s technically recoverable gas resources would increase more than 40% if all the shale gas
resources were added to the already identified conventional gas resources (US EIA, 2011). This newly available energy source
could cover 30% of the world’s total primary energy supply by 2050 (EC, 2012a).
The use of ‘fracking’ in conjunction with horizontal drilling has opened up natural gas resources that had previously not
been commercially viable (US EIA, 2010b). Increasing development of these unconventional resources is closely linked to the
improvement of fracking technologies. Fracking is a part of the production process, even though it is commonly confused
with the complete process, which includes well construction, hydraulic fracturing, production and closure (Cooley and
Donnelly, 2012).
Social awareness about the potential risks of fracking techniques has fostered research on the environmental impacts:
land-take, air pollution, noise pollution, water contamination and withdrawal, biodiversity impacts and seismicity (EC, 2012b).
Public concern is especially focused on the risks affecting drinking water resources. In fact, evidence of a relationship between
methane contamination of shallow aquifers and shale gas exploitation has been recently documented (Osborn et al., 2011).
Drinking water resources as well as ecosystems can be affected by contaminated water (Haluszczak et al., 2013) released by the
well after injection.
Besides groundwater pollution risks, local groundwater consumption by fracking might become a limiting factor, especially in
arid regions where groundwater resources are generally available, unlike surface water. The fracturing process of a single well
requires 7,000–18,000 m3 water (Arthur et al., 2008) distributed along a period of 30–40 years (Nicot and Scanlon, 2012). The
aquifer replenishment capacity of this temporally intense groundwater demand needs to be tackled during project design,
while considering possible conflicts with other groundwater uses.
Other potential impacts from fracking processes are related to chemical mixing or wastewater treatment and disposal (US EPA,
2012; Howarth et al., 2011).
Source: Laura del Val Alonso, IGRAC.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

31

32

CHAPTER 3

120 000
100 000
80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000

Biodiesel

2008

2005

2002

1996
1999

0
1993

In 2010, traditional biomass represented 9.6% of global
final energy consumption (Figure 9.2), whereas modern
biofuels represent only 0.8% of global final energy
consumption (Banerjee et al., 2013, fig. 4.1). But the
contribution of biofuels to energy supply is expected to
grow rapidly, with beneficial impacts including reduction

World ethanol and biodiesel production,
1975–2010

1987
1990

3.2.2 Biofuels

3.3

1981
1984

The development of unconventional gas resources (i.e.
shale gas) appears to be on a fast track in Australia, China
and the USA. There are several other countries where
shale gas resource estimates are high (above 5.6 km3)
and there exists a significant natural gas production
infrastructure for internal use or for export, including
Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Libya and Mexico
(US EIA, 2011). However, regulatory uncertainties
linked to environmental and health concerns are likely
to slow down shale gas development in many of these
countries (IEA, 2012a). Water limitations have also
stymied development of shale gas resources in certain
areas. Significant shale gas development could also
emerge in countries that have at least some gas production
infrastructure and whose estimated shale gas resources are
substantial relative to their current levels of consumption,
which are currently met by natural gas imports. Examples
of countries in this group are Chile, France, Morocco,
Poland, South Africa, Turkey and Ukraine (US EIA, 2011).

Biofuel production has increased dramatically since
2000 (Figure 3.3). Biofuel was originally perceived as a
sustainable (‘green’) alternative to GHG-emitting oil and
gas for transportation (primarily). Propelled in part by
rising oil prices, the macroeconomic trading environment,
and energy security concerns, biofuel policies in the
European Union (EU) have been reconsidered due to
growing recognition of their adverse effects on land,
water and the environment. Understanding of shortterm climate mitigation benefits of biofuels has also been
revised; it has been estimated that biofuels will achieve net
GHG savings only after 2030 (IIASA, 2009).

1975
1978

Demand for natural gas is expected to increase as a result
of rapid growth in developing countries, led by China
(IEA, 2012a). Abundant supplies in North America are
likely to spur growth in natural gas development in the
USA and Canada, and lower natural gas prices may lead
to a significant shift towards the increasing use of gas in
power generation and transport.

However, local and regional impacts of biofuels could be
substantial, as they are among the most water intensive
types of fuel production (Figure 3.1). Biomass production
for energy will compete with food crops for scarce
land and water resources, already a major constraint
on agricultural production in many parts of the world.
China and India, the world’s two largest producers and
consumers of many agricultural commodities, already
face severe water limitations in agricultural production,
yet both have initiated programmes to boost biofuel
production (de Fraiture et al., 2008). The potential
impacts of biofuels on water resources and the impacts
of bioenergy on ecosystems are discussed in detail in
Sections 6.5 and 9.2.2, respectively.

Million litres

Growth in oil consumption in emerging economies
(China, India and the Middle East) is likely to outweigh
reduced demands in OECD countries, pushing global oil
demand steadily higher over the next two decades (IEA,
2012a).

in GHGs, improved energy security and potential new
income sources for farmers (de Fraiture et al., 2008).

FIGURE

Coal met 45% of the growth in global energy demand over
the past decade (IEA, 2012a). Policy decisions, including
possible measures to cut coal-related greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and to develop and deploy CCS will
determine whether demand carries on rising strongly or
changes course radically. In the power sector, inter-fuel
competition with renewables and gas can also affect coal
demand (IEA, 2012a).

Ethanol

Source: Shrank and Farahmand (2011, fig. 1, from source cited
therein).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Global production of ethanol and biodiesel is
projected to expand, but at a slower rate than in the
past. Ethanol production is dominated by the USA,
Brazil and, to a lesser extent, the EU and China.
Biofuel production in many developing countries is
projected to remain below expressed targets, as the
cultivation of non-edible biofuel crops (i.e. ‘biomass
based [second generation]’ in Figure 3.4) remains,
in most cases, on a project or small-scale level, and
the high price of agricultural commodities does
not encourage their use as biofuel feedstock. The
high price of crude and policies promoting biofuel
usage strongly affect biofuel markets (OECD/FAO,
2012). Subsidies continue to be a major driver of biofuel
expansion (Webb and Coates, 2012).

3.3 Electrical power generation

Approximately 90% of global power generation is
water intensive. Water is used directly for hydropower
generation as well as for all forms of thermal power
generation schemes. Water also indirectly enables power
generation through the cooling it provides for the vast
majority of thermal power plants. These plants use heat
(from nuclear, coal, natural gas, petroleum, solar or
biomass sources) to make power, and are responsible for
roughly 80% of global electricity production (Figure 3.5).

Increasing ambient water temperatures and changes in
overall water availability create risks for the power sector.
Power plants have had to shut down because of lack
of water for cooling purposes or because of high water
temperatures; droughts are threatening the hydropower
capacity of many countries; and several reports
conclude that water availability could be a constraint
for the expansion of the power sector in many emerging
economies, especially in Asia (IEA, 2012a; Bloomberg,
2013; Sauer et al., 2010).
Almost 1.3 billion people did not have access to electricity
in 2010 (Table 1.1). Although access differs significantly
across regions, the majority of the unserved population
resides in LDCs and sub-Saharan Africa in particular
(Figure 3.6).

Global ethanol production by feedstock

Billion litres

FIGURE

3.4

Approximately 90% of global
power generation is water intensive.
Water is used directly for
hydropower generation as well as
for all forms of thermal
power generation schemes.

180

Other feedstocks

160

Roots and tuber

140

Biomass based
(second generation)

120

Sugar beet

100

Molasses

80

Sugar cane

60

Wheat
Coarse grains

40
20
0
20072009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Source: OECD/FAO (2010, fig. 4.5, p. 87). OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2010–2019 © OECD.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

33

Globally, electricity demand is expected to grow by
roughly 70% by 2035. This growth will be almost entirely
in non-OECD countries, with China and India accounting
for more than half that growth. As shown in Table
3.1 and Figure 3.7, the greatest increases in the power
generation mix in both OECD and non-OECD countries

FIGURE

3.5

World electricity generation by source of
energy as a percentage of world electricity
generation, 2011
Waste 0.4% Solar PV 0.3%
Biofuels 1.5%
Wind 2.0%

Geothermal 0.3%
Other <0.1%

Hydro 15.8%

The following sections examine water-related impacts and
implications of the main forms of electricity generation
and provide an outlook of projected future growth trends
that will determine the pressures on water resources.

3.3.1 Thermal power

Nuclear
11.7%

Coal and Peat
41.3%

Oil 4.8%

Gas 21.9%

Note: PV, solar photovoltaic.
Source: WWAP, from data in IEA (2013).

With a direct heat transferring capacity roughly four
times greater than air, water is a much more effective
coolant. The thermal power sector is a large user of water;
in Europe, it is responsible for 43% of total freshwater
withdrawals (Rübbelke and Vögele, 2011) and accounts
for more than 50% national water withdrawals in
several countries (Eurostat, 2010). The thermal power
sector is also the single largest user of water in the USA,
responsible for nearly half of all water withdrawals, ahead
of even agriculture (Kenny et al., 2009). In China, water

Access to electricity in developing countries as a percentage of the population, 2011

FIGURE

3.6

are expected to come from renewables. Hydropower
is expected to account for the largest portion of the
renewable increase in non-OECD countries, whereas wind
is predicted to dominate in the OECD. In the absence
of sturdy energy policies, the capital cost of the plant
is by far the most important driver in the evolution of
nuclear power and renewables. Relative costs, which are
also influenced by government policies, are the primary
driver of the projected changes in the types of fuels and
technologies used to generate power (IEA, 2012a).

Source: ChartsBin.com (http://chartsbin.com/view/10471, based on source cited therein [original data from IEA World Energy Outlook statistics at
http://www.iea.org/stats/index.asp]) (Accessed Oct 2013) and updated with data from the IEA World Energy Outlook 2013 Electricity Access Database
(http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/energydevelopment/WEO2013Electricitydatabase.xlsx) for India and Nicaragua.

34

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

withdrawals for power plant cooling exceed 100 billion m3
annually, which is more than 10% of the national cap
(700 billion m3) (Bloomberg, 2013). In developing

Share of electricity generation by source and region in the New Policies Scenario

FIGURE

3.7

countries, relative water use by the power sector is
generally lower, and by the agriculture sector is generally
higher.

Coal
OECD

2010

10 850 TWh

Gas

2035

13 300 TWh

Oil
Nuclear

Non-OECD

2010

10 560 TWh

Bioenergy

2035

23 340 TWh

Hydro
Wind

World

2010

21 410 TWh

2035

36 640 TWh

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

Solar PV
Other renewables

100%

Note: See Box 3.1 for an explanation of the New Policies Scenario. PV, solar photovoltaic.
Source: IEA (2012a, fig. 6.2, p. 183). World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.

Electricity generation by source and scenario (TWh)

TABLE

3.1

New Policies

Current Policies

450 Scenario

1990

2010

2020

2035

2020

2035

2020

2035

OECD

7 629

10 848

11 910

13 297

12 153

14 110

11 470

12 153

Fossil fuels*

4 561

6 600

6 629

6 401

6 981

7 948

5 931

3 328

Nuclear

1 729

2 288

2 318

2 460

2 299

2 240

2 392

2 982

Hydro

1 182

1 351

1 486

1 622

1 474

1 578

1 521

1 730

Other renewables

157

609

1 477

2 813

1 400

2 343

1 627

4 112

Non-OECD

4 190

10 560

16 325

23 340

17 040

26 255

15 026

19 595

Fossil fuels*

2 929

7 847

11 163

14 528

12 167

18 882

9 522

7 159

Nuclear

283

468

1 125

1 906

1 099

1 668

1 209

2 986

Hydro

962

2 079

3 027

4 054

2 916

3 771

3 137

4 532

Other renewables

15

166

1 010

2 851

858

1 934

1 159

4 918

World

11 819

21 408

28 235

36 637

29 194

40 364

26 497

31 748

Fossil fuels*

7 490

14 446

17 793

20 929

19 148

26 829

15 453

10 487

Nuclear

2 013

2 756

3 443

4 366

3 397

3 908

3 601

5 968

Hydro

2 144

3 431

4 513

5 677

4 390

5 350

4 658

6 263

Other renewables

173

775

2 486

5 665

2 259

4 277

2 785

9 031

* Includes coal-, gas- and oil-fired generation.
Note: See Box 3.1 for an explanation of the scenarios.
Source: IEA (2012a, table 6.2, p. 182). World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

35

Several factors determine how much cooling water is
needed by thermal power plants, including the fuel type,
cooling system design and prevailing meteorological
conditions. However, efficiency is often the main factor
that drives water requirements: the more efficient the
power plant, the less heat has to be dissipated, thus
less cooling is required (Delgado, 2012). Older power

Wind
Solar PV
CSP*

Dry

Geothermal**
Gas CCGT
Gas CCGT
Cooling tower

Gas CCGT (CCS)
Coal IGCC
Coal IGCC (CCS)
Fossil steam

Fossil steam (CCS)

Oncethrough

Cooling
pond

Nuclear
Gas CCGT
Fossil steam
Nuclear
Gas CCGT
Fossil steam
Nuclear

Withdrawal
Consumption

<1

10

1

10

2

10

3

4

5

10
10
10
Litres per MWh

6

* Includes trough, tower and Fresnel technologies using tower, dry
and hybrid cooling, and Stirling technology. ** Includes binary, flash
and enhanced geothermal system technologies using tower, dry
and hybrid cooling.
Notes: Ranges shown are for the operational phase of electricity
generation, which includes cleaning, cooling and other process
related needs; water used for the production of input fuels is
excluded. Fossil steam includes coal-, gas- and oil-fired power
plants operating on a steam cycle. Reported data from power
plant operations are used for fossil-steam once-through cooling;
other ranges are based on estimates summarized in the sources
cited. Solar PV, solar photovoltaic; CSP, concentrating solar power;
CCGT, combined-cycle gas turbine; IGCC, integrated gasification
combined-cycle; CCS, carbon capture and storage. For numeric
ranges, see http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org.
Source: IEA (2012a, fig. 17.4, p. 510, from sources cited therein).
World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.

36

CHAPTER 3

[ See Chapter 21 (Volume 2) for the case study
‘Water use efficiency in thermal power plants in
India’. ]
For power plants with similar efficiency levels, the
cooling system used will determine how much water is
required. The three most prevalent cooling methods are
open-loop, closed-loop and dry cooling (hybrid wet-dry
systems exist, but are not widely used). Open-loop, or
once-through, cooling withdraws large volumes of surface
water, fresh and saline, for one-time use and returns nearly
all the water to the source with little being consumed by
evaporation (Figure 3.8). Closed-loop cooling requires
less water withdrawal, as the water is recirculated through
use of cooling towers or evaporation ponds, leading to
much higher water consumption (Table 3.2) (Stillwell
et al., 2011).

Water use for electricity generation by
cooling technology
Other/none

FIGURE

3.8

plants tend to be less efficient and thus consume more
water (using the same cooling system under similar
meteorological conditions).

Dry cooling does not require water, but instead cools by
use of fans that move air over a radiator (similar to those
in automobiles). Power plant efficiency is lower, and this
option is often the least attractive economically. While dry
cooling is less effective in warmer and dryer climates, such
installations do operate in warm and dry areas, including
China, Morocco, South Africa and south-western USA,
because these systems offer resilience against drought, but
have parasitic losses on power plant output. It has been
estimated that cost reductions of 25% to 50% are needed
for air cooled condensers (ACC) to become economically
competitive in most regions of the world (Ku and Shapiro,
2012).
The volatility of price fluctuations of the three main
fuels for thermal power generation – coal, natural gas
and oil – renders the projection of future trends in plant
development and related fuel consumption problematic.
The future energy mix is likely to be determined by
factors such as developments in the exploration and
production of unconventional oil and gas, the economic
implications of these developments, and their impact on
the market price of fuels. The future of unconventional
gas is itself uncertain, according to the IEA (2012a,
p. 125): ‘the prospects for unconventional gas production
worldwide remain uncertain and depend, particularly,
on whether governments and industry can develop and
apply rules that effectively earn the industry a “social

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

licence to operate” within each jurisdiction, so satisfying
already clamorous public concerns about the related
environmental and social impacts’ (Box 3.2).
In spite of the uncertainties, coal is expected to remain
the backbone fuel for electricity generation globally
through to 2035 (Figure 3.7). Although its use for this
purpose will continue to rise in absolute terms, its
share in the total generation is expected to fall while the
share of gas increases slightly (IEA, 2012a). Oil-fired
power generation is also likely to diminish, due in part
to increased competition for oil from the transportation
sector.

Globally, electricity demand is
expected to grow by roughly 70%
by 2035. This growth will be almost
entirely in non-OECD countries.

3.3.2 Nuclear power
As nuclear power generation relies on the same cooling
technologies as those described above for thermal power
(nuclear is a form of thermal power), the immediate
water-related impacts are similar. Nuclear output is

3.3.3 Hydropower
Although hydropower generation is a major water
user, most of the water used is returned to the river

Thermal power plant cooling system advantages and disadvantages

TABLE

3.2

expected to grow in absolute terms, driven by expanded
generation in China, Korea, India and Russia, but its share
in the global electricity mix is expected to fall slightly over
time (Table 3.3; Figure 3.7) (IEA, 2012a). In Canada and
the USA, the competitiveness of nuclear power is being
challenged by the growth of relatively inexpensive natural
gas.

Cooling system

Advantages

Disadvantages

Once-through [open-loop]

Low water consumption

High water withdrawals [with risk of
impingement and entrainment of
aquatic life]

Mature technology
Lower capital cost
[Highest performance]
Wet tower [closed-loop]

Impact on ecosystem
Exposure to thermal discharge limits

Significantly lower water withdrawal
than once-through

Higher water consumption than
once-through

Mature technology

Lower power plant efficiency [slightly
lower performance than once-through]

[High performance]

Higher capital cost than once-through
[Thermal plumes]
Dry

Zero or minimal water withdrawal and
consumption

Higher capital cost relative to oncethrough and wet tower
Lower plant efficiency, particularly
when ambient temperatures are high
[hot, dry days]
Larger land area requirements

Hybrid [wet-dry]

Lower capital cost than dry cooling

Higher capital cost than wet tower

Reduced water consumption
compared with wet tower

Limited technology experience

No efficiency penalty on hot [wet] days
Operational flexibility
Source: Adapted from IEA (2012a, table 17.2, p. 509, from source cited therein). World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

37

Hydroelectricity is currently
the largest renewable source for
power generation in the world,
meeting 16% of global electricity
needs in 2010

Beyond electricity generation, hydropower, and more
specifically reservoirs, can also provide storage for dry
spells, and they support flood management, navigation
and recreation. Problems can arise due to the different
timings throughout the year when releases of water are
required for different purposes. Large-scale hydroelectric
plants around the world have been criticized for a number
of reasons, including damage to the environment and
biodiversity, loss of cultural and historical sites, and social
disruption (Glassman et al., 2011) (see Section 9.2.1 for
more on the impacts of hydropower on ecosystems).

downstream of the plant once it has run through the
turbines or when the reservoir has been filled. Data on
water consumption by hydropower are widely inconsistent
(WWAP, 2012, box 2.1) and initiatives are exploring the
need and methods for apportionment of the consumed
water to the various services of the reservoir. The amount
of water consumed via seepage and evaporation is
determined by climate, physical characteristics of the
reservoir, and allocations to other uses, which are sitespecific and variable.

[ See Chapters 19 and 23 (Volume 2) for the
case studies ‘Hydropower development in Eastern
Herzegovina: The Trebišnjica Multipurpose
Hydrosystem’ and ‘The role of hydroelectric power
stations in the aftermath of the Great East Japan
Earthquake’, respectively. ]
Hydroelectricity is currently the largest renewable source
for power generation in the world, meeting 16% of global
electricity needs in 2010 (IEA, 2012a) (Figure 3.5). The recent
rate of growth in electricity generation from additional hydro
capacities has been similar to that of all other renewables
combined (Figure 3.9) (IEA, 2012b). In 2010,11 the global

‘Run-of-the-river’ hydroelectric plants consume minimal
water. They return temporarily diverted water to the
running water source, and do not require reservoirs. At
the moment, however, they are too small in scale to supply
large amounts of energy (Glassman et al., 2011) and are
therefore best suited to provide power at the community
level.

Electricity generation from recent additions to hydropower and other renewables

600

600

500

500

400

400

TWh

TWh

FIGURE

3.9

11	The most recent single year for which such data were available at the time
of writing this report.

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0
2005

2006

2007

2008
2009
Hydropower

2010

2011

2005

2006
Wind

2007
2008
2009
Solar
Bioenergy

2010
2011
Geothermal

Source: IEA (2012b, fig. 3, p. 12, from source cited therein). Technology Roadmap: Hydropower 2012 © OECD/IEA.

38

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

production of hydroelectricity was estimated to have
increased by more than 5% (IRENA, 2012b).
Hydropower, when associated with water storage in
reservoirs, can store energy over weeks, months, seasons
or years. Because spinning turbines can be ramped
up more rapidly than any other generation source,
hydropower (and pumped storage) can contribute to the
stability of the electrical system by providing the full range
of ancillary services required for the high penetration of
variable renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar
(IRENA, 2012b).
Pumped storage hydroelectricity is a type of generation
used by some power plants. These plants make use of lowcost off-peak energy to adjust to variations in demand and
to balance the load. They are a net consumer of energy.
They draw electricity from the grid to lift the water up,

FIGURE

3.10

then return most of the water later, with a round-trip
energy efficiency of 70% to 85% (IEA, 2012b). It has been
estimated that more than 127,000 MW of pumped storage
capacity was operating worldwide in 2009, and this was
expected to grow 60% through 2014 (Montoya, 2009).
Pumped storage currently represents 99% of on-grid
electricity storage (EPRI, 2010).
According to Kumar et al. (2011), the percentage of
undeveloped technical potential for hydropower is highest
in Africa (92%), followed by Asia (80%), Australasia/
Oceania (80%) and Latin America (74%) (Figure 3.10).
However, only about two-thirds of estimated total
technical potential is believed to be economically feasible
(Table 3.3) (Aqua-Media International Ltd, 2012).
Hydropower’s share in total electricity generation is
expected to remain around 15% through 2035 (IEA,

Regional hydropower technical potential in terms of annual generation and installed capacity, and
percentage of undeveloped technical potential in 2009
North America

388 1659
61%*
GW TWh/year

Latin America

608 2856
74%*
GW TWh/year

Europe

338 1021 47%*
GW TWh/year

Africa

283 1174
92%*
GW TWh/year

Asia

2037 7681
80%*
GW TWh/year

Australasia/
Oceania

67
185
80%*
GW TWh/year

World Hydropower
Technical Potential:
14 576 TWh/year
Technical Potential
Capacity (GW)
Generation (TWh/year)
Installed (%)
*Undeveloped (%)

Source: Kumar et al. (2011, fig. 5.2, p. 445, based on source cited therein). © IPCC.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

39

Wind and solar PV consume
negligible amounts of water, yet
they provide an intermittent
service that needs to be
compensated for by other sources
of power (which do require water)
to maintain load balances on
larger grids
2012a), keeping pace with the overall growth rate of
power generation. Nearly 90% of the expected increase in
hydropower production between 2010 and 2035 would be
in non-OECD countries, where the remaining potential is
higher and growth in electricity demand is strongest. Most
incremental increases in hydropower output are expected
to come from large projects in emerging economies and
developing countries in Asia and Latin America, notably
in China, India and Brazil (IEA, 2012a). In Asia and
particularly in Africa, lack of financing and of operational
capacity, combined with political and market risks, create
major challenges to hydropower development (Chapters
11, 14). Uncertainty remains with respect to how various
social and environmental issues may affect the rate of
hydropower development in these regions.

PV generally consumes minimal water (Figure 3.8),
mainly in the production stage and during cleaning and
maintenance. The other, concentrated solar power (CSP),
commonly known as ‘solar thermal’, concentrates solar
rays to produce steam to power turbines.
Using the same type of cooling system (and assuming
today’s generation of technology and cleaning frequency),
CSP consumes approximately five times more water per
unit energy than a gas-fired power plant, two times more
than a coal-fired plant and 1.5 times more than a nuclear
plant (Glassman et al., 2011). There are efforts to reduce
this need for water in many aspects of solar thermal
systems, ranging from mirrors to fluids and thermal
storage. Dry cooling (Section 3.3.1) is already being
implemented in some CSP power plants around the world,
including the Ain Beni Mathar CSP-CC power plant in
Morocco (Abengoa Solar, n.d.).
During the period 2000–2010, electricity generation from
wind grew by 27% and from solar PV by 42% per year on
average (IEA, 2012a). While hydropower and geothermal
electricity produced at optimal sites are still among the
cheapest ways of generating electricity, the levelized12
cost of electricity is declining for wind, solar PV, CSP and
some biomass technologies (IRENA, 2013). Wind and
solar power are expected to continue expand rapidly over
the next 20 years (IEA, 2012a).

3.3.4 Solar and wind power
Broadly, there are two primary categories of solar
technologies. One, solar photovoltaic (PV), converts
solar energy directly into electricity. Like wind, solar

Economically feasible hydropower potential, installed capacity and power generation by region

TABLE

3.3

12	The ‘levelized cost of energy’ is the constant price per unit of energy that
causes the investment to break even.

Economically feasible
hydropower potential
(GWh/year)

Installed hydrocapacity
(MW)

Hydro generation in 2011
or average/most recent
(GWh/year)

Africa

842 077

25 908

112 163

Asia

4 688 747

444 194

1 390 800

Australasia/Oceania

88 700

13 327

39 394

Europe

842 805

181 266

531 152

North America

1 055 889

140 339

681 496

South America

1 676 794

140 495

712 436

World

9 195 041

975 528

3 467 440

Source: WWAP, with data from Aqua-Media International Ltd (2012).

40

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

In a study comparing various sources of renewable energy
in terms of environmental and social impacts, wind power
turned out to be the most sustainable, mainly because of
its low GHG emissions and water consumption (Evans
et al., 2009). Wind and solar PV consume negligible
amounts of water, yet they provide an intermittent service
that needs to be compensated for by other sources of
power (which do require water) to maintain load balances
on larger grids. Climate information is critical for the
safety and basic operations of these renewable energy
sources (as well as hydropower) to ensure consistency and
cost-effectiveness of power generation.

3.3.5 Geothermal power
Although geothermal power plants have been reported
to generally use and consume less water per kilowatthour of lifetime energy output than other electric power
generation technologies (Clark et al., 2010), actual water
requirements are highly variable from site to site
(Figure 3.8) based on well depth and technology used,
among other factors.
The relative growth in wind and solar energy has in recent
years outstripped that of geothermal energy, reflecting
strong investment for research and development in
those sectors. In contrast to wind and solar power plants,
however, geothermal power plants are well suited to

[ See Chapters 22 and 29 (Volume 2) for the
case studies ‘A science-based tool for integrating
geothermal resources into regional energy planning
in Umbria, Italy’ and ‘The use of and prospects for
geothermal energy in Turkey’. ]
Considering the average thermal gradient of Earth, the
potential for developing low to medium temperature
geothermal resources (from a few degrees above ambient
temperature to 150°C) for direct thermal uses is present
in most parts of the world. High temperature resources
capable of electricity generation (ranging from 150°C
to more than 300°C) being linked to crustal thermal
anomalies are rarer. They have been identified in some 90
countries, and quantified records of their utilization exist
for 79 countries. Geothermal electricity is generated in 24
countries, providing a significant proportion (5% to 26%)
of the national electricity balance in nine of them. Ten
developing countries are among the top 16 countries in
geothermal electricity production (Bertani, 2012)
(Figure 3.11).

Worldwide installed capacity for geothermal electricity in 2010

FIGURE

3.11

producing a balanced and highly efficient electrical base
load (van der Gun et al., 2012).

Germany
7 MW

Austria
1 MW

Turkey
91 MW

USA
3098 MW

Russia
82 MW

Iceland
575 MW

France
16 MW
Nicaragua
88 MW
Mexico
958 MW

China
24 MW

Portugal
29 MW

Japan
535 MW

Italy
843 MW

Guatemala
52 MW
El Salvador
204 MW

Philippines
1904 MW

Thailand
0.3 MW
Costa Rica
166 MW

Ethiopia
7 MW
Kenya
202 MW

Papua
New Guinea
56 MW

Indonesia
1197 MW
Australia
1 MW

New Zealand
762 MW

Note: Worldwide total: 10.9 GW.
Source: Bertani (2012, fig. 2, p. 3).

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

41

[ See Chapter 25 (Volume 2) for the case study
‘The role of geothermal energy in Kenya’s long-term
development vision’. ]
Geothermal energy for both direct thermal uses
(district heating and others) and for power generation
is underdeveloped and its potential is greatly
underappreciated. It is climate independent, produces
minimal to near-zero GHG emissions, does not consume
water, and its availability is infinite at human time
scales. In 2010, the annual worldwide use of geothermal
energy was reported to be 67 TWh for electricity and
122 TWh for direct use (Fridleifsson, 2012). Although
this is a marginal quantity on the global scale (Figure 3.5),
geothermal energy can make a substantial contribution
to energy supply at the local or national levels. It is
considered possible to increase the installed worldwide
geothermal electricity capacity from the current 10 GW
to 70 GW with present technology, and to 140 GW with
enhanced technology (Fridleifsson et al., 2008).
A recent study consolidating decades of archived
geological information in the USA shows that geothermal
energy could offer 3,000 GW of added power –
approximately 10 times the capacity of the country’s coal
power plants (Blackwell et al., 2011).

BOX

3.3

The water-related challenges of coal-fired
power stations in Western China
In the water-scarce western regions of China,
new industries and power stations secure cooling
water from local lakes and rivers, drawing down
groundwater aquifers and building reservoirs to
capture rainwater, all of which disrupt water supplies
to other local users and lead to unsustainable water
use. Because of such activities in Inner Mongolia
it has been reported that the water table has
dropped and grasslands such as Xilingol have
become unproductive. The Wulagai Wetland has
dried up significantly (Larson, 2012). In such cases,
the sheer volumes of water abstracted for cooling,
even though mainly non-consumptive, can have a
significant impact on water levels and other users
in regions of growing water scarcity. The most
recent Chinese Five Year Plan (2011−2015) calls for
the creation of 14 large coal industry bases across
Western China, to include coal mines and coal-fired
power plants (Larson, 2012).
Source: James Winpenny, WWAP.

42

CHAPTER 3

3.4 Energy policy implications for water

As described throughout this chapter, water can play either
a beneficial or a detrimental role in the viability of energy
production options. It is therefore vital to take account of
the water implications of different options when developing
energy policy. Changes to the energy mix are not occurring
in the same way globally. Trends can be differentiated
for the power sector and transportation fuels sector. The
energy mix is constantly evolving, determined in large
part by national energy policy, which is itself influenced by
markets, technologies and (often to a lesser extent) social
and environmental concerns.
In the transportation fuels sector, much of the world is
moving away from conventional petroleum-based fuels
(petrol and diesel, relatively water-lean to produce). Many
nations are selecting more water intensive options, such
as unconventional fossil fuels (from hydraulic fracturing,
coal-to-liquids or oil sands), biofuels and electricity. Even
electric powered transportation is water intensive because
of water requirements at the power plant. The USA initiated
a major policy priority in 2007 of moving towards increased
use of biofuels, with additional policy support for gas and
liquids produced from hydraulic fracturing, both of which
are relatively water intense. While the EU is revisiting
its biofuel policies, biofuels remain a priority and a nonnegligible portion of the fuel mix in Europe.
In the power sector, some regions are moving towards more
water intensive options while others are moving towards less
water intensive choices as different nations pursue different
paths. Planned and possible phase-outs and reductions
in nuclear power may lead to more or less water intensive
alternatives, including renewables and natural gas. Much
of the Asia-Pacific region and South America is moving
towards a large build-up of hydroelectric power (Chapters 11
and 13). New reservoirs might increase consumption (due
to increased evaporation), but might also increase water
availability for other uses because of large-scale storage
capacity. China is moving aggressively to ramp up its coal
production, which can be water intensive at the power plant
and in the mining process (Box 3.3). China, along with
India and the Middle East, is also moving towards increased
nuclear power production. The USA is moving away from
coal towards natural gas and wind and solar energy, which
will reduce the water intensity of its power production.

3.4.1 Competition over scarce water supplies: The
emerging challenge of thermal power generation
The abstraction of water for cooling purposes by thermal
power stations is high and rising across many regions

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

and countries of the world. This is especially so in the
countries of Europe and in China, India and the USA.
This has triggered concern in the US Administration
(US GAO, 2009). Concern is also spreading about the
compatibility of China’s energy plans with its water
availability (IEA, 2012a, ch. 17; Larson, 2010, 2012).
A common view is that raw water drawn for thermal
power and industrial cooling purposes is nonconsumptive, because nearly all of it is returned to public
water bodies for use by other sectors. For the most
common forms of cooling (once-through/open-loop),
large volumes of water are abstracted, but only a small
percentage is actually consumed (Section 3.3.1).
Concerns about the use of water by thermal power
stations centre on several key issues. First, the release
of large volumes of heated water from open-loop power
plants into natural watercourses affects fish and other
wildlife, which raises environmental concerns (Section
9.2.4). Second, the abstraction, transport, storage and
release of the cooling water can be highly disruptive for
other local water users. Third, for the alternative, closedloop thermal power stations, consumptive use is much
higher – 50% or more (Kenny et al., 2009). This cooling
technology is spreading, especially in water scarce areas.
The water footprint of thermal power generation extends
to its main source of primary energy – whether coal, oil or
gas.13 For countries such as China and India, where a high
proportion of electricity is from coal-fired power stations
(80% in China), the water required for coal mining
operations (Figure 3.1) is a major additional factor to be
considered.

In the transportation fuels sector,
much of the world is moving away
from conventional petroleumbased fuels (petrol and diesel,
relatively water-lean to produce).
Many nations are selecting more
water intensive options, such as
unconventional fossil fuels (from
hydraulic fracturing, coal-to-liquids
or oil sands), biofuels and electricity.
Even electric powered transportation
is water intensive because of water
requirements at the power plant.
It is unrealistic and unfair to expect all the adjustment
to fall on a single water user, such as thermal power
generation. Actions by other major water users are
necessary too. As described in Part 2 of this report,
there is major scope for reducing the water footprints of
agriculture, industry and cities as well. However, with
energy (and thermal power in particular) expected to be
the fastest growing water demand sector over the next
few decades, it is imperative that the water implications
of energy options such as thermal power are taken into
consideration.

13	Nuclear power is a special case.

WWDR 2014

ENERGY’S THIRST FOR WATER

43

CHAPTER

4

Data challenges and opportunities
WWAP | Richard Connor, Arjen Y. Hoekstra and Engin Koncagül

This chapter focuses on data issues directly related to the
water–energy nexus.14
Generally speaking, aggregated data on energy are
available with much greater fidelity and abundance than
are data on water.
Top-level annual estimates for energy consumption by
fuel exist at the national level for most countries, allowing
for informed decision-making in terms of energy policy
as well as for financial, economic, environmental and
welfare policy, among others. In addition, because some
forms of energy – namely oil, gas and coal – have a global
market, trade statistics are available that can be used to
track global production and consumption by country.
The World Bank and IEA track top-level statistics based
on energy trade, as does the British Petroleum Statistical
Review. No such market-related parallel exists for water.
In the industrialized countries, data are also available
on a frequently updated basis (weekly for petroleum,
monthly for electricity and other forms of energy) for
energy production and consumption according to fuel
type and end use. This provides these countries with a
net competitive advantage over developing countries that
may not have the governmental structures or capacities
necessary for such systematic data collection and analysis.
Even where energy data are collected in great detail,
however, the resolution and extent of the data are not
aligned with water data. From a water management point
of view, it is important to know whether, for instance,
desalination is done using fossil fuels or solar energy.

For water resources,
monitoring availability and
use represents an immense and
ongoing challenge, especially
given their variable distribution
over time and space
44

CHAPTER 4

For water resources, monitoring availability and use
represents an immense and ongoing challenge, especially
given their variable distribution over time and space.
Traditional statistics assessing the relative water intensity
of major water uses (domestic, industry, agriculture) are
often unsatisfactory when one is interested in the final
goal of allocating water resources to different sectors.
This is especially unsatisfactory regarding energy, which
appears to account for 75% of all industrial withdrawals
(Section 2.2). There are often too few metrics upon which
to make informed decisions or to track any outcomes
of water productivity improvement measures. In many
cases, relevant water datasets may be non-existent, out
of date, limited or filled with errors. And when available,
water use statistics are generally limited to gross water
withdrawals, while it is often more relevant to know the
net water consumption.
Lack of data puts water resources management at a
political disadvantage in terms of priority decisionmaking. While energy may be perceived as ‘big business’
(Section 1.3.2), the central role of water in socioeconomic development remains under-acknowledged
(WWAP, 2012). As a result, many of the decisions
made and implementation mechanisms adopted with
respect to energy (e.g. improved efficiency, economic
growth, enhanced service coverage or benefitting the
impoverished) fail to take proper account of the impact of
these actions on water resources or the different benefits
to other water users.
Water and energy use accounts offer a limited means
for understanding the critical links between the water
and energy domains. An often-overlooked issue in the
water-for-energy debate is whether water requirements
are expressed per unit of gross or net energy output. For
example, existing agricultural water use statistics make
it hard to determine how much water is actually used

14	For a detailed discussion of data availability on water resources and their
use, see WWAP (2009, ch. 13 and 2012, ch. 6).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

for the production of biofuel crops, where the energy
input in production is often substantial compared with
the energy output, so the water footprint per unit of
net energy output can easily be a multiple of the water
footprint per unit of gross energy output (GerbensLeenes et al., 2009).
Decisions about water and energy allocation, production
and distribution between different users and uses have
important social and gender equality implications, and
impact on the resources available at community levels.
Monitoring progress requires the generation and analysis
of gender-disaggregated data, which considers not only
the existence of differences between men and women, but
also the causes and impacts of these differences.

Top-level annual estimates for
energy consumption by fuel exist
at the national level for most
countries, allowing for informed
decision-making in terms of
energy policy
and other stakeholders, and it is hoped they will allow for
informed, rational decisions to be made.

Data and Indicators Annex of the WWDR 2014

The coordinated approaches to water and energy called
for throughout this report require the generation and
harmonization of data concerning the supply and use
of water and energy production. A more detailed set of
water accounting statistics describing different water uses
within sectors, including energy, would facilitate decisionmaking and help ensure that water resources are allocated
to the most appropriate uses. Although estimating water
consumption for different types of energy production
can be quite challenging, time consuming and errorprone, this knowledge is fundamental to ensuring energy
security where water availability can be a limiting factor.

Demographics
I-1: Demographic projections
I-2:	Urban and rural populations by development
group (1950–2050)

4.1 Key indicators relating to water and energy

Water demand
I-6:	Water withdrawal by sector (around 2006)
I-7:	Water demand at the global level and in country
groups (Baseline Scenario 2000 and 2050)

Information forms the basis of the United Nations World
Water Development Report. Because raw data can be
viewed from varying perspectives and interpreted subject
to varying perceptions, indicators are indispensable tools
for establishing a common ground when examining
status, measuring progress and planning targets. While
data availability and quality remain a concern for water
professionals and decision-makers in associated sectors,
the importance of indicators based on best possible data
cannot be overestimated.
This fifth edition of the Report presents a Data and
Indicators Annex (DIA) of 41 indicators (see the summary
listing in this chapter and the Annex [in Volume 2] for
the full entries of charts and tables). These indicators have
been selected because they benchmark actual conditions
and highlight trends related to water and energy, and thus
enrich the Report. Taken together, the indicators also
serve to present complex information in a meaningful
but understandable manner for both decision-makers

WWDR 2014

State of freshwater resources
I-3:	Total actual renewable water resources per capita
(2011)
I-4:	Total actual renewable water resources per capita:
Trends and projections
I-5:	Annual average monthly blue water scarcity in the
world’s major river basins (1996–2005)

Human well-being
I-8:	Population using solid fuel for cooking and
without access to electricity, improved water and
sanitation in a selection of countries
I-9:	Access to improved drinking water (1990–2011)
Energy
I-10:	World total primary energy supply by source
I-11:	World primary energy demand: Trends and
projections
I-12:	Trends in electricity generation in the world and
in selected countries (1971–2012)
I-13:	Trends in world electricity generation by energy
source
I-14:	Trends in electricity consumption (2000–2011)

DATA CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES

45

Lack of data puts water
resources management at a
political disadvantage in terms
of priority decision-making
I-15:	Share of people without electricity access in
developing countries (2011)
I-16:	Global electricity access rate: Trends and
projections
I-17:	Energy consumption per capita (2010)
I-18:	Trends in electricity consumption per capita
(2000–2011)
Dams and hydropower
I-19:	Use of dams by purpose
I-20:	Total dam capacity per capita by region (around
2010)
I-21:	Hydropower: Technical potential and installed
capacity by region (2009)
I-22:	Trends in hydropower production in selected
regions and countries
Water <-> Energy
I-23:	Global water use for energy production by
scenario
I-24:	Energy requirement to deliver 1 m3 water safe for
human consumption from various water sources
I-25:	Indicative energy use of municipal water and
wastewater services
I-26:	Energy requirements and cost implications of
desalination by technology

46

CHAPTER 4

I-27:	Global cumulative contracted versus
commissioned daily desalination capacity (2013)
I-28:	Power consumption trends in seawater reverse
osmosis desalination (1985–2009)
I-29:	Water footprint of energy generation by fuel
I-30:	Water use for electricity generation by cooling
technology
ISO certification
I-31:	Trends in ISO 14001 certification (1999–2012)
I-32:	ISO 50001 certification on energy management
Geothermal electricity
I-33:	Trends in geothermal electricity output
(2000–2011)
I-34:	Worldwide installed capacity for geothermal
electricity generation (2010)
Bioenergy
I-35:	Global trends in ethanol and biodiesel production
(1975–2010)
I-36:	Indicative yields and water requirements for some
major biofuel crops
I-37:	Global total final energy consumption versus
share of renewable energy
Water and energy in national policy
I-38:	The importance of water for energy
I-39:	Perceived change over the past 20 years in the
importance of water for energy
I-40:	National energy policy/strategy/plan with water
resources management component
I-41:	Infrastructure development and mobilizing
financing for energy/hydropower

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

PART 2

THEMATIC FOCUS
CHAPTERS
5. Infrastructure
6. F ood and agriculture
7. Cities
8. Industry
9. E cosystems

CHAPTER

5

Infrastructure
World Bank
Diego J. Rodriguez and Anna Delgado

5.1 Infrastructure and development

Between 2013 and 2015, annual economic growth is
estimated to be around 6% in developing countries and
around 2% in higher-income countries (World Bank,
2013a). As economies grow and diversify, they experience
competing demands for water to meet the needs of more
municipal and industrial uses, as well as agriculture.
However, many people in the world still lack access to
basic water and energy services (Section 1.1). Closing the
energy gap could generate additional pressures on water
resources given that water is needed for fuel extraction, for
cooling and other processes in thermal power plants, and for
turning turbines in hydropower plants (Chapter 3). Moreover,
climate change can exacerbate already stressed energy and
water scenarios through events such as extreme weather
conditions and prolonged drought periods (Section 12.3).
A lack of adequate infrastructure undermines living
standards and limits the growth potential of developing
countries (Rodriguez et al., 2012), yet infrastructure
expansion often comes at the expense of the local
environment and has complicated responses to longterm challenges, including climate change (Toman et al.,

5.2

1 200

FIGURE

1 000
800
600

al
ation
sform
Tran

400
200
10

20

30

40

50

GDP per capita
(US$ thousands)
Source: World Bank (2012a, fig. 4, p. 6). © World Bank, Washington, DC.

CHAPTER 5

Needs versus actual investment in
infrastructure

Percent of GDP

1 400

0

48

Large infrastructure investments in Africa have catalysed
growth, helping many African countries catch up to
middle income countries in terms of development (World
Bank, 2012a). However, many countries still have a serious
shortage of key infrastructure services and the existing
ones are often of poor quality or under-maintained. To
improve access and quality of infrastructure services and
to meet fast-growing future demand, a substantial amount

Infrastructure investment and economic
development

Infrastructure investment
per capita (US$)

FIGURE

5.1

2011). Planning, building and maintaining infrastructure
is a real challenge, as it requires lump-sum up-front
outlays with a high risk of lock-in effects. However,
much research indicates a clear positive linkage between
infrastructure services (including water and energy)
and economic development, poverty reduction and
improvement of broader development goals, such as the
MDGs (Figure 5.1) (World Bank, 2004). The relationship
between infrastructure and development is complex, as
more infrastructure does not necessarily entail more
growth. Growth and development are also influenced
by factors such as the nature of regulatory standards
and economic incentives for reducing environmental
degradation, availability and affordability of technologies,
and availability of complementary knowledge and skills,
as well as broader issues of institutional capacity and
governance (Toman et al., 2011).

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Low income
countries

Lower middle
Upper middle
income countries income countries

Needs

Actuals

Source: Qureshi (2011, and source cited therein). © World Bank,
Washington, DC.

THEMATIC FOCUS

of investment and operation and maintenance (O&M)
spending is required. Infrastructure gaps exist in the
majority of countries, however, the gap is especially large
in low income countries (Figure 5.2).
Estimates suggest that developing countries will require
US$1.1 trillion in annual expenditure through 2015 to
meet growing demand for infrastructure (World Bank,
2011). This is more than double their $500 billion annual
spending (Qureshi, 2011). These estimates are even higher
if climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies are
incorporated. Funding gaps threaten economic growth
and could lead to an increase in the number of people
living in poverty. Regarding energy infrastructure, the
IEA has estimated that nearly $1 trillion in cumulative
investment ($49 billion per year) will be needed to achieve
universal energy access by 2030 (IEA, 2012a). It also
concludes that in a business-as-usual scenario, one billion
people will remain without access to electricity by 2030.
Investment requirements for water infrastructure are
even higher. For developing countries alone, it has been
estimated that $103 billion per year are required to finance
water, sanitation and wastewater treatment through 2015
(Yepes, 2008). Middle income countries such as Brazil,
China and India are all already committing considerable
resources to develop their infrastructure.
Traditionally, most infrastructure services have been
provided by the public sector. It is estimated that 75%
of water infrastructure investments in developing
countries comes from public sources (Rodriguez et al.,
2012). Nevertheless, given the infrastructure financing
gap, the public sector alone cannot provide enough
funding to satisfy the needs of the increasing demand
for services. Private capital must be involved to close the
gap. Private investors are, however, usually reluctant to
invest in infrastructure projects, including those relating
to water and energy, due to the risks involved such as
a long pay-off period, lumpy investments and the sunk
nature of the investment. When they do invest, they
prefer to work in middle income countries where the
risk is lower and capacities are high, leaving low income
countries dependent on volatile public budgets and donor
commitments. There is a need for an environment that
enables private investment in infrastructure in tandem
with the public sector to promote sustainable service
delivery, especially in the poorest countries. Such an
environment includes, among other features, coordinating
efforts by the private sector, governments and
international institutions; enhancing capacity-building

WWDR 2014

Funding gaps threaten economic
growth and could lead to an
increase in the number of people
living in poverty. Regarding
energy infrastructure, the IEA has
estimated that nearly $1 trillion in
cumulative investment ($49 billion
per year) will be needed to achieve
universal energy access by 2030. It
also concludes that in a businessas-usual scenario, one billion
people will remain without access
to electricity by 2030.
of local institutions; improving public spending and its
monitoring; and reducing investment inefficiencies and
helping utilities to move towards cost recovery.
Tools governments can use to attract and leverage private
financing include public expenditure reviews and resultsbased financing (Rodriguez et al., 2012). International
organizations have an important role in fostering
mutually beneficial public–private partnerships, enabling
the implementation of sound governance frameworks,
and promoting sustainable and integrated planning so
that future infrastructure is lower in maintenance, less
expensive and more efficient. Given the limited resources
and the size of the financing gap (which, although
significant for energy, is far greater for water), it is
crucial to ensure that investments are as efficient and
as cost-effective as possible. Spending efficiency is a
chronic problem in many developing countries. Recent
work by the IEA (2010) suggests that in 2008, energy
consumption subsidies added up to more than US$550
billion globally, but much of it was not properly targeted
and provided limited benefits to the poor (Toman et al.,
2011). It is important to explore innovative approaches to
spending efficiency, such as cross-sector cooperation to
leverage possible synergies, integrated planning for water
and energy to decrease costs and ensure sustainability,
trade-off assessment at the national level, demand-side
interventions and decentralized services.

INFRASTRUCTURE

49

Investment requirements
for water infrastructure are
even higher [than for energy
infrastructure]. For developing
countries alone, it has been
estimated that $103 billion per
year are required to finance
water, sanitation and wastewater
treatment through 2015.
5.2 Opportunities for synergies in water and
energy infrastructure

An array of opportunities exists to co-produce energy
and water services and to exploit the benefits of synergies.
However, the current political and economic incentive
system still favours independent sectoral outcomes over
cross-sectoral results. Sustainable solutions require a
systems approach of integrated solutions rather than
addressing issues in isolation. Water and energy issues
should be addressed holistically, as the optimal solution for
one can have negative impacts on the other. Such common
solutions can be achieved only if there is communication
between sectors, and if the right incentives are in place.
In addition to new technical solutions, new political and
economic frameworks need to be designed to promote
cooperation among sectors and integrated planning.
For example, given the different uses of dams, hydropower
sustainability can be improved through integrated water
and energy planning and management. Most thermal power
plants require large amounts of water to dissipate the excess
produced heat (‘waste heat’) to the environment (Section
3.3.1). Therefore, the siting of power plants should take into
account their interaction with water resources, water facilities
and other sectors that compete for water supplies. There are
also ways to utilize waste heat and thus decrease the amount
of water needed for cooling, as explained in examples below.
Wastewater treatment plants can generate energy from sludge
produced at the plant. Another opportunity to mitigate
nexus trade-offs is to improve water and energy efficiency
and conservation. Improving efficiency in the water domain
saves energy for treatment and supply and therefore reduces
the amount of water needed by the power sector. When the
power sector shifts towards a more efficient operation, less

50

CHAPTER 5

water is used as less waste heat will have to be dissipated.
Thus, policies and integrated plans that encourage energy
and water conservation can reduce future energy and water
requirements.

5.2.1 Combined power and desalination plants
Combined power and desalination plants (also known as
hybrid desalination plants) are an example of integrated
infrastructure to produce drinking water and electricity.
This solution is especially suited to extreme arid areas
such as the Middle East, where there is very little water
available and where desalination is likely to expand
(Chapter 12). Examples of hybrid desalination plants are
the Fujairah plant in the United Arab Emirates and the
Shoaiba plant in Saudi Arabia.
Desalination is a more energy intensive process than
traditional water treatments (Section 2.3). Despite this,
desalination might be necessary in some regions of the
world to meet the growing demand for industrial and
domestic water supplies. Hybrid desalination plants use an
innovative process to integrate desalination with thermal
power generation, which improves efficiency and lowers
the electricity cost of desalination processes. Waste heat
from the power plant (steam) is used as the heat source for
the desalination process.
Integrated water and energy production has several
benefits. First, waste heat becomes a useful part of
the process, decreasing the volume of water required
for cooling purposes in the plant. Second, the cost of
desalinating water decreases, making it more economically
attractive, and the integrated system is more efficient
than the stand-alone option (a separate power plant
and a separate desalination plant) (Pechtl et al., 2003).
However, there are also disadvantages. The integrated
system is more complex to operate, mainly due to seasonal
variability. During winter, demand for electricity can
decrease (in warmer climates) while demand for water
can remain relatively constant all year long. Demand
variability can be managed, but when the two demands are
not aligned, the system runs below maximum efficiency.

5.2.2 Alternative water sources for thermal power
plant cooling
Thermal power plants require water mainly for cooling.
The quality of this water does not need to meet drinking
water standards, so there is a potential to explore
alternative non-freshwater sources that could be used for
the purpose. Although using alternative water sources can

THEMATIC FOCUS

Wastewater usually contains many polluting substances
such as soaps, organic matter, oils and chemicals. The
treatments necessary to meet the water quality standard
to avoid corrosion and other undesired effects in the
cooling system can be expensive and sometimes complex.
In some countries, power plant operators need to obtain
permits to use reclaimed water for cooling, which can be
a burden. However, in those same countries, wastewater
treatment plants are often required to pre-treat municipal
water before discharging it back to the source, usually
to at least secondary treatment standards. This makes
wastewater an attractive option for cooling. Although
additional treatments might be required before running
the wastewater through the cooling system (e.g. sand
filtration, coagulation and chlorination), these processes
are widely used in water treatment plants around the
world (Veil, 2007).
One important advantage of wastewater for cooling is that
it is a source available all around the world, particularly in
large cities. Securing wastewater from a nearby wastewater
treatment plant could reduce future uncertainty and
ensure a reliable, continuous water source for the power
plant. Even if initial capital investment is high, it can
make economic sense in the long term. This integrated
solution is already being used in some countries. In the
USA, wastewater is used for cooling in 50 power plants
including Palo Verde in Arizona, the largest nuclear
power plant in the country. Water is a scarce and valuable
resource in Arizona and the power plant uses wastewater
from several large cities as its only cooling source. The
wastewater is piped in and re-treated on-site before use.
Once run through the cooling system, the wastewater is
transported to a pond where it evaporates. The power
plant has recently secured 98.4 million m3 wastewater
per year until 2050 (Averyt et al., 2011). An important
barrier to implementing this solution worldwide is that
many developing countries lack sanitation infrastructure.
However, this option presents a great opportunity to plan
integrated water and energy infrastructure in the future
and avoid the lock-in inefficiencies of developed countries.

WWDR 2014

5.2.3 Combined heat and power plants
Combined heat and power (CHP) plants (also known
as cogeneration plants) integrate power and usable heat
production into a single process. Whereas in conventional
power plants half or more of the produced heat (on
average) gets lost as waste heat (dissipated into the
environment through the cooling system), in CHP plants
the heat is usually used for district heating as steam or
hot water. CHP plants can be implemented with most fuel
sources (natural gas, coal, solar thermal), allowing them
to be adapted to any environment, though different plants
will achieve different efficiencies.
An important advantage of CHP plants is that an
integrated power and heat generation process tends to
be more efficient than the two stand-alone processes
(Figure 5.3), thus decreasing GHG emissions and
diminishing water requirements. The combined efficiency
of the heat and power processes (total energy output by
energy input) can reach as high as 90% (IEA, 2008a).
CHP plants rely on existing and well-known technologies
and are used in many parts of the world. In Denmark
about 50% of the total power generated is produced in
CHP plants (IEA, 2008a). Another recent example is the
city of Boston, where the Kendall power plant, which
already sends heat to the Massachusetts General Hospital,
will send additional heat to Boston to avoid regulatory
problems due to water intake and discharges (Daley, 2011).

5.3
FIGURE

be challenging (e.g. cost will vary depending on location
of the source and quality of the water), this option has
a great potential to reduce freshwater use. One widely
used alternative source is seawater, but this option only
works if the power plant is located on the coast. Another
option, relevant to the integration of water and energy
infrastructure, is the use of wastewater for cooling.

Sankey diagram of combined heat and power
(CHP) and conventional power plants
CHP

Conventional
methods

Losses

Losses
40

65
160

Heat
demand

160
Boiler

100

Power
demand

100

165

Power
station

Losses
Source: ‘What is CHP?’ page of CHP Focus website, DEFRA, now on
The National Archives. © Crown copyright 2008.

INFRASTRUCTURE

51

CHP plants are more efficient when located near the
source of demand for heat and power (i.e. a city, a village,
an industrial complex). If heat has to be transported far
from its production site, a significant percentage gets lost
and process efficiency drops considerably. CHP plants are
thus well suited as decentralized forms of energy supply.
On the other hand, CHP plants require higher initial
capital investment than a conventional power plant. The
payback time is usually quite long, although they are more
economical in the long term due to the energy savings. As
with combined desalination and power plants, another
disadvantage of CHP plants is the seasonal variation that
affects their performance. Meeting two demands (heat
and power) adds an extra layer of complexity to plant
operations. During summer, it can become challenging to
deal with the extra heat.

5.2.4 Sewage water energy recovery
In many cities around the world and especially in
developing countries, faecal sludge management is one
of the most significant health problems. Anaerobic
digestion is an option that could be implemented in many
wastewater treatment plants to (a) reduce sludge volume
and disposal costs; (b) produce a source of green energy
(biogas); (c) use organic material as a fertilizer; and (d)
eliminate pathogens (see Chapters 17 and 24 [Volume 2]
for the case studies ‘Green energy generation in Vienna,

FIGURE

5.4

Biogas production in a wastewater
treatment plant

Note: For more detail on the numbered stages, see http://news.bbc.
co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/8501236.stm (Accessed Oct 2013)
Source: Shah (2010). © BBC News.

52

CHAPTER 5

Austria’ and ‘Green energy production from municipal
sewage sludge in Japan’, respectively).
The biogas produced in wastewater treatment plants
(Figure 5.4) comprises primarily methane (CH4) and
carbon dioxide (CO2) and is produced by anaerobic
digestion or fermentation of biodegradable materials
such as sewage, manure, human municipal solid waste
and green waste. Biogas can be sold as gas for heat and
cooking, as vehicle fuel or as fuel for a power plant, or
can be burnt on-site to produce electricity and heat for
the treatment plant (Box 16.3). The remaining sludge
can be sold as fertilizer for agriculture purposes, which
makes this practice economically viable in the long term
depending on the price of gas and fertilizer. There are
several environmental benefits: biogas can replace fossil
fuels (e.g. natural gas, coal for cooking), thereby reducing
GHG emissions; and given the reduction in sludge volume
after digestion, landfill lifespan can be extended.
There are several examples of this integrated water
and energy solution throughout the world. The size of
wastewater treatment plants with anaerobic digesters
varies considerably, with important economies of scale in
terms of both cost and energy consumption. La Farfana
wastewater treatment plant treats urban water from 50% of
the population of Santiago, Chile (population equivalent of
3.7 million people), and produces around 24 million m3 per
year in biogas (Degrémont, n.d.). This biogas is sold to the gas
utility company (Metrogas) and directly replaces natural
gas being used in households, benefiting around 100,000
people in the metropolitan area (Aguas Andinas, n.d.).
There are also examples of smaller scale decentralized
biodigester projects; for example, in India (Müller, 2007),
where the biogas is used for cooking.
Biogas generated can also be burnt on-site in a CHP plant
to generate both heat and electricity in a highly efficient
process (discussed earlier). The heat produced by the
CHP plant is used in the digester to dry the sludge and
for space heating the plant facilities, and the power is
used in the plant or sold to the grid. All or most of the
plant power needs can be met by electricity generated at
the plant, and thermal requirements of the biodigesters
can be met by heat generated at the plant, which reduces
costs by displacing fuel purchasing. Depending on local
electricity prices, the CHP plant can produce electricity
below retail cost, which can create a compelling case for
private investors. Having its own decentralized power
source also enhances plant reliability, which is important

THEMATIC FOCUS

in areas that experience frequent power outages. Biogas
is a ‘green’ energy source and therefore generating power
and heat from burning it can potentially reduce GHG
emissions and other air pollutants (if it replaces fossil
fuels). Due to its benefits, implementation of CHP plants
at wastewater treatment plants is growing in popularity
as a way to reduce environmental impacts and increase
efficiency. In the USA, there are 104 wastewater treatment
plants using biogas to produce a total of 190 MW capacity
(US EPA, 2011).

5.3 Moving forward

The complex interlinkages between water and energy
systems requires a more systematic approach that
takes into account the multiple interactions and
relationships between domains, and explores strategic
complementarities and potential synergies across
all sectors. Energy and water planning must be
better integrated to optimize investments and avoid
inefficiencies. Similarly, cross-sectoral implications need
to be better understood. In addition to taking water
constraints in the energy sector into account when
undertaking power expansion plans, there are many
opportunities for joint development and management
of water and energy infrastructure and technologies,
maximizing co-benefits and minimizing negative tradeoffs. When assessing the needs of the energy sector, water
planners and decision-makers must fully understand
the requirements of electricity generation and fuel
extraction technologies and their potential impact on the
resource. Similarly, energy planners and investors must
take into account the complexities of the hydrological
cycle and other competing uses when assessing plans and
investments. One way of ensuring robust planning efforts
is by implementing technical approaches and reforming

WWDR 2014

When assessing the needs of the
energy sector, water planners
and decision-makers must fully
understand the requirements of
electricity generation and fuel
extraction technologies and their
potential impact on the resource.
Similarly, energy planners and
investors must take into account
the complexities of the hydrological
cycle and other competing
uses when assessing plans and
investments.
governing institutions. Technical approaches may include
(but are not limited to) the ones described in this chapter.
Institutional reform requires integrated planning and
cross-sectoral communication to bolster efforts to mitigate
inefficiencies in the energy–water nexus, and must be
achieved before technical solutions can be successfully
adapted. An integrated energy and water planning
approach can ensure that both resources are developed
sustainably, and that synergies are explored more
effectively. Meeting future demands requires innovative
approaches that encourage cross-sectoral cooperation and
help to better assess water and energy trade-offs at the
national and regional levels.

INFRASTRUCTURE

53

CHAPTER

6

Food and agriculture
FAO
Editor: Jippe Hoogeveen (Land and Water Division [NRL], Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO];
Contributors: Robina Wahaj (NRL, FAO), Irini Maltsoglou (Climate, Energy and Tenure Division [NRC], FAO), James Thurlow
(International Food Policy Research Institute [IFPRI]), Olivier Dubois (NRC, FAO), Devin Bartley (Fisheries and Aquaculture
Resources Use and Conservation Division [FIR], FAO), Thomas Hofer (Forest Assessment, Management and Conservation
Division [FOM], FAO), Thierry Facon (Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific [RAP], FAO), Giovanni Munoz (Investment Centre
Division [TCI], FAO), Ines Beernaerts (Sub-regional Office for Central Asia [SEC], FAO), Zhijun Chen (TCI, FAO) and Pasquale
Steduto (Regional Office for the Near East [RNE], FAO)

6.1 The water–energy–food nexus

Water, energy and food are inextricably linked. Water is
an input for producing agricultural goods in the fields
and along the entire agrifood supply chain. Energy is
required to produce and distribute water and food: to
pump water from groundwater or surface water sources,
to power tractors and irrigation machinery, and to process
and transport agricultural goods. Agriculture is currently
the largest user of water at the global level, accounting
for 70% of total withdrawal. The food production and
supply chain accounts for about 30% of total global energy
consumption (FAO, 2011b).
There are many synergies and trade-offs between water
and energy use and food production. Using water to
irrigate crops might promote food production but it
can also reduce river flows and hydropower potential.
Growing bioenergy crops under irrigated agriculture can
increase overall water withdrawals and jeopardize food
security. Converting surface irrigation into high efficiency
pressurized irrigation may save water but may also result
in higher energy use. Recognizing these synergies and
balancing these trade-offs is central to jointly ensuring
water, energy and food security. This chapter considers
the implications of water and energy for food security by
focusing on irrigation, hydropower and biofuels.

6.2 The effects of increasing food demand on
water and energy

An estimated 870 million people are undernourished
due to a lack of food or a lack of access to food (FAO,
2013a). Demographic projections suggest that world
population will increase by a third – to 9.3 billion – by
2050 (UNDESA, 2012). Most of this increase will occur
in developing countries, where population growth will be

54

CHAPTER 6

coupled with rising incomes, urbanization and climate
change to place considerable pressure on national and
global food systems. Estimates suggest that global food
production will need to increase by as much as 60% by
2050 to meet demand (FAO, 2012). Achieving such a
dramatic increase is a formidable challenge.
Agriculture currently uses 11% of the world’s land surface,
and irrigated agriculture uses 70% of all water withdrawals
on a global scale. Rainfed agriculture is the predominant
agricultural production system around the world, and
its current productivity is, on average, little more than
half the potential obtainable under optimal agricultural
management. Water scarcity and decreasing availability
of water for agriculture constrain irrigated production
overall, and particularly in the most hydrologically stressed
areas and countries. As many key food production systems
depend on groundwater, declining aquifer levels and the
depletion of non-renewable groundwater put local and
global food production at risk (Section 2.4). Increasing
food production is not, on its own, sufficient to achieve
food security and eradicate hunger. Hunger can persist in
the midst of adequate national and global food supplies.
Efforts to promote food production must be complemented
by policies that enhance household access to food, either
by creating employment and income opportunities or
by establishing effective safety net programmes. The
experiences of countries like Brazil and China, which have
undergone strong economic growth and succeeded in
significantly reducing hunger and malnutrition, show that
economic growth alone does not automatically ensure food
security – the source of the growth matters too, along with
the distribution of the economic gains and social benefits.
Growth originating in agriculture, in particular in the
smallholder sector, is at least twice as effective as growth in

THEMATIC FOCUS

non-agricultural sectors in benefiting the poorest members
of society in rural areas (FAO, 2009a).
Access to modern energy services is extremely problematic
for households in many developing countries, particularly
in rural areas. The IEA estimates that one-fifth of the
world’s population lacks access to electricity and that twofifths rely on traditional biomass for cooking – a cause
of severe indoor air pollution, which affects women in
particular (Table 1.1). Rural electrification can address
these issues and boost rural economies, in turn increasing
household food security. It also frees up time spent by
household members – mostly women and girls – in
collecting the biomass. To meet rising household energy
demands, an especially difficult challenge in rural areas,
new energy sources must be found that are technically,
economically and environmentally viable (Box 6.1).

6.3 Water for energy and the linkages to food
security

Hydroelectricity generation is one way to help meet future
energy demands. Multi-purpose dams can provide energy
as well as water for irrigation and flood management.
However, water demand for energy production can be
in conflict with water demand for agriculture. In Central
Asia, dams in the mountains of Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan
once collected water in autumn and winter that was
released in spring and summer to irrigate cotton and
wheat in Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan.
Upstream countries were compensated for this water by
cheap oil and gas from downstream countries. However,

BOX

6.1

As groundwater irrigation,
in general, provides greater
flexibility than other types
in responding to fluctuating
water demands, its relative
importance is likely to increase
in the future
rising energy prices made it beneficial for upstream
countries to generate more hydropower in winter by
releasing water that could not then be used for irrigation.
As a result, downstream countries, maintaining the same
crop and production patterns, had insufficient water
in summer to satisfy agricultural demand. Dam and
reservoir management procedures, cropping patterns,
irrigation practices and compensation packages that are
agreeable to all countries involved have not yet been
achieved (FAO, 2013b). There are concerns that this
situation may prompt nations like Uzbekistan to start
considering alternative water sources for irrigation, such
as groundwater (Karimova et al., 2010).
The benefits of hydropower generation do not always flow
to the people who depend on rivers for their livelihoods
(WCD, 2000). The creation of reservoirs has displaced
millions of people throughout the world. Damming rivers
to produce energy can have adverse impacts on important

Renewable energy technologies for improved irrigation efficiency help women farmers
Renewable energy technologies are already helping communities, women and men, to meet water, fuel and food security
needs in clean and cost-efficient ways. In Mozambique, the UN Joint Programme on Environmental Mainstreaming and
Adaption to Climate Change (FAO, UNDP, UNEP, UN-Habitat, UNIDO, WFP) supported the installation of renewable energy
systems for water, irrigation and electricity in seven different communities, and built the capacities of community members
to maintain the systems. By providing marginalized communities with renewable energies and clean, accessible drinking
water, women’s lives were transformed by lessening the burden of fetching unsafe water and increasing opportunities for
income generation and other pursuits. Due to the project’s very positive impact, the Government of Mozambique and the
National Energy Fund (FUNAE) have replicated its best practices and have rolled out the initiative in other rural communities
(see http://mdgfund.org for more information). Another example is the Solar Electric Light Fund’s (SELF) Solar Market Gardens
in Benin that use solar-powered drip irrigation systems to help women farmers in remote, arid regions grow crops during the
dry season. With drip irrigation – a proven efficient and labour-saving technology that delivers water directly to plant roots
and facilitates simple and uniform fertilizer application – farmers can achieve higher yields over larger areas with less water
and labour. The initiative reduces greenhouse emissions while allowing women farmers to increase their income and improve
food security for their families (see http://self.org for more information).
Source: UN Women.

WWDR 2014

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

55

inland fisheries by changing water flow rates and timing,
fragmenting habitat and disrupting fish migration routes
(Section 9.2). These issues are becoming more apparent in
many river basins; the Lower Mekong is a notable example.
Changing a riparian environment to a reservoir changes
the community of fish in the water body. Although
the fish in reservoirs can be harvested and reservoir
fisheries developed, compensation for the loss in yield
from river fisheries can be difficult to achieve (Marmulla,
2001). However, reservoirs can have advantages over
rivers as aquaculture facilities. Fish farming in floating
cages in lakes and reservoirs is an effective way to use
hydroelectric dams for the direct production of food.
Cage farming can help compensate farmers and fishers for
losses after the building of dams.

6.4 Energy use in agrifood systems

Estimates are that the food sector15 currently accounts for
about 30% of the world’s total end-use energy consumption,
and that more than 70% of that energy is used beyond
the farm gate (FAO, 2011b). Figure 6.1 illustrates the
percentage beyond production for processing, distribution,

FIGURE

6.1

Indicative shares of final energy
consumption for the food sector globally
and for high and low Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) countries
100
90

Energy consumption (%)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Global
~95 EJ/year
Retail, preparation
and cooking

High GDP
countries
~50 EJ/year
Processing and
distribution

Livestock
production

Low GDP
countries
~45 EJ/year
Fisheries
distribution

Cropping
production

Source: FAO (2011b, fig. 6, p. 11, based on sources cited therein).

56

CHAPTER 6

retail, preparation and cooking in countries grouped by
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Developed countries
use a greater portion of this energy for processing and
transport; in developing countries, cooking consumes the
highest share.16
On an annual basis, the direct energy demand of primary
production is about 2,200 TWh, which equates to less than
2% of total end-use energy consumption (FAO, 2011b).
On-farm direct energy demand is about 1,700 TWh, and
is used mainly for pumping irrigation water, housing
livestock, and cultivating, harvesting, drying and storing
crops (OECD, 2008, ch. 1, section 1.4, ‘Energy’). Indirect
energy demands for operating tractors and other farm
machinery as well as for fertilizer manufacturing is about
2,500 TWh (UK GOS, 2011). The synthesis of nitrogenous
fertilizers alone consumes approximately 1,400 TWh.
Global primary production in fisheries directly consumes
about 550 TWh of total final energy annually, mainly
for boat propulsion, pond aeration and water pumping
(Muir, 2010; FAO, 2009b). Indirect energy embedded in
aquaculture feedstuffs is about 140 TWh (Smil, 2008).
These figures illustrate how heavily dependent agriculture
is on the energy sector.
Powering the pumps on a total of 300 million irrigated
hectares consumes around 62 TWh/year. Manufacture
and delivery of irrigation equipment consumes another
62 TWh (Smil, 2008). The 112 million ha or so globally
that are irrigated by groundwater account for most of
the energy used for irrigation. As groundwater irrigation,
in general, provides greater flexibility than other types
in responding to fluctuating water demands, its relative
importance is likely to increase in the future.
Groundwater for irrigation can be withdrawn from
both shallow and deep aquifers. Where extraction
rates from shallow groundwater stores exceed recharge
rates, water abstracted from greater depths, pumped by
energy intensive electric pumps, will likely become more
important. Avoiding groundwater depletion, through
sustainable groundwater management, can lead to longterm cost and energy savings (Section 2.3).

15	In this context, ‘food sector’ concerns those parts of ’agriculture’ in the
broad FAO sense; that is, agriculture, forestry and fisheries that produce
food as well as the food processing, distribution, retail, preparation and
cooking phases.
16	For a comprehensive examination of water use, see WWAP (2012, chs 2,
‘Water demand: What drives consumption’ and 18, ‘Managing water along
the livestock value chain’).

THEMATIC FOCUS

6.5 Biofuels, water and food security linkages

Biomass can be used to produce a range of fuels that
can be used for heating, power generation and transport
(Section 3.2.2). Biofuels have, in certain contexts, the
potential to provide a cleaner alternative energy source to
fossil fuels. Many developing countries have considerable
prospects to raise agricultural productivity, and
biofuels could help achieve broader rural development.
Bioenergy investments can be arranged so that they
not only generate profits for investors, but also involve
smallholders, thereby creating jobs, improving livelihoods
and reducing poverty in rural areas. Feedstock production
through a combination of large-scale plantation farming

TABLE

6.1

and smallholder outgrower schemes is an example of such
an arrangement. Smallholder outgrower schemes used to
produce biofuel crops can also benefit other crops if they
deliver modern seed material and agro-chemical inputs,
improve farming practices and provide marketing support.
Optimism over biofuels is tempered by concerns over
their economic viability and their implications for socioeconomic development, food security and environmental
sustainability (Section 9.2.2). Although bioenergy
investment can improve income, employment and market
access, it can have negative consequences for traditional
land tenure arrangements. This is particularly the case

Indicative yields and water requirements for some major biofuel crops
Crop

Fuel
product

Annual
Energy
obtainable yield
yield
(GJ/ha)
(L/ha)

Potential
Evapocrop
transpiration
evapo(L/L fuel)
transpiration
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigated
Rainfed
or rainfed
conditions
production

Water resource
implications under
irrigated conditions
(assuming an
irrigation efficiency
of 50%)

Actual
rainfed crop
evapotranspiration
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigation
water used
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigation
water used
(in L/L fuel,
indicative)

Sugarcane

Ethanol
(from
sugar)

6 000

120

1 400

2 000

Irrigated/
rainfed

1 100

600

1 000

Sugar
beet

Ethanol
(from
sugar)

7 000

140

650

786

Irrigated/
rainfed

450

400

571

Cassava

Ethanol
(from
starch)

4 000

80

1 000

2 250

Rainfed

900

–

–

Maize

Ethanol
(from
starch)

3 500

70

550

1 360

Irrigated/
rainfed

400

300

857

Winter
wheat

Ethanol
(from
starch)

2 000

40

300

1 500

Rainfed

300

–

–

Palm oil

Biodiesel

6 000

193

1 500

2 360

Rainfed

1 300

–

–

Rapeseed/
mustard

Biodiesel

1 200

42

500

3 330

Rainfed

400

–

–

Soybean

Biodiesel

450

14

500

10 000

Rainfed

400

–

–

Note: 1 GJ/h = 277.8 kW.
Source: Hoogeveen et al. (2009, table II, p. S153, adapted from source cited therein).

WWDR 2014

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

57

for marginal land, which provides important ecosystem
services such as pasture land or fuel wood for local
traditional communities (Cotula et al., 2008). Marginal
land is also a target for rehabilitation for food production
or sequestering carbon (e.g. forest regrowth).
Biofuels have been heavily debated due to concerns over
trade-offs with food security. The debate has largely
focused on first generation biofuels: ethanol and biodiesel
produced from feedstock such as maize, sugarcane and
palm oil.17 The contribution of biofuels to the recent
food price increases is difficult to disentangle from
other factors such as rising food demand in emerging
economies, declining food stocks, fluctuating oil and
natural gas prices, commodity speculation, and a
succession of low harvests in major food producing
regions. Nonetheless, the demand for agricultural
feedstock for biofuels is the largest source of new demand
for agricultural production in decades, and it was a major
factor behind the 2007−2008 spike in world commodity
prices. For example, FAO (2011c) estimates that biofuels
accounted for about one-third of the maize price
increase. This raises concerns about the implications that

TABLE

6.2

global biofuel production may have on food security in
developing countries.
When considering feedstock production for biofuels, the
most important distinguishing characteristic of a biofuel
from a water systems perspective is whether it is produced
from rainfed or irrigated feedstock crops. In general,
rainfed production does not substantially alter the water
cycle, whereas irrigated production extracts groundwater
or uses surface water and can have important implications
for local water availability. When assessing the impact of
biofuel production on water and food security, land is
the key factor for rainfed agriculture, while water is the
key factor for irrigated agriculture. Water used in biofuel
processing is a strong competitor for local uses, but it can
be returned to rivers and other water bodies and made
available for further use. However, these return flows
often have negative impacts due to chemical and thermal
pollution.

17	Other first generation feedstocks include sunflower and other oilseeds,
cassava, and wheat and other grains.

Water consumed through evapotranspiration per unit bioenergy feedstock production and per unit
gross bioenergy production
Biofuel

Feedstock

Traditional food crop

Energy crop evapotranspiration (ET)a
(tonne water per GJ feedstock)

Total water use in the production chain
(tonne water per GJ gross electricity or
biofuel output)

Low case

High case

Low case

High case

Biodiesel

Rapeseed

45

80

100

175

Ethanol

Sugarcane

25

125

35

155

Sugar beet

55

150

70

190

Corn

35

190

75

345

Wheat

20

200

40

350

5

70

Ethanol

10

170

Methanol

10

135

Hydrogen

10

125

Electricity

15

195

Lignocellulosic cropb

Note: 1 GJ = 277.8 kWh.
Lower range numbers refer to systems where (a) harvest residues from non-lignocellulosic crops (50% total amount of residues) are used for power
production at 45% efficiency or (b) higher efficiencies in processing lignocellulosic crops are achieved. When ethanol is produced from sugarcane or
lignocellulosic feedstocks, process by-products (bagasse and lignin, respectively) are used for internal heat and electricity. Here, lower range numbers
refer to system designs allowing for export of electricity in excess of internal requirements. b For example, short rotation woody crops such as willow
and eucalyptus and grasses such as miscanthus and switchgrass.
Source: Adapted from Berndes (2002, table 2, p. 259, based on sources cited therein).

a

58

CHAPTER 6

THEMATIC FOCUS

If bioenergy feedstock is produced on irrigated lands, then
the potential impact of biofuels on water resources is also
of major concern. This is most relevant for commercial
feedstock production. Biofuels use water for both
feedstock production and processing stages. Consequently,
the water requirements of biofuels produced from
irrigated crops can be much larger than for fossil fuel
resources (Figure 3.1), although fossil fuels can have
much larger environmental impacts. Table 6.1 presents
the variability of yields across crop types and provides
indicative water requirement levels of rainfed and
irrigated crops. Table 6.2 illustrates water requirements
along the entire biofuel production chain. Although the
water footprint of second generation biofuels (e.g. from
non-edible crops, crop residue and algae) could be much
lower, production remains almost entirely at the pilotproject level.
Overall, biofuel development needs to be considered in
the context of food security, energy needs, land availability,
and other national priorities. Biofuels are neither good nor
bad and are subject to the same constraints and challenges
as the rest of the agricultural sector. What is essential
is that the biofuel options be viewed as an agriculture
investment option that needs to be sustainable and
smallholder inclusive in order to target poverty reduction
and rural development and to safeguard food security.

TABLE

6.3

For both large and small
systems, any means of avoiding
food wastage should be
encouraged and can result in
considerable savings in the energy,
land and water used to produce
this food that no one consumes
6.6 Energy-smart agriculture

Energy efficiency measures can be applied at all stages
along the agrifood chain. Table 6.3 presents examples
of energy efficient farming practices. Energy efficiency
improvements can bring direct savings through
technological or behavioural changes, or indirect savings
through co-benefits derived from the adoption of agroecological farming practices. For both large and small
systems, any means of avoiding food wastage should be
encouraged and can result in considerable savings in the
energy, land and water used to produce this food that no
one consumes.
Knowledge-based precision irrigation, which provides
reliable and flexible water application, along with deficit
irrigation and wastewater reuse, will be a major platform
for sustainable crop production intensification (FAO,

Examples of energy efficiency improvements at the farm level
Direct intervention

Indirect intervention

Adoption and maintenance of fuel efficient engines

Improved water allocation and management of water demand

Precise water application

Improved surface water delivery to reduce the need for pumping

Precision farming for fertilizers

Provision of water services for multiple water use

Adoption of no-till practices

Reduced water losses

Energy efficient buildings

Crop varieties and animal breeds that demand less input (including
multipurpose crops and perennials)

Heat management of greenhouses
Propeller design of fishing vessels
Use of high efficiency pumps (high cost)

Reduced soil erosion
Use of bio-fertilizer
Efficient machinery manufacture
Identification of stock locations and markets by information and
communications technology

Source: Adapted from FAO (2011b, table 5, p. 20).

WWDR 2014

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

59

2011d). Mechanical irrigation systems should be designed
to use water as efficiently as possible. Crops often take up
only half of the irrigation water applied (FAO, 2011d), so
there is clearly potential to improve water use efficiency,
which would also result in less demand for electricity
or diesel fuel for pumping. However, much controversy
and debate exist about the engineering concept of ‘water
use efficiency’ (FAO, 2012). It is widely accepted that,
while irrigation losses appear high, a large part of these
‘losses’ return to the river basin in the form of return flow
or aquifer recharge, although the water quality of the
return flows may have been altered. Measures to increase
water use efficiencies upstream, while maintaining
existing levels of withdrawal, will increase the productive
efficiency of water use, but at the same time, may deprive
downstream users who depend on return flow in rivers
or groundwater aquifers fed from these returns. Still,
from the energy point of view, it remains worthwhile to
increase water use efficiencies to prevent energy being
spent in pumping the same water twice (upstream and
again downstream).
Dam and reservoir design that accommodates fisheries
and aquaculture will allow continued food production
from rivers that are dammed for hydroelectric
development. To protect increasingly scarce water
resources for food and energy production, in terms of
both quantity and quality, increased attention is required
for water management in upstream and mountain areas.
Watershed management is an appropriate approach
that comprehensively considers management of all
available natural resources, and links this management
to agricultural production and livelihoods (Section
9.3.5). Through proper watershed management, the risk
of some natural hazards (such as landslides and localized
floods) can be reduced, surface water flows regulated,
sediment loads in river systems reduced and water
quality maintained – all indispensable characteristics
for successful and sustainable food and hydropower
production. Optimizing the management of storage
capacity of reservoirs and catchments, including soils

Market trends, technological
innovations and the availability of
cheap (but not necessarily energy
efficient) equipment can increase
the use of energy in agriculture
60

CHAPTER 6

and groundwater, offers opportunities for improved
efficiencies; for example, drawing upon groundwater
reserves at times of low reservoir capacity and enabling
groundwater to recharge when reservoirs are full.
Market trends, technological innovations and the
availability of cheap (but not necessarily energy efficient)
equipment can increase the use of energy in agriculture.
For example, public policy changes to subsidize fossil fuels
have stimulated the import of innovative, cheap Chinesemade farm machinery to Bangladesh, which has led to
the country’s ‘agro-tractorization’. Small, mobile diesel
engines that are demountable and can be used for a range
of applications, including powering pumps for irrigation,
have increased food production and economic returns to
farmers (Steele, 2011). The diesel engines can be repaired
easily by local mechanics and are less expensive than
more sophisticated and more fuel efficient machinery
manufactured in India. Seeing these results, Nepalese and
Indian farm machinery manufacturers have recognized
a new business opportunity. Small engines are now being
sold mainly in low-cost farm machinery markets in rural
communities. Farm services have expanded as a result
of the versatility and transportability of this equipment
(Biggs and Justice, 2011). This example illustrates how
inexpensive fossil fuels, made available and affordable
through government subsidies, have delivered benefits to
smallholder farmers using inexpensive diesel-powered
farm machinery.
Subsidizing energy, in the form of fossil fuels, has
benefited smallholder farmers in Bangladesh without
over-exploiting water resources; however, energy subsidies
in the form of cheap electricity in the drier parts of
India have had detrimental effects on groundwater levels
(Section 1.4). It is estimated that in India one million new
tube wells become operational every year. In some parts
of India, these wells are drilled ever deeper over time to
obtain a consistent groundwater yield. More energy is
needed and the quality of the extracted water is often poor,
with high levels of harmful chemicals such as arsenic. In
Gujarat, one of the drier states in India, policies to ration
farm power supply, and thus water supply, have been
recommended to encourage farmers to use water more
sparingly (IWMI, 2011).
Modernization of existing canal irrigation systems to
improve services may encourage farmers to reduce
groundwater use, as it is often more expensive than
surface water supply of similar quality. Modernized

THEMATIC FOCUS

surface water supply systems not only improve water
productivity and water use efficiency, but can also
improve people’s livelihoods. They have high potential to
serve multiple uses such as in crop production, domestic
purposes, animal husbandry and small industries.

6.7 Towards a nexus approach

The global community is well aware of food, energy
and water challenges, but has so far addressed them in
isolation, within sectoral boundaries. At the country
level, fragmented sectoral responsibilities, lack of
coordination, and inconsistencies between laws and
regulatory frameworks may lead to misaligned incentives.
If water, energy and food security are to be simultaneously
achieved, decision-makers, including those responsible
for only a single sector, need to consider broader
influences and cross-sectoral impacts. They must strive
for innovative policies and integrated institutions. Water
development and management programmes, if planned
properly, can serve multiple functions, from contributing
to energy and food production to helping communities
adapt to climate change. A nexus approach to sectoral
management, through enhanced dialogue, collaboration
and coordination, is needed to ensure that co-benefits and

WWDR 2014

trade-offs are considered and that appropriate safeguards
are put in place.
Sustainable and successful policy options best suited for
a particular country should take into account all aspects
of water, energy and food and should be based on sound
technical, environmental (ecosystems) and economic
information. This information should address issues on
the availability and suitability of natural resources as
well as socio-economic costs and benefits. An integrated
approach includes:

· An in-depth understanding of synergies and trade-

offs in the use of natural resources, while taking into
consideration the role of ecosystem services, for the
energy and agricultural sector

· An enabling policy and institutional environment,

with sound and flexible policies and effective
instruments to implement these policies to enforce
good practices

· Proper impact monitoring, evaluation, reporting and
policy response mechanisms

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

61

CHAPTER

7

Cities
UN-Habitat
Bhushan Tuladhar, Vincent Kitio, Robert Goodwin and Andre Dzikus

7.1 Global urbanization trends

More than half of humanity currently lives in cities, and
this proportion is expected to grow rapidly. Between 2011
and 2050, it is estimated that the world’s population will
increase by 2.3 billion, while the urban population will
increase by 2.6 billion (UNDESA, 2012). This means that
urban areas will absorb all the population growth over
the next four decades while the rural population will start
to decrease in about a decade. Almost all of this increase
will be in cities located in developing countries, while the
urban population in developed countries will remain close
to constant (Figure 7.1). Between 2010 and 2015, almost
200,000 people are projected to be added to the world’s
cities every day; 91% of this growth is expected to take
place in cities of developing countries (UN-Habitat, 2012).
In developing countries, urban growth will be
concentrated in, but not limited to, larger cities. In 2011,
about 60% of the world’s urban population lived in cities

As many of the rapidly growing cities in developing
countries – particularly in Africa, South Asia and China
– already face problems related to water and energy, and
have limited capacity to overcome these problems, such
cities will be major hotspots for water and energy crises in
the future. Kathmandu, for example, is currently able to
supply only about one-third of the total water demanded
by its one million plus residents, who are also struggling
with up to 14 hours per day of power cuts in the dry
season. Yet the city continues to grow by about 4% per
year (CBS, 2012). Cities like Kathmandu are illustrative of

Urban and rural populations by development group, 1950–2050

FIGURE

7.1

with a population of less than one million people. By
2025, this will decrease to about 50%, while the number
of people living in cities with more than one million will
increase from 40% to 47%. The annual population increase
in six major developing country cities – Dhaka, Karachi,
Kinshasa, Lagos, Mumbai and New Delhi – is greater than
the entire population of Europe (UN-Habitat, 2012).

6 000

Population (millions)

5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

More developed regions – Urban population

Less developed regions – Urban population

More developed regions – Rural population

Less developed regions – Rural population

2050

Source: UNDESA (2012, fig. 1, p. 3).

62

CHAPTER 7

THEMATIC FOCUS

Cities are complex systems that use inputs such as water,
energy, food, materials and nutrients, much of which is
imported from outside, and produce outputs such as waste,
wastewater and emissions that pollute the surrounding
environment. Growing urban populations and their
increasing affluence generally lead to higher energy and
water consumption for domestic use. In India for example,
the government’s norm for rural water supply schemes is
40 litres per capita per day (l.p.c.d.), but for towns without
sewers it is 70 l.p.c.d., for cities with sewers it is 135 l.p.c.d.,
and for metropolitan and mega cities, with populations
over 1 million, it is as high as 150 l.p.c.d. (CPHEEO, 1999).
While these are design standards, the actual demand for
water in these cities could be higher. Mumbai, for example,
claims its water demand to be 300 l.p.c.d. (Narain, 2012). In
the USA, which has a much higher per capita income than
India, domestic indoor water use in cities averages 242 l.p.c.d.
However, with the addition of outdoor irrigation, swimming
pools and pipeline leakages the total per capita water usage in
the USA reaches almost 650 l.p.c.d. (Novotny, 2012).
Although per capita water consumption generally increases
with affluence, experience from some high income cities
indicates that this relationship need not be linear, as
some cities have started reducing their per capita water
consumption after reaching a certain income level. This is
mainly due to adoption of improved water conservation
measures in homes, reduction in water losses (including
leakage from urban distribution systems) and enhanced
awareness among consumers. Per capita water consumption
in New York City declined from 806 l.p.c.d. in 1980 to
481 l.p.c.d. in 2010 (NYC, 2012), a drop of more than 40%.
Figure 7.2, comparing per capita income with per capita
water consumption in selected Asian cities, also illustrates
this phenomenon. Singapore’s per capita GDP is more
than twice that of neighbouring Kuala Lumpur, but its per
capita water demand is much lower. The same is the case
of Guangzhou and Hong Kong. This indicates that while
there is bound to be rapid increase in water demand as cities
continue to grow, there is also room to restrict the growth
of per capita water demand or reduce it by using water
conservation measures.
In addition to the water they directly consume, urban
residents tend to have a large water footprint because
of higher incomes, which is generally associated with

WWDR 2014

Cities not only consume large amounts of water, their high
concentration of industry, transport systems and buildings
also demands large amounts of energy. Cities are home to
just over 50% of the global population, but they consume
60% to 80% of the commercial energy and emit about
75% of the GHGs (IEA, 2008b; UNEP, 2011b). As with
water consumption, per capita energy consumption in
cities depends on factors such as urban design, income
levels, climate and consumption patterns of citizens.
High density compact cities tend to have lower per capita
energy consumption because less energy is required for
transportation as well as for provision of services such as
water supply and sanitation.
The difference between energy consumption in rural and
urban areas also depends on the level of development.
In industrialized countries, the per capita energy use of
city residents is slightly lower than the national average,

18	' Water footprint’ and ‘virtual water’ are defined in Section 8.3.

7.2

Water consumption and per capita income in
selected Asian cities
600
Water consumption (litres/day)

7.2 Urban water and energy demands

a higher level of consumption of water intensive foods
(Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004) and economic structures
that enable people in cities to have reliable supplies of
water intensive goods. As this virtual demand of cities
could exceed direct water use by an order of magnitude
(Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2008), efforts can be made
towards reducing this external water footprint.18

FIGURE

the challenge of providing adequate and sustainable water
and energy services in the urban context.

500
400
300
200
100
0
0

10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 50 000 60 000 70 000
Annual GDP per person (US$)

Note: Years differ from city to city from 2005 to 2009. Annual Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) per person in US$ is based on current prices
at the time.
Source: UNDP (2012, fig. 5.3, p. 125, based on source cited therein).

CITIES

63

but in developing countries where the per capita energy
consumption in rural areas is very low, urban residents
have much higher per capita energy consumption. For
example, the per capita energy use in urban China is
almost twice as high as the national average due to higher
average incomes and better access to modern energy
services in the cities (IEA, 2008b). More than 90% of the
future urbanization will happen in developing countries,
resulting in a huge increase in global energy demand,
which in turn will result in increasing water demand. The
IEA (2012a) predicts that the water needs for energy
production will grow at twice the rate of energy demand.
The rapid growth of cities will therefore result in serious
challenges associated with access to both water and energy
in cities and their surrounding areas.

the technologies used. Electricity costs are estimated at 5%
to 30% of the total operating cost of water and wastewater
utilities (World Bank, 2012b), but in some developing
countries such as India and Bangladesh, it is as high as 40%
of the total operating cost (Van Den Berg and Danilenko,
2011). A survey of water and wastewater management in 71
Indian cities found that electricity is the single highest cost
for water utilities. In some cities, such as Jodhpur, where
water is pumped and transported from the Indira Gandhi
Canal more than 200 km away, electricity cost is as high
as 77% of the total operating cost (Narain, 2012). As cities
continue to grow, they will have to go further or dig deeper
to obtain water, which will further increase demand for
energy, particularly in developing countries where energy
is already in short supply and in many cases expensive.
Energy supply will therefore have direct implications on
availability as well as affordability of water in the rapidly
growing cities of developing countries in the future.

7.3 The water–energy nexus in the urban context
Water supply and wastewater management are significant
consumers of energy in the urban context. The United
States Environmental Protection Agency estimates that
the supply of treated water and wastewater management
consumes 3% of the total energy use by cities in the USA,
but in some states (e.g. California) it can be as high as
20% (Novotny, 2012). The amount of energy required at
each step varies significantly depending on site-specific
conditions including distance to the water source, its
quality (and in the case of groundwater, its depth), and

Typical energy footprint of the major steps in water cycle management with examples from different
treatment plants using specific technologies
5.0

5

Energy consumption (kWh/m3)

FIGURE

7.3

In urban water supply and wastewater management
systems, water conveyance and the use of advanced water
treatment options are generally the most energy intensive
activities (Figure 7.3). Water reuse may also require
significant energy, depending on the technology used,
but this is still less energy intensive than desalination
or transporting water over extremely long distances
(Lazarova et al., 2012).

4

3

2.5 kWh/m ,
State Water
Project, CA
3

0.53 kWh/m3,
GWRS, Orange
County, CA

2.5

2.9 kWh/m3,
Desalination
Ashkelon,
Israel

4.0

2.5

2.5

2.5

0.35 kWh/m ,
Strass WWTP,
Austria
3

2

1

0

1.5

1.4

1.5

1.4

1.1

0.1
Water
conveyance

0.2
Water
treatment

0.24
0.05
Water
distribution

0.3

Preliminary
treatment

0.24
Trickling
filters

1.2
1.0

0.6

0.4
0.16

1.4

0.5
0.25

Activated
sludge

0.3

Activated
sludge with
nitrification

0.3

0.2
Membrane
bioreactor

Water reuse

Brackish
water
desalination

Seawater
desalination

Rainwater
harvesting

Note: GWRS, groundwater replenishment system; WWTP, wastewater treatment plant.
Source: Lazarova et al. (2012, fig. 23.1, p. 316, adapted from sources cited therein). © IWA Publishing, reproduced with permission.

64

CHAPTER 7

THEMATIC FOCUS

Desalination is the most energy intensive water treatment
technology (Section 2.3). The energy cost of treating low
salinity seawater is about ten times greater than a typical
freshwater source and about double the energy cost of
treating wastewater for reuse (Pearce, 2012). Desalination
is therefore an appropriate option only when there are no
other sources or the cost of energy for transporting water
is very high. As shown in Figure 7.3, even an efficient
desalination plant such as the Ashkelon plant in Israel,
which requires 2.9 kWh/m3, is more energy intensive
than the transportation of water over long distances in
California, which requires 2.5 kWh/m3. However, the
desalination industry is working on reducing energy
costs. The International Desalination Association has a
goal of achieving a 20% energy reduction by 2015, and
some companies have started to experiment with using
renewable energy for desalination. Abengoa Water has
set up a pilot plant in Spain, and Abu Dhabi’s renewable
energy company Masdar has announced plans to launch
three new projects to test the use of renewables for
desalination. By 2020, Masdar aims to have a large-scale
commercial desalination plant powered by renewable
sources – solar, wind or a combination thereof (Newar,
2013).

[ See Chapter 20 (Volume 2) for the case study
‘Desalination in Gulf Cooperation Council countries’. ]
Once treated water is supplied to consumers, water
heating may also consume large amounts of energy,
particularly in cities with cold climates and in affluent
cities. In Sweden, for example, it is estimated that
collection, treatment and supply of water requires only
about 0.46 kWh/m3 of energy but heating water at the
point of use consumes more than 100 times more energy
– over 50 kWh/m3 (Olsson, 2012). As cities become more
affluent and consumers start demanding the convenience
of hot water systems in their homes, the energy
requirement for water supply will increase further, unless
renewable energy options such as solar water heaters can
be promoted.

7.4 Re-thinking urban development in terms of
water and energy

As cities continue to grow rapidly, it will become
increasingly difficult and energy intensive to meet the
water demands of their populations and economies. Lowcost surface and groundwater sources have been depleted
or contaminated in many urbanized areas (Lazarova
et al., 2012). Many experts (e.g. Daigger, 2009; Novotny,

WWDR 2014

2012) agree that abstracting freshwater from a surface or
groundwater source, using it, and disposing of it – known
as a ‘linear approach’ – is not sustainable. Future urban
development requires approaches that minimize resource
consumption and focus on resource recovery.

[ See Chapter 28 (Volume 2) for the case study
‘Water and energy linkage in Austin, Texas, USA’. ]
Novotny (2012) presents a three-phase model for the
relationship between water demand and energy use
(Figure 7.4). The model suggests that in the first phase,
up to 65% of water demand and energy consumption
could be saved in some US cities just by implementing
simple water conservation measures, such as efficient
water appliances, reduction in leaks and dry landscaping
(i.e. xeriscaping). In the second phase, cities can augment
their water supply through additional sources and treating
and reusing stormwater, although this will not result
in significant decrease in energy demand as in phase
one. The third phase involves advanced water treatment
options such as reverse osmosis water recycling systems
and desalination plants. Although these advanced systems
are energy intensive, they can offer a reliable source of
water and their additional energy inputs may be countered
by the use of efficient technology and renewable energy
sources.

7.4.1 Energy efficiency in water and wastewater
management
As energy cost is usually the greatest expenditure for
water and wastewater utilities, water and energy audits
to identify and reduce water and energy losses and

Many experts agree that
abstracting freshwater from a
surface or groundwater source,
using it, and disposing of it –
known as a ‘linear approach’
– is not sustainable. Future
urban development requires
approaches that minimize resource
consumption and focus on
resource recovery.
CITIES

65

enhance energy efficiency can result in substantial
energy and financial savings to the utilities. The World
Bank (2012b) estimates that technical measures to
improve energy efficiency can result in 10% to 30%
energy savings per measure and can have as little
as a one- to five-year payback period. In 2003, the
Vizianagaram Municipal Council in India introduced
the concept of Watergy (energy and water efficiency),
conducted energy audits of the municipal bulk water
supply systems, and implemented a series of efficiency
measures. The city managed to save more than
100 MWh and US$63,700 annually, while lowering
energy costs by 18% and eliminating 600 tonnes of
carbon dioxide emissions (UN-Habitat-IUTC, 2012).
A solar powered wastewater treatment plant under
development in Los Alisos, Mexico, is expected to be
energy self-sufficient.

[ See Chapter 27 (Volume 2) for the case study ‘Solar
powered wastewater treatment plant in Mexico'. ]
7.4.2 Urban planning and integrated urban water
management
Water and energy consumption in cities can be
reduced during early stages of urban planning through
development of compact settlements and investment
in systems for integrated urban water management
(IUWM), such as conservation of water sources, use of

FIGURE

7.4

A three-phase model of the water–energy
nexus (without energy recovery)

7.4.3 Energy from wastewater

Energy use (kWh)

Reuse limit

Energy form
renewable
sources

Water
conservation only

0

Water conservation
and stormwater
treatment and
reuse

Water conservation,
used water reclamation
and reuse by reverse
osmosis

100

Water demand reduction (%)

Source: Novotny (2012, fig. 3.2, p. 39). © IWA Publishing, reproduced
with permission.

66

CHAPTER 7

multiple water sources – including rainwater harvesting,
stormwater management and wastewater reuse – and
treatment of water as needed rather than treatment of
all water to a potable standard (Box 7.1). High density
mixed land use settlements can significantly reduce water
and energy consumption compared to low density land
use settlements, which require large amounts of water
for irrigation of outdoor landscaping and energy for
transporting water and sewage over long distances.
A study on residential water use in 12 Western US cities
showed that in all of the cities, more than half of the
household water consumption was for outdoor irrigation.
However, the community of Civano in Tucson, Arizona,
has managed to reduce its use of potable water to
197 l.p.c.d. – less than half the average amount consumed
by other Tucson residents – through innovative
development planning and landscape design. The
Civano community has smaller than average lot sizes
and primarily uses native plants for landscaping, which
require less irrigation water. Each house in Civano also
has two water supply lines: potable water for indoor use
and reclaimed water for outdoor use (WRA, 2003). As
indicated in Figure 7.4, the use of water conservation
measures and reclaimed water results in significant
reductions in energy demand. As many cities of the future
are yet to be built or are in the process of being built,
better urban planning with efficient, integrated systems for
urban water management and the conservation of water
resources can go a long way in reducing both water and
energy demand in cities (Box 7.2).

Wastewater contains energy in the form of potential
energy, thermal energy and chemically bound energy, all
of which can be harnessed and utilized. The potential
energy in wastewater depends on the topography’s
available head, or difference in height. However, even at
a height of 50 m, the potential energy content of water or
wastewater is only 6 kWh per capita per year (Lazarova
et al., 2012). This energy source is therefore is limited
to areas with favourable topography. In Amman, as the
altitude difference between the city and the As-Samra
wastewater treatment plant is about 100 m and the
altitude difference between the plant and the outlet is
42 m, the plant is able to generate about 3 MW of
electrical energy by operating two turbines before the
plant and two after it. When added to what its four
biogas digesters generate (Box 16.5), the plant becomes
nearly energy self-sufficient (Lazarova et al., 2012). In
high rise buildings, treated wastewater from the upper

THEMATIC FOCUS

BOX

7.1

Cities leading the way in water and energy conservation
Windhoek, in the heart of Namibia, the most arid country in sub-Saharan Africa, is successfully applying integrated urban
water management, which includes diversifying its water sources and recycling wastewater to meet its water needs. More
than 40 years ago, in 1969, the city established the Goreangab reclamation plant, which supplied 10% to 15% of the city’s
daily demand for potable water. In 2002, the city established another plant. Today, 26% of the water supplied in the city is
recycled sewage. In 1993, Windhoek installed a dual pipe system to irrigate all municipal parks, gardens and sports fields
with semi-purified sewage effluent, thus reducing potable water demand by 5% to 7%. In 1997, the city started recharging
its aquifer, which enabled the city to survive for two years without any surface water. Reduction of water demand and
reclamation of wastewater has enabled Windhoek to sustain its water supply system and reduce energy consumption related
to transportation of water over very long distances and treatment of water from alternative sources such as seawater. From
Trepper (2012) and Jacobsen et al. (2013).
Chennai, like most Indian cities, is struggling to meet the thirst of its eight million people. In the absence of perennial rivers,
the city has traditionally depended on the rain that it captures in lakes, ponds and aquifers. While the city continues to keep
an eye on distant rivers, it is also experimenting with innovative options such as rainwater harvesting, sewage recycling
and desalination to avoid the high energy costs associated with transporting water over long distances. Following two
consecutive drought years in 2002 and 2003, the city managed to develop India’s most successful rainwater harvesting
programme by making rainwater harvesting mandatory in all houses. It is also the first city in India to recycle sewage and
has now started venturing into desalination. It is estimated that about 75% of the houses in the city now have rainwater
harvesting and recharging systems and a study conducted in 2007 found that the groundwater table in the city had risen
by almost 50%, from an average of 6.18 m in 2004 to an average of 3.45 m in 2007. MetroWater, Chennai’s water supply and
sewerage authority, earns INR120 million per year by selling sewage to the Chennai Petroleum Company, which in turn treats
the sewage in its 41 million litres per day capacity reverse osmosis plant and turns it into water for its use. The company has
found reclaiming sewage to be a more reliable and cost-effective option than other sources. Overall in 2008−2009, only 12%
of MetroWater’s total cost was for electricity, which is much lower than most other Indian cities. From Narain and Srinivasan
(2012).
In 2010–2011, Sydney Water’s renewable energy plants generated almost 15% of the utility’s energy needs and it is
committed to becoming carbon neutral for energy use by 2020. Sydney Water currently supports four different renewable
energy technologies. Biogas is captured and converted into electricity to power its wastewater treatment plants. Similarly,
treated wastewater is used to generate hydropower as it passes down a large drop shaft on its way to a deep ocean outfall.
It uses photovoltaic solar energy to generate electricity and solar heaters for hot water. It also uses wind energy; the power
requirements of its desalination plant are offset by the energy produced by the Capital Wind Farm near Queanbeyan. From
Sydney Water (n.d.).
Source: UN-Habitat.

BOX

7.2

Conservation of water sources
In October 2012, when Hurricane Sandy swept through north-eastern USA, New Yorkers were left for days without electricity,
but they continued to have access to water, thanks to New York City’s efforts to invest in the Catskill/Delaware forests and
wetlands instead of energy intensive water treatment plants (WWAP, 2009, ch. 14). The city saved US$4 billion to $6 billion
on the cost of water treatment plants by protecting forests and compensating farmers in the Catskill Mountains for reducing
pollution in lakes and streams (Leahy, 2013). More than 200 cities and regions around the world have invested in conserving
their watersheds and using natural infrastructure to provide essential ecosystem services. In 2011, more than $US8 billion
was invested globally in watershed projects; China led the way with 91% of this sum (Bennett et al., 2013). Investment in
watersheds ensures regular supply of freshwater and reduces the need to invest in expensive and energy intensive alternative
sources. As conveyance over long distances and use of advance water treatment are the most energy intensive components
of water and wastewater management systems, the application of integrated urban water management options such as
watershed management results in reduced energy demand.
Source: UN-Habitat.

WWDR 2014

CITIES

67

floors or collected rainwater from the roof can be used
in the lower floors to minimize energy required for
pumping of freshwater.
The thermal energy in wastewater comes from its
temperature when leaving a building – about 27°C for
mixed wastewater and 38–40°C for grey water (Roest
et al., 2010). The thermal energy of wastewater is
particularly useful in places where a large amount of
energy is required for heating water, because it can be
used to preheat the water via heat exchangers or heat
pumps. In Dalian, a city of 5.7 million people in northeast China (recognized as a National Model City in
Environmental Protection by the Chinese government),
heat is reclaimed from sewage to meet part of the heating
and cooling requirements of the Xinghai Bay Business
District. Authorities claim they save more than 30% in
energy compared to conventional solutions (Friotherm,
2012).
The chemically bound energy in wastewater results from
its carbon content, which can be converted to methane
under anaerobic conditions. The methane can then be
used for cooking and heating, converted to electricity, or
used to fuel vehicles. Based on the maximum chemical
oxygen demand (COD) load per capita of 110–120 mg/L,
Lazarova et al. (2012) estimates the maximum theoretical
chemical energy content of wastewater to be 146 kWh per
capita per year. Although the chemically bound energy
content in wastewater is less than its thermal energy,
it can be transported without much loss, whereas the
thermal energy has to be reclaimed as close to the source
as possible. Many wastewater treatment plants have been
able to generate biogas from wastewater or sludge and
convert it to heat or electricity. In Stockholm, for example,
public buses, waste collection trucks and taxis run on
biogas produced from sewage treatment plants (Osterlin,
2012) (see Chapters 17 and 24 [Volume 2], for the case
studies ‘Green energy generation in Vienna, Austria’ and
‘Green energy production from municipal sewage sludge
in Japan’, respectively).
In developing countries, particularly in warm climates,
there is little opportunity for using thermal energy from
wastewater, but generating biogas from wastewater can
be very useful. This is now a widespread practice in many
cities in Africa and in Asia. More than 300 households
and institutions in Maseru, Lesotho, are generating biogas
from wastewater and using it as a cooking fuel. Although
the initial cost for decentralized wastewater treatment

68

CHAPTER 7

systems – which includes a biogas digester, an anaerobic
baffle reactor and planted gravel filters – is slightly higher
than septic tanks, the additional benefits of biogas allow
the system to pay for itself in three years (Mantopi and
Huba, 2011). When biogas is used for cooking it often
replaces inefficient and potentially harmful solid biomass
fuels (Chapters 3, 9). Decentralized biogas systems for
wastewater treatment also reduce the cost of transporting
and pumping wastewater.
Another potential option for energy production is the use
of dried faecal sludge (FS) as fuel. Nakato et al. (2012)
analysed FS samples from three cities (Dakar, Senegal;
Kampala, Uganda; Kumasi, Ghana) and found the average
calorific value of the samples to be 17.2 MJ/kg dry solids
(DS), which is comparable to other commonly used fuels
such as rice husk (15.6 MJ/kg DS), forest residue
(19.5 MJ/kg DS), coffee husk (19.8 MJ/kg DS) and sawdust
(20.9 MJ/kg DS).19 The study found that the FS must be
dried to ≥27% DS to enable industry to derive the net
energy of 17.2 MJ/kg DS. Experience from Uganda has
shown that it is possible to achieve a DS concentration of
more than 30% by drying the FS in simple drying beds for
two weeks, thus indicating that additional energy inputs
would not be required.

7.4.4 Waterborne transit
Many urban areas are located next to large water bodies,
making waterborne transit another area where water
and energy come together in the urban context. Several
studies have shown that waterborne transit is one of the
most energy efficient means of transport. Studies done in
the USA indicate that inland towing barges are more than
three times more energy efficient than road (trucks) and
40% more efficient than rail in transporting cargo (PIANC,
2011). A study done by India’s National Transport Policy
Committee (1980) showed that the energy consumption
of transporting goods by barge was 328.0 BTU per
tonne-km,20 whereas for diesel trucks it was five times
higher at 1587.3 BTU per tonne-km. As transportation
is one of the most energy intensive sectors in the urban
context, increasing the use of waterways for passenger or
goods transit can lead to substantial energy savings.

19	1 MJ = 0.278 kWh.
20

1 BTU = 0.293 Wh.

THEMATIC FOCUS

CHAPTER

8

Industry
UNIDO
Water Management Unit (UNIDO) and John Payne (SNC Lavalin)

8.1 The relationship of water and energy with
industry

In its internal operations and with its external reach,
industry both uses and abuses water and, in so doing,
consumes energy. Industry seeks water and energy
efficiency though the two are not always compatible and
there are trade-offs to be made. Efficiencies are usually
driven in terms of cost−benefit as they relate to company
profits, although government policy and legislation
can significantly influence the situation. When these
efficiencies translate to reduced water and energy use in
a plant, one potential result is a reduction in water and
energy stress outside the factory walls in the communities
and river basins where it operates. In addition to the
use (and therefore the cost and economics) of water and
energy along supply and value chains (WWAP, 2012,
ch. 20), there is an increasing trend towards corporate
social responsibility (CSR) and a company’s licence to
operate, linked with broader public policy and legislation.
Many industries see their direct interaction with water
and energy occurring primarily at a plant or factory
level, yet the value chain approach is increasingly used
by several multinationals, and incorporated into their
risk assessment and risk management strategies. At the
end use level, water is used in a variety of ways – as a raw
material, for steam, for heating and cooling, as a solvent,
for cleaning, and for transport of waste and particulates.
Energy is further required to move, heat, cool, treat,
discharge or recycle the water. Water consumption and
efficiency is therefore an important determinant in
energy efficiency (UNIDO, 2011). Industry uses energy
independently of water as well; for example, to power
machinery and equipment, and to heat and cool buildings.
Energy is used outside production and manufacturing, for
example in transporting goods.
Water footprints often capture external or indirect factors,
such as industry’s indirect relationship with embedded
water to produce energy used in its facilities. Virtual water
is found in the supply chains of materials and equipment
employed by industry and in the downstream use of
products by consumers, which use energy as well. Such

WWDR 2014

factors have a broader reach outside the manufacturing or
production process. There is a relationship of water and
energy with industry both in and out of the ‘water box’
(WWAP, 2009).

8.2 The status of water and energy in industry

The separate means by which water use and energy
consumption are managed in industry generates
information and data relating to each sector’s individual
use and efficiency, but essentially no linkage between the
two. Information on a worldwide scale is generalized and
is influenced by industrialized nations, such as those in
the OECD, and by emerging industrial countries, such as
China and India. Useful data from individual countries
illustrate some general points and trends as do detailed
data within individual sectors and companies. However,
there is a need to relate water and energy indicators to one
another.

8.2.1 Amounts and trends
Industry uses proportionately significantly more of
the energy supply than it does of the water supply. The
industrial sector accounts for about 37% of primary global
energy use (UNIDO, 2008). Within this sector in 2010,
five principal energy intensive industries accounted for
about 50% of that use: chemicals (19%), iron and steel
(15%), non-metallic minerals (7%), pulp and paper (3%)
and non-ferrous metals (2%) (US EIA, 2013). Worldwide,
industry accounts for 19% of all water withdrawals, but
with big regional variations: 2% in South Asia and 77%
in Western Europe (FAO AQUASTAT, n.d.). In England
and Wales, the manufacturing sector is the largest user of
water, with 45% to 55% of the directly abstracted volume
from non-tidal sources, excluding major non-consumptive
use. The top five abstraction categories were chemicals
and chemical products, basic metals, paper and paper
products, beverages, and food products – a noticeable
overlap with the energy intensive industries noted above
(WRAP, 2011).
World energy consumption increased by 186% between
1973 and 2010 and for the same period industry’s use

INDUSTRY

69

increased by 157% (IEA, 2012c). The IEA predicts that
global energy demand will increase by about one-third by
2035, with the non-OECD component increasing to 65%
(IEA, 2012a), indicating that the amount of industrial
energy use varies with the type of economy. The OECD
predicts that by 2050 global water demand will increase
by 55% and within that, manufacturing’s share, though
not the largest, will increase by 400%, with the largest
component coming from the BRICS countries (OECD,
2012b). For Asia, a 65% increase in industrial water use is
forecast between 2000 and 2030 (WEF, 2009).

8.2.2 Water quality and energy
Different industrial processes are able to use water of
varying quality. Not all industrial production requires the
ultra-pure water of the semiconductor industry or the
high quality raw-material water of the food and beverage
industry. However, some water treatment is required
for cooling, condensing and steam. Further treatment
is required for discharge: for example, in Canada, 38%
of discharged industrial water is not treated, while 16%,
37% and 8% underwent primary, secondary or tertiary
treatment, respectively (Statistics Canada, 2009). Industry
can recycle its own water in heating and cooling, and
may use reclaimed water from sources such as urban
water supplies instead of freshwater abstraction. Specific
industries report some water recycling data and, while

BOX

8.1

global statistics are not widely available, it is reported that
recirculated (recycled) water use, as a percentage of intake,
is 53% in the Canadian manufacturing industry (Statistics
Canada, 2009).21 Water treatment requires energy, and the
amount of treatment needed increases as the quality of
the source decreases. As shown in Figure 2.2 (Section 2.3),
approximately twice as much energy is required to deliver
treated water from wastewater as from a lake or river.
For industry, the implication is that in terms of energy
required, it may be more economical to extract water
directly from a raw external source or treat wastewater
to minimum standards for discharge, than to fully treat
wastewater for reuse.

8.2.3 Industry in low income countries
Globalization has led several manufacturing industries
to move to lower income countries. Drivers for this trend
have commonly been cheaper labour, favourable taxation,
and less or lighter regulation and enforcement. Water
intensive industries in regions with adequate water may
be transferred to areas with less water, stressing local
water supplies and local utilities (WWAP, 2003). New
industry may contaminate vulnerable water supplies with

21	Similar statistics are not generally available for developing countries, and
even for OECD countries, details of how much industrial water is treated
and recycled are difficult to obtain.

Trends in water and energy use in tourism
Tourism is one of the most promising drivers of growth for the world economy, but its development is accompanied by
sustainability-related challenges. An investment of 0.2% of current global Gross Domestic Product (US$135 billion) per year
between now and 2050 would allow the tourism sector to grow steadily, contributing to economic growth, employment and
development while ensuring significant environmental benefits such as reductions in water consumption (18%), energy use
(44%) and carbon dioxide emissions (52%) compared with a business-as-usual scenario (UNEP/UNWTO, 2012).
To mobilize and maximize this tourism investment, small and medium-sized tourism enterprises need better access to tools
and financing from governments and international organizations through public–private partnerships. Public policies and
support such as subsidies to encourage private investment in green tourism would provide the conditions for the further
development of sustainable tourism. Destination planning and development strategies are the first step towards the
greening of tourism (UNEP/UNWTO, 2012).
Initiatives such as the Hotel Energy Solutions (HES) project, initiated by UNWTO with the support of the European Union
‘Intelligent Energy Europe Programme’ and in close partnership with UNEP, IH&RA, EREC and ADEME, aim to increase energy
efficiency in small and medium-sized hotels by 20% and increase their use of renewable energies by 10%, demonstrating that
economic growth and sustainability can, and should, go hand in hand. The project helps to reduce hotel operational costs
while increasing competitiveness and sustainability and assisting in alleviating the industry’s impact on climate change. Its
principal asset is easy-to-use software – the HES E-toolkit – which allows hoteliers to assess current energy use and decide on
the most advantageous technology investment solutions.
Source: UNWTO.

70

CHAPTER 8

THEMATIC FOCUS

industrial waste. The combined effect of these stresses may
impose barriers on the transfer of certain manufacturing
activities to low income countries. Services such as The
Global Water Tool (WBCSD, n.d.) are available to assist
companies in evaluating the risks involved. In developed
countries, industrial water use may be stabilizing due to
increased efficiency and the move of some manufacturing
plants to low income countries yet, at the same time, lack
of access to water may hinder such moves, especially for
water-dependent industries (Goldman Sachs, 2008). It
is significant to note that 60% of the world’s industrial
energy consumption is estimated to occur in developing
countries and transitional economies (UNIDO, 2010).

8.2.4 Private enterprise
Large companies and multinationals, particularly in the
food and beverage sector, have been engaged for some time
in improving water and energy efficiencies. One estimate
suggests that the combined direct year’s consumption of
five of the large food and beverage companies is enough to
provide the basic water needs of the world’s population for
one day (JPMorgan, 2008). Such companies often see the
value of efficiencies in both monetary and societal terms.
Nestlé, for example, has reduced its water use from 5 to 1.8
litres per dollar of sales over a ten-year period (McKinsey &
Company, 2009a) and promotes CSR values (Nestlé Waters,
n.d.). Other companies, such as those in the mining sector,
are less advanced in achieving efficiency, as water is seen
more as a compliance issue than a strategic resource (Sarni
and Stanislaw, 2012).
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with 20 or
fewer employees comprise more than 70% of enterprises
in most economies (OECD, 2013a). They employ between
9% (USA) and 35% (Greece) of the workforce (OECD,
2013a), and figures from non-OECD countries are likely
to be higher. Although SMEs as a group have the potential
for making a significant impact on water and energy
efficiencies, that impact is mostly apparent on a local
scale. SMEs are commonly in need of equity capital and
have fewer resources to improve efficiencies. Monetary
assistance from financial institutions and expertise and
capacity-building support may have catalysing impacts
(e.g. UNIDO’s TEST programme, Box 16.4).
Tourism, a major economic sector in many small
developing countries, is affected by a set of unique
challenges with respect to water and energy. Efforts are
currently under way to increase the level of sustainability
in industry operations (Box 8.1).’

WWDR 2014

8.3 Water and energy metrics in industry

Efficiency and improvement in water and energy need
to be measured for benchmarking and future evaluation.
Separate data and indicators are available for both water
and energy use in industry. Industry is interested in
measuring the cost effects on its profitability whereas
governments and civil society are more focused on overall
economic results, social benefits and the environment.
Metrics comparing water and energy use to indicate the
effects of one upon the other, both at plant scale and for
countries as a whole, are necessary yet seemingly absent.

In developed countries, industrial
water use may be stabilizing due to
increased efficiency and the move
of some manufacturing plants to
low income countries yet, at the
same time, lack of access to water
may hinder such moves, especially
for water-dependent industries
Water and energy audits are a starting point to benchmark
a facility’s status, measure usage and identify areas for
improvement. This information can be used to compile
water and energy footprints. A water footprint is ‘the
total volume of water used in the production of the goods
and services consumed by an individual or community
or produced by a business’ (WWAP, 2009, p. 101) and is
usually quoted in terms of cubic metres of water per unit
product. It is closely connected to the concept of virtual
water, which is the ‘volume of water required to produce
a commodity or service’ (Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2007,
p. 36). This is an economic concept: the water embedded
in traded goods. Virtual water is commonly presented
in terms of litres of water per kilogram (WBCSD, 2006).
Energy footprints, on the other hand, map energy
flows from supply to end use; common examples for
manufacturing sectors have been produced (US DOE,
n.d.). These footprints indicate primary energy flow from
both off-site and on-site (Figure 8.1) and the distribution
of energy to on-site end uses.
Other measures include water productivity, the monetary
value of the product for each cubic metre of water used,

INDUSTRY

71

and energy intensity, expressed in terms of energy use per
monetary unit, such as per unit of value added (UNIDO,
2010) or the amount of energy used to produce one unit of
a commodity (UNIDO, 2008).

transportation, infrastructure, regulatory frameworks and
centres of innovation (McKinsey & Company, 2012).

8.4.1 Population pressure and living standards
Population growth and poverty reduction produce increased
demands for water and manufactured goods, which means
increased demand for energy, mainly as electricity. This trite
point underlies many drivers that put demand pressure on
water and energy. Globally, manufacturing output continues
to grow in advanced economies by about 2.7% annually
and by 7.4% in large developing economies (McKinsey &
Company, 2012). Per capita use of water tends to increase
with the higher standards of living associated with rising
levels of industrial activity in developing countries (Goldman
Sachs, 2008). The case is similar for energy. In developing
countries, the growing industrial sector requires increasing
energy – already more than 50% of the energy supply
(UNIDO, 2008).

8.4 Forces influencing the use of water and
energy in industry

As described in Sections 2.1 and 3.1 of this report, water
and energy have many of the same demand drivers.
Principal among these are population growth, economic
development and urbanization, and a growing middle
class (Sarni and Stanislaw, 2012). Overarching these
drivers is the challenge of policy and governance and their
resulting fiscal and legal drivers. In the decision-making
process for industrial location, water and energy needs
compete for priority not just with each other but also
with factors such as labour costs, availability of skilled
labour, and access to raw materials, markets, suppliers,

FIGURE

8.1

Primary energy use: All USA manufacturing

Manufacturing Energy and Carbon Footprint

21,972 TBtu
Total Primary Energy Use:
Total Combustion Emissions: 1,261 MMT CO2e

Sector: All Manufacturing (NAICS 31-33)

Total
Energy
Onsite
Energy

Offsite
Energy
Fuel

Onsite
Generation

11,789

Generation
and
Transmission
Losses

6,161

21,972

Electricity
Generation 2,850

9,011
Generation
and
Transmission
Losses

318

1,173

330.7

4,807

290.6

12,974

9,639

Steam
Distribution
Losses

Steam
Generation 855

Energy Use

Combustion Emissions

(TBtu = Trillion British
Thermal Units)

(MMT CO2e = Million Metric Tons
Carbon Dioxide Equivalent)

All Energy

Offsite

Fuel
Total

Losses

788.0

Process
Losses

544.3

618.6

Steam

11,327

Process
Energy

4,276

Onsite

Total Emissions =
Offsite Emissions +
Onsite Emissions

1,647

937

74.3

Electricity

1,582

322.9

5,855
15,494

Electricity
and Steam
Generation
Losses

Nonprocess
Energy
142.6

1,261.3

Nonprocess
Losses

647

29.3
642.8

67

Electricity
Export

Energy use data source:

2006 MECS (with adjustments)

Last Revised:

October 2012

Notes:

Feedstock energy not included Energy
values <0.5 TBtu shown as 0 Values
represent aggregate data Offsite
generation shown on net basis

Prepared for the Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) by Energetics Incorporated

Source: US DOE (n.d.).

72

CHAPTER 8

THEMATIC FOCUS

8.4.2 Economic forces
Although supply and demand are fundamental parameters,
they are influenced by factors other than the amounts of
water and energy involved. Perhaps the most significant
of these is price. Although there is wide variation, water
prices for domestic use in the OECD are generally
higher than for industry and agriculture (CWF, 2011)
(Table 8.1). Electricity prices per megawatt-hour for
industry range from US$69.57 (USA) to US$279.31 (Italy)
(IEA, 2012c). Again, domestic prices are significantly
higher in all countries, although prices between countries
are not always comparable, as they are not related to
disposable incomes or GDP (CWF, 2011).
Water and energy prices are strongly affected by subsidies
that support industry and its competitiveness. These
subsidies distort the true economic relationship between
water and energy. Particularly for water, price is not a
true reflection of cost and may in fact be less than the
cost. Historically, the price of water has been so low that
there has been no incentive to save it (TSG, 2012). There
is growing momentum for water prices to reflect its true
cost, which, it is hoped, can reduce consumption and
encourage conservation and efficiency. Demand elasticity
can allow industry to adapt to conservation-minded

Volatility in energy prices affects industry more than the
availability of energy. The reverse is somewhat true for
water – availability of water is a bigger business risk – as
the price is generally low and stable. Oil has shown a price
variation of 42.9% since 1989 whereas the same figure
for water is 4.2% (WEF, 2009). Water prices are capped
because the service is generally publicly run or regulated
(WEF, 2009), at least in developed countries (Section 1.3).

8.4.3 Availability and security
Access to water, competition for water and water security
are expressions of water availability and the need to obtain

OECD estimates of prices for water by broad sector usage

TABLE

8.1

pricing over the long term, especially in those industries
with high water use (Goldman Sachs, 2008). The
assumption that lower energy prices will lead to higher
specific energy consumption (SEC) and vice versa has
been shown in only a few industries. Higher SEC is
related to other factors such as keeping old, less efficient
machinery to avoid the high investment in newer, more
efficient equipment during uncertain economic times.
Where local energy is relatively cheap, for example in
major fossil-fuel producing countries such as Russia,
Saudi Arabia and South Africa, there is little incentive to
reduce energy use (UNIDO, 2010).

OECD nation

Household water
supply

Industrial and
commercial

Irrigation and
agriculture

Average price of
water supply

Netherlands

3.16

1.08

1.44

1.89

Austria

1.05

1.05

1.01

1.04

France

3.11

0.95

0.08

1.38

Greece

1.14

1.14

0.05

0.78

Spain

1.07

1.08

0.05

0.73

United States of
America

1.25

0.51

0.05

0.60

Hungary

0.45

1.54

0.03

0.67

United Kingdom

2.28

1.68

0.02

1.33

Australia

1.64

1.64

0.02

1.10

Portugal

1.00

1.26

0.02

0.76

Turkey

1.51

1.68

0.01

1.07

Canada

0.70

1.59

0.01

0.77

Note: Data not available for all Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) member nations. Prices are in US$/m3 water.
Includes water supply only and excludes wastewater charges and taxes.
Source: CWF (2011, fig. 9, p. 8, derived from source cited therein).

WWDR 2014

INDUSTRY

73

adequate supplies. These issues are growing in importance
as industry grows in (or moves to) lower income countries
that are frequently water stressed. The challenge is to
prioritize and satisfy basic local water requirements
ahead of those of industry. Water needs to be provided
at an affordable cost to the population (and at no cost to
those who cannot afford it) for meeting basic domestic
needs, but could perhaps be provided at a premium
for industry. While quantity is often the focus of water
security, quality issues can be as important. Contaminated
and untreated water effectively reduces the water supply,
notwithstanding the pollution it causes. All of these risks
can extend to the supply chain.
Energy security is dependent not only on supply but
also, importantly, on access (WEF, 2012a). Reliability
of transmission and distribution systems for electricity,
including risks related to disruptions to supply (especially
in countries with a limited range of energy sources) and
relations between nations and trading partners raise
significant concerns for industry, especially with respect
to price volatility. As with water, there is an interaction
with the MDG of universal access to energy in lower
income countries where access is non-existent or energy
costs are prohibitive.

8.4.4 Governance and policy-making
Governments and their policies are the principal enablers
for water and energy efficiency. There is frequently a lack
of coordination and collaboration between policy- and
decision-makers in the realms of energy and water. There
is a common perception that energy efficiency is too
complex for public policy, and that it is best resolved in
the marketplace (UNIDO, 2008). As industry is primarily
focused on production, its interest is to secure water and
energy at the lowest prices and not necessarily within a

As industry is primarily focused
on production, its interest is to
secure water and energy at the
lowest prices and not necessarily
within a programme of water
and energy efficiency. This
provides an opportunity for
policy intervention.

74

CHAPTER 8

programme of water and energy efficiency. This provides
an opportunity for policy intervention (UNIDO, 2008).
The challenge is to develop a sustainable approach to
policy intervention. Manufacturing has traditionally been
considered in terms of a vector for mass employment,
but it also is ‘a critical driver of innovation, productivity
and competitiveness’ (McKinsey & Company, 2012,
p. 15). Policy-makers need to understand the diversity
of industry and its position in the wider national and
regional economy. In the case of energy, governments
need to be aware of industries affected by energy costs, the
impacts of energy costs, and what might drive location
(McKinsey & Company, 2012). Similar points may apply
to water use in terms of affordable access to reliable supply
and treatment services. However, cost and other market
considerations are often not as prominent as the overall
availability of water resources, especially for larger plants
that may have their own water supply and treatment
facilities.

8.4.5 Legislation and regulation
Energy regulation is more directed towards production
and distribution than use in industry, although in many
industries, energy efficiency is driven by regulations
concerning carbon footprints and GHGs. For water
resources, regulation generally concerns use and discharge.
For example, the USA’s Clean Water Act protects surface
water from pollution discharges and the EU Urban
Wastewater directive is aimed in part at industrial
wastewater. Overall there appears to be an increase in
water regulation facing industry: this increases cost and
may jeopardize predictable supply (JPMorgan, 2008).
Laws and regulation can be effective drivers of efficiency,
and they are often based on both offering incentives
and threatening penalties. A less forceful method is to
use voluntary guidelines. Regulation is becoming more
global; for example, China is mirroring much of the
USA’s regulatory framework with its State Environmental
Protection Agency (SEPA) (Goldman Sachs, 2008). In
contrast, better use of energy and water in lower income
countries may be the indirect result of regulations in
developed countries with markets and companies that
are subject to higher environmental standards (WWAP,
2012). This must be seen in the context that an estimated
70% of industrial waste (and 90% of sewage) is discharged
without treatment into usable water supplies in developing
countries (UN, 2003).

THEMATIC FOCUS

Enforcement of regulation can be a challenge, especially
in countries with limited resources. The goal is that
regulations must be clear and based on the latest
information and science. Industry is susceptible to
changes in rules and regulations whether they are
unexpected or the result of political changes.
Regulators and organizations are working on ways for
companies to calculate and disclose their water and energy
footprints and efficiencies and these efforts could lead to
industry rankings, adding leverage regarding reputational
risk. Many organizations, such as the WWF, the UN CEO
Water Mandate and the Alliance for Water Stewardship,
are working to increase the awareness, leadership and
engagement of the private sector so that companies
consider more fully the water risks they face – physical,
regulatory and reputational. On a global scale, the recently
designed Energy Architecture Performance Index is a tool
designed for policy- and decision-makers to manage and
monitor the challenges associated with the transition to ‘a
new energy architecture’ (WEF, 2012b, p. 8). It measures
energy’s contribution to the economy, sustainability, and
access and security, ranking countries accordingly.

8.5 Opportunities and trade-offs

The private management structure of industry gives it
the flexibility to effect changes, which can be rapid, and
improve efficiency in water and energy use within itself
and its immediate sphere of influence − working from
inside the water and energy ‘boxes’. For governments and
regulators, outside-the-box opportunities exist to provide
enabling environments and institutional frameworks to
assist industry efforts.
Opportunities for energy efficiency in industry have
existed for a long time. Beyond the quest for more costefficient energy use, the most recent driver is the emphasis
on climate change, where a reduction in GHG emissions
is strongly linked to energy use and efficiency. Water
use and efficiency opportunities are now following suit,
driven in part by climate change and the scarcity of water
resources it is projected to produce. However, there may
be a rebound effect. Although energy efficiency means the
same production can be delivered with less energy, it also
means more can be produced with the same amount of
energy. The same effect can be true for water (Ercin and
Hoekstra, 2012).
New and developing technology is available to improve
industry water productivity and energy efficiency. While

WWDR 2014

it is often the case that more efficient or less use of water
translates into energy savings because of the need to heat,
cool, move and treat water, the opposite is less likely to be
the case – that more efficient use of energy means less use
of water (unless embedded water to produce the energy
is factored in). Closed-loop dry cooling systems are an
example of both water and energy savings combined.

Enforcement of regulation can be
a challenge, especially in countries
with limited resources. The goal is
that regulations must be clear and
based on the latest information
and science.
In most cases, the main trade-offs are whether energy
savings trump water savings (or vice versa), and whether
gaining an improvement in water can come at the
expense of energy (or vice versa). This is where water
productivity intersects with energy efficiency. For example,
alternative tailing disposal (ATD) mining techniques
may reduce water use but they require more energy to
dewater and transport the filtered, thickened or pastelike material (Watson, 2010). Recycling water is strongly
encouraged yet the energy used for treatment per cubic
metre is considerably more than that for supplying fresh
water (Figure 2.2). These trade-offs highlight the need
for balanced optimization, as industry is concerned
with its overall costs. Such cost–benefit interactions are
easiest to measure at the plant level. In the short term,
investments may be perceived as a high and risky cost
in the light of longer term gains such as lower operation
and maintenance costs. But many investments in water
productivity have shown positive returns in as little as
three years (McKinsey & Company, 2009b).
Industry must consider the full range of inputs in the
trade-off between where products are produced and
where they are sold (McKinsey & Company, 2012). Tradeoffs are made not only between water and energy but
between both of them in regards to labour availability, raw
materials, transportation, markets and so on. Industry’s
priority is productivity, so compromises will be made
in business interests, and water and energy efficiencies
have to be optimized under the specific circumstances.
Capital for investment is frequently limited and industry

INDUSTRY

75

In the short term, investments
may be perceived as a high
and risky cost in the light of
longer term gains such as lower
operation and maintenance
costs. But many investments in
water productivity have shown
positive returns in as little as
three years.
may choose to expand capacity, which will generate more
revenue, rather than improve efficiency (UNIDO, 2010).
The opportunities in energy savings in industry translate
to a potential 26% improvement worldwide based on
benchmark data, and more than 75% in developing
countries or economies in transition. This would result in
a saving of 3% to 4% in total cost of production (UNIDO,
2010).

76

CHAPTER 8

Trade-offs may be difficult to see in monetary terms
as a return on investment. When a company sees
the opportunity to adopt new paradigms of CSR and
commits to cleaner production and sustainability, there
is a financial investment of time and materials. While
this may lead to more profit, which is one measure, it is
also intended to improve the company’s social licence to
operate, which is intangible, like goodwill.
Government and decision-makers are also faced with
trade-offs, which are very different to those of industry
because their constituency has many stakeholders with
competing interests. In theory, IWRM takes account of
industry’s requirements, balanced with the needs and
interests of affected stakeholders and environmental
concerns. Trade-offs are bound to be necessary, and
dealing with them needs to be based on good data in
the bigger picture. Industry generally recognizes that
regulation will shape water economics and that regulators’
preferences can shape responses (McKinsey, 2009b). The
same is also likely true for energy.

THEMATIC FOCUS

CHAPTER

9

Ecosystems
UNEP
Thomas Chiramba, Elizabeth Khaka, Eric Hoa, Maite Aldaya, Djaheezah Subratty, Ryuichi Fukuhara (UNEP); Maija Berthule,
Gareth James Lloyd (UNEP DHI); Rebecca Welling (IUCN); and Eline Boelee (Water Health)

9.1 Ecosystems as the foundation of the water–
energy nexus

The availability of adequate quantities of water, of
sufficient quality, depends on healthy ecosystems and
can be considered an ecosystem service (UNEP, 2011a).
Looking at the world as a range of ecosystems (from
pristine nature to intensive agriculture) and recognizing
that ecosystems provide a variety of services to the
water–energy nexus can help the management of tradeoffs and ensure that short-term gains (e.g. in providing
energy) do not undermine services critical for resilience

Ecosystems provide the enabling environment for water
flows as well as energy provision, and are impacted by
many processes across the water–energy nexus. Where
water is a source of energy, be it directly (e.g. hydropower)
or indirectly (e.g. irrigated biofuels), healthy ecosystems

Simplified diagram of some major interlinkages between ecosystem services, energy and water

FIGURE

9.1

and long-term environmental sustainability (Boelee
et al., 2011). Maintaining environmental flows enables
important ecosystem services that are fundamental to
sustainable economic growth, human well-being and
societal peace in shared river basins (UNEP-IRP, in press).

Healthy ecosystems

Provisioning services, e.g
• Food: crops, fish, livestock
• Firewood
• Biofuels
• Transport

Regulating services, e.g.
• Water flow regulation
• Pollination
• Erosion regulation
• Greenhouse gas regulation
• Climate regulation

Bioenergy

Hydropower

Cultural services, e.g.
• Aesthetics
• Recreational fishing

Supporting services, e.g.
• Nutrient cycling
• Soil formation
o Long term: peat
o Prehistoric: fossil fuels
• Mitigation of climate change

Energy from
fossil fuels

Note: Bold arrows indicate a major dependency; dashed arrows indicate major, usually negative, impacts; and shading indicates that water flows play a
crucial role in these interactions. Categories of ecosystem services are according to MEA (2005).
Source: UNEP.

WWDR 2014

ECOSYSTEMS

77

deliver the services to sustain the production of that
energy (Figure 9.1). At the same time, energy generation
has an impact on ecosystems both directly (e.g. mining of
fossil fuels in forested areas) and through the use of water
for energy (e.g. hydropower dams that alter river ecology).

9.2 Energy, water and ecosystems:
Dependencies and impacts

Links between energy production, water and ecosystems
are manifold (Table 9.1). Power generation plants are
often located near rivers, as they require a regular supply
of freshwater for cooling, and in the case of hydropower,
water is used to drive electricity-generating turbines.

TABLE

9.1

The waste and warm water generated in thermal power
plants can be treated by ecosystems through in-stream
processes involving absorption, buffering, dilution and
detoxification.
At the same time, ecosystem services are being
compromised worldwide, and energy production is one of
the drivers of this process (WWF, 2012). Different forms
of energy have, to a greater or lesser extent, an impact on
water resources (Table 9.1). These impacts can be easier
quantified and understood at smaller spatial scales due to
the nature of water resources and the boundaries of water
flows (GEA, 2012). Most energy production is heavily

Examples of water use for energy production and the related ecosystem services
Type of energy source

Example of water use

Hydropower

Electricity generation

Ecosystem services
Depends on

Impacts on

Water flow regulation
upstream (R)

Fisheries (P)

Erosion regulation
upstream (R)
Climate regulation (S)

Water flow regulation
downstream (R)
Sediment transport
downstream (S)
Recreation (C)

Bioenergy

Water use for irrigation of
biofuel crops
Water used for biomass

Water supply (P)

Water flow regulation (R)

Water flow regulation (R)

Food production (P)

Soil fertility (S)

Water quality (P)

Pollination (R)
Fossil fuels

Extraction
(e.g. exploration, hydraulic
fracturing, shale processing,
drilling equipment, dust
suppression)

Long-term soil formation (S)

Refining
(e.g. coal washing, oil
hydrogenation, gas
purification)

Water flow regulation (R)

Landscape (C)
Erosion (R)

Use
Thermal power generation
(fossil, nuclear, concentrated
solar power)

Cooling

Nutrient cycling (S)

GHG regulation (R)

GHG emissions (R)
Water flow regulation (R)

Biodiversity (R)
Aquatic ecosystem functions

Waste disposal

Almost all regulating and
supporting services

Ecosystem services: C, cultural; P, provisioning; R, regulating; S, supporting. GHG, greenhouse gas.
Source: UNEP.

78

CHAPTER 9

THEMATIC FOCUS

9.2.1 Hydropower
Hydropower is the largest renewable source of electricity
generation (Figure 3.5), and although it uses water
flows as the source of energy, most of the water that
passes through hydropower plants can be used for other
purposes afterwards (Section 3.3.3). Large dams are often
built to create reservoirs, the functioning of which relies
on vegetation and healthy soils upstream to protect the
reservoir from sedimentation and regulate the flow of
water to it. Many well-designed and operated reservoirs
include catchment management.
From an environmental perspective, an important issue
in hydropower generation, as for dams and reservoirs
in general, is the fragmentation of river systems with
far-reaching impacts on ecosystem services that benefit
human activities, economies and development (GEA,
2012). A recent global assessment indicates that of
the 292 large rivers studied, 172 are already seriously
affected and fragmented by dams (Nilsson et al., 2005),
obstructing upstream and downstream fish migration.
Damming for power production and artificial regulation
of flows can affect the timing of water flows: often it
reduces or eliminates seasonal floods and negatively
affects river ecology, adjacent floodplains and wetlands.
This in turn has an impact on the breeding grounds of
aquatic species (affecting protein stock and fisheries),
groundwater recharge, soil fertility, agricultural
productivity, biodiversity and water quality (e.g. Herath

WWDR 2014

9.2.2 Bioenergy
Bioenergy refers to the renewable energy derived
from biomass or biological sources, such as firewood,
biofuels, agricultural by-products, charcoal, peat and
dung. Globally, renewables (including hydropower)
account for 18% of the primary energy used in the world
(Figure 9.2). Bioenergy dominates, accounting for 78%
of renewables (14.1% of the total), the majority of which
comes from traditional biomass (68% of bioenergy)
(Banerjee et al., 2013). More than two billion people in
the world rely on firewood and charcoal for their daily
energy needs (REN21, 2012) (Table 1.1). When used for
cooking indoors, this leads to high levels of indoor air
pollution, affecting particularly poor women and children
(Section 1.1). Biomass is also used on a larger scale for the
generation of electricity in power plants consuming wood
chips and forest residues (Figure 9.2).

9.2

Global total final energy consumption (TFEC)
versus share of renewable energy (RE)
70
60
Global TFEC (petajoule)

Life-cycle environmental impact assessment (EIA)
methods are available to quantify and rank impacts
of various types of energy generation. Water
consumption often is included into these methods,
though environmental impacts of water use can also
be determined. A focus on ecosystem services in EIA
can help the approach move beyond impact assessment
towards a comparison of options; for example, various
biofuel crops, to determine which is most sustainable
(Coleby et al., 2012). Funding organizations such as the
World Bank emphasize the need to match development
with environmental sustainability, such as green growth in
the energy sector (World Bank, 2013b).

et al., 2011; Opperman et al., 2011; see also Section 6.2).
Another impact of dams is the reduced levels of sediments
transported downstream, which undermines coastal
ecosystem integrity through loss of the land-stabilizing
benefits of healthy sediment flows. In some cases, this
could increase vulnerability to storm events. Globally,
dams in river systems are estimated to trap 4–5 Gt/year
(Vörösmarty et al., 2003), or approximately 25%, of total
sediment transport (GEA, 2012).

FIGURE

dependent on readily available water (Chapter 3), and this
dependency impacts water-related ecosystems in a variety
of ways. If adequate water is not available at the right place
at the right time and in the right quantity and quality,
ecosystem functions and services, and subsequently
energy production, can be negatively affected.

16.6%

17.2%

17.4%

17.0%

1995

2000

2005

18.0%

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990
Other RE

Hydro

Traditional Biomass

2010

Modern Biomass
RE share in TFEC

Source: Banerjee et al. (2013, fig. 4.5, p. 209, based on IEA data cited
therein). © World Bank, Washington, DC.

ECOSYSTEMS

79

Regardless of scale and type, all forms of biomass energy
need land and water (UNEP, 2011a); they are directly
dependent on the continuous delivery of supporting and
regulating ecosystem services such as nutrients for the
soil, pollination and water regulation. Healthy ecosystems
are in turn essential for meeting the energy needs of poor
people (e.g. in the case of fuelwood, the environmental
water requirements of forest systems must be met and the
erosion of savannah-type ecosystems prevented).
It is difficult to assess the water consumption of bioenergy
in general, as opposed to specific biofuels. Livestock,
for instance, is an important asset for traction power
and transport (a form of bioenergy), meat and milk
production, manure (often used as fuel), leather and
horns. Livestock water productivity calculations aim to
include all benefits per consumed unit of water (Peden
et al., 2009). Adding the ecosystems dimension makes
the calculations more complicated. If manure is brought
back into the ecosystem, it will help nutrient and water
cycling, soil formation and, by increasing both fertility
and structure of the soil, contribute to the reduction of
erosion. However, the same manure can also be used for
construction and as fuel for cooking. In the latter case,
much of the nutrients are lost to the ecosystem.
Biofuel, as a specific type of bioenergy, is often promoted
as an alternative to fossil fuels to reduce GHG emissions
(Sections 3.2.2, 6.5). Increasing surface area for biofuels
under conventional agriculture leads to sometimes
disproportionate increases in the use of land, water (de
Fraiture et al., 2008), fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides

BOX

9.1

(GEA, 2012) and other inputs. Hence, unsustainable
biofuel production can have significant local
implications for the state of water resources (including
downstream pollution), land ownership, food security
and ecosystems (FAO, 2008). Expansion of biofuel
production, and its attendant shift and expansion in
agricultural and forestry activity, has raised a number
of environmental and social concerns, ranging from
potentially increased GHG emissions to labour rights
abuses, deforestation (with its own impacts on water
flows as well as on firewood provision) and reduced
food security (e.g. Fargione et al., 2008). Environmental
impacts appear to be less in the case of algal biofuels
(Moazami, 2013), though this technology needs to be
proven effective beyond the pilot level. New policies and
guidelines to better monitor and manage future biofuel
production are needed (Groom et al., 2008).

9.2.3 Fossil fuels
The extraction, processing and use of fossil fuels have
many impacts on today’s ecosystems through water use,
pollution and production of GHGs. Oil spills, damaged
land, accidents, fires and incidents of air and water
pollution are gaining attention in addition to GHG
emissions. Oil frontiers are inevitably reaching remote or
undeveloped sites, some of which are in environmentally
vulnerable or sensitive areas, such as the Iraqi Marshlands
of Mesopotamia (Box 9.1). The Ogoniland in Nigeria used
to be a wetland high in biodiversity, but oil spills and oil
well fires have destroyed the ecosystem and with that, the
livelihoods of indigenous communities (UNEP 2011c).

Impacts of oil extraction in Mesopotamia, Iraq
The Iraqi Marshlands of Mesopotamia comprise the largest wetland ecosystem in West Eurasia. As the ultimate destination
for the Tigris and Euphrates waters flowing in the arid region, the Marshlands are vulnerable to hydrological, social, political,
economic and environmental events upstream. The Marshlands, which supported rich biodiversity, traditional indigenous
lifestyles, and unique natural and cultural landscapes, had been almost destroyed by the time the Iraqi regime collapsed
in 2003 because of over-exploitation, a lack of coordinated management and political ill will. Although the new Iraqi
government and the international community have made restoration and conservation efforts since 2003, exploitation of
supergiant oil reserves near and within the Marshland areas could undo any progress. Water needs for oil extraction will
place extra pressure on scarce freshwater resources in the Marshlands and thus threaten many aquatic ecosystem services.
Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) requires water injection and water steam to displace and move oil to nearby wells through
enhanced recovery wells. Normally, 30% of the oil in a reservoir can be extracted (known as the recovery factor), but EOR
increases this and maintains the production rate over a longer period. The oil companies operating in the area would demand
approximately one billion m3 using the least water-consumptive EOR method when oil production is increased to 12 million
barrels (1.4 million m3) per day.
Source: UNEP, from UNEP (2007) and UN (2010).

80

CHAPTER 9

THEMATIC FOCUS

Water quality can be degraded at every step of the fuel
cycle (Allen et al., 2012) in fossil fuel production and
use. Extraction, refining and combustion of fossil fuels
can pollute water in many ways, through both regular
operations and accidental releases. Approximately 15–18
billion m3 per year freshwater resources are contaminated
by fossil fuel production, with significant implications for
ecosystems and the communities that depend on the water
for drinking or to support their livelihoods. At the global
level, the single greatest water impact generated by fossil
fuels comes from their combustion and the subsequent
climate change, which will have major, long-term impacts
on water availability and quality across the planet (Allen
et al., 2012).
Hydraulic fracturing uses large amounts of water to
extract oil or natural gas from deep rocks (Section 3.2.1).
The risk of significant effects due to water abstraction
could be high where there are multiple installations.
Hydraulic fracturing has recently come under
international scrutiny due to its potential environmental
impacts. Several studies point out risks to surface water
and groundwater contamination, freshwater depletion,
biodiversity impacts, land-take, air pollution, noise
pollution and seismicity (EC, 2012b; US EPA, 2013).
Risks include discharges into surface waters, disposal
into underground injection wells, spills or faulty
construction, explosions from pipeline construction, water
contamination with toxic substances (leading to long
term-health impacts), and soil and air pollution (Peduzzi,
2012; IEA, 2012d).

9.2.4 Thermal power plants
Many thermal power plants use water from nearby rivers
or lakes for various processes, especially cooling. Cooling
water intake structures can have adverse effects on aquatic
fauna, while water released back into water bodies is
usually very warm and sterile, disrupting local aquatic
ecosystems and potentially altering local habitats and
species (Teixeira et al., 2009; Yi-Li et al., 2009). Water
in most fossil fuel power plants is also used in other
processes, such as flue gas desulfurization, ash handling,
coal washing and dust removal. These add pollutants to
the water streams, which can have negative impacts on the
ecosystem. Moreover, air emissions from thermal power
plants’ fuel combustion can contain mercury, sulphur
and nitrogen oxides, among other chemicals, which may
settle and impact water quality and aquatic ecosystems
downstream.

WWDR 2014

9.3 An ecosystems approach to the
water–energy nexus

Expansions of all types of energy generation should be
planned with an ecosystem perspective (Hoff, 2011).
While formal EIAs can quantify the effects that energy
generation and water use have on the environment,
IWRM can make an ecosystem approach operational
in the context of green growth. IWRM encompasses
systematic basin hydropower planning, strategic
basin water allocation and environmental flows
assessment. These all necessitate valuation and use of
natural infrastructure. Tools that further support the
application of an ecosystems approach include payments
for environmental services (PES), remediation through
sustainable dam management and strategic basin water
investment. Some tools that are most relevant for water
management as an entry to the nexus are highlighted
below.

9.3.1 Valuing natural infrastructure
Nature can provide critical infrastructure functions for
energy provision – in many cases this natural or ‘green’
infrastructure can complement, augment or replace the
services provided by traditional engineered infrastructure
(Krchnak et al., 2011). Mixed infrastructure in river
basins may result in cost-effectiveness, risk management
and sustainable development that are closer to optimal.
Improved water resources and natural infrastructure in
the form of healthy ecosystems can reinforce each other
and generate benefits in the water–energy–food nexus
(Hoff, 2011). Ongoing degradation of water and land
resources in river basins threatens energy provision. It
could be reversed through protection and restoration
initiatives, re-establishing natural capacities that support
protection against increased climate variability and
extreme events (Bergkamp et al., 2003). Some examples of
natural infrastructure are described below.

· Wetlands deliver a range of ecosystem services

(Krchnak et al., 2011), including regulation of
water flows. However, headwater wetlands may
actually increase flood flows and decrease low flows
(McCartney et al., 2013). Wise use of wetlands is
essential for maintaining an infrastructure that can
help meet a wide range of policy objectives, including
the provision of energy (Box 16.5).

· Healthy floodplains reduce downstream flood peaks
by giving rivers the space they need to dissipate
peak flows (McCartney et al., 2013; V&W, 2006).

ECOSYSTEMS

81

· Coastal wetlands, mangroves, barrier reefs and islands

protect inland areas against erosion and storm damage
and also attenuate tidal and storm surges, as witnessed
in the Asian tsunami of 2004, where damage from
coastal inundation was reduced where mangroves
were intact (UNEP-WCMC, 2006). Mangrove forests
can, if exploited wisely, serve as sustainable providers
of firewood and protect critical energy and transport
infrastructure (Chong, 2006; Macintosh and Ashton,
2002).

Analytical tools can be used to quantify the services
provided by ecosystems and estimate their economic
value (TEEB, 2010). An ecosystems approach increases
understanding of the interlinkages between water
and energy and provides support to decision-making
processes, which is fundamental to charting a course
to a green economy (UNEP, 2011b, pt 1, ch. ‘Water’).
Economic valuations of the infrastructure benefits of
ecosystem services can include market prices for products
(e.g. wetland fisheries), the cost of replacing ecosystems
through engineering (e.g. water filtration) or the costs of
damage avoided (e.g. flood attenuation) (Emerton and
Bos, 2004). In some cases, natural infrastructure can be
integrated within financing for engineered infrastructure.
In many cases, natural ecosystems can provide ecosystem
services at a lower price or with higher economic returns
than hard engineered approaches, as in the case of
wetland restoration (Russi et al., 2013).

9.3.2 Payments for ecosystem services
The approach of payments for ecosystem (or
environmental) services (PES) has often focused on
supporting watershed protection and water quality

Ongoing degradation of
water and land resources in
river basins threatens energy
provision. It could be reversed
through protection and
restoration initiatives.
82

CHAPTER 9

enhancements that help water supply by regulating flows
(Wunder et al., 2008). It has been suggested that farmers
should receive payments or ‘green water credits’ from
downstream water users for good management practices
that support and regulate ecosystem services, thereby
conserving water and increasing both water availability
and quality for downstream users (ISRIC, 2007).
Environmental service fees encourage individuals and
businesses to internalize the value of ecosystem services.
These fees have been established in a number of places
around the world, particularly in Latin America (Smith
et al., 2006). For example, in the Sarapiqui watershed in
Costa Rica, a hydropower company pays US$48/ha per
year to upstream landowners for forest management and
restoration. The payment is based on the costs of reservoir
dredging that the company avoids and the operational
benefits of more reliable stream flow that can be used for
hydropower (Hanson et al., 2008).
The success of PES schemes depends to a large extent
on access to a secure source of funding. This is the case
when schemes are operated on the basis of a mutual
agreement on the specific ecosystem services required
and a price agreeable to the providers and the users. As
most government-financed schemes depend on general
revenues, typically cover large areas, and are subject to
political risks, these are likely to be less efficient and less
sustainable (Pagiola and Platais, 2007; Wunder et al.,
2008).

9.2
BOX

Floodplains are also widely used as grazing grounds,
feeding animals that subsequently provide draught
power and manure for fuel, and fertile floodplains can
be used for biofuel production.

Sustainable dam management for fish and
hydropower
‘On Maine’s Penobscot River (USA) abundant fisheries
were the cultural foundation for the Penobscot
Indian Nation and the economic driver of the local
economy. A series of hydropower dams built over
the past century contributed to the decline of the
river’s overall health, blocking access for salmon and
other species. The power company, the Penobscot
Indian Nation, environmental groups and numerous
state and federal agencies and riverside communities
joined forces to restore more than 1,000 miles
[1,600 km] of river habitat without diminishing
hydropower generation in the basin ... [by] removing
two dams in the lower river, installing a state-of-theart fish bypass to a third dam further upstream and
increasing energy production at dams elsewhere in
the basin where impacts on fish are low.’
Source: UNEP, from Krchnak et al. (2011, p. 7).

THEMATIC FOCUS

9.3.3 Strategic river basin development
A common vision for economic development and
environmental sustainability, achieved through
approaches from consensus-building among stakeholders
to integrated planning, can be the basis for strategic
investments in multiple sectors (Krchnak et al., 2011). In
response to frequent severe flooding in the Magdalena
River basin, the Government of Colombia has given
central importance to an ecosystem-based approach
to regulating planning and development to make sure
that future economic activity in the basin – especially
hydropower and agriculture – is regulated to take
into account river dynamics, flows, other water uses
and adaptation to climate change. This key river basin
produces 86% of the country’s GDP, 75% of its agricultural
production and more than 90% of its lucrative coffee
crop, as well as 70% of its hydropower and 90% of its
thermal power. With its combination of natural and
man-made infrastructure, the Magdalena provides a vast
transportation network of interconnecting rivers, channels
and canals that link producers to global markets (Krchnak
et al., 2011). Strategic river basin planning can help build
synergies between water, energy and environmental
concerns (Pegram et al., 2013).

9.3.4 Sustainable dam management
Throughout the various processes of energy provision,
measures can be taken to reduce the impacts of water–
energy interactions on ecosystems. Many methods
have been developed to address the sustainability of
hydropower, such as the Rapid Basin-wide Hydropower
Sustainability Assessment Tool (RSAT)22 and the
Hydropower Sustainability Assessment Protocol (HSAP).23
The need for new dams could be reduced by retrofitting
existing dams with power generation installations and
other ways of turning them into multi-purpose structures,
as well as increasing operational efficiency by better

integration of natural infrastructure in catchments.
The negative impacts of current dams on fish and
other aquatic life can be reduced by applying decision
models that include environmental flows and other
such considerations in the management of hydropower
dams (McCartney, 2007). Better design elements such
as modified intake screens, acoustic deterrent systems,
barrier nets and variable speed pumps can reduce
the negative impacts substantially. Sustainable dam
management goes a step further and is based on designing
new and regulating existing infrastructure to address
overall system health (Box 9.2).

[ See Chapter 26 (Volume 2) for the case study
‘The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as a part
of the National Green Growth Strategy in Republic
of Korea’. ]
9.3.5 Conservation and remediation
Actions to avoid land degradation contribute to savings in
water and energy consumption by, for example, increasing
groundwater recharge and soil water storage or reducing
the use of energy intensive fertilizer (Hoff, 2011). In
this way, water conservation can also help reduce GHG
emissions (Maas, 2009). Managing for multiple uses
below the basin level can also reduce pressure on water
resources by increasing water productivity, for example
when irrigation canals, downstream of a hydropower dam,
are used for aquaculture, or when water from laundry
basins is diverted to vegetable plots (Van Koppen et al.,
2009). Water can yield more ecosystem services when it is
managed not for a single purpose such as crop production
but as part of a multifunctional landscape of agroecosystems, thus also benefitting biodiversity, groundwater
recharge and erosion control (Keys et al., 2012; Boelee
et al., 2011).

22	For more information, see http://www.mrcmekong.org/news-and-events/
news/innovative-tool-for-mekong-basin-wide-sustainable-hydropowerassessment-launched/
23	For more information, see http://www.hydrosustainability.org/

WWDR 2014

ECOSYSTEMS

83

PART 3

REGIONAL ASPECTS

CHAPTERS
10. Europe and North America
11. A
 sia and the Pacific
12. The Arab region
13. L atin America and
the Caribbean
14. Africa

84

CHAPTER 1

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

CHAPTER

The regional chapters of Part 3 cover Europe and North America, Asia and the Pacific, the Arab
region, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Africa. The delineation of the five regions follows
the regional division of the United Nations regional economic commissions (UNECA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP and UNESCWA; maps of the Member States can be found in the fourth
edition of the WWDR [WWAP, 2012, ch. 7]). For the Arab region and Africa chapters, it was
decided (in agreement with UNECA and UNESCWA) that all the Arab countries would be reported
on in the Arab region chapter rather than having some of them included in the Africa chapter.

10

Europe and North America
UNECE
Annukka Lipponen

The UNECE region, extending from North America,
through Europe to Central Asia, is highly diverse in
terms of water resources availability, energy sources and
energy mix, and socio-economic development. While the
challenges at the interface of water and energy differ, a few
major issues emerge across the region.
Renewed interest in hydropower may allow capacity
expansion of other renewable energy sources, reduce
carbon dioxide emissions and, in some cases, better
cope with the predicted increase in variability of flows.
However, there are also related concerns. In many areas,
hydropower generation is in conflict with other water
uses, notably irrigated agriculture. Hydropower is one of
the main drivers of hydromorphological alteration, loss of
connectivity and change in the flow of water and sediment.
In the EU in particular, numerous projects are under way
to address the negative impacts of hydromorphological
changes, such as restoration of habitats and river
continuity (e.g. ICPR, 2010).
Because of concerns related to the safety of nuclear power
plants, many European countries (e.g. Germany, Sweden,
Switzerland) are presently considering reducing or even
phasing out nuclear power generation.
Freshwater supplies are increasingly augmented by highly
energy intensive methods (e.g. desalination), especially
where water scarcity prevails. Limited policy coherence
may aggravate the situation because of the complex
interlinkages between water and energy issues. Informing
policy formulation requires suitable data and information

WWDR 2014

(OECD, 2010a). Where transboundary impacts may
occur, consistency of data across borders is necessary for
an accurate and holistic view. A better understanding of
inter-sectoral impacts, trade-offs and benefits is needed to
inform dialogue.
The recent call for a coordinated approach to better manage
energy and water trade-offs in the USA resonates with
the rest of the UNECE region: improved energy and
water planning will require better coordination among
national/federal agencies and other stakeholders as well
as consideration of impacts to both resources (US GAO,
2013). Uncertainties in climate change, population growth
and demographic shifts are expected to exacerbate the
challenges associated with managing both the supply and
demand of water and energy, and need to be accounted for
when developing national policies (Howells et al., 2013; US
GAO, 2013).

10.1 Hydropower

The region’s hydropower sector is mature, and
developments focus on modernizing and refurbishing
existing plants as well as expanding pumped storage
capability (Figure 10.1). In Europe and in North
America, some 65% and 61%, respectively, of hydropower
generation potential is estimated to have been already
developed, according to the IEA (IEA-EC, n.d.). Some
countries are still developing new capacity. Additional
pumped storage facilities to balance supply with demand
are under construction in the European Economic Area24
and the USA. In 2008, hydropower generated 16% of
Europe’s electricity; there are currently more than 7,000

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

85

large dams and a number of large reservoirs in Europe
(EEA, 2009). Hydropower has been a particularly
dominant aspect of industrial development in the
northern and Alpine countries.
The renaissance in expanding pumped storage capacity in
Europe (Figure 10.1) is driven by the increasing share of
intermittent electricity sources, such as wind and solar, in
the energy mix, which stored electricity helps to integrate.
The increasing development of renewable energy sources
is spurred by the Renewable Energy Directive,25 which
lays down legally binding targets; notably, a 20% share
of renewable energy in the EU by 2020. There are
significant new development projects in the pipeline in
South-Eastern Europe, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and
Central Asia.
High investment requirements and environmental
impacts of large-scale projects have increased interest in
the construction of small-scale hydropower installations,

10.2 Conflicts over water use between energy
and other sectors, and across borders

In parts of the UNECE region, conflicts exist over water
for irrigated agriculture (over the growing season) and
for hydropower generation (particularly in winter). For
transboundary rivers, it may be particularly difficult for
the multiple countries affected to reconcile their different
uses over different time periods regarding flow regulation,

24	The European Economic Area includes the EU, Iceland, Norway and
Liechtenstein.
25	Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23
April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources.

Pumped storage capacity in Europe (data from the beginning of 2011)

FIGURE

10.1

especially in remote rural areas. But there are some
barriers to this approach. For example, in Albania, where
most energy is produced by hydropower, small individual
projects are not necessarily well structured (reducing their
appeal to investors), equity capital is lacking, and capacity
and public awareness are low (UNECE, 2009).

Above 5 000 MW
Up to 5 000 MW
Up to 2 000 MW
Up to 1 000 MW
No pumped storage

Source: ecoprog, The European Market for Pumped Storage Power Plants 2011/2012.

86

CHAPTER 10

REGIONAL ASPECTS

although there are examples of joint management of
regulation infrastructure. Hydropower development
projects are planned in South-Eastern Europe and in the
Caucasus, many of them on transboundary rivers; for
example, the Sava, Bosna, Morača, Vjosa and Devoll in
South-Eastern Europe (ECA-Watch/Euronatur, 2012)
and the upper reaches of the Aras and the Kura in
Turkey as well as the Çoruh. In Central Asia the conflict
between sectoral water uses is particularly prominent.
The construction of a number of new dams, mainly for
hydropower but also for irrigation purposes, was initiated
in the 2000s, with ongoing and planned projects at least
on the Naryn, Tejen and Vakhsh rivers. Some of these are
heavily disputed between the riparian countries due to
concerns about transboundary effects. Because of facility
ageing and inadequate maintenance, concern has grown in
recent years over the safety of more than 100 large dams
and other control facilities in Central Asia, located mostly
on transboundary rivers (UNECE, 2011a).
Responses to intersectoral conflicts over water use can
include a more commercial approach to structuring
and regulating energy markets (World Bank 2010c);
a wider view of the benefits of cooperation (going
beyond allocating volumes of water); and a strengthened
institutional basis for project development and
management (UNECE, 2011a; Granit et al., 2012).26 Such
responses also relate to the water–energy–food nexus

BOX

10.1

Complex impacts of modernizing irrigation
and the role of energy
Irrigated agriculture in Spain went through a rapid
transformation from 2002 to 2009, and currently
accounts for 40% of the country’s total water-related
electricity demand. The use of drip irrigation systems,
involving replacement of gravity irrigation systems,
increased by 40% between 2002 and 2008. The net
electricity consumed in irrigation increased by 10%
per volume unit during the same period. However,
from 2006 to 2008 the price for energy increased
by 30% to 70% and energy consumption dropped,
illustrating the complex dynamics of the situation.
Modernizing irrigation systems requires major
investment and there is a risk that water consumption
will increase and returns will decrease. Consequently,
a thorough assessment of possible increases in energy
consumption must be made: how they can be met, at
what cost and with what impacts on the environment.
Source: UNECE, from Hardy et al. (2012).

WWDR 2014

Improved energy and water
planning will require better
coordination among national/
federal agencies and other
stakeholders as well as
consideration of impacts to both
resources
in a broad sense. Shortcomings in energy infrastructure
and trade as well as problems in transboundary and
broader cooperation in Central Asia do not presently
allow for resolution of the conflict between water use for
hydropower and irrigated agriculture. Environmental
impact assessments of planned infrastructure projects
with potential significant adverse transboundary effects on
shared waters should be carried out more systematically.27

10.3 Coping with water scarcity

Inefficient use of water leads to higher energy use, with
extra financial and environmental costs. However, even
the application of more efficient irrigation methods
may introduce higher energy requirements (Box 10.1;
Chapter 6).

Southern European countries and parts of the USA are
increasingly using desalination to meet their water needs,
with significant implications on energy consumption.

10.4 Climate change outlook and effects of
water scarcity on thermoelectric power plants

Thermoelectric power plants produce 91% of total
electricity in the USA and 78% in Europe. Cooling water
scarcity during recent warm, dry summers led several
thermal (nuclear and fossil-fuelled) power plants in
Europe and the south-eastern USA to reduce production.
Climate change is expected to aggravate the situation in
areas where lower summer flows and higher river water

26	The UNECE’s assessment of water-food-energy-ecosystems in selected
transboundary river basins (2013–2015) will provide analysis as well as
further the identification of and dialogue on opportunities for synergy and
cooperation.
27	Guidance on such assessment is provided by UNECE instruments: the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes (Helsinki Convention) and the Convention on
Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context (Espoo
Convention).

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

87

temperatures are anticipated (van Vliet et al., 2012). An
increase in and spread of water scarcity and stress is
predicted to affect about half the river basins in the EU
by 2030 (EC, 2012c). Countries that depend on imported
energy may also be exposed to effects of change and
variation in climatic conditions (e.g. the Netherlands;
Rübbelke and Vögele, 2011). In Western Europe and
the USA, roughly 50% of water is abstracted for energy
production as cooling water, and the majority of this is
discharged to water bodies at a higher temperature (EEA,
2009).

10.5 Extraction of natural gas and oil from
unconventional sources

The USA has experienced a tremendous expansion of
natural gas extraction from unconventional sources28
with hydraulic fracturing (‘fracking’), due to technical
developments that have made the extraction more
economically viable (IEA, 2012d; Cooley and Donnelly,
2012). Between 2005 and 2010, shale gas production
in the USA grew more than 45% per year. Parts of the

UNECE region also have potential unconventional natural
gas resources, some of which have been explored, notably
in France, Germany, Poland, Sweden and the United
Kingdom (UK). Increasing indigenous energy production
and diversifying energy sources are behind the appeal of
unconventional natural gas resources, but concerns about
the impacts of hydraulic fracturing on the environment
and on water resources specifically (Section 3.2.1) have
raised public opposition in the above-mentioned countries
(IEA, 2012d).
Canada faces water management challenges related to
exploiting large, low-quality unconventional petroleum
reserves in oil (tar) sands (e.g. University of Toronto/
University of Alberta, 2007). Medium- and long-term
impacts remain unclear, and recent independent reports
emphasize the need for improved monitoring to ensure
the sustained functioning of aquatic ecosystems and
public health in human settlements downstream (CESD,
2010; Royal Society of Canada, 2010).

28

88

CHAPTER 10

Definitions of the categories are available from IEA (2012d, p. 18).

REGIONAL ASPECTS

CHAPTER

11

Asia and the Pacific
UNESCAP

Nowhere is the critical inter-relationship between water
and energy more evident than in the Asia-Pacific region,
considering its huge population and size. Home to 61%
of the world’s people and with its population expected to
reach five billion by 2050 (UNESCAP, 2011), the region’s
rapid population growth is accompanied by a burgeoning
economic presence. The Asian Development Bank (ADB)
estimates that developing Asia has an average 6% annual
GDP growth, and forecasts a massive rise in energy
consumption in the Asia-Pacific region: from barely onethird of global consumption to 51–56% by 2035 (ADB,
2013).29 The ability to address issues of water availability
and distribution will play an important role in the region’s
capacity to grow and develop. Some areas of the region
have water in abundance, with current withdrawals in
at least 11 UNESCAP Member States below 10% of total
actual renewable freshwater resources (TARWR). Asia’s
per capita freshwater availability nonetheless remains
half of the global average (FAO, 2011e), and almost 380
million people do not have access to safe drinking water
(UNESCAP, 2013). Compounding chronic uncertainties
in water availability and quality is the fact that this region
is the most vulnerable to climate change impacts in the
form of extreme weather-related disasters (UNESCAP,
2013).
Asia is also where 46% of the global primary energy is
produced (UNESCAP, 2011). Coal is the most prevalent
energy product within the region, with China and India
together extracting more than half of the world’s total
output (World Coal Association, 2011). There is also a
growing market for renewable sources such as biofuel,
with China, India, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand
among the leading regional producers (UNESCAP, 2012).
Both coal and biofuel require vast amounts of freshwater
(Chapter 3), and some areas within the region are already
deemed water-scarce (Figure 1.1).
Potential sites for hydropower development exist in
upstream countries of South-East Asia and South Asia
(Figure 3.11), and the majority of added capacity on a
global scale in 2011 occurred in Asia (REN21, 2012). But
concern over the potential adverse effects of hydropower
raises other issues, for example in the lower Mekong delta,

WWDR 2014

where 45 million people are reliant on the river system
for their livelihoods and sustenance (ADB, 2013). Twelve
dams are set for construction in 2011–2015, and altered
river ecology and disrupted fisheries are critical issues
(Orr et al., 2012).
Whether considering water use in energy production
or energy requirements for water service provision,
concerns over water availability and energy demand in
the Asia-Pacific region are compounded by environmental
considerations. The application of multi-scale integrated
analyses could be useful in evaluating trade-offs based
on societal and ecosystem functioning and requirements.
For example, FAO and LIPHE4 (a non-profit scientific
association) are studying current trends in future options
for balancing food production and groundwater pumping,
given the potential reduction of subsidies for electricity
use in agriculture, against local sustainability criteria in
Punjab, India (FAO/LIPHE4, 2013).

11.1 Hydropower

The potential for hydropower generation in countries such
as Bhutan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Nepal,
and in countries with large populations such as China,
India and Thailand presents an economic opportunity,
particularly as cross-border power interconnections
increase (e.g. ASEAN Power Grid, SAARC Market for
Electricity, proposed Asian Energy Highway).
Countries with short, swift rivers can benefit from small
hydropower installations (100 kW to 30 MW capacity),
particularly if these are integrated with land use plans and
overall economic development. Such countries include
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Republic of Korea, as well as some of
the small island developing states (SIDS) in the Indian
Ocean, Pacific Ocean and South China Sea. Installations
may also be advantageous on certain tributaries of big
rivers, particularly if these projects extend benefits to rural
communities and the alteration of flow patterns does not
have significant downstream effects. Small-scale projects

29

ADB’s Asia-Pacific region excludes the Russian Federation.

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

89

Coal is the most prevalent
energy product within the
region, with China and India
together extracting more than
half of the world’s total output.
There is also a growing market for
renewable sources such as biofuel,
with China, India, Malaysia, the
Philippines and Thailand among
the leading regional producers.
Both coal and biofuel require
vast amounts of freshwater, and
some areas within the region are
already deemed water-scarce.

in Tajikistan, for example, are helping rural communities
such as in Bozorboi Burunov Jamoat gain access to social
services and secure a reliable heat source in the cold
winter months (UNDP, 2011).
Existing and potential hotspots in Asian transboundary
river basins develop where issues and challenges for both
energy and water have political and socio-economic
implications at local and basin levels. Areas of conflict
include the Aral Sea, Ganges-Brahmaputra River, Indus
River and Mekong River basins. The Mekong River basin
in South-East Asia spans Cambodia, China, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand and Viet Nam.
Although a 2011 Environmental Impact Assessment of
the Mekong River Commission indicated that the 11
proposed mainstream dam projects could reduce the
GHG emissions of the regional power sector by 50 million
tonnes by 2030, severe ecological consequences such as
disruption of fish migration, erosion and biodiversity loss
are anticipated (MRC, 2011). In the Ganges-Brahmaputra
River basin (Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India and
Nepal), the Zangmu Dam in Tibet, a run-of-the-river
facility slated for completion in 2015, as well as the recent
approval of three more Brahmaputra dams as part of
China’s Twelfth Five Year Plan, are raising concerns over
downstream effects in India and Bangladesh.

90

CHAPTER 11

11.2 Coal

While already heavily reliant on coal, Asia’s demand for
this primary energy source is projected to increase by
47% in coming years, which will account for 119% of the
global total increase in demand (IEA, 2010). The location
of water intensive coal mining in water-scarce areas is
becoming increasingly controversial in many parts of Asia;
for example, in India, where 16% of the world’s population
has access to only 4% of its water resources (InfraInsights,
2013). Given that coal contributes to more than half of
India’s primary commercial energy, and is likely to do
so for the next few decades, concern is mounting over
falling water tables in areas already struggling to meet
water demand (Sreenivas and Bhosale, 2013). Expansion
plans for coal power plants in China and India could be
unachievable due to water scarcity issues (Adelman, 2012).

Continued coal production and growing energy demand
in the Asia-Pacific region is closely aligned with high
population and economic growth. This expansion can
offset burgeoning investments in renewable or cleaner
energy. China, although one of the largest producers
and users of coal in the world, was also the dominant
country for investments in renewable energy in 2012, with
commitments rising to US$67 billion – a 22% increase
from 2011 (Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/BNEF,
2013). Other nations have set ambitious goals in energy
system transitions. As South-East Asia’s biggest economy,
Indonesia intends to increase renewable energy usage to
17% by 2025, a shift aided by co-financing mechanisms
targeted at developing geothermal and biomass capacities
(Climate Investment Funds, 2013). At the same time,
Indonesia overtook Australia as the world’s largest exporter
of coal in 2011 (ADB, 2013), and its domestic consumption
(under 23 million tonnes less than a decade ago) has been
projected to reach 72 million tonnes by 2020 (Indrayuda,
2005).
Serious concerns about water quality degradation as an
effect of coal mining in many parts of the region are being
raised. Without careful regulation, contamination from
acid mine drainage can seriously compromise ground and
surface water resources. A recent water quality survey of
the Grose River in Australia – an area with a history of
more than a century of mining operations in an otherwise
pristine region of the Greater Blue Mountains – detected
a considerable level of water contamination, a result of
leaching from the disused mines (Wright et al., 2011).

REGIONAL ASPECTS

11.3 Biofuels

Asia is increasingly recognized for its potential to develop
into a significant market for and exporter of biofuels
(Zhou et al., 2009). Indonesia and Malaysia are the top
two global producers of palm oil (InfraInsights, 2013),
and China is the third largest producer of biofuels overall
in the world (European Biofuels Technology Platform,
2009). India, the Philippines and Thailand are major new
contributors to the biofuel industry (PR Newswire, 2009).
A recent study from the Global Biofuels Center points to
tremendous growth in overall ethanol production in the
Asia-Pacific region, which could amount to as much as
20% of total global production by 2015 (Adelman, 2012).
There is a hope that the evolving biofuel industry will
help job growth in several developing nations. Indonesia,
currently producing almost 45% of the world’s total palm
oil with around 8% of land designated for this purpose
(Climate Investment Funds, 2013), has targeted biofuel
development as a way to increase the income of on- and
off-farm workers (Komarudin et al., 2010). In China,

WWDR 2014

growing interest and investment in advanced biofuel
technology could potentially lead to the creation of
2.9 million jobs by 2030 (Bloomberg, 2012).
Although it provides a cleaner energy source and is a
potentially strong economic driver, the biofuel industry
has large water requirements that could exceed capacity
in some regions (Section 3.2.2). China, already facing a
pressing shortage of water and shrinking supply of arable
land, has a goal of producing 12 million metric tonnes of
biodiesel by 2020 (Timilsina and Shrestha, 2010) – a target
that requires an amount of water approximately equivalent
to the annual discharge of the Yellow River (ADB, 2013).
Solutions in impact mitigation could lie in biofuel
production from agricultural by-products or waste, or
investments in algal fuel production as its cost efficiency
improves. Research and development in algal fuel in
many parts of the Asia-Pacific region, such as Japan and
Korea, is resulting in its gaining ground as a sustainable
alternative to biofuel and biomaterial production.

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

91

CHAPTER

12

The Arab region
UNESCWA
Carol Chouchani Cherfane and Sung Eun Kim

12.1 Increasing knowledge and awarenessraising for policy coherence

The Arab region is seeking to improve understanding and
awareness of the water–energy nexus at the policy and
operational levels. While IWRM has been promoted in
the region for more than a decade, limited understanding
of the interdependencies affecting the management of
water and energy resources has stymied coordination
between the water and energy policy-makers, even when
these sectors are managed within the same ministry.
Energy requirements for surface and ground water
extraction are not regularly monitored in the region, while
energy demand for desalination processes continues to
increase. Although energy requirements for water supply
services differ depending on the type of pump used, the
efficiency of a water supply system and the topographic
conditions, there is a need to improve the monitoring and

92

CHAPTER 12

management of energy resources used in the production
and distribution of water. Approximately 0.36 kWh is
needed to lift 1 m3 water a vertical distance of 100 m, and
0.04 kWh is needed for pumping 1 m3 water a horizontal
transfer distance of 100 km (UNESCWA, 2009b). This
is particularly significant when considering the energy
costs associated with the distribution of water desalinated
along the coastline to inland communities in the Arabian
Gulf and southern Mediterranean countries. The energy
requirements for producing and distributing desalinated
water would be prohibitive for the water-scarce city of
Sana’a, Yemen, which lies 2,200 m above sea level, and
thus desalination cannot be considered a sustainable
solution for what may be the first capital city in the region
to run out of water (UNESCWA, 2009b).
Limited coordination between the water, energy,
electricity and agriculture sectors leads to conflicting
policies and development objectives. For example, energy
costs for groundwater pumping at increasingly greater
depths are increasing production costs and reducing
revenues for small-scale farmers in Jordan, Lebanon
and Palestine. Water operators in Jordan, Lebanon and
Yemen complain of high energy costs and the rationing of

12.1
BOX

Although Arab countries form a homogeneous
geopolitical region that is among the water poorest of
the world (WWAP, 2012, ch. 33), countries can still be
clustered according to the severity of their water scarcity
and their energy endowments. Member countries of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) are among the water
poorest in the region, but thanks to their prodigious oil
and gas reserves, they have the economic capacity to
overcome water scarcity through desalination and to
consume water at rates that are among the highest in the
world. In contrast, four of the region’s six least-developed
countries (the exceptions being Djibouti and Yemen)
have an annual per capita water share that exceeds the
water poverty level of 1,000 m3, yet they are unable to
mobilize economic growth; oil production in Sudan and
Yemen has not helped to improve water use efficiency or
water security in either country. With the exception of
Iraq and Lebanon, the low to middle income countries in
the region have an annual per capita share of renewable
water resources that falls below the water poverty line
(UNESCWA, 2013a) and are struggling to achieve energy
security; many are seeking to reorient their energy mix
towards renewable energy sources to meet growing
demand for water and energy services.

Intermittent supply and unaccounted-for
water
'The intermittent supply of water through distribution
networks can increase the volume of unaccountedfor water that is lost through the network as water
pressure variability increases the stress on pipes
and joints, resulting in cracks in the network and
associated leaks. While intermittency is sometimes
caused by water rationing due to water scarcity,
limited access to reliable and adequate energy
supplies by water operators due to electricity
rationing or high energy costs has also constrained
their ability to provide water services on a continuous
basis throughout the network. This condition is
commonly experienced in Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine
and Yemen.’
Source: UNESCWA (2011a, p. 14).

REGIONAL ASPECTS

electricity services, which has forced some water utilities
to provide intermittent water services to urban and rural
communities (UNESCWA, 2009a). Civil crises and unrest
in the region have also affected delivery of basic services,
while energy shortages affect the ability to supply water.
Unaccounted-for water in Arab countries is estimated
to vary between 15% and 60%, whereas the best practice
rate ranges from less than 10% for new systems to 25% for
older systems (World Bank, 2009). The high percentage
of water losses in Arab countries is coupled with high
energy losses, which further increases the cost of service
provision (Box 12.1). This challenge is all the more true
when water is sourced from desalination plants.

12.2 Informing technology choice and
renewable energy options

The Arab region is situated in a sunbelt that receives
about 300 sunny days per year. The annual direct solar
irradiation in all Arab countries exceeds the defined
threshold for economic potential for concentrating solar
power (UNESCWA, 2010). This has prompted research
and development and investment in solar desalination
in the Mashreq and Maghreb (Box 12.2) (see Chapter
20 [Volume 2] for the case study ‘Desalination in Gulf
Cooperation Council countries’).
Energy recovered from wastewater treatment plants
(Section 5.2.4) is almost non-existent in the Arab region,
even though the best-performing wastewater treatment

BOX

12.2

plants can produce more energy than is needed for
treatment (WERF, 2011). This is partially because most
wastewater treatment plants in the Arab region are based
on aerobic treatment systems that are commonly found
in Europe, the USA and cooler climates. Anaerobic
technologies for wastewater treatment are more suitable
for the warmer Arab region and are more energy efficient
because they do not require energy for aeration to
maintain the dissolved oxygen levels needed for aerobic
bacterial growth. In addition, anaerobic processes can
produce biogas, which can fuel the treatment facility,
and digested sludge cake, which can be processed into
safe, high quality agricultural fertilizers.30 Investments
in sanitation thus present opportunities for biogas
production in some Arab countries, based on regional
specificities (Box 16.3).

30	Aerobic wastewater treatment uses the biological processes of oxidizing
and decomposing organic matter by microorganisms in the presence
of oxygen. Anaerobic treatment is a bacterial process that is carried out
in the absence of oxygen. Anaerobic treatment is much more sensitive
to low temperatures than is aerobic treatment. Anaerobic treatment
processes are performed in temperatures ranging from 25°C to 35°C
(Metcalf and Eddy, 2003). This is important to consider when pursuing
green investments or appropriate technology transfer arrangements in the
warmer climates found in the Arab region.

Solar desalination in the Mashreq and Maghreb
Solar energy investments are increasing in the Arab region for desalination and the creation of green industries. The King
Abdul-Aziz City for Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia launched a national initiative for water desalination using
nanotechnology to produce solar energy and water desalination membranes at low cost. The first phase of the initiative was
achieved by building a solar energy-powered water desalination plant in Khafji with a production capacity of 30,000 m3 per
day (KACST, 2012). Egypt constructed its first concentrating solar power system generating 140 MW solar power; another
concentrating solar power project of 100 MW is in preparation (NREA, 2012). In the United Arab Emirates, a solar photovoltaic
power plant was inaugurated in Masdar City in June 2009 and produces about 17,500 MWh of clean electricity annually.
However, the site faces challenges in supplying the freshwater necessary to remove dust and sand that accumulates on the
solar panels. Nevertheless, a 100 MW concentrated solar power project remains in preparation nearby; it will extend over
an area of 2.5 km² and have a solar field of 768 parabolic trough collectors to generate clean, renewable electricity (Masdar,
n.d.). During the UNFCCC 18th Conference of the Parties (COP-18) held in Doha in December 2012, the Government of Qatar
reaffirmed its goal to meet 80% of its freshwater needs through a 1,800 MW solar-powered water desalination plant. Solar and
wind energy investments are also strongly promoted in Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. In Morocco, the current energy strategy
plans a very quick development of the renewable energy sector and aims to satisfy 42% of the national energy needs though
renewable energy production by 2020.
Source: UNESCWA.

WWDR 2014

THE ARAB REGION

93

With the exception of Iraq and
Lebanon, the low to middle
income countries in the region
have an annual per capita share
of renewable water resources
that falls below the water
poverty line and are struggling
to achieve energy security; many
are seeking to reorient their
energy mix towards renewable
energy sources to meet growing
demand for water and energy
services
12.3 Addressing climate change and natural
disasters

Climate change is directly and indirectly impacting
production and consumption of water and energy
resources in the Arab region. Rising temperatures are
increasing evapotranspiration rates and water demand
in an already thirsty agriculture sector. As temperatures
rise, so does the need for cooling, which requires water
and electricity for industry and housing units. Energy
efficiency in the building sector is being promoted in the
Gulf and the Mashreq, as are closed-loop cooling systems
in industrial and commercial facilities. Sea level rise
associated with climate change presents risks to urban and

94

CHAPTER 12

agricultural development in low-lying coastal areas along
the Egyptian delta and across the island state of Bahrain.
Real estate investments on artificial islands, desalination
plants and offshore oil installations are also being affected
by extreme weather events and sea surges that have been
felt more prevalently over the past decade along the
eastern Arabian Peninsula. Flooding has strained ageing
or inadequate stormwater systems, while drought has
forced farmers to migrate to cities, increased the price of
food and fostered social unrest.
With a view to increasing understanding of the impact of
climate change and extreme events on the Arab region
associated with the new radiative forcing scenarios
developed by the IPCC, the United Nations, the League
of Arab States and other international organizations have
launched the Regional Initiative for the Assessment of the
Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources and SocioEconomic Vulnerability in the Arab Region (RICCAR).
RICCAR is generating regional climate modelling and
hydrological modelling projections and a multi-sectoral
vulnerability assessment for the Arab region (UNESCWA,
2011b), which will inform further work on the water–
energy nexus and climate change adaptation as well as
mitigation efforts in the Arab region.
Despite challenges, efforts are being made to improve
cross-sectoral coordination and policy coherence across
the water and energy domains. Intergovernmental
processes have been launched (UNESCWA, 2013b)
and the need for integrated approaches for achieving
sustainable development, including integrated regional
approaches for pursuing water security, energy security
and food security, have been identified (LAS, 2011).

REGIONAL ASPECTS

CHAPTER

13

Latin America and the Caribbean
UNECLAC
Author: Andrei Jouravlev, Natural Resources and Infrastructure Division. The author acknowledges comments and
contributions from Abel Mejia, Andres Arroyo, Armando Llop, Beno Ruchansky, Caridad Canales, Gonzalo Delacámara,
Hugo Altomonte, Humberto Peña, Jean Acquatella, Juan Pablo Schifini, Michael Hantke-Domas, Miguel Mathus, Miguel
Solanes, Patricio Rozas and Rene Salgado.

Water and energy inter-relationships in Latin America and
the Caribbean are diverse, complex and intense. Current
trends suggest that this interdependence will be subject to
increased stress in the future mostly because of population
growth and urbanization; rising income levels and
economic growth; competition for water in river basins
with concentrated economic development; and tendencies
towards increasing the water intensity of energy
production and the energy intensity of water provision for
different uses – all this in the context of climate change.
There are two principal areas of the water–energy nexus
that stand out at the regional scale:

· Water use for hydropower generation
· Energy consumption in the provision of water services
This is not to say that the water–energy nexus in the
region is limited to these two issues. There are various
other water and energy inter-relationships, but most of
them are either specific to particular areas or countries,
or not unique to the region. The most important of these
other issues are the following:

· The impact of electricity subsidies to farmers on

aquifer sustainability (as in Mexico and Argentina)
as well as on social equity. The powerful economic
incentives created by these subsidies often make it
virtually impossible to prevent aquifer deterioration
through regulatory instruments alone (Solanes and
Jouravlev, 2006). In Mexico, for example, subsidies for
electricity used for pumping ‘have detrimental impacts
on water demand and groundwater management, and
mostly accrue to the richest farmers, making this a
particularly regressive subsidy’ (OECD, 2013b).

· An increasing interest in biofuels (Saulino, 2011),

although in Brazil – the main producer – ethanol
primarily comes from sugar cane, which is rain fed
(Scott and Sugg, 2011).

WWDR 2014

· A slowdown in the expansion of irrigated area

accompanied by a shift to more water efficient, and
more energy intensive, irrigation methods (as in
Chile and Mexico), and its negative impact on aquifer
sustainability due to increased consumptive use and
reduced return flows.31

· The impacts of the use of water for cooling in

thermoelectric power plants (Section 3.3.1), including
the growth in the nuclear energy industry in Brazil.

· The perspectives of introducing hydraulic fracturing
(Section 3.2.1) in the region, as in Argentina
and Mexico, and its implications, especially for
groundwater quality.

13.1 Water use for hydropower generation

Latin America and the Caribbean has the second largest
hydropower technical potential of all regions in the
world – about 20% (of which almost 40% is in Brazil)
or approximately 700 GW. Less than one-quarter of this
is developed (IEA, 2012b; OLADE, 2013). The region
has experienced an impressive hydropower expansion,
including large binational hydropower projects such as
Itaipú, Salto Grande and Yacyretá, which are examples of
the long tradition of transboundary cooperation in the
region, especially since the 1970s. At present the region
has almost 160 GW of installed capacity. As a result,
hydropower provides some 65% of all electricity generated
(even more in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Paraguay
and Venezuela); in comparison, the world average is just
16% (IEA, 2012b). Hydropower development slowed

31	Improvements in on-farm irrigation efficiency that increase
evapotranspiration (e.g. because of application of ‘saved’ [or salvaged]
water to additional crops) ‘fail to conserve water on a broader geographic
scale when irrigation return flows are an important component of basinwide hydrology’ (Huffaker, 2010, p. 134). Therefore, investing in more
efficient irrigation methods but allowing expansion of irrigated area is
likely to actually reduce water availability, increase the energy intensity of
agriculture and stress water supplies.

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

95

Given intense competition for
limited water supplies and the
predominant role of hydropower
in river basins, conflicts
increasingly arise between
hydropower and consumptive
uses
down between the late 1990s and the early 2000s as
increased private participation resulted in a preference
for less capital intensive technologies (thermal power),
and also because of heightened public opposition to the
environmental and social impacts of large dams.
Since then, in response to rising energy prices, escalating
demand and growing concerns about climate change,
hydropower development has accelerated again,
predominantly in Brazil, which concentrates more than
60% of the new capacity installed in the past decade,
followed at a distance by Chile, Paraguay and Mexico
(OLADE, 2013). Hydropower projects play a central role
in the expansion plans of many countries (IEA, 2012b),
and are expected to be a major driver of new water
demands in the future. At present, the emphasis is not
only on large plants, capable of multi-year regulation, but
also increasingly on smaller single-purpose reservoirs (the
average reservoir capacity of the dams built in the 2000s is
only about one-fifth of those commissioned in the 1980s
and 1990s [ICOLD, 2013]), run-of-the-river plants, and
modification of existing dams to increase their generation
capacity. Another concern relates to the vulnerability
of hydropower to climate variability. In Brazil, climate
change is expected to decrease the overall reliability of
hydropower, with negative effects concentrated in the
North East and North regions, in terms of both average
and firm energy, and positive variations in the South and
South East river basins (Margulis and Dubeux, 2011).
Hydroelectric power is usually viewed as a nonconsumptive water use, even though it is in part
consumptive (reservoir evaporation) and has important
impacts on other attributes of streamflows (timing and
quality). Given intense competition for limited water
supplies and the predominant role of hydropower in river
basins, conflicts increasingly arise between hydropower

96

CHAPTER 13

and consumptive uses, as with irrigated agriculture in
Brazil and Chile (Dourojeanni and Jouravlev, 1999),
and in some cases with other instream uses, like
recreation. These conflicts are particularly common where
hydropower relies on reservoirs with multi-year storage
to allocate streamflow to meet power demand that is often
out of phase with the seasonal requirements of other water
uses, especially irrigation (Huffaker et al., 1993). In Chile,
conflicts emerge between farmers who prefer to store
water during winter for use during the summer growing
season, while hydropower requires water to be stored
during summer to meet high electricity demand in winter
(Bauer, 2009). As reservoirs are often located upstream
and are controlled by hydropower interests, farmers
sometimes find much of their water cut off during the
peak of the irrigation season; in some cases, they have had
to be compensated by hydropower companies. In many
countries, there are concerns about the impact of dam
construction and operation on aquatic ecosystems and
water quality.
In Chile, the granting of water rights without the
requirement of beneficial and effective use created a
barrier to entry for competitors in various markets,
particularly electricity generation, thus potentially
reducing competition and fostering monopolization. As
a result of the 2005 Water Code reform which, among
other measures, introduced a licence fee for unused water
rights, the situation has improved and unused water
rights no longer present an impediment to energy sector
development (Peña, 2005).

13.2 Energy consumption in the provision of
water services

In comparison with other developing regions, Latin
America and the Caribbean is well advanced in the
provision of water supply and sanitation services: 94% of
its population has access to improved water sources and
82% to improved sanitation facilities (WHO/UNICEF,
2013b). Rising energy expenditures present challenges for
the water industry: energy is often the highest component
of operational costs (30–40%) associated with water
supply services in the region (Rosas, 2011). The reasons
for this situation are manifold:

· Inefficient system design and operation, with little if
any attention to energy efficiency

· Bad asset condition and high unaccounted-for water

(40% on average [Mejía and Rais, 2011], but up to 75%

REGIONAL ASPECTS

in extreme cases [Jouravlev, 2004]), including both
physical and commercial losses

· Low level of household metering (as in Argentina,

Panama and Paraguay) or artificially low tariffs,
resulting in water consumption far above normal
levels and in over-dimensioned water production and
treatment systems (Ferro and Lentini, 2013; Jouravlev,
2004)

· Heavy reliance on groundwater, which accounts for
more than half the water supply in many countries,
with increasing pumping costs due to falling water
tables in many areas due to inadequate aquifer
management

· The need to meet more stringent drinking water and

effluent quality standards, but especially to resort to
more distant (as in Mexico City and São Paulo), less
convenient and more polluted water sources, or even
to seawater desalination, particularly in the Caribbean
(as in Aruba and Trinidad and Tobago) and arid areas
of Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Peru

· Wide and low density operational areas, often with
complex topography

strategies to more efficiently manage the water–energy
nexus include the following:

· Development of effective coordination mechanisms

between water and energy authorities, at both
national and river basin levels, to ensure their policies,
instruments and objectives are mutually consistent
and do not undermine each other. An important
prerequisite is better availability and access to accurate
and consistent water and energy data as well as
facilitating dialogue among stakeholders on relevant
issues.

· Improvement of water and energy regulatory

frameworks, and harmonization of control, policymaking and financial mechanisms, with particular
attention to multipurpose water use, requirements for
approval of dam projects, resource conservation and
reuse, demand management, watershed protection,
strategic planning, and appropriate tariff/pricing and
subsidy design.

· Transition to integrated water resources management
(Solanes and Jouravlev, 2006), with emphasis on:
o

Water authorities that are independent from sector
influences, in order to ensure objective decisionmaking, and whose powers and resources are in line
with their responsibilities

o

An effective conflict prevention and resolution
system – including an efficient judicial system that
is capable of resolving conflicts with low transaction
costs and consistent results – and river basin
organizations that integrate all relevant stakeholders

o

Water (re)allocation systems that promote
investment in the development and conservation
of water resources and, at the same time, avoid
monopolies and facilitate coordination and control
in the public interest, taking into consideration the
particular characteristics of the water system and the
river basin

o

Protection of watershed ecosystem services and
environmental flows, as well as integration with
watershed and forest management, as key strategies
for ensuring water and energy sustainability

· Expansion of wastewater treatment (and associated

sludge disposal), which has almost tripled in recent
decades (Lentini, 2008), although it also presents new
opportunities for biogas production

Increased energy costs have direct implications for
service affordability and sector financing, especially
considering that the vast majority of water utilities
struggle to attain self-financing and that sector
investment, and sometimes even operation and
maintenance, is often financed through state budgets
(Jouravlev, 2004; Fernández, 2009; Ferro and Lentini,
2013). With more efficient operation, many water
utilities would be able to reduce energy costs by 10%
to 40% (Rosas, 2011), and even more (up to 75%) in
wastewater treatment – savings that could help expand
service coverage to the poor, improve service quality, and
make bills more affordable for customers.

13.3 The way forward

The search for appropriate response options is still a major
challenge for Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Regional experience suggests that the most promising

WWDR 2014

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

97

CHAPTER

14

Africa
UNECA
Author: Stephen M. Donkor; Contributors: Seleshi B. Awulachew and Michael Menker

In Africa the quest for water security has always been
linked to the quest for energy security (African Water
Vision 2025; UNECA, 2000). Energy security will be
achieved only when society obtains access to dependable,
modern energy services. Because most of sub-Saharan
Africa’s population is predominantly rural (70%) (World
Bank, n.d.a), achieving rural energy security is a
prerequisite for equitable and sustainable development.
Sub-Saharan Africa is characterized by low consumption
of commercial energy and high dependence on traditional
fuels. The majority of the rural population relies on
traditional energy supplies, mainly unprocessed biomass,
the burning of which causes significant pollution and
health concerns (Section 3.1).

to electricity in 2011 (IEA, 2012a). Excluding South
Africa, the entire installed generation capacity of subSaharan Africa is only 28 GW, equivalent to that of
Argentina (World Bank, n.d.b). Sub-Saharan Africa
consumes126 kWh/year electricity; including South
Africa causes this figure to rise to 447 kWh/year. The
variation between countries and regions is exacerbated
by the urban–rural divide: the sharp disparity is evident
in the low figure of 7.5% electrification in rural areas. The
trend of electricity consumption in Africa over the past
decade is shown in Figure 14.1. A steady increase on the
aggregate is expected to accelerate with the current rapid
economic growth being experienced in many African
countries.

Water as a source of power has a vital role to play
in responding to the socio-economic crisis facing
Africa. One aspect of the interdependence between
water availability and development can be seen by the
introduction of electricity to rural areas in Africa. The
impact is immediate and visible.

With increasing demand, some progress has been made
and overall electricity production has more than doubled
in the past two decades (Figure 14.2). Nevertheless,
sub-Saharan Africa is the only region in which the
absolute number of people without access to electricity is
increasing. It is estimated that without major policy action
and increased investment in the electricity sector, 650
million people will be living without electricity in subSaharan Africa in 2030 compared with some 500 million
today (IEA, 2011b). Fortunately, this rapidly growing

14.1 Energy use

Sub-Saharan Africa is the least electrified of all major
world regions, with 57% of its population without access

Trends in hydropower consumption in Africa (1998–2012)

FIGURE

14.1

Consumption (million metric
tonnes of oil equivalent)

30
25
20

15.70

17.20

16.90

17.40

1999

2000

2001

18.70

18.20

2002

2003

19.60

20.40

21.30

21.60

21.40

22.00

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

23.40

22.50

24.10

15
10
5
0
1998

2004

2010

2011

2012

Source: Statista/BP (http://www.statista.com/statistics/265560/african-hydropower-consumption-in-oil-equivalent/) (Accessed Sep 2013).

98

CHAPTER 14

REGIONAL ASPECTS

Addressing the development challenges of low life
expectancy and high infant mortality, illiteracy and
fertility rates in sub-Saharan Africa requires improved
access to electricity, particularly by poor and rural
communities. Improving access to electricity for the
majority of the population living in peri-urban and rural
areas is critical. Indeed, access to electricity is essential for
powering local industry and thus generating employment,
alleviating poverty, improving public health, and
increasing access to modern information and education
services. With growth in the African economy there will
also be a need to provide additional electricity to urban
centres and industries.

14.1

Key facts on hydropower in Africa

BOX

region of the world also has the greatest hydropower
potential of any region (Section 3.3.3).

• E conomically feasible hydropower potential:
842,077 GWh/year (Table 3.3)
• P
 otential developed: 8% (Figure 3.11)
• C
 ountries with the largest hydropower potential:
Congo, Ethiopia, Cameroon
• C
 ountries with the largest installed hydropower:
Egypt, Congo, Sudan, Nigeria
• H
 ydropower in operation (2011): ~26 GW
• H
 ydropower under construction (2011): ~14 GW
• K ey river basins for future hydropower development:
Congo, Nile, Zambezi
• P
 roposed projects: Grand Inga Project on the Congo
River, estimated cost US$50 billion. At 40,000 MW,
this would be world’s largest hydropower project.
The Congo is the second richest river in the world for
fish. Fish diversity could be threatened by insensitive
hydropower development.

14.2 Hydropower

Hydropower is an important source of modern energy.
Hydroelectric power supplies 32% of Africa’s energy
(UNEP, 2012). Although endowed with considerable
hydropower potential, African countries have developed
only a small fraction of it – about 8% (Box 14.1). The
key hubs, sometimes called ‘water towers’, for potential
hydropower generation are in the Congo River basin, the
Fouta-Djallon highlands in West Africa and the Ethiopian
highlands in East Africa – in fact 60% of the region’s
hydropower potential is in the Congo and Ethiopia.

Source: UNECA, with values from Aqua-Media International
Ltd, 2012. See also UNSD (2013) and Kumar et al. (2011).

Recent trends in electricity production for world regions including Africa

Electricity net generation (billion kWh)

FIGURE

14.2

• N
 egative impacts of hydropower: Downstream
fisheries and ecosystems have been heavily
impacted by large hydropower projects, for example
in the Zambezi and Senegal basins. Dams have
displaced 400,000 people across Africa.

9 000

North America

8 000

Central and South America
Europe

7 000

Africa
6 000

Asia and Oceania

5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000

10
20

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

92
19

19

90

0

Source: UNECA, with data from US Energy Information Administration ‘International Energy Statistics’ Web page (http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/
ipdbproject/IEDIndex3.cfm) (Accessed Sep 2013).

WWDR 2014

AFRICA

99

Sub-Saharan Africa is the only
region in which the absolute
number of people without access
to electricity is increasing
Global electricity access rate
100
Percentage of population
with access to electricity

FIGURE

14.3

75

50

25

0

1970
Latin America

1990

2004

Mid-East/North Africa
South Asia

2020
(forecast)

East Asia and Pacific

Africa

Note: The graph shows that more than 500 million people in subSaharan Africa lack access to electricity. Connection rates are as low
as 5% in rural areas.
Source: Cosgrove-Davies (2006).

Low exploitation of hydropower potential can be
explained to a significant extent by the fact that most
African countries are dependent on external resources
for major infrastructure projects. During the 1980s,
development partners shied away from major projects,
especially dams. Africa currently faces an infrastructure
funding gap of US$31 billion a year, mainly in power
(World Bank, 2010d). Another challenge facing

100

CHAPTER 14

most sub-Saharan African countries with substantial
hydropower resources stems from the difficulties in
adopting the long-term policy measures necessary for
sustainable development of these resources.
Water and energy in Africa is synonymous with
hydropower in terms of potential available energy for
present and future use. Hydropower is a renewable energy
and thus preferable to many other energy sources (i.e.
fossil fuels) in terms of sustainability. In light of the lack
of exploitation to date, hydropower remains the main
energy option to promote sustainable development and to
power trade, regional integration and poverty eradication
in Africa. Hydropower provides the opportunity for good
long-term and trans-generational investment in clean
energy for the growth of Africa, economically, socially
and environmentally. In the context of climate change,
especially where models predict reductions in river flows,
hydropower will still provide the bulk of energy in an
optimal mix with other sources, including geothermal,
wind and solar power (see Chapter 25 [Volume 2] for the
case study ‘The role of geothermal energy in Kenya’s longterm development vision’).

14.3 Access to services

The most important variable at the human level when it
comes to water and energy is whether the service can be
accessed – when, where and in adequate quantity and
quality – by every individual who needs it. The level of
access strongly correlates to socio-economic development
and is a critical prerequisite to poverty reduction globally
and in Africa in particular. Figure 14.3 shows global
electricity access; it is evident that Africa lags behind
other regions. This presents a great challenge, which can
also be seen as a great opportunity: to develop the great
hydropower potential in a clean, efficient way, having
learnt from the rest of the world so as not to repeat the
negative aspects of their experiences.

REGIONAL ASPECTS

PART 4

RESPONSES:
FOSTERING SYNERGIES
AND MANAGING
TRADE-OFFS
CHAPTERS
15. C
 reating an enabling
environment for change
16. R
 esponses in practice

WWDR 2014

CHAPTER TITLE

101

The first three parts of this report have demonstrated how water and energy are highly interdependent,
and that choices made in one domain have impacts on the other − direct and indirect, positive and
negative. These choices also collectively impact upon, and are affected by, other water- and energydependent sectors. Water and energy are both drivers and inhibitors of economic growth and
improvement of human health. They are enablers for widespread poverty reduction and job creation,
and are generators of well-being. Many internationally agreed development goals, including nearly all
the MDGs, depend on major progress in access to safe water, adequate sanitation and reliable sources
of energy. Decisions about water and energy sharing, allocation, production and distribution between
different users and uses have important social and gender equality implications, as they ultimately
determine the resources and services that can be made available at the household and community levels.
Growing demand for finite water resources is leading to increased competition between the energy sector
and other water-using sectors of the economy, principally agriculture and industry. Climate change creates
additional pressures. All around the world, droughts, heatwaves and local water shortages in the past
decade have interrupted electricity generation, with serious economic consequences. At the same time,
limitations on energy availability constrain the delivery of water services.
Because of their similarities, and despite their differences, the water and energy domains face common
challenges. Water is a major, and generally inefficient, user of energy; while energy is a major, and generally
inefficient, user of water. However, the respective incentives facing the two domains are asymmetrical: energy
users have little or no incentive to conserve water due to zero or low prices, but water users normally do pay
for energy, though prices are often subsidized.32 Water and energy prices are strongly affected by political
decisions and subsidies that support major sectors such as agriculture and industry, and these subsidies often
distort the true economic relationship between water and energy. Particularly for water, price is rarely a true
reflection of cost – it is often even less than the cost of supply. Historically, the price of water has been so low
that there has been little or no incentive to save it in many places around the world.
Finally, a crucial aspect of burgeoning global demand for water and energy is the resulting pressure on
water resources and degradation of ecosystems. Ecosystems provide the natural enabling environment
for energy provision and water flows. They also deliver energy, often depending on water to do so.
Recognition of this interconnectedness has led some observers to call for a greater level of integration of
the two domains. Although this may be possible and beneficial under certain circumstances, an increased
level of collaboration and coordination would create favourable outcomes in nearly all situations.
How should policy-makers and decision-makers respond to the dilemmas, risks and opportunities
presented in this report? Various solutions have been explored. Their most common theme is improving
the efficiency and sustainability with which water and energy are used, and finding win–win options
that create savings of both, which can become mutually reinforcing (creating synergy).
Not every situation offers such opportunities. Where competition between different resource domains
are likely to increase, the requirement to make deliberate trade-offs arise. These trade-offs will need
to be managed and contained, preferably through collaboration in a coordinated manner. To do this,
better and sometimes new data will be required.

32	The energy bills of water utilities often go unpaid, as well as vice versa (Hussey et al., 2013). In South Asia and elsewhere, farmers pay highly subsidized rates
for publicly supplied electrical power (Molle and Berkoff, 2008, ch. 9). Globally, ‘underpricing power costs the sector at least $2.2 billion a year in foregone
revenues… [in Africa] neither commercial nor residential customers [of power] are close to paying full cost recovery prices’ (AICD, 2012, pp. 191–192).

102

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

CHAPTER

15

Creating an enabling environment for change
WWAP | Richard Connor, Lyndsay Mountford, Frederik Pischke and James Winpenny

Problems arise when water and energy policies are
formulated in isolation. There are, fortunately, examples of
policies and actions that benefit both domains (win–win
projects, optimum trade-offs). Sometimes these synergies
arise unintentionally, by policy-makers acting with an
eye towards their own domains. But accidental synergy
cannot be relied upon to produce enough of the positive
common actions necessary to address growing problems
evident in both domains.
A coherent policy – which is to say an adequate public
response to the interconnectedness of the water, energy
and related domains – requires a hierarchy of actions.
These include:

· Developing coherent national policies affecting the
different domains

· Creating legal and institutional frameworks to
promote this coherence

· Ensuring reliable data and statistics to make and
monitor decisions

· Encouraging awareness through education, training
and public information media

· Supporting innovation and research into technological
development

· Ensuring availability of finance
· Allowing markets and businesses to develop
Together these actions make up the enabling environment
necessary to produce the changes needed for sustainable
and mutually compatible development of water and
energy.
At the outset, the different political economies of water and
energy should be recognized, as these affect the scope,
speed and direction of change in the respective domains.
While energy is often synonymous with big business and

WWDR 2014

carries great political clout, water is not and generally
does not. There is a marked difference in the pace of
change visible in the energy and water domains, driven by
the evolution of markets and technologies (Hussey et al.,
2013; Sections 1.2, 1.3). These forces also drive changes in
governance, which happens at a different rate in the two
domains. Unless those responsible for water step up their
own governance reform efforts, the pressures emanating
from developments in the energy sphere will become
increasingly restrictive and make the tasks facing water
planners, and the objective of a secure water future, much
more difficult to achieve. And failures in water can also
lead directly to failures in energy.

National energy and water
policies need to be compatible
and coherent
National energy and water policies need to be compatible
and coherent. Policies in response to climate change are a
specific case in point: efforts to mitigate GHG emissions
(e.g. through hydropower or biofuels) may place greater
strain on water resources, and development of new water
sources (e.g. through desalination) imperils national
emissions targets.
Governments also need to cultivate widespread awareness
of the water–energy nexus through public information
fora, social and political conversation, and education. It is
incumbent on professional communities in the water and
energy domains to meet and discourse with each other to
a much greater extent than they do at present.
Legal and regulatory frameworks should be created to
channel reforms and establish rules and sanctions for
infractions by users, including businesses. Calls for closer
regulation and greater transparency, monitoring and
local community engagement are part of the public and
political reaction to the potential impact on water from
the development of unconventional sources of oil and
gas; for example, fracking in Argentina, Mexico, the USA

CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR CHANGE

103

and in Europe, and the development of oil (tar) sands in
Canada (Sections 3.2.1, 10.5).
Institutions involved in policy formulation (e.g. ministries,
planning commissions, committees, local government
bodies) must be mindful of the water–energy nexus and
incorporate it into their planning and decision-making
systems. Integrating water and energy into decisions
is easier said than done. It will take different forms in
different countries, at different administrative levels in
each country, but it is important to make some progress
in this direction. Where river basin organizations (RBOs)
exist, for instance, it is sensible to include representatives
from energy, power and water communities in their

Research into how much of a
reduction in energy demand can
be achieved from increased water
efficiency and vice versa would
support policy-makers and investors
in making more resource efficient
strategies and investment choices
stakeholder fora – some RBOs even use the terminology
‘parliaments’ to denote a style of debate and resolution.
The collaboration on resource planning approach was
recognized some years ago in a key report of the USA’s
Department of Energy:
Collaboration on energy and water resource planning is
needed among federal, regional, and state agencies as well
as with industry and other stakeholders. In most regions,
energy planning and water planning are done separately.
The lack of integrated energy and water planning and
management has already impacted energy production in
many basins and regions across the country…
Mechanisms, such as regional natural resources planning
groups, are needed to foster collaboration between
stakeholders and regional and state water and energy
planning, management, and regulatory groups and

Institutional capacity development can play an
important role in fostering interdisciplinary and
interministerial approaches that support the integration of
interdependencies in decision-making through knowledge
and technology transfers between different governmental
levels and sectors, and through the exchange of
experiences.
The Strategic Environmental Assessment33 produced by
the Mekong River Commission exemplifies an integrated
approach to water and energy in the context of a major
transboundary river basin. This assessment considers
the interdependencies between energy generation and
the availability of water, and the impacts of alternative
policies for energy and water resource development and
management on ecosystems, social systems and economic
development over a 15-year perspective (MRC, 2009).
For major infrastructure, integrated planning and the joint
design of programmes and investments between energy and
water experts and managers may be appropriate. Sharing
data for modelling, and agreeing on common assumptions,
is clearly important. There is a role for collaborative
resource planning, identifying synergies and optimizing
and negotiating trade-offs. Some of these factors can be
mediated in local planning decisions. All such actions
would be easier with a better mutual understanding of
the economic gains to be had from collaboration and
cooperation between the two domains.
With an annual investment of US$198 billion globally on
average over the next 40 years, water use can be made
more efficient, enabling increased agricultural, biofuel
and industrial production (UNEP, 2011b). Investing
$170 billion annually in energy efficiency worldwide
could produce energy savings of up to $900 billion per
year (SE4ALL, 2012), and each additional $1 spent on
energy efficiency in electrical equipment, appliances and
buildings avoids more than $2, on average, in energy
supply investments (US EIA, 2010a). Research into how
much of a reduction in energy demand can be achieved
from increased water efficiency and vice versa would
support policy-makers and investors in making more
resource efficient strategies and investment choices.
For example, water decoupling (i.e. using less water

agencies. These types of collaborative efforts are needed
to ensure proper evaluation and valuation of water
resources for all needs, including energy development and
generation (USA DOE, 2006, p. 11).

104

CHAPTER 15

33	General guidance on the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of
plans and programmes is provided by the Protocol on the SEA to the
Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary
Context (Espoo Convention) (UNECE, 2011b).

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

and causing fewer environmental impacts per unit of
economic output) is possible and already happening in
many regions and sectors, offering win−win opportunities,
especially in developing countries (UNEP-IRP, 2012).
Although the bulk of water and energy infrastructure has
been traditionally provided by the public sector, the size
of future investment required for both domains means
that the gap cannot be filled solely from public finance,
and major recourse to private finance will be essential.
However, public actions will be required to establish
adequate and predictable investment environments and
to mitigate some of the risks that currently deter private
financiers in some of the poorest countries. Sound
regulatory policies, public–private partnerships, public
expenditure reviews and results-based financing are
some approaches proposed to help enlist private finance
(Section 5.1).
Water and energy governance should be gender sensitive,
recognizing women as important decision-makers in all
areas of water and energy governance at all levels and
ensuring their due voice and influence in the shaping
of policy and practice. Governments can benefit from
prioritizing full and equitable access to water and energy
in national development plans and poverty reduction
strategies, and promote investments that alleviate the
unpaid work burden of women and children.
Other key measures include the establishment of
accountability frameworks based on clear gender
equality benchmarks and gender audits to monitor the
gender-related performance of the two domains; the
implementation of positive measures to increase the
enrolment of young women in technical areas related to
water and energy; the positioning of qualified women as
leaders of innovation in water and energy efficiency; and
the generation of gender-disaggregated data required to
measure progress.

15.1 Breaking down barriers – and building
bridges

Policy-makers, planners and practitioners in water and
energy need to take steps to overcome the barriers
that exist between their domains. ‘The disconnect
between water and energy policy is driven in large
part by the failure of water and energy practitioners to
engage with and fully understand one another’ (Cooley
et al., 2011, p. 9). That being said, the disconnection
can also be attributed to the fact that each domain

WWDR 2014

has been traditionally expected to focus on a narrow
mandate in meeting its own aims and fulfilling its own
targeted responsibilities. As a result, there is often little
or no incentive to initiate and pursue coordination or
integration of policies across sectoral institutions
(Section 5.1).
Previous editions of the United Nations World Water
Development Report (WWAP, 2009, 2012) urged water
policy-makers to think outside the box to address the many
ways in which water is impacted by events and decisions
arising outside water ‘borders’ as they are commonly
viewed. By the same token, policy-makers in other areas
of social and economic life should acknowledge both their
own impact on water and the impact of water on their
policies, for example as an input or constraint. Nowhere
is this more true – or more urgent – than for energy. The
water–energy nexus can be regarded as one of the first and

Each domain has been
traditionally expected to focus on
a narrow mandate in meeting its
own aims and fulfilling its own
targeted responsibilities. As a
result, there is often little or no
incentive to initiate and pursue
coordination or integration of
policies across sectoral institutions.
most important steps outside the box (or ‘silo’) for both
domains. Other linkages are also important to explore
where these can improve policy-making; for instance,
those between energy, water and land (EU, 2012); between
water, food, energy and climate (WEF, 2011); and with
the environment. Water and energy practitioners need
to work collaboratively towards a coherent response to
common challenges.
In some countries the same national institution is
responsible for planning, management and service
provision for water and power (e.g. in Pakistan the Water
and Power Development Authority [WAPDA]; in Guinea
where the Ministry of Energy is also responsible for
water resources development; and in Zambia where the

CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR CHANGE

105

Ministry of Energy and Water Development looks after
both portfolios). However, effective collaboration does
not necessarily require that responsibilities for water and
energy be combined into the same institutional portfolio,
nor does doing so assure coherent cooperation.
Urban water and power utilities have much in common,
and much to learn about each other’s reform agenda
– both its successes and its failures. Examples in the
realm of distribution of urban water and power services
demonstrate that the common aims of efficient use and
reduction of waste could be achieved by focusing on
programmes to reduce unaccounted-for water, as water
is a profligate user of energy (see Chapter 28 [Volume 2]
for the case study ‘Water and energy linkage in Austin,
Texas, USA’). Likewise, the aim of improved bill collection
by both services could be attained more easily if a single
agency coordinated collection for both utilities.
Although there is scope for synergies and win–win results,
there is also an array of situations where competition
for resources or genuine conflict between water and
energy aims can arise, requiring some degree of tradeoff. Dealing with trade-offs may require and benefit
from negotiation, especially where international issues
are involved, as in the upstream–downstream tensions
between hydropower and irrigation over the use of water
in Central Asian countries (Sections 10.2, 6.6) and the
Mekong basin (Section 11.1). Likewise, conflicts have
arisen in many countries, for example in Chile between
farmers and hydropower companies over the timing of
water releases and unused water rights, which has been
somewhat mitigated by the imposition of taxes on the
latter (Section 13.1).

15.2 Economic instruments

There is no silver bullet to bring about the kind of
changes and reforms considered in the above paragraphs.

Although there is scope for
synergies and win–win results,
there is also an array of situations
where competition for resources
or genuine conflict between
water and energy aims can arise,
requiring some degree of trade-off
106

CHAPTER 15

Governments have to use a variety of measures –
incentives and well as sanctions, a mixture of persuasion
and penalties. Economic incentives and market-based
instruments should be considered in policy packages
designed to change behaviour towards water and energy.
They can greatly reinforce the impact of other types
of measures, such as regulations, public awareness
campaigns, exhortations and technological developments.
This does not imply that the market should have the
final word in allocating water and energy resources
and services. Pricing should be used sensitively with a
view to its social and distributional impact. Pricing can,
however, add a crucial boost to other water and energy
policies.
Economic instruments include prices, taxes, pollution
charges, subsidies, and markets for buying and selling
a service, a resource or the rights to use the service or
resource.
Economic pricing of energy and water services can more
closely reflect the economic cost of their provision;
provide sufficient revenues for continued operation
and maintenance; and avoid waste and distortions
due to under-pricing. In 2005, Komives et al. reported
that ‘global tariff surveys indicate that the majority of
electricity and (particularly) water utilities charge tariffs
substantially below levels commensurate with full cost
recovery. A significant proportion of utilities charge
tariffs that do not even cover operating and maintenance
costs.’ (Komives et al., 2005, pp. 165–166). In many
countries, subsidies in water and energy are widespread
and impose a large and growing fiscal burden. Although
it is unrealistic to expect a rapid reversal of this
situation, there is scope in many cases for adjusting tariff
structures and targeting subsidies to protect the poorest
and most deserving consumers, while reducing some
of the worst distortions and waste caused by subsidy
dependency (OECD, 2009, 2010b,c).
Even ‘economic’ tariffs that fully recover financial costs
exclude important external costs that the use of water
and energy imposes on others. This is partly a matter of
internalizing externalities such as pollution and GHG
emissions through pollution charges, carbon taxes
and so forth. It is also partly a matter of reckoning the
opportunity costs of using resources for one purpose,
when this deprives some other potential user. Tools such
as environmental economic valuation can be used to
reflect these costs at the project level.

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

Though energy (generally fuels) is systematically traded
on commodity exchanges, water trading is much more
difficult and contentious as it is based on tradable ‘rights’
rather than a commodity. However, water trading between
major use sectors is possible in some circumstances and
provides an economic mechanism for resolving allocation
conflicts. Trade could be either seasonal or permanent.
Although water markets have been created in a few
countries (e.g. Australia, Chile, USA) trading depends on
an appropriate legal framework and effective regulation
designed to avoid transfer of negative externalities and
monopolization of water rights and to reduce transaction
costs. The large volume of water required for thermal
power on a long-term basis is likely to need permanent
transfers; for example, by buying out farmers’ rights.
Such transactions tend to arouse social and political
resistance, although there are cases of cities securing
their water by such deals.
The imposition of a non-consumptive water use tariff at
an economic level, applicable to power generation and
other sectors such as industry and mining competing for
bulk water, could provide a level playing field for charging,
and create incentives for the more efficient use of water
all round. Imposing higher non-consumptive tariffs on
thermal and hydropower generation would clearly signal
and incentivize the need to adopt more water efficient
processes. This would apply whatever water tariffs were
charged to other sectors.

15.3 Role of the United Nations system and the
international community

Local, national and regional policies and actions can
often benefit from a strong endorsement from the
international community, in such areas as (a) cooperation
and information exchange in state-of-the-art public policy
formulation; (b) government, consumer and investor
awareness and commitment; (c) application of integrated
resource efficiency planning; (d) capacity development on
existing strategies and tools; and (e) improvements in the
availability of relevant and robust data.

The United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) in 2012 explicitly acknowledged
that water is at the core of sustainable development as it is
closely linked to a number of key global challenges. The
United Nations General Assembly in 2012 also recognized
the critical role that energy plays in the development
process. However, it is particularly telling that there is no
mention whatsoever of water in the energy section, or of

WWDR 2014

energy in the water section of the outcome document. The
Bonn 2011 Nexus Conference,34 organized in preparation
for Rio+20, focused international and national attention
on the water–energy–food nexus and the solutions such
an integrated approach can provide.

Economic pricing of energy and
water services can more closely
reflect the economic cost of their
provision; provide sufficient
revenues for continued operation
and maintenance; and avoid
waste and distortions due to
under-pricing
In practice, different people in different departments,
if not different agencies, are responsible for funding
decisions, project development and policy-making. This
holds true at all levels of administration and explains why
integrated energy and water policies are rare (Section 5.1).
However, in the work of the United Nations system, other
international regional organizations, development banks
and bilateral development agencies, many programmes
and projects exist aiming to address the interplay
between energy and water. This points to a project-byproject approach to deliver context-specific support. The
coordination mechanisms of the United Nations system,
UN-Water and UN-Energy continue to play leadership
roles in providing a platform for cooperation with civil
society to formulate coherent responses on water and
energy – issues that cut across the mandates of the
international system. The recognized need for separate
sustainable development goals dedicated to water, food
and energy security, which must be independent of each
other but closely related and coordinated, provide an
excellent opportunity for UN-Water and UN-Energy to
assume a strong leadership and facilitatory role.
In the realm of financing, the international community
has an obligation to support those people most in need

34	For more information, see http://www.water-energy-food.org/en/
conference.html (Accessed Apr 2013)

CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR CHANGE

107

– the ‘bottom billion’ – in countries considered too risky
by lenders to fund provision of basic water, sanitation
and modern energy services and nutrition (Box 1.3).
International agencies also have programmes to help
increase efficiency in public spending and to ensure that
the regulatory framework in a country is strong enough
for public–private partnerships to function to the benefit
of society.
The international community can bring actors together
and play a catalytic role in supporting national,
subnational and local governments as well as utility
providers, who have a major role in how the water–energy
nexus plays out at the national and relevant local levels.
Though the energy and water service sectors function in
different ways, external support can help authorities in
charge of public policy formulation, regulation, planning
and financing as well as utilities in both sectors learn from
each other in their reform processes and provide a space
to work with each other to realize efficiency gains and
plan for future demands.
The same is true for the relationship between the United
Nations and the private sector. The UN Global Compact’s
CEO Water Mandate35 provides a platform to facilitate
private sector support to governments and society at large
in order to realize overall economic results, social benefits
and environmental protection. One approach would be
to assist companies in the formulation, development,
implementation and disclosure of appropriate water
sustainability policies and practices as they relate to
energy.

Without reliable monitoring data, it is difficult to devise
good projects, programmes and policies (Chapter 4).
If countries are expected to collect new types of data
and include water–energy indicators, particularly
when developing a post-2015 development agenda, the
international community needs to help strengthen the
collectors and distributors of primary data in countries
– including national statistics agencies and water, energy
and environmental authorities and users. Strengthening
data collection entities and disclosing the gains of water
and energy policies can eliminate blind spots in water
and energy management, facilitate better public policy
formulation, increase the visibility of co-benefits, and
provide the basis for an open dialogue when difficult
trade-off decisions need to be taken.
The increasing synergy between water and energy
can drive change and innovation. The international
community can play a key role in resolving this
multifaceted issue. Its voice is needed to ensure that
sustainability and equity are factored into decisions about
the use of resources nationally as well as internationally.
Transboundary cooperation, international trade and
regional energy grids can all be vehicles for delivering
benefits to nations and their people. The independent
and strong voice of the international community can
help ensure that social and environmental messages get
through, alongside economic considerations, to target the
‘triple bottom line’ of overall economic progress, social
equity and environmental protection.

35	For more information, see http://ceowatermandate.org/ (Accessed Apr
2013)

108

CHAPTER 15

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

CHAPTER

16

Responses in practice
WWAP | Richard Connor, Lyndsay Mountford and James Winpenny

The interplay of water and energy, and the scope for
fostering synergies and managing trade-offs between
them, is illustrated below in the contexts of agriculture,
industry, cities, ecosystems and power. This chapter
summarizes the response options outlined in earlier parts
of this report with some specific examples.36

16.1 Energy-smart and water efficient
agriculture

Applying energy efficiency measures at the farm level
(Table 6.3) and at all stages along the agrifood chain
can bring direct savings through technological and
behavioural changes, and indirect savings through cobenefits derived from the adoption of agro-ecological
farming practices. Avoiding food wastage can result in
considerable savings in energy, land and water.

BOX

16.1

Knowledge-based precision irrigation can provide flexible,
reliable and efficient water application, which can be
complemented by deficit irrigation and wastewater reuse.
Crops often take up only half of the irrigation water
applied, so there is clearly potential to improve water use
efficiency of mechanical irrigation systems, which would
also result in less demand for electricity or diesel fuel for
pumping. However, while irrigation losses may appear
high, a large part of these losses usually return to the
water body in the form of return flow or aquifer recharge
(Section 6.6), often laden with nutrients and other
chemicals. Cases have been reported where more efficient,
but energy intensive irrigation increases the consumptive

36	Yet more examples are presented in Volume 2.

Groundwater, irrigation and energy: Responses to an unsustainable situation in Gujarat, India
The issue of groundwater overdraft in India has been well known for decades. In the state of Gujarat, free groundwater
and subsidized electricity to pump it contributed to severe groundwater overdraft, near bankruptcy of the State Electricity
Board, and poor power supply to farmers and other rural residents. The textbook solution seemed simple enough: price
groundwater and electricity to reflect their value. However, those who tried to implement these solutions did not appreciate
the political realities in India. Efforts to rationalize pricing were met with great resistance by farmers. Politicians lost their jobs
and external funds for modernizing the system were withdrawn. The State Electricity Board continued to generate great
losses and was unable to meet the needs of the rapidly growing economy. Farmers had to accept poor quality power supply
as the cost of their ‘free’ supply, and the pressure on aquifers was substantial.
An alternative approach, called the Jyotigram Scheme, diverged from the textbook approach and embraced subsidies as part
of a strategy. But rather than viewing subsidies as a default component of free electricity supply, the Jyotigram Scheme focused
on providing rationally managed subsidies where needed, and pricing where possible. Under the programme, rural Gujarat has
been completely rewired. Villages are given 24-hour, three-phase power supply for domestic use and in schools, hospitals and
village industries, all at metered rates. Farmers operating tubewells continue to receive free electricity, but for 8 hours rather
than 24 and, importantly for the satisfaction of farmers, on a pre-announced schedule designed to meet their peak demands.
The separation of agricultural energy from other uses and the promise of quality supply were sufficient to gain political and
social backing for implementation. The Jyotigram Scheme has now radically improved the quality of village life, spurred nonfarm economic enterprises, and halved the power subsidy to agriculture. While groundwater itself is still free, the programme
has indirectly raised the price of groundwater supply from tubewell owners in the informal market by 30% to 50%, thus
providing a signal of scarcity, and reducing groundwater overdraft. The solution may not be perfect, but it has proved to be
implementable and it has brought substantial improvement inside and outside the water sector.
Jyotigram is now a flagship programme of the Government of India, replicated in Punjab, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
Source: IWMI, from Shah et al. (2004, 2008) and Shah and Verma (2008).

WWDR 2014

RESPONSES IN PRACTICE

109

Energy audits to identify and
reduce water and energy losses
and enhance energy efficiency can
result in substantial energy and
financial savings, with savings of
between 10% and 40% reported
use of water and reduces return flows, leading to more
pressure on aquifers.
Dam and reservoir design that accommodates fisheries
and aquaculture can allow continued food production
from rivers that are dammed for hydroelectric
development. Optimizing the management of storage
capacity of catchments, including soils, groundwater and
reservoirs, offers scope for greater efficiency; for example,
drawing upon groundwater reserves at times of low
reservoir capacity and enabling groundwater to recharge
when reservoirs are full (Box 2.2).
While access to inexpensive fossil fuel combined with
access to versatile, affordable low-maintenance diesel

BOX

16.2

engines in Bangladesh has benefited smallholder farmers
without over-exploiting water resources (Section 6.6),
energy subsidies in the drier parts of India have had
detrimental effects on groundwater levels. In Gujarat, one
of the drier states in India, policies to ration farm power
supply, and thus water supply, have been recommended to
encourage farmers to use water more sparingly (Box 16.1).
In Argentina and Mexico, electricity subsidies are having
a damaging effect on groundwater aquifers while mainly
benefiting the most prosperous farmers (Chapter 13). The
political difficulties of reform cannot be underestimated,
but reform of energy subsidies could benefit both energy
and water domains in such situations.
In areas with sufficient endowments of surface water,
modernization of existing canal irrigation systems to improve
services may encourage farmers to reduce their groundwater
use as it is often more expensive (due to the cost of pumping)
than surface water supply. These systems can have multiple
purposes – such as crop production, domestic use, animal
husbandry and support of small industries.

16.2 Innovating cities

It has been suggested that more than half of the water
demand and water-related energy consumption in some

Energy efficiency generates savings for water supply systems
The Improvement of Energy Efficiency (IEE) project of the Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ) is focusing on demand-side
energy reduction in pumping stations and promoting institutional change through private sector participation. The case was
presented at the Amman–Cologne Symposium 2011.
‘In initial energy audits, the IEE project analysed the electricity consumption and improvement potential of key pumping
stations and developed detailed recommendations for implementation. Efficiency improvements in the range of 4%–65%
of the electricity consumed are feasible in various pumping stations. This would reduce the annual energy use by 21 million
kWh, representing about 1 mill. JOD [US$1.4 million] per year in energy cost savings for WAJ and hence improving cost
recovery.’
‘... An energy service company (ESCO) provides the funding for the repair and replacement of the pumping equipment,
designs and installs the equipment, and takes over operation, maintenance and repair processes for a defined period. The
remuneration of the ESCO for its services depends on the reduction of specific energy consumption (kWh/cbm[m3] pumped)
during the contract period, since the cost savings are shared between WAJ and the ESCO.’
‘By this, a triple win situation is created: firstly a cost recovery improvement reduction, secondly the availability of new
infrastructure at no cost for WAJ, and thirdly a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.’
‘The results from a pilot pumping station confirm an increase in average energy efficiency of 40%, which translates into a
cost recovery improvement of approx. 120’000 JOD [US$170,000] per year, very low maintenance efforts for the enhanced
equipment and an overall reduction of pumping station downtime.’
Source: Waleed K. Al-Zubari, Arabian Gulf University, from Rothenberger (2011, pp. 20–21).

110

CHAPTER 16

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

cities in the USA could be saved just by implementing
simple water conservation measures, such as leakage
prevention, efficient water appliances and xeriscaping.
Further measures include collecting, treating and reusing
stormwater for low-risk purposes such as garden watering
and building cleaning and maintenance. Advanced
water treatment options (such as reverse osmosis and
desalination) can contribute to increased water availability,
but their additional energy requirements need to be offset
by the use of efficient technology and renewable energy
sources (Section 7.4). Energy audits to identify and reduce
water and energy losses and enhance energy efficiency can
result in substantial energy and financial savings, with
savings of between 10% and 40% reported (Box 16.2).
Potential, thermal and chemically bound energy contained
in wastewater can be harnessed and utilized. Potential
energy offers limited opportunities for energy production.
Thermal energy in wastewater comes from its temperature
when leaving a building, which can be particularly useful
in places where a large amount of energy is required for
heating water, especially in colder climates. It can be used
for pre-heating via heat exchangers or heat pumps and
recent technologies are highly cost-effective.

BOX

16.3

Chemically bound energy in wastewater is due to its
carbon content, which can be converted to methane under
anaerobic conditions. Methane can be used for domestic
cooking and heating, as fuel for vehicles and power
plants, or for operating the treatment plant itself. Biogas
is a source of green energy, which replaces fossil fuels
and reduces the amount of sludge to be disposed of, as

Chemically bound energy in
wastewater ... can be used for
domestic cooking and heating, as
fuel for vehicles and power plants,
or for operating the treatment
plant itself
well as achieving financial savings for the plant (Section
5.2.4). Many wastewater treatment plants have been
able to generate biogas from wastewater or sludge and
convert it to heat or electricity (Box 16.3; Section 7.4.3). In
Stockholm, public buses, waste collection trucks and taxis
run on biogas produced from sewage treatment plants.
The anaerobic water treatment technologies responsible

Recovery of energy from wastewater
The As-Samra wastewater treatment plant was inaugurated in 2008 to treat the wastewater of 2.3 million equivalentinhabitantsa of Amman and surrounding areas. The project is a public–private partnership for financing the construction and
operation of public infrastructure in Jordan based on a build-operate-transfer (BOT) contract spanning 25 years.b
Wastewater is transported from Amman to the plant site by gravity over 40 km through a conveyor pipeline. The difference
in elevation between the city and the treatment plant is significant, so the wastewater is under high pressure when it arrives
at the plant. Instead of the pressure diverters commonly used to break the flow of this type of wastewater effluent, turbines
have been installed to run on upstream wastewater flow and generate hydraulic energy, which is used on site. The treated
effluent is again used to power hydraulic turbines generating renewable energy before it is released into the environment,
joining a stream that directs the waters to King Talal Dam.
Biogas recovery has been implemented for the sludge digesters. Sewage sludge generated during the process is treated
through anaerobic digestion. Biogas generated in the digester is captured and recovered in the form of electrical and thermal
energy which is used on site. The plant is almost self-sufficient and requires very little power from the grid as it generates up
to 95% of the plant electrical consumption from renewable sources (Solutions for Water, 2012).
Notes: a Population equivalent (in wastewater monitoring and treatment) refers to the amount of oxygen-demanding substances whose oxygen
consumption during biodegradation equals the average oxygen demand of the wastewater produced by one person. For practical calculations, it
is assumed that one unit equals 54 grams of BOD per 24 hours (OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms at http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/). b This is the
first BOT project for both Jordan and USAID. SWECO is the consulting company. The Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) financed
technical assistance during preparation, construction, commissioning, and 18 months of commercial operation of the project.
Source: Waleed K. Al-Zubari, Arabian Gulf University.

WWDR 2014

RESPONSES IN PRACTICE

111

for biogas production are particularly appropriate for
warmer climates like those found across the Arab region
(Section 12.2) among others. The use of dried faecal
sludge as fuel is gaining momentum in several developing
countries (Section 7.4.3).

16.3 Enhancing the role of industry

Large industry is well advanced in reacting to water and
energy issues. Energy efficiency has been prioritized and
driven by high energy prices and regulations concerning
climate change and GHG emissions. More recently, water
use efficiency has also taken on a higher profile. Industry’s
actions are the result of commitment to corporate policies,
sustainability and CSR as well as a response to commercial,
shareholder and consumer pressures (Chapter 8). These
influences often extend through the industrial supply
chain, with far-reaching impacts ranging from more
sustainable practices to increased public awareness.

BOX

16.4

Carrying out water and energy audits to calculate
balances and corresponding footprints is an important
first step towards setting conservation and efficiency
goals and targets. Many firms are adopting standards
such as ISO 14000 (Environmental Management), ISO
5000 (Energy Management) and LEED (Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design). Specific measures
include increasing water productivity through reuse,
recycling or the use of reclaimed wastewater, and focusing
on zero discharge technologies. In the energy domain
the adoption of green technologies, such as energy
efficient machinery, is increasingly an option. In terms
of manufactured goods, considerable achievements have
been made in the design and formulation of products
specifically aimed at reducing the water and energy
content or consumption of products and appliances. The
formulation of detergents and washing machines is a
notable example.

Initiatives for small and medium-sized enterprises
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have been a focus for UNIDO, which has successfully set up National Cleaner
Production Centres promoting Cleaner Production (CP) practices (UNIDO, n.d.a). These practices include:
• Good housekeeping to prevent leaks and spills and good operation and maintenance procedures and practices
• Input material change: using less hazardous or renewable materials or materials with a longer service lifetime
• B
 etter process control, equipment modification and technology change for higher efficiency and lower rates of waste and
emission generation
• On-site recovery and reuse of wasted materials within the company
• Production of useful by-products: transformation of wastes into materials for reuse or recycling outside the company
• P
 roduct modification to minimize environmental impacts during use or after (disposal) or to minimize environmental
impacts of production
The UNIDO Transfer of Environmentally Sound Technology (TEST) programme (UNIDO, n.d.b) is associated with CP and
supports industry by:
• Prioritizing a preventative approach to CP
• A
 ddressing preventative environmental management and providing information on materials, energy and finance using
environmental management systems (EMS) and environmental management accounting (EMA)
• Incorporating environmental management within corporate social responsibility (CSR) leading to sustainable enterprise
strategies
Three areas of response specific to energy were identified for SMEs (UNIDO, 2008), although they could apply equally to
water management:
• T arget setting agreements. These can result in significant energy savings with long-term effects in changing attitudes and
awareness.
• E nergy management standards. By adopting standards, companies raise their image and a process of continuous
improvement is set in place; energy efficiency becomes part of corporate culture.
• System optimization. This offers a fast return and encourages companies to adopt more fully integrated programmes.
Source: UNIDO.

112

CHAPTER 16

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

Large companies and multinationals, particularly in the
food and beverage sector, have been engaged for some
time in improving water and energy efficiencies. Such
companies see the value of efficiencies in both monetary
and societal terms. An important policy issue is how to
harness the combined capacity of small and medium-sized
enterprises, which account for 70% of enterprises in most
countries, and provide the financing necessary for them to
generate efficiencies as a sector (Box 16.4).

16.4 Prioritizing ecosystem services

Expansions of all types of energy generation can be
planned with an ecosystem perspective. IWRM, supported
by systematic environmental flows assessment, is one
framework for planning and allocating water at the
basin level. The application of an ecosystems approach
necessitates the valuation and use of natural infrastructure,
supported by tools that include PES, remediation through
sustainable dam and reservoir management, and strategic
river basin investment.

Natural or green infrastructure can complement, augment
or replace the services provided by traditional engineered
infrastructure, which can enhance cost-effectiveness, risk
management and sustainable development. Improved
water resources and natural infrastructure in the form
of healthy ecosystems can reinforce each other and
generate additional benefits in the water–energy–food

BOX

16.5

nexus (Box 16.5). The ongoing degradation of water
and land resources in river basins, which threatens
energy provision, could potentially be reversed through
protection and restoration initiatives, providing resilience
for increased climate variability and extreme events
(Section 9.3).

In terms of manufactured goods,
considerable achievements have
been made in the design and
formulation of products specifically
aimed at reducing the water and
energy content or consumption of
products and appliances
The economic value of ecosystems for downstream
water users is formally recognized and monetized in
PES schemes. These provide farmers with payments or
green water credits from downstream water users for
good management practices that support and regulate
ecosystem services, thereby conserving water and
increasing its availability and quality. In the Sarapiqui
watershed in Costa Rica, upstream landowners are
paid by a hydropower company for forest management

Natural infrastructure: Wetlands and hydropower in Rwanda
Rwanda presents a good example of how natural infrastructure (healthy wetlands) can complement and support built
infrastructure (hydropower generation). In the mid-2000s, ‘Rwanda experienced an electricity supply crisis that adversely
affected its development prospects. This crisis was spurred in large measure by a steep decline in generation capacity at
Ntaruka hydropower station which, along with the downstream Mukungwa station, provided 90 percent of the country’s
electricity’. The combined annual power production from Ntaruka and Mukungwa stations was around 120 GWh in 1998
and only 23 GWh (19%) in 2007. ‘Ntaruka’s reduced electricity generation was attributed to a significant drop in the depth
of Lake Bulera, which acts as the station’s reservoir. This decline in water levels in turn was precipitated by a combination of
factors, including: poor management of the upstream Rugezi Wetlands, the headwaters of the watershed; degradation of
the surrounding Rugezi-Bulera-Ruhondo watershed due to human activity; poor maintenance of the station; and reduced
precipitation in recent years’. In response, ‘the Government of Rwanda sought to restore the degraded Rugezi-BuleraRuhondo watershed by halting on-going drainage activities in the Rugezi Wetlands and banning agricultural and pastoral
activities within and along its shores, as well as along the shores of Lakes Bulera and Ruhondo’. To compensate the local
population for the subsequent reduction in access to key resources, which adversely affected livelihoods, ‘the Government
implemented a suite of agricultural and watershed management measures ... These measures included the construction
of erosion control structures; the establishment of a belt of bamboo and Pennisetum grasses around the Rugezi Wetlands;
planting of trees on the surrounding hillsides; distribution of improved cookstoves; the promotion of integrated and
environmentally sound farming practices; and promotion of income-generating activities such as beekeeping. Today, through
protection of the watershed surrounding the Ntaruka hydropower station, the plant has returned to full operational capacity’.
Source: UNEP, from Hove et al. (2011, pp. 1–2).

WWDR 2014

RESPONSES IN PRACTICE

113

and restoration. The payment is based on the benefits
generated from more reliable stream flow for hydropower
optimization and the avoided costs of reservoir dredging
due to reduced siltation.
In response to frequent severe flooding in the Magdalena
River basin, the Government of Colombia has given
central importance to an ecosystem-based approach
to regulating planning and development to make sure
that future economic activity in the river basin (which
produces 86% of the country’s GDP) – especially
hydropower and agriculture – is compatible with its water
resources (Section 9.3.3).
Sustainable dam management aims to design new and
regulate existing structures with a view towards mitigating
their impacts on natural ecosystems and society. The need
for new dams can be reduced by retrofitting existing dams
with power generation installations, and their operational
efficiency can be enhanced by better integration of natural
infrastructure in catchments. In the Rhine basin, the
historical impact of extensive river modification is being
partially mitigated by ‘re-naturalization’ efforts such as the
restoration of spawning and juvenile habitats for salmon
(ICPR, 2010).

significantly impact other potential users (Sections 3.3.3,
6.2 and 9.2.1, as well as Chapters 10, 11, 13 and 14 for
regional aspects). Multipurpose projects often include
cross-subsidy from hydropower sales to irrigation
and domestic consumption. In transboundary water
management, the possibility of sharing power produced
by multipurpose projects can be a common benefit that
enables cooperation.
As Africa has not yet tapped in to its rich potential for
hydropower development to a substantial degree (Chapter
14), water and energy policy-makers there have the ability
to learn from the positive as well as negative aspects of
hydropower implementation practices that nations in
Europe, North America and elsewhere have undergone
and where some countries with rapidly emerging
economies appear to be heading. It can do so by using the
rich experience that has been developed over the years,
including existing sustainability frameworks and best
practices.
However, hydropower development will not be easy. The
IEA cautioned in its World Energy Outlook 2012:
Several challenges threaten the development of
hydropower in Africa, particularly the availability of

In the area of land management, conservation and
remediation measures to avoid land degradation can lead
to savings in water and energy consumption. Managing
for multiple uses can reduce pressure on water resources
by increasing water productivity; for example, when
irrigation canals, downstream of a hydropower dam, are
used for aquaculture or when household grey water from
washing is reused on vegetable plots.

16.5 Power generation

With the exception of evaporative losses, hydropower
generation is essentially a non-consumptive use of water,
though the abstraction, storage and return of water can

funding. Political and market risks, as well as local
environmental considerations are barriers to securing the
large initial investments required. However, opportunities
for funding are enhanced by several international
programmes, including the Clean Development
Mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol and a recent G20
initiative promoting investment in developing countries,
which identified the Grand Inga project on the Congo
River as a possible candidate for funding. Africa’s energy
needs are huge: 590 million of its people [57%] still lack
access to electricity. Hydropower, both large and small
scale, is an abundant source of clean energy that can make
a major contribution to providing energy for all (IEA,
2012a, p. 226).

Thermal power generation
development involves the
increasing potential for serious
conflict between power, other
water users and environmental
considerations
114

CHAPTER 16

Other options for power generation present their own
challenges. Thermal power generation development
involves the increasing potential for serious conflict
between power, other water users and environmental
considerations. These trade-offs can sometimes be reduced
by technological advances, but these may carry trade-offs
of their own (Sections 3.3.1, 3.4, 5.1). Many new thermal
power stations, especially in arid regions, incorporate
cooling processes that minimize the abstraction of water.

RESPONSES: FOSTERING SYNERGIES AND MANAGING TRADE-OFFS

Closed-loop (or wet recirculating with cooling tower)
systems typically have high rates of consumptive water
use and carry a heavy energy penalty, either in the direct
input of energy to the process or in reduced power output.
For these and other reasons, these processes tend to be
costly. Dry cooling is resistant to drought, but power plant
efficiency can decrease in warmer and drier climates,
compromising their potential cost-effectiveness in many
parts of the world. However, both systems allow more
flexibility in the location of power plants, which can be sited
with more consideration to other potential water users.
Heat generated in thermal power plants, which has to be
dissipated with large volumes of cooling water, can be
tapped for other purposes – for example in multi-stage
flash distillation at desalination plants – with savings in
both energy and water abstraction. This has implications
in selecting the most appropriate locations for power and
desalination plants. Some integrated hybrid desalination
plants in the Middle East successfully combine power
and water production in the same facility (Section 5.2.1).
A variant of this is the use of solar-powered desalination
processes (Box 12.2).
Alternative sources of water can be sought for power
station cooling. Seawater is an option for coastal plants.
Another option in response to the problem of obtaining
large volumes of cooling water in arid regions is
wastewater, used in 50 power plants in the USA including
the Palo Verde nuclear power station (Section 5.2.2).
CHP stations seek the synergies from co-production
of heat and power to directly serve neighbourhoods.
Although management of the plants to meet the two
different demands for heat and power can be challenging,
CHP plans have off-setting advantages. In Denmark,
CHP plants produce 50% of the total power generated
(Section 5.2.3).

WWDR 2014

Support for the development
of renewable energy will
need to increase dramatically
in comparison to support for
fossil fuels in order to make
a significant change in the
global energy mix and, and by
association, to water demand

From a water perspective, power generated from solar
PV and wind is clearly the most sustainable choice
(3.3.4). However, their intermittent service needs to
be compensated for by other sources of power (which
do require water) in order to maintain load balances.
Another renewable energy resource, geothermal power,
holds enormous potential in certain locations where the
geological conditions are suitable (Section 3.3.5). Global
fossil fuel consumption subsidies totalled US$523 billion
in 2011, which was almost 30% higher than in 2010
(IEA, 2012a). Financial support for renewable energy, by
comparison, amounted to only $88 billion in 2011, and
increased by another 24% in 2012 – mainly due to the
expansion of solar PV in the EU (IEA, 2012a). Although
this progress is encouraging, support for the development
of renewable energy will need to increase dramatically in
comparison to support for fossil fuels in order to make a
significant change in the global energy mix and, and by
association, to water demand.

RESPONSES IN PRACTICE

115

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2013. Asian Development Outlook 2013: Asia’s Energy Challenge. Manila, ADB.
Adelman, J. 2012. China, India lack water for coal power plans, GE Director says. BusinessWeek, Bloomberg News, 8 June.
Aguas Andinas. n.d. Aguas Andinas y Metrogas inauguran planta de Biogás. Press release. Antilco, Chile, Aguas Andinas.
http://www.aguasandinas.cl/la-empresa/novedades/aguas-andinas-y-metrogas-inauguran-planta-de-biogas?CodTempla
te=20120213120706 (Accessed Oct 2013)
AICD (African Infrastructure Country Diagnostic study partnership). 2012. Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
Allen, L., Cohen, M.J., Abelson, D. and Miller, B. 2012. Fossil fuel and water quality. P.H. Gleick (ed.), The World’s Water.
Oakland, CA, Pacific Institute/Island Press, ch. 7.
Aqua-Media International Ltd. 2012. World Atlas Industry Guide 2012. Surrey, UK, International Journal on Hydropower and
Dams. http://www.hydropower-dams.com/world-atlas-industry-guide.php?c_id=159
Arthur, J.D., Bohm, B. and Layne, M. 2008. Hydraulic Fracturing Considerations for Natural Gas Wells of the Marcellus Shale.
Paper presented at the Ground Water Protection Council 2008 Annual Forum, Cincinnati, OH, 21–24 September 2008.
Averyt, K., Fisher, J., Huber-Lee, A., Lewis, A., Macknick, J., Madden, N., Rogers, J. and Tellinghuisen, S. 2011. Freshwater
Use by US Power Plants: Electricity’s Thirst for a Precious Resource. A Report of the Energy and Water in a Warming World
Initiative. Cambridge, MA, Union of Concerned Scientists.

B

Banerjee, S.G., Bhatia, M., Azuela, G.E., Jaques, I., Sarkar, A., Portale, E., Bushueva, I., Angelou, N. and Inon, J.G. 2013. Global
tracking framework. Global Tracking Framework, Vol. 3. Sustainable Energy for All. Washington DC, The World Bank. http://
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/05/17765643/global-tracking-framework-vol-3-3-main-report
Bauer, C.J. 2009. Dams and markets: Rivers and electric power in Chile. Natural Resources Journal, 49 (Summer-Fall): 583–651.
Beal, C.M., Hebner, R.E., Webber, M.E., Ruoff, R.S., Seibert, F. and King, C.W. 2012. Comprehensive evaluation of algal biofuel
production: Experimental and target results. Energies (Special Issue: Algal Fuel), doi:10.3390/en5061943
Bennett, G., Carol, N. and Hamilton, K. 2013. Charting New Waters: State of Watershed Payments 2012. Washington DC,
Forest-Trends Eco System Market Place. http://www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_3308.pdf
Bergkamp, G., Orlando, B. and Burton, I. 2003. Change: Adaptation of Water Resources Management to Climate Change.
Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK, International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Berndes, G. 2002. Bioenergy and water: The implications of large-scale bioenergy production for water use and supply.
Global Environmental Change, 12(4): 253–271.
Bertani, R. 2012. Geothermal Power Generation in the World, 2005–2010 Update Report. Geothermics, 41: 1–29.
Biggs, S. and Justice, S. 2011. Rural Development and Energy Policy: Lessons from Agricultural Mechanization in South Asia.
ORF Occasional Paper No. 19, New Delhi, Observer Research Foundation.
http://www.observerindia.com/cms/export/orfonline/modules/occasionalpaper/attachments/occ_rural_1296292421217.pdf
Blackwell, D., Richards, M., Frone, Z., Batir, J., Ruzo, A., Dingwall, R. and Williams, M. 2011. Temperature at depth maps for
the conterminous US and geothermal resource estimates. Transactions, 2011. Davis, CA, Geothermal Resources Council
(GRC).
Bloomberg. 2012. Moving towards a next generation ethanol economy. Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
http://about.bnef.com/white-papers/moving-towards-a-next-generation-ethanol-economy-report/
——. 2013. China’s power utilities in hot water. Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
http://about.bnef.com/files/2013/03/BNEF_ExecSum_2013-03-25_China-power-utilities-in-hot-water.pdf
Boberg, J. 2005. Liquid Assets. Santa Monica, CA, RAND Corporation.

116

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Boelee, E., Chiramba, T. and Khaka, E. (eds) 2011. An Ecosystem Services Approach to Water and Food Security.
Nairobi/Colombo, UNEP/International Water Management Institute (IWMI).

C

CBS (Central Bureau of Statistics). 2012. National Census 2011. Kathmandu, CBS, National Planning Commission,
Government of Nepal.
CEPAL (Comisiόn Econόmica para América Latina y el Caribe). 2011. Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource
Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Circular No. 33, February 2011.
http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/circulares/2/42122/Carta33in.pdf
CESD (Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development). 2010. 2010 Fall Report of the Commissioner of the
Environment and Sustainable Development. Ottowa, Office of the Auditor General of Canada.
Chapagain, A.K. and Hoekstra, A.Y. 2004. Water Footprints of Nations. Value of Water Research Report Series No. 16.
Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE.
Chilton, J. 2002. Groundwater. D. Chapman (ed.), Water Quality Assessments: A Guide to Use of Biota, Sediments and Water in
Environmental Monitoring, 2nd edn. London, E&FN Spon for UNESCO/WHO/UNEP, ch. 9.
Chong, V.C. 2006. Sustainable utilization and management of mangrove ecosystems of Malaysia. Aquatic Ecosystem Health &
Management, doi:10.1080/14634980600717084
Clark, C.E., Harto, C.B., Sullivan, J.L. and Wang, M.Q. 2010. Water Use in the Development and Operation of Geothermal Power
Plants. Argonne, IL, Argonne National Laboratories Environmental Science Division for the US Department of Energy.
Climate Investment Funds. 2013. Indonesia Focuses on Renewable Energy. Washington DC, Climate Investment Funds,
The World Bank Group. https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/node/3344
Coleby, A.M., van der Horst, D., Hubacek, K., Goodier, C., Burgess, P.J., Graves, A., Lord, R. and Howard, D. 2012.
Environmental Impact Assessment, ecosystems services and the case of energy crops in England. Journal of Environmental
Planning and Management, doi:10.1080/09640568.2011.603958
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water Management Institute
(IWMI).
Cooley, H. and Donnelly, K. 2012. Hydraulic Fracturing and Water Resources: Separating the Frack from the Fiction.
Oakland, CA, Pacific Institute. http://www.pacinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/full_report35.pdf
Cooley, H., Fulton, J. and Gleick, P.H. 2011. Water for Energy: Future Water Needs for Electricity in the Intermountain West.
Oakland, CA, Pacific Institute. http://www.pacinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/water_for_energy3.pdf
Cosgrove-Davies, M. 2006. Energy Access in Sub-Saharan Africa – A World Bank Action Plan: Programme Of Action For The
Least Developed Countries (2001–2010). Presentation, Geneva, 18–19 July 2006. Africa Energy Unit, The World Bank.
http://www.unohrlls.org/UserFiles/File/LDC%20Documents/Workshop/worldbank2006.pdf
Cotula, L., Dyer, N. and Vermeulen, S. 2008. Fuelling Exclusion? The Biofuels Boom and Poor People’s Access to Land. London,
FAO/International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
CPHEEO (Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization). 1999. Manual on Water Supply and Treatment.
New Delhi, CPHEEO Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India.
CWF (Canada West Foundation). 2011. Water, Water Use and Water Pricing Around the World. Canadian Water Policy
Backgrounder No. 8, September 2011. Calgary, Alberta, CWF.
http://cwf.ca/pdf-docs/publications/Water_Backgrounder_8_Sept_2011.pdf
Daigger, G.T. 2009. Evolving urban water and residuals management paradigms: Water reclamation and reuse, decentralization,
resource recovery. Water Environment Research, 81(8): 809–823.

WWDR 2014

CHAPTER TITLE

117

D

Daley, B. 2011. Agreement to cut power plant discharge, send steam heat to Boston. Boston Globe, 2 February.
http://www.boston.com/news/science/articles/2011/02/02/power_plant_plan_to_cut_discharge_send_heat_to_boston/?page=1
de Fraiture, C., Giordano, M. and Liao, Y. 2008. Biofuels and implications for agricultural water use: Blue impacts of green
energy. Water Policy, 10 (Suppl. 1): 67–81.
Degrémont. n.d. La Farfana, Chile. Web page.
http://www.degremont.com/en/activities/references/references/?reference_id=51 (Accessed Oct 2013)
Delgado, A. 2012. Water footprint of electric power generation: Modeling its use and analyzing options for a water-scarce
future. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Dillon, P. 2005. Future management of aquifer recharge. Hydrogeology Journal, 13: 313–316.
Dourojeanni, A. and Jouravlev, A. 1999. El Código de Aguas de Chile: entre la ideología y la realidad. Serie Recursos Naturales e
Infraestructura 3. LC/L.1263-P. Santiago, UNECLAC.
Durack, P.J., Wijffels, S.E. and Matear, R.J. 2012. Ocean salinities reveal strong global water cycle intensification during 1950 to
2000. Science 336(6080): 455–458.

E

EC (European Commission). 2012a. Pearson, I., Zeniewski, P., Gracceva, F., Zastera, P., McGlade, C., Sorrell, S., Speirs, J. and
Thonhauser, G. Unconventional Gas: Potential Energy Market Impacts in the European Union. Luxembourg,
European Commission, JRC Scientific and Policy Reports.
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/jrc/downloads/jrc_report_2012_09_unconventional_gas.pdf
——. 2012b. Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health Arising from Hydrocarbon
Operations Involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe. Didcot, UK, European Commission, DG Environment.
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf
——. 2012c. Communications from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A Blueprint to Safeguard Europe’s Water Resources.
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:52012DC0673:EN:NOT
ECA-Watch/Euronatur. 2012. Balkan Rivers: The Blue Heart of Europe: Hydromorphological Status and Dam Projects. Vienna,
ECA-Watch Austria/Euronatur. http://www.euronatur.org/fileadmin/docs/projekte/Balkan_Rivers_Blaues_Herz_Europa/
BalkanRiverAssessment29032012web.pdf
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2009. Water Resources Across Europe: Confronting Water Scarcity and Drought.
EEA Report 2/2009. Copenhagen, EEA.
Emerton, L. and Bos, E. 2004. VALUE: Counting Ecosystems as Water Infrastructure. Gland, Switzerland, International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
EPRI (Electric Power Research Institute). 2010. Electric Energy Storage Technology Options: A White Paper Primer on
Applications, Costs, and Benefits. Palo Alto, CA, EPRI.
Ercin, A.E. and Hoekstra, A.Y. 2012. Carbon and Water Footprints: Concepts, Methodologies and Policy Responses. WWDR4
Side Publication Series 04. Paris, World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), UNESCO.
EU (European Union). 2012. Confronting Scarcity: Managing Water, Energy and Land for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth.
Overseas Development Institute (ODI)/European Centre for Development Policy Management (ECDPM)/German
Development Institute-Deutsches Institut für Entwicklungspolitik (GDI/DIE).
European Biofuels Technology Platform. 2009. Global Biofuels: An Overview.
http://www.biofuelstp.eu/global_overview.html
Eurostat. 2010. Eurostat database. Brussels, European Commission.
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/environment/data/main_tables
Evans, A., Strezov, V. and Evans, T.J. 2009. Assessment of sustainability indicators for renewable energy technologies.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(5): 1082–1088.

F

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2008. The State of Food and Agriculture 2008 – Biofuels:
Prospects, Risks and Opportunities. Rome, FAO. ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/i0100e/i0100e.pdf
——. 2009a. Feeding the World in 2050. World Summit on Food Security, Rome, 16–18 November 2009. Rome, FAO.
——. 2009b. Climate Change Implications for Fisheries and Aquaculture: Overview of Current Scientific Knowledge.
FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper 530. Rome, FAO.
——. 2011a. The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources: Managing Systems at Risk. London/Rome, Earthscan/FAO.
——. 2011b. ‘Energy-Smart’ Food for People and Climate. Issue paper. Rome, FAO.
http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2454e/i2454e00.pdf

118

BIBLIOGRAPHY

——. 2011c. Price Volatility and Food Security: A Report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition.
Rome, Committee on World Food Security, FAO.
——. 2011d. Save and Grow: A Policy Maker’s Guide to the Sustainable Intensification of Smallholder Crop Production.
Rome, Plant Production and Protection Division, FAO.
——. 2011e. FAO Irrigation in Southern and Eastern Asia in Figures: AQUASTAT Survey – 2011. K. Frenken (ed.),
FAO Water Reports 37. Rome, FAO.
——. 2012. World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050: The 2012 Revision. N. Alexandratos and J. Bruinsma, ESA Working paper
No. 12-03. Rome, FAO.
——. 2013a. FAO World Hunger Map. Rome, FAO.
http://faostat.fao.org/site/563/default.aspx
——. 2013b. Scenario Thinking to Enhance Water Cooperation in the Aral Sea Basin. Special event at the High-Level
International Conference on Water Cooperation, Dushanbe, 20–21 August 2013.
——. n.d. AQUASTAT database. Rome, FAO.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/water_use/index.stm (Accessed Jan 2013)
FAO/LIPHE4. 2013. Application of an Integrated Approach: Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Societal and Ecosystem Metabolism.
Rome, FAO.
Fargione, J., Hill, J., Tilman, D., Polasky, S. and Hawthorne, P. 2008. Land clearing and the biofuel carbon debt. Science,
doi:10.1126/science.1152747
Fernández, D. 2009. Sustentabilidad financiera y responsabilidad social de los servicios de agua potable y saneamiento en
América Latina. D. Fernández, A. Jouravlev, E. Lentini and A. Yurquina. Contabilidad regulatoria, sustentabilidad financiera y
gestión mancomunada: temas relevantes en servicios de agua y saneamiento. LC/L.3098-P. Santiago, UNECLAC.
Ferro, G. and Lentini, E. 2013. Politicas tarifarias para el logro de los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio (odm): situacion actual
y tendencias regionales recientes. LC/W.519. Santiago, UNECLAC.
Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/BNEF. 2013. Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment 2013. Frankfurt, Germany,
UNEP/Bloomberg.
Fridleifsson, I.B. 2012. Geothermal energy and the Millennium Development Goals. P. de Oliveira (ed.), Green Economy and
Good Governance for Sustainable Development: Opportunities, Promises and Concerns. Tokyo, United Nations University
Press, pp. 160–180.
Fridleifsson, I.B., Bertani, R., Huenges, E., Lund, J.W., Ragnarsson, A. and Rybach, L. 2008. The possible role and contribution
of geothermal energy to the mitigation of climate change. O. Hohmeyer and T. Trittin (eds), Proceedings of the IPCC Scoping
Meeting on Renewable Energy Sources. Luebeck, Germany, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Working
Group III, pp. 59–80.
Friotherm. 2012. Dalian-Xinghai: Environment-friendly heating and cooling for a business district in China, with 3 Unitop®
33/28 units. http://www.friotherm.com/webautor-data/41/xinghai_e013_uk.pdf

G

Garduno, H., Romani, S., Sengupta, B., Tuinhof, A. and Davis, R. 2011. India: Groundwater Governance Case Study. Water
papers 71727 June 2011. Washington DC, The World Bank.
GEA (Global Energy Assessment). 2012. Global Energy Assessment: Toward a Sustainable Future. Vienna/Cambridge,
UK and New York, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)/Cambridge University Press.
Gerbens-Leenes, W., Hoekstra, A.Y. and Van der Meer, T.H. 2009. The water footprint of bioenergy. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106(25): 10 219–10 223.
Glassman, D., Wucker, M., Isaacman, T. and Champilou, C. 2011. The Water-Energy Nexus: Adding Water to the Energy Agenda.
World Policy Papers. New York/Zurich, Switzerland, World Policy Institute (WPI)/EBG Capital.
Gleeson, T., Wada, Y., Bierkens, M.F.P. and van Beek, L.P.H. 2012. Water balance of global aquifers revealed by groundwater
footprint. Nature, doi:10.1038/nature11295
Gleick, P.H. and Palaniappan, M. 2010. Peak Water: Conceptual and practical limits to freshwater withdrawal and use.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(25): 11 155–11 162.
Goldman Sachs. 2005. Water: Pure, Refreshing Defensive Growth. New York, Goldman Sachs.
——. 2008. The Essentials of Investing in the Water Sector, version 2.0. New York, Goldman Sachs.
http://www.excelwater.com/2008-goldman-sachs-water-primer.pdf

WWDR 2014

119

Granit, J., Jägerskog, A., Lindström, A., Björklund, G., Bullock, A., Löfgren, R., de Gooijer, G. and Pettigrew, S. 2012.
Regional options for addressing the water, energy and food nexus in Central Asia and the Aral Sea Basin. Water Resources
Development, 28(3): 419–432.
Groom, M.J., Gray, E.M. and Townsend, P.A. 2008. Biofuels and biodiversity: Principles for creating better policies for biofuel
production. Conservation Biology, doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.2007.00879.x
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2013. Global Water Market 2014. Oxford, UK, GWI.

H

Haluszczak, L.O., Rose, A.W. and Kump, L.R. 2013. Geochemical evaluation of flowback brine from Marcellus gas well in
Pennsylvania, USA. Applied Geochemistry, 28: 55–61.
Hanson, C. et al. 2008. The Corporate Ecosystem Services Review: Guidelines for Identifying Business Risks and Opportunities
Arising From Ecosystem Change. Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI).
Hardy, L., Garrido, A. and Juana, L. 2012. Evaluation of Spain’s water-energy Nexus. Water Resources Development, 28(1):
151–170.
Herath, I., Deurer, M., Horne, D., Singh, R. and Clothier, B. 2011. The water footprint of hydroelectricity: A methodological
comparison from a case study in New Zealand. Journal of Cleaner Production, 19(14): 1582–1589.
Hoekstra, A.Y. and Chapagain, A.K. 2007. Water footprints of nations: Water use by people as a function of their consumption
pattern. Water Resources Management, doi:10.1007/s11269-006-9039-x
——. 2008. Globalization of Water: Sharing the Planet’s Freshwater Resources. Hoboken, NJ, Wiley-Blackwell.
Hoff, H. 2011. Understanding the Nexus. Background Paper for the Bonn2011 Nexus Conference: The Water, Energy and Food
Security Nexus. Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).
Hoogeveen, J., Faurès, J-M. and van de Giessen, N. 2009. Increased biofuel production in the coming decade: To what extent
will it affect global freshwater resources? Irrigation and Drainage, doi:10.1002/ird.479
Hove, H., Parry, J-E. and Lujara, N. 2011. Maintenance of Hydropower Potential in Rwanda through Ecosystem Restoration.
World Resources Report Case Study. Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI).
Howarth, R., Ingraffea, A. and Engelder, T. 2011. Natural gas: Should fracking stop? Nature, doi:10.1038/477271a
Howells, M., Hermann, S., Welsch, M., Bazilian, M., Segerström, R., Alfstad, T., Gielen, D., Rogner, H., Fischer, G., van
Velthuizen, H., Wiberg, D., Young, C., Roehrl, R.A., Mueller, A., Steduto, P. and Ramma. I. 2013. Integrated analysis of
climate change, land-use, energy and water strategies. Nature Climate Change, 3: 621–626.
Huffaker, R. 2010. Protecting water resources in biofuels production. Water Policy, doi:10.2166/wp.2009.113
Huffaker, R., Whittlesey, N. and Wandschneider, P. 1993. Institutional feasibility of contingent water marketing to increase
migratory flows for salmon on the Upper Snake River. Natural Resources Journal, 33 (Summer 1993): 671–696.
Hussey, K., Carter, N. and Reinhardt, W. 2013. Energy sector transformation: Implications for water governance. Australian
Journal of Water Resources, 17(2): 170.
Hydro-Québec. 2006. Plan stratégique 2006–2010. Montreal, Hydro-Québec.

I

ICOLD (International Commission on Large Dams). 2013. World Register of Dams. Paris, ICOLD.
ICPR (International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine). 2010. Master Plan Migratory Fish Rhine. Report No. 179.
Koblenz, Germany, ICPR.
IDA (International Delsalination Association). n.d. Desalination Overview.
http://www.idadesal.org/desalination-101/desalination-overview/ (Accessed Oct 2013)
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2004. Energy Statistics Manual. Paris, IEA/OECD/Eurostat.
——. 2008a. Combined Heat and Power: Evaluating the Benefits of Greater Global Investments. Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2008b. World Energy Outlook 2008. Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2010. World Energy Outlook 2010. Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2011a. World Energy Outlook 2011. Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2011b. Energy for All: Financing Access for the Poor. Special early excerpt of the WEO World Energy Outlook 2011.
Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2012a. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris, OECD/IEA.
——. 2012b. Technology Roadmap: Hydropower. Paris, OECD/IEA.

120

BIBLIOGRAPHY

——. 2012c. Key World Energy Statistics 2012. Paris, OECD/IEA. http://www.iea.org/stats/index.asp
——. 2012d. Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas. World Energy Outlook Special Report on Unconventional Gas. Paris, OECD/
IEA. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/goldenrules/WEO2012_GoldenRulesReport.pdf
——. 2013. Statistics search. Web page. Paris, OECD/IEA. http://www.iea.org/statistics/statisticssearch
IEA-EC (Executive Committee of the International Energy Agency). n.d. Hydropower: A Key to Prosperity in the Growing
World. Paris, OECD/IEA in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation, US Department of the Interior.
http://www.ieahydro.org/reports/hydbroch.pdf (Accessed Jun 2013)
IIASA (International Institute for Advanced Systems Analysis). 2009. Biofuels and Food Security: Implications for an Accelerated
Biofuels Production. Schlossplatz, Austria, IIASA. http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/LUC/Homepage-News-Highlights/OFID_
IIASAPam_38_bio.pdf
Indrayuda, R. 2005. Indonesia’s Coal Policy Toward 2020: Prospect and Implementation. Paper presented at the APEC Clean
Fossil Energy Technical and Policy Seminar, Cebu City, Philippines, 26–29 January 2005.
InfraInsights. 2013. After Coal, Water to Hit India’s Power Sector: Is there Enough Water to Fuel India’s Power Expansion?
http://www.infrainsights.com/home/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=152%3Aafter-coal-water-to-hitindias-power-sector-is-there-enough-water-to-fuel-indias-power-expansion&catid=44%3Afeatured-articles&Itemid=27
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper VI. B.C. Bates, Z.W.
Kundzewicz, S. Wu and J.P. Palutikof (eds). Geneva, IPCC Secretariat.
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/technical-papers/climate-change-water-en.pdf
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency). 2012a. Water Desalination Using Renewable Energy. IRENA and and IEAETSAP (International Energy Agency Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme) Technology Brief I12. Abu Dhabi,
IRENA.
——. 2012b. Hydropower. Renewable Energy Technologies: Cost Analysis Series Volume 1: Power Sector. IRENA Working Paper
Issue 3/5. Abu Dhabi, IRENA.
——. 2013. Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2012: An Overview. Abu Dhabi, IRENA.
ISRIC (International Soil Reference and Information Centre). 2007. Green Water Credits. Wageningen, The Netherlands, ISRIC.
IWMI (International Water Management Institute). 2011. Innovative electricity scheme sparks rural development in India’s
Gujarat State. Nourishing the Planet. WorldWatch Institute.
http://blogs.worldwatch.org/nourishingtheplanet/innovative-electricity-scheme-sparks-rural-development-inindia%E2%80%99s-gujarat-state/

J

Jacobsen, M., Webster, M. and Vairayamoorthy, K. 2013. The Future of Water in African Cities, Why Waste Water? Directions in
Development. Washington DC, The World Bank. http://water.worldbank.org/node/84190
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Services on the Threshold of the XXI century. Serie Recursos Naturales
e Infraestructura. LC/L.2169-P. Santiago, UNECLAC.
JPMorgan. 2008. Watching Water. Global Equity Research. New York, JPMorgan.
http://pdf.wri.org/jpmorgan_watching_water.pdf

K

KACST (King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology). 2012. The Supervisory Committee of King Abdullah Imitative [sic]
for Water Desalination Using Solar Energy Holds its First Meeting. Press Release.
http://www.kacst.edu.sa/en/about/media/news/Pages/news168.aspx (Accessed Dec 2012)
Karimova, A., Smakhtin, V., Mavlonovc, A. and Grachevac, I. 2010. Water ‘banking’ in Fergana valley aquifers: A solution to
water allocation in the Syrdarya river basin? Agricultural Water Management, 97(2010): 1461–1468.
Kenny, J.F., Barber, N.L., Hutson, S.S., Linsey, K.S., Loveland, J.K. and Maupin, M.A. 2009. Estimated Use of Water in the United
States in 2005. USGS Circular 1344. Reston, VA, United States Geological Survey (USGS).
Keys, P., Barron, J. and Lannerstad, M. 2012. Releasing the Pressure: Water Resource Efficiencies and Gains for Ecosystem Services.
Nairobi/Stockholm, UNEP/Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).
Komarudin, H., Obidzinski, K. and Andrianto, A. 2010. Biofuel Development in Indonesia: Progress and Challenges. Bogor,
Indonesia, Center for International Forestry, Forests and Governance Programme (CIFOR).
Komives, K., Foster, V. Halpern, J. and Wodon, Q. 2005. Water, Electricity and the Poor: Who Benefits from Utility Subsidies?
Directions in Development. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Krchnak, K., Smith, M. and Deutz, A. 2011. Putting Nature in the Nexus: Investing in Natural Infrastructure to Advance WaterEnergy-Food Security. Paper presented at the Bonn2011 Conference: The Water, Energy and Food Security Nexus – Solutions
for the Green Economy, Background Papers for the Stakeholder Engagement Process. Gland, Switzerland/Arlington, VA,
International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN)/The Nature Conservancy (TNC).

WWDR 2014

121

Ku, A.Y. and Shapiro, A.P. 2012. The energy–water nexus: Water use trends in sustainable energy and opportunities for
materials research and development. Materials Research Society Bulletin, 37(4): 439–447.
Kumar, A., Schei, T., Ahenkorah, A., Caceres Rodriguez, R., Devernay, J-M., Freitas, M., Hall, D., Killingtveit, A. and Liu,
Z. 2011. Hydropower. O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P.
Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schlomer and C. von Stechow (eds), IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate
Change Mitigation. Cambridge, UK and New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 437–496.
Larson, C. 2010. Growing shortages of water threaten China’s development. Yale Environment 360, 26 July.

L

——. 2012. China’s looming conflict between energy and water. Yale Environment 360, 30 April.
LAS (League of Arab States). 2011. Arab Strategy for Water Security in the Arab Region to Meet the Challenges and Future Needs
for Sustainable Development 2010–2030. Cairo, Arab Ministerial Water Council, LAS.
Lazarova, V., Choo, K. and Cornel, P. (eds). 2012. Water-Energy Interactions in Water Reuse. London, IWA Publishing.
Leahy, S. 2013. Green Approaches to Water Gaining Ground Around the World. Inter Press Service.
http://www.ipsnews.net/2013/01/green-approaches-to-water-gaining-ground-around-world/
Lentini, E. 2008. Servicios de agua ppotable y saneamiento: lecciones de experiencias relevantes. Santiago, UNECLAC.
Lutz, B.D., Lewis, A.N. and Doyle, M.W. 2013. Generation, transport, and disposal of wastewater associated with Marcellus
Shale gas development. Water Resources Research, doi:10.1002/wrcr.20096

M

Maas, C. 2009. Greenhouse Gas and Energy Co-benefits of Water Conservation. POLIS Research Report 09-01, POLIS Project on
Ecological Governance Water Sustainability Project. Brussels, POLIS.
Macintosh, D.J. and Ashton, E.C. 2002. A Review of Mangrove Biodiversity Conservation and Management. Aarhus, Denmark,
Centre for Tropical Ecosystems Research, University of Aarhus.
Mantopi, L. and Huba, E.M. 2011. Biogas systems in Lesotho: An effective way to generate energy while sanitizing wastewater.
Sustainable Sanitation Practice, 9, 10. EcoSan Club.
http://www.ecosan.at/ssp/issue-09-biogas-systems/SSP-09_Okt2011_10-17.pdf/view
Margulis, S. and Schmidt Dubeux, C.B. 2011. The Economics of Climate Change in Brazil: Costs and Opportunities. São Paulo,
Brazil, School of Economics, Business Administration and Accountancy, University of São Paulo [English]/Núcleo de
Economia Regional y Urbana de Universidade de São Paulo [Original].
Marmulla, G. (ed.). 2001. Dams, Fish and Fisheries. Opportunities, Challenges and Conflict Resolution. FAO Fisheries Technical
Paper No. 419. Rome, FAO.
Masdar. n.d. Website. http://www.masdar.ae (Accessed Dec 2012)
McCartney, M. 2007. Decision Support Systems for Large Dam Planning and Operation in Africa. IWMI Working Paper 119.
Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
McCartney, M., Cai, X. and Smakhtin, V. 2013. Evaluating the Flow Regulating Functions of Natural Ecosystems in the Zambezi
River Basin. IWMI Research Report No. 148. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
McKinsey & Company. 2009a. Water as a scare resource: An interview with Nestlé’s Chairman. McKinsey Quarterly, December.
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/Water_as_a_scarce_resource_An_interview_with_Nestles_chairman_2482
——. 2009b. The business opportunity in water conservation. McKinsey Quarterly, December.
http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/The_business_opportunity_in_water_conservation_2483
——. 2012. Manufacturing the future: The next era of global growth and innovation. McKinsey Quarterly, November.
MEA (Millenium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis. Washington DC, Island Press.
Mejía, A. and Rais, J. 2011. La infraestructura en el desarrollo integral de América Latina: diagnóstico estratégico y propuestas
para una agenda prioritaria. Bogotá, Gatos Gamelas Comunicacion/Corporacion Andina de Fomento.
Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. 2003. Wastewater Engineering Treatment and Reuse. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Moazami, N. 2013. What can we do with 10 hectares of microalgae. Video. Teheran, TEDx.
http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video/What-Can-We-Do-with-10-Hectares
Molle, F. and Berkoff, J. (eds). 2008. Irrigation Water Pricing: The Gap Between Theory and Practice. Wallingford, UK, CAB
International.
Montoya, A. 2009. Maximizing the Efficiency of Renewable Energy. Paris, Alstom.

122

BIBLIOGRAPHY

MRC (Mekong River Commission). 2009. Inception Report: MRC SEA for Hydropower on the Mekong Mainstream. Kathmandu,
International Center for Environmental Management.
http://www.mrcmekong.org/assets/Publications/Consultations/SEA-Hydropower/IRVOL2final.pdf
——. 2011. Main Report: Assessment of Basin-wide Development Scenarios. Kathmandu, MRC.
Muir, J.F. 2010. Fuel and Energy Use in the Fisheries Sector: Approaches, Inventories and Strategic Implications. Rome, FAO.
Mukherji, A., Das, B., Majumdar, N., Nayak, N.C., Sethi, R.R. and Sharma, B.R. 2009. Metering of agricultural power supply in
West Bengal, India: Who gains and who loses? Energy Policy, 37(12): 5530–5539.
Müller, C. 2007. Anaerobic Digestion of Biodegradable Solid Waste in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Overview Over
Existing Technologies and Relevant Case Studies. Dübendorf, Switzerland, Eawag.

N

Nakato, T., Strande, L., Niwagaba, C., Dione, H., Baawuah, N. and Murray, A. 2012. Fuel Potential of Faecal Sludge: Calorific
Value Results from Uganda, Ghana and Senegal. Paper presented at the Faecal Sludge Management Conference (FSMII) in
Durban, South Africa, 29–31 October 2012.
http://www.eawag.ch/forschung/sandec/publikationen/ewm/index_EN
Narain, S. 2012. Excreta Matters: How Urban India is Soaking up Water, Polluting Rivers and Drowning in its Own Waste. State
of India’s Environment 7, A Citizens’ Report, Vol. 1. New Delhi, Centre for Science Environment.
Narain, S. and Srinivasan R.K. 2012. Excreta Matters: How Urban India is Soaking up Water, Polluting Rivers and Drowning in
its Own Waste. State of India’s Environment 7, A Citizens’ Report, Vol. 2. New Delhi, Centre for Science Environment.
National Transport Policy Committee. 1980. Report. New Delhi, Government of India Planning Commission. As quoted in
Biswas, A. K. 1987. Inland waterways for transportation of agricultural, industrial and energy products. International Journal
of Water Resources Development, 3(1): 9–22.
Nestlé Waters. n.d. Website. http://www.nestle-waters.com/water (Accessed Jan 2013)
Newar, N. 2013. Clean Water from Cleaner Energy. Inter Press Service.
http://www.ipsnews.net/2013/01/clean-water-from-cleaner-energy/
Nicot, J.P. and Scanlon, B.R. 2012. Water use for shale-gas production in Texas, US. Environmental Science and Technology,
46: 3580–3586.
Nilsson, C., Reidy, C.A., Dynesius, M. and Revenga, C. 2005. Fragmentation and flow regulation of the world’s large river
systems. Science, 308(5720): 405–408.
Novotny, V. 2012. Water and energy link in the cities of the future: Achieving net zero carbon and pollution emissions footprint.
V. Lazarova, K. H. Choo, P. Cornel (eds), 2012: Water-Energy Interactions in Water Reuse. London, IWA Publishing.
NREA (New and Renewable Energy Authority). 2012. Concentrated Solar Power in Egypt. Ministry of Electricity and Energy.
Presentation by A. M. Elhewehy to the Joint Workshop on Lessons Learned from MENA Region Concentrated Solar Power
Initiative, Tunisia, 28 June 2012.
NYC (New York City). 2012. Water Conservation Report Annual Update July 2012. New York, New York City Department of
Environmental Protection.

O

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008. Environmental Performance of Agriculture in OECD
Countries since 2008. Paris, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/25/53/40678556.pdf
——. 2009. Strategic Financial Planning for Water Supply and Sanitation. A report from the OECD task team on sustainable
financing to ensure affordable access to water supply and sanitation. Paris, OECD.
http://www.oecd.org/env/resources/43949580.pdf
——. 2010a. Coherence Between Water and Energy Policies. ENV/EPOC/GSP(2010)21. Paris, Working Party on Global and
Structural Policies, Environment Directorate, OECD.
——. 2010b. Pricing Water Resources and Water and Sanitation Services. Paris, OECD.
——. 2010c. Innovative Finance Mechanisms for the Water Sector. Paris, OECD.
——. 2012a. OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Paris, OECD.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264122246-en
——. 2012b. Environmental Outlook to 2050: Key Findings on Water. Paris, OECD.
http://www.oecd.org/environment/indicators-modelling-outlooks/49844953.pdf
——. 2013a. Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises. OECD Factbook 2013: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics.
Paris, OECD. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/factbook-2013-21-en
——. 2013b. Making Water Reform Happen in Mexico. OECD Studies on Water. Paris, OECD.

WWDR 2014

123

OECD/FAO. 2010. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2010–2019. Paris, OECD. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_outlook-2010-en
——. 2012. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2012-2021. Paris, OECD.
OLADE (Latin American Energy Organization). 2013. Sistema de Información Económica Energética (SIEE). OLADE.
Olsson, G. 2012. Water and Energy Threats and Opportunities. London, IWA Publishing.
Onda, K., LoBuglio, J. and Bartram, J. 2012. Global access to safe water: Accounting for water quality and the resulting impact
on MDG progress. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, doi:10.3390/ijerph9030880
Opperman, J.J., Roytem J., Banks J., Dayn L.R. and Apse, C. 2011. The Penobscot River, Maine, USA: A basin-scale approach
to balancing power generation and ecosystem restoration. Perspective, part of a Special Feature on The Energy-Water Nexus.
Ecology and Society, doi:10.5751/ES-04117-160307
Orr, S., Pittock, J., Chapagain, A. and Dumaresq, D. 2012. Dams on the Mekong River: Lost fish protein and the implications
for land and water resources. Global Environmental Change, 22(4): 925–932.
Osborn, S.G., Vengosh, A., Warner, N.R. and Jackson, R.B. 2011. Methane contamination of drinking water accompanying
gas-well drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(20): 8172–8176.
Osterlin, C. 2012. A systems approach to biogas planning in Stockholm, Sweden. Master’s thesis, Stockholm University,
Stockholm.
Pagiola, S. and Platais, G. 2005. Payments for Environmental Services: From Theory to Practice. Presentation during ESSD Week
2005. Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEEI/214584-1115796410065/20887700/IntrotoPES.ppt

P

Pearce, G.K. 2012. Desalination vs water reuse: An energy analysis illustrated by case studies in Los Angeles and London.
V. Lazarova, K. Choo and P. Cornel (eds), 2012: Water-Energy Interactions in Water Reuse. London, IWA Publishing, ch. 18.
Pechtl, P., Dieleman, M., Posch, M., Davari, B., Erbes, M. and Schneeberger, S. 2003. Integrated Thermal Power and
Desalination Plant Optimization. Paper No. 110 presented at the PowerGen Middle East Conference, Abu Dhabi,
October 2003.
Peden, D., Taddesse, G. and Haileslassie, A. 2009. Livestock water productivity: Implications for sub-Saharan Africa. The
Rangeland Journal, doi:10.1071/RJ09002
Peduzzi, P. 2012. Gas fracking: Can we safely squeeze the rocks? UNEP Global Environmental Alert Service, Nov 2012. Nairobi,
UNEP. http://na.unep.net/geas/archive/pdfs/GEAS_Nov2012_Fracking.pdf
Pegram, G., Li, Y., Le Quesne, T., Speed, R., Li, J. and Shen, F. 2013. River Basin Planning: Principles, Procedures and Approaches
for Strategic Basin Planning. Paris, UNESCO.
Peña, H. 2005. Meaning and Scope of Water Code Reform in Chile. Circular of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated
Water Resource Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 22. Santiago,
UNECLAC.
PIANC (World Association for Water-Borne Transport Infrastructure). 2011. Towards a Sustainable Waterborne Transport
Industry. Brussels, EnviCom Task Group 2, PIANC Secretariat General.
Poff, N.L., Richter, B.D., Arthington, A.H., Bunn, S.E., Naiman, R.J., Kendy, E., Acreman, M., Apse, C., Bledsoe, B.P., Freeman,
M.C., Henriksen, J., Jacobson, R.B., Kennen, J.G., Merritt, D.M., O’Keeffe, J.H., Olden, J.D., Rogers, K., Tharme, R.E. and
Warner, A. 2010. The ecological limits of hydrologic alteration (ELOHA): A new framework for developing regional
environmental flow standards. Freshwater Biology, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2427.2009.02204.x
PR Newswire. 2009. Global biofuels growth to double by 2015, challenges remain for second generation technologies.
Press Release. Houston, PR Newswire Association.
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/health-latest-news/global-biofuels-growth-to-double-by-2015-62833927.html

Q

Qureshi, Z. 2011. Rebalancing, Growth, and Development in a Multipolar Global Economy. Washington DC, The World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/10094

R

REN21 (Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century). 2012. Renewables 2012 Global Status Report. Paris, REN21
Secretariat. http://www.ren21.net/REN21Activities/GlobalStatusReport.aspx
Rodriguez, D., van den Berg, C. and McMahon, A. 2012. Investing In Water Infrastructure: Capital, Operations and Maintenance.
Water Papers. Washington DC, Water Unit, Transport, Water and ICT Department, The World Bank.
Roest, K., Hofman, J. and Loosdrecht, M. 2010. [The Dutch water cycle can produce energy.] (in Dutch) H2O, 43(25/26): 47–51.
http://www.kwrwater.nl/Artikelen/Archief_2010/

124

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Rosas, R. 2011. La eficiencia energética en empresas de agua y saneamiento en países de América Latina y e Caribe (mejores
prácticas y lecciones aprendidas). Washington DC, Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).
Rothenberger, D. 2011. Energy Efficiency in Water Pumping: Innovative Approaches for an Important Issue. Proceedings of the
First Amman–Cologne Symposium, The Water and Energy Nexus, Amman, 24 January 2011.
http://iwrm-master.web.fh-koeln.de/?page_id=594.
Royal Society of Canada. 2010. Environmental and Health Impacts of Canada’s Oil Sands Industry. Report of the Royal Society
of Canada Expert Panel. Ottowa, Royal Society of Canada.
Rübbelke, D. and Vögele, S. 2011. Impacts of climate change on European critical infrastructures: The case of the power sector.
Environmental Science & Policy, 14(1): 53–63.
Russi, D., ten Brink, P., Farmer, A., Badura, T., Coates, D., Förster, J., Kumar, R. and Davidson, N. 2013. The Economics of
Ecosystems and Biodiversity for Water and Wetlands. London and Brussels/Gland, Switzerland, Institute for European
Environmental Policy (IEEP)/Ramsar Secretariat.

S

Sanders, K.T. and Webber, M.E. 2012. Evaluating the energy intensity of water in the United States. Environmental Research
Letters, 7: 034033.
Sarni, W. and Stanislaw, J. 2012. No Water, No Energy. No Energy, No Water. Deloitte Development LLP.
Sauer, A., Klop, P. and Agrawal, S. 2010. Over Heating: Financial Risks from Water Constraints on Power Generation in Asia:
India, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam. Washington DC/London, World Resources Institute/HSBC Climate Change.
http://pdf.wri.org/over_heating_asia.pdf
Saulino, F. 2011. Implicaciones del desarrollo de los biocombustibles para la gestión y el aprovechamiento del agua. LC/W.445.
Santiago, UNECLAC.
Scott, C. and Sugg, Z. 2011. The Water-Energy Nexus in Global Context. Paper presented at the International Workshop ’Clean
Energy and Water: An Assessment of Services for Local Adaptation to Climate Change’, Porto de Galinhas, Recife, Brazil,
23–24 September 2011.
SE4ALL (Sustainable Energy For All). 2012. SE4ALL initiative. United Nations Secretary-General.
http://www.sustainableenergyforall.org/
Shah, D. 2010. Will we switch to gas made from human waste? BBC News Magazine online, 19 April.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/8501236.stm
Shah, T. and Verma, S. 2008. Co-management of electricity and groundwater: An assessment of Gujarat’s Jyotigram Scheme.
Economic and Political Weekly, 43(7): 59–66.
Shah, T., Scott, C., Kishore, A. and Sharma, A. 2004. Energy-Irrigation Nexus in South Asia: Improving Groundwater
Conservation and Power Sector Viability. IWMI Research Report No. 70. Colombo, International Water Management
Institute (IWMI).
Shah, T., Bhatt, S., Shah, R.K. and Talati, J. 2008. Groundwater governance through electricity supply management: Assessing
an innovative intervention in Gujarat, Western India. Agricultural Water Management, 95(11): 1233–1242.
Shirouzu, N. 2010. Some roads to US electric-car batteries go via China. The Wall Street Journal, 22 May.
http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2010/05/22/some-road-to-us-electric-car-batteries-goes-via-china/
Shrank, S. and Farahmand, F. 2011. Biofuels regain momentum. Vital Signs Online, 29 August. Washington DC, WorldWatch
Institute. http://vitalsigns.worldwatch.org/vs-trend/biofuels-regain-momentum
Smil, V. 2008. Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetic of Complex Systems. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Smith, M., de Groot, D., Perrot-Maître, D. and Bergkamp, G. (eds). 2006. PAY: Establishing Payments for Watershed Services.
Gland, Switzerland, IUCN Water and Nature Initiative.
Solanes, M. and Jouravlev, A. 2006. Water Governance for Development and Sustainability. LC/L.2556-P. Santiago, UNECLAC.
Solutions for Water. 2012. As Samra: A Wastewater Treatment Plant 95% Self-sufficient in Energy. Marseille, France, World Water
Forum. http://www.solutionsforwater.org/solutions/as-samra-a-wastewater-treatment-plant-95-self-sufficient-in-energy
Sreenivas, A. and Bhosale, K. 2013. Black and Dirty: The Real Challenges Facing India’s Coal Sector. Pune, India, Prayas Energy
Group.
Stakhiv, E.Z. 2011. Pragmatic approaches for water management under climate change uncertainty. Journal of the American
Water Resources Association, 47(6): 1183–1196.
Statistics Canada. 2009. Industrial Water Use 2009: Updated. Ottawa, Government of Canada.
http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?lang=eng&catno=16-401-XWE

WWDR 2014

125

——. 2011. Envirostats – Spring 2011. Catalogue no. 16-002-X, Vol. 4, No. 1. Ottawa, Government of Canada.
Steele, P.E. 2011. Agro-Mechanization and the Information Services Provided by FAOSTAT. Unpublished internal report. Rome,
FAO.
Stillwell, A.S., King, C.W., Webber, M.E., Duncan, I.J. and Hardberger, A. 2011. The energy-water nexus in Texas. Ecology and
Society, 16(1): 2.
Sydney Water. n.d. Home page. http://www.sydneywater.com.au (Accessed Oct 2013)
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity). 2010. Mainstreaming the Economics of Nature: A Synthesis of the
Approach, Conclusions and Recommendations of TEEB. Geneva, TEEB, UNEP.

T

Teixeira, T., Neves, L. and Araújo, F. 2009. Effects of a nuclear power plant thermal discharge on habitat complexity and fish
community structure in Ilha Grande Bay, Brazil. Marine Environmental Research, 68(4): 188–195.
Timilsina, G.R. and Shrestha, A. 2010. Biofuels: Markets, Targets, and Impacts. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
Series. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Toman, M., Benitez, D. and Csordas, S. 2011. Infrastructure and sustainable development. S. Fardoust, Y. Kim and C. Sepulveda
(eds), Postcrisis Growth and Development: A Development Agenda for the G-20. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Trepper, E. 2012. In Windhoek, integrated urban water management is key to closing the water loop. The Water Blog.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://blogs.worldbank.org/water/water/in-windhoek-iuwm-is-key-to-closing-the-water-loop
TSG (TechKNOWLEDGEy Strategic Group). 2012. 2012 Water Market Review. Boulder, CO, TSG.
http://www.tech-strategy.com/index.htm
Tuinhof, A., Van Steenbergen, F., Vos, P. and Tolk, L. 2012. Profit from Storage. The Costs and Benefits of Water Buffering.
Wageningen, The Netherlands, 3R Water Secretariat.

U

UK GOS (United Kingdom Government Office for Science). 2011. Foresight Project on Global Food and Farming Futures,
Synthesis Report C12: Meeting the Challenges of a Low-Emissions World. London, UK GOS.
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/bispartners/foresight/docs/food-and-farming/synthesis/11-632-c12-meeting-challengesof-lowemissions-world.pdf
UN (United Nations). 2003. Water: A Matter of Life and Death. International Year of Freshwater 2003 Factsheet. New York, UN.
http://www.un.org/events/water/factsheet.pdf
——. 2010. Managing Change in the Marshlands: Iraq’s Critical Challenge. United Nations White Paper, Report of the United
Nations Integrated Water Task Force for Iraq. New York, UN.
——. 2013. The Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. New York, UN.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2012. World Urbanization Prospects, The 2011
Revision: Highlights. New York, UN. http://esa.un.org/unup/pdf/WUP2011_Highlights.pdf
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2011. Tajikistan: Local Communities Benefit from Small Hydro
and Clean Energy. UNDP in Europe and Central Asia. http://europeandcis.undp.org/ourwork/environment/show/
E67CF52B-F203-1EE9-B191FF1E616D313A
——. 2012. One Planet to Share: Sustaining Human Progress in a Changing Climate. Asia-Pacific Human Development Report.
New Delhi, Routledge for Bangkok, UNDP.
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/corporate/HDR/Asia%20and%20Pacific%20HDR/UNDP_Asia_Pacific_
HDR_En_2012.pdf
UNDP/WHO (United Nations Development Programme/World Health Organization). 2009. The Energy Access Situation in
Developing Countries. New York, UNDP.
UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 2000. African Water Vision 2025. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 2009. Investor Interest and Capacity Building Needs: Financing
Energy Efficiency Investments for Climate Change Mitigation Project. New York and Geneva, UN.
——. 2011a. Second Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and Groundwaters. New York and Geneva, UN.
——. 2011b. Resource Manual to Support Application of the UNECE Protocol on Strategic Environmental Assessment.
New York and Geneva, UN. http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/documents/2011/eia/ece.mp.eia.17.e.pdf
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007. UNEP in Iraq: Post-conflict Assessment, Clean-up and Reconstruction.
Geneva, UNEP.
——. 2011a. The Bioenergy and Water Nexus. Oeko-Institut and IEA Bioenergy Task 43. Geneva, UNEP.

126

BIBLIOGRAPHY

——. 2011b. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP.
——. 2011c. Environmental Assessment of Ogoniland. Geneva, UNEP.
——. 2012. Africa Water Atlas, Summary for Decision Makers. Geneva, UNEP.
UNEP-IRP (United Nations Environment Programme-International Resource Panel). 2012. Measuring Water Use in a Green
Economy. Paris, UNEP.
——. (in press). Decoupling Economic Growth from Water Uses and Water Pollution. Geneva, UNEP-IRP.
UNEP/UNWTO (United Nations Environment Programme/World Tourism Organization). 2012. Tourism in the Green
Economy: Background Report. Madrid, UNWTO.
UNEP-WCMC (United Nations Environment Programme-World Conservation Monitoring Centre). 2006. In the Front Line:
Shoreline Protection and Other Ecosystem Services from Mangroves and Coral Reefs. Cambridge, UK, UNEP-WCMC.
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2011. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and
the Pacific, 2011. Bangkok, UNESCAP.
——. 2012. The Status of the Water-Food-Energy Nexus in Asia and the Pacific Region. Discussion Paper. Bangkok, UNESCAP.
——. 2013. Building Resilience to Natural Disasters and Major Economic Crises. Bangkok, UNESCAP.
UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia). 2009a. Water and Energy for Development.
Presentation by C. Chouchani Cherfane to the Seminar on Water and Energy Linkages in the Middle East during World
Water Week, Stockholm, 18 August 2009.
——. 2009b. Water Development Report 3: Role of Desalination in Addressing Water Scarcity. New York, UNESCWA.
——. 2010. Promoting Large-Scale Renewable Energy Applications in the Arab Region an Approach for Climate Change Mitigation.
New York, UNESCWA.
——. 2011a. Sustainable Production and Consumption Patterns in Energy and Water Sectors in the ESCWA Region. E/ESCWA/
SDPD/2011/WP.1. New York, UNESCWA.
——. 2011b. Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources and Socio-Economic Vulnerability in the ESCWA Region:
A Methodological Framework for Pursuing and Integrated Assessment. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2011/1. New York, UNESCWA.
——. 2013a. Progress Made in the Development of a Legal Framework for Shared Water Resources in the Arab Region. Beirut,
Committee on Water Resources, UNESCWA.
——. 2013b. Regional Initiative for the Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources and Socio-Economic
Vulnerability in the Arab Region. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2013/Pamphlet. New York, UNESCWA.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2012. State of the World’s Cities 2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities.
Nairobi, UN-Habitat. http://www.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.aspx?publicationID=3387
UN-Habitat-IUTC (United Nations Human Settlements Programme-International Urban Training Centre). 2012. Sustainable
Urban Energy: A Source Book for Asia. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2008. Policies for Promoting Industrial Energy Efficiency in
Developing Countries and Transition Economies, Executive Summary. Vienna, UNIDO.
http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/media/documents/pdf/Energy_Environment/ind_energy_efficiencyEbookv2.pdf
——. 2010. Global Industrial Energy Efficiency Benchmarking: An Energy Policy Tool. Working Paper. Vienna, UNIDO.
http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/Energy_and_Climate_Change/Energy_Efficiency/Benchmarking_%20
Energy_%20Policy_Tool.pdf
——. 2011. Industrial Development Report 2011: Industrial Energy Efficiency for Sustainable Wealth Creation: Capturing
Environmental, Economic and Social Dividends. Vienna, UNIDO.
http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Publications/IDR/2011/UNIDO_FULL_REPORT_EBOOK.pdf
——. n.d.a. The National Cleaner Production Centres (NCPCs) Network. Vienna, UNIDO.
http://www.unido.org/ncpc.html (Accessed Oct 2013)
——. n.d.b. Transfer of Environmentally Sound Technologies (TEST). Vienna, UNIDO.
http://www.unido.org/en/what-we-do/environment/resource-efficient-and-low-carbon-industrial-production/
watermanagement/test.html (Accessed Oct 2013)
University of Toronto/University of Alberta. 2007. Running Out of Steam? Oil Sands Development and Water Use in the
Athabasca River-Watershed: Science and Market Based Solutions. Toronto, Ontario/Edmonton, Alberta, Munk Centre for
International Studies, University of Toronto/Environmental Research Centre, University of Alberta.
http://www.ualberta.ca/~ersc/water.pdf

WWDR 2014

127

UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2013. The Energy Statistics Database. New York, UN.
US DOE (United States Department of Energy). 2006. Energy Demands on Water Resources: Report to Congress on the
Interdependency of Energy and Water. Washington DC, US DOE.
——. n.d. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. Advanced Manufacturing Office Information Resources: All Manufacturing.
Web page. Washington DC, US DOE. http://www1.eere.energy.gov/manufacturing/resources/footprints.html (Accessed Oct
2013)
US EIA (United States Energy Information Administration). 2010a. International Energy Outlook 2010: Highlights. Washington
DC, Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting, EIA, US Department of Energy.
——. 2010b. Annual Energy Outlook 2010 with Projections to 2035. DOE/EIA-0383(2010). Washington DC, US EIA.
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/pdf/0383(2010).pdf
——. 2011. World Shale Gas Resources: An Initial Assessment of 14 Regions Outside the United States. Washington DC, US EIA.
http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/
——. 2013. International Energy Outlook 2013. Washington DC, US EIA. http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/
US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2011. Opportunities for Combined Heat and Power at Wastewater
Treatment Facilities: Market Analysis and Lessons from the Field. Washington DC, US EPA/Combined Heat and Power
Partnership.
——. 2012. EPA’s Study of of Hydraulic Fracturing and its Potential Impact on Drinking Water Resources. Washington DC, US
EPA. http://www.epa.gov/hfstudy
——. 2013. Natural Gas Extraction: Hydraulic Fracturing. Washington DC, US EPA.
http://www2.epa.gov/hydraulicfracturing
US GAO (United States Government Accountability Office). 2009. Energy-Water Nexus: Improvements to Federal Water Use
Data Would Increase Understanding of Trends in Power Plant Water Use. GAO-10-23. Washington DC, US GAO.
——. 2011. Energy-Water Nexus: Amount of Energy Needed to Supply, Use and Treat Water is Location-Specific and Can Be
Reduced by Certain Technologies and Approaches. Report to the Ranking Member Committee on Science, Space and
Technology, US House of Representatives. GAO-11-225. Washington DC, US GAO.
——. 2013. Energy-Water Nexus: Coordinated Federal Approach Needed to Better Manage Energy and Water Tradeoffs.
Washington DC, US GAO. http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-880

V

V&W (Dutch Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management). 2006. Spatial Planning Key Decision ‘Room for the
River’: Investing in the Safety and Vitality of the Dutch River Basin Region. Amsterdam, V&W.
http://www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl/files/Files/brochures/EMAB%20PBK%20Engels.pdf
Van Den Berg, C. and Danilenko, A. 2011. The IBNET Water and Sanitation Performance Blue Book 2011. Washington DC,
The World Bank.
van der Gun, J., Merla, A., Jones, M. and Burke, J. 2012. Governance of the Subsurface Space and Groundwater Frontiers.
Groundwater Governance Thematic Paper 10. Rome, Groundwater Governance.
Van Koppen, B., Smits, S., Moriarty, P., Penning de Vries, F., Mikhail, M. and Boelee, E. 2009. Climbing the Water Ladder:
Multiple-Use Water Services for Poverty Reduction. TP Series 52. The Hague, The Netherlands, IRC International Water and
Sanitation Centre and International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
van Vliet, M., Yearsley, J., Ludwig, F., Vögele, S., Lettenmaier, D.P. and Kabat, P. 2012. Vulnerability of US and European
electricity supply to climate change. Nature Climate Change, 2: 676–681.
Veil, J.A. 2007. Use of Reclaimed Water for Power Plant Cooling. ANL/EVS/R-07/3. Argonne, IL, Argonne National Laboratory
Environmental Science Division for the US Department of Energy.
Vörösmarty, C.J., Meybeck, M., Fekete, B., Sharma, K., Green, P. and Syvitski, J.P.M. 2003. Anthropogenic sediment retention:
Major global impact from registered river impoundments. Global and Planetary Change, 39: 169–190.

W

Watson, A. 2010. Alternative tailing disposal: Fact and fiction. Paste Tailings Management, Supplement to International Mining,
April 2010. http://www.infomine.com/library/publications/docs/InternationalMining/IMApr2010c.pdf
WBCSD (World Business Council on Sustainable Development). 2006. Business in the World of Water: WBCSD Water Scenarios
to 2025. Washington DC, WBCSD.
http://www.wbcsd.ch/Pages/EDocument/EDocumentDetails.aspx?ID=132&NoSearchContextKey=true
——. 2009. Water, Energy and Climate Change: A Contribution from the Business Community. Geneva, WBCSD.
http://www.wbcsd.org/pages/edocument/edocumentdetails.aspx?id=40&nosearchcontextkey=true

128

BIBLIOGRAPHY

——. n.d. The WBCSD Global Water Tool. Washington DC, WBCSD.
http://www.wbcsd.org/work-program/sector-projects/water/global-water-tool.aspx (Accessed Jan 2013)
WCD (World Commission on Dams). 2000. Dams and Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making. London, WCD/
Earthscan.
Webb, A. and Coates, D. 2012. Biofuels and Biodiversity. CDB Technical Series No. 65. Montreal, Canada, Secretariat of the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).
WEC (World Energy Council). 2010. 2010 Survey of Energy Resources. London, WEC.
http://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/ser_2010_report_1.pdf
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2009. The Bubble is Close to Bursting: A Forecast of the Main Economic and Geopolitical Water
Issues Likely to Arise in the World During the Next Two Decades. Geneva, WEF.
http://www.weforum.org/reports/bubble-close-bursting
——. 2011. Water Security: The Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus. The WEF Water Initiative. Washington DC, Island Press.
——. 2012a. The Global Energy Architecture Performance Index Report 2013: Industry Agenda. Geneva, WEF in collaboration
with Accenture. http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-energy-architecture-performance-index-report-2013
——. 2012b. The Global Energy Architecture Performance Index Report 2013: Executive Summary. Geneva, WEF in collaboration
with Accenture.
http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-energy-architecture-performance-index-report-2013
——. 2013. Global Risks 2013, 8th edn. Geneva, WEF.
WERF (Water Environment Research Foundation). 2011. Fact Sheet. Energy Production and Efficiency Research: The Roadmap
to Net-Zero Energy. Alexandria, VA, WERF.
http://www.werf.org/lift/docs/tfadocs/ENER1_factsheet.aspx
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund). 2012. Progress on Drinking Water and
Sanitation: 2012 Update. New York, WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
——. 2013a. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-Water: 2013 Update. New York, WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme
for Water Supply and Sanitation.
——. 2013b. Data Resources and Estimates. New York, WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and
Sanitation. http://www.wssinfo.org/
Winpenny, J. 2003. Financing Water For All: Report of the World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure. M. Camdessus
(Chair). Global Water Partnership/World Water Council/3rd World Water Forum.
World Bank. 2004. Infrastructure Services in Developing Countries: Access, Quality, Costs and Policy Reform. Briceño-Garmendia,
C., Estache, A. and Shafik, N. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3468. Washington DC, The World Bank.
——. 2009. Water in the Arab World: Management Perspectives and Innovations. N. V. Jagannathan, A. S. Mohamed and A.
Kremer (eds). Washington DC, The World Bank.
——. 2010a. World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change. Washington DC, The World Bank.
——. 2010b. Deep Wells and Prudence: Towards Pragmatic Action for Addressing Groundwater Exploitation in India. Washington
DC, The World Bank.
——. 2010c. Lights Out? The Outlook for Energy in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union. Washington DC, The World Bank.
——. 2010d. Africa’s Infrastructure: The Time for Transformation. V. Foster and C. Briceño-Garmendia, C. (eds). Washington
DC, The World Bank/Agence Française de Développment.
——. 2011. Current Debates on Infrastructure Policy. World Bank Infrastructure Strategy Update 2011. A. Estache and M. Fay.
Washington DC, Commission on Growth and Development, The World Bank.
——. 2012a. Transformation Through Infrastructure. World Bank Group Infrastraucture Strategy Update FY12–15.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTINFRA/Resources/Transformationthroughinfrastructure.pdf
——. 2012b. A Primer on Energy Efficiency for Municipal Water and Wastewater Utilities. Technical Report 001.12.
Washington DC, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, The World Bank. http://water.worldbank.org/node/84130
——. 2013a. Global Economic Prospects, Vol. 6: Assuring Growth Over the Medium Term. Washington DC, The World Bank.
——. 2013b. Toward a Sustainable Energy Future for All: Directions for the World Bank Group’s Energy Sector.
Washington DC, The World Bank.

WWDR 2014

129

http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/07/18016002/toward-sustainable-energy-future-all-directions-worldbank-group%C2%92s-energy-sector
——. n.d.a. Agriculture and Rural Development: Regions. Web page. Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://go.worldbank.org/RF3O70S7F0 (Accessed Oct 2013)
——. n.d.b. Energy in Africa: Overview. Web page. Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://go.worldbank.org/ZD42IOATZ0 (Acccessed Oct 2013)
World Coal Association. 2011. Coal Statistics 2011. Web page. http://www.worldcoal.org/resources/coal-statistics/
WRA (Western Resource Associates). 2003. Smart Water: A Comparative Study of Urban Water Use Across the Southwest.
Boulder, CO, WRA. http://www.westernresourceadvocates.org/water/smartwater.php
WRAP (Waste & Resources Action Programme). 2011. Freshwater Use in the UK: Manufacturing Sector: Annex to Final Report
on Freshwater Availability and Use in the UK. Banbury, UK, WRAP.
http://www.wrap.org.uk/sites/files/wrap/PAD101-201%20-%20Manufacturing%20sector%20water%20report%20-%20
FINAL%20APPROVED%20for%20publication%20-%2012,03,12.pdf
Wright, I.A., Wright, S., Graham, K. and Burgin, S. 2011. Environmental protection and management: A water pollution case
study within the Greater Blue Mountains World Heritage area, Australia. Land Use Policy, 28(1): 353–360.
Wunder, S., Engel, S. and Pagiola, S. 2008. Taking stock: A comparative analysis of payments for environmental services
programs in developed and developing countries. Ecological Economics, 65(4): 834–852.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. The United Nations World Water Development Report 1: Water for People,
Water for Life. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
——. 2006. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared Responsibility. Paris/New York,
UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
——. 2009. The United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO/
Earthscan.
——. 2012. The United Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water Under Uncertainty and Risk. Paris,
UNESCO.
WWF (World Wildlife Fund). 2012. Living Planet Report 2012: Biodiversity, Biocapacity and Better Choices. Gland, Switzerland,
WWF.

Y

Yepes, T. 2008. Investment Needs for Infrastructure in Developing Countries 2008–2015. Unpublished. Washington DC, The
World Bank (Latin America and Caribbean Region).
Yi-Li, C., Hsiao-Hui, Y. and Hsing-Juh, L. 2009. Effects of a thermal discharge from a nuclear power plant on phytoplankton
and periphyton in subtropical coastal waters. Journal of Sea Research, 61(4): 197–205.

Z

130

Zhou, A. and Thomson, E. 2009. The development of biofuels in Asia. Applied Energy, 86(1): 11–20.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ABBREVIATIONS, ACRONYMS AND UNITS

Abbreviations and acronyms that appear only once in the Report or only in boxes, tables and figures are not included in this
list. UN agencies are also not included. Organization and institute acronyms that appear in citations are given in full in the
Bibliography.
BTU

British Thermal Unit

CHP

combined heat and power

CSP

concentrated solar power

CSR

corporate social responsibility

EIA

environmental impact assessment

EU

European Union

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GHG

greenhouse gas

IEA

International Energy Agency

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

IWRM

integrated water resources management

kWh/MWh/GWh/TWh

kilo/mega/giga/terawatt-hours

l.p.c.d.

litres per capita per day

LDCs

least-developed countries

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

OECD

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PES

payments for ecosystem/environmental services

PV	

solar photovoltaic

WWDR 2014

131

BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES

BOXES
1.1
1.2
1.3
2.1
3.1
3.2
3.3
6.1
7.1
7.2
8.1
9.1
9.2
10.1
12.1
12.2
14.1
16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5

The evolution of the global energy mix and its implications for water
Climate change adaptation and mitigation
Gender and equity dimensions
Aquifer recharge
Scenarios of the International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook 2012
Hydraulic fracturing: Prospects and limitations of the natural gas future
The water-related challenges of coal-fired power stations in Western China
Renewable energy technologies for improved irrigation efficiency help women farmers
Cities leading the way in water and energy conservation
Conservation of water sources
Trends in water and energy use in tourism
Impacts of oil extraction in Mesopotamia, Iraq
Sustainable dam management for fish and hydropower
Complex impacts of modernizing irrigation and the role of energy
Intermittent supply and unaccounted-for water
Solar desalination in the Mashreq and Maghreb
Key facts on hydropower in Africa
Groundwater, irrigation and energy: Responses to an unsustainable situation in Gujarat, India
Energy efficiency generates savings for water supply systems
Recovery of energy from wastewater
Initiatives for small and medium-sized enterprises
Natural infrastructure: Wetlands and hydropower in Rwanda

16
20
21
25
28
31
42
55
67
67
70
80
82
87
92
93
99
109
110
111
112
113

TABLES
1.1 	Population using solid fuel for cooking and without access to electricity, improved water
and sanitation in a selection of countries
3.1
Electricity generation by source and scenario
3.2
Thermal power plant cooling system advantages and disadvantages
3.3
Economically feasible hydropower potential, installed capacity and power generation by region
6.1
Indicative yields and water requirements for some major biofuel crops
6.2 	Water consumed through evapotranspiration per unit bioenergy feedstock production
and per unit gross bioenergy production
6.3
Examples of energy efficiency improvements at the farm level
8.1
OECD estimates of prices for water by broad sector usage
9.1
Examples of water use for energy production and the related ecosystem services

132

BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES

14
35
37
40
57
58
59
73
78

FIGURES
1.1
Global physical and economic surface water scarcity
1.2
Energy consumption per capita by country, 2010
2.1
Global water demand (freshwater withdrawals): Baseline Scenario, 2000 and 2050
2.2 	Amount of energy required to provide 1 m3 water safe for human consumption
from various water sources
2.3
Total renewable water resources, 2011
2.4
Water stress of aquifers important for farming
3.1
Water withdrawals and consumption vary for fuel production
3.2
World primary energy demand by fuel in the New Policies Scenario
3.3
World ethanol and biodiesel production, 1975–2010
3.4
Global ethanol production by feedstock
3.5 	World electricity generation by source of energy as a percentage of
world electricity generation, 2011
3.6
Access to electricity in developing countries as a percentage of the population, 2011
3.7
Share of electricity generation by source and region in the New Policies Scenario
3.8
Water use for electricity generation by cooling technology
3.9
Electricity generation from recent additions to hydropower and other renewables
3.10 	Regional hydropower technical potential in terms of annual generation and
installed capacity, and percentage of undeveloped technical potential in 2009
3.11 Worldwide installed capacity for geothermal electricity in 2010
5.1
Infrastructure investment and economic development
5.2
Needs versus actual investment in infrastructure
5.3
Sankey diagram of combined heat and power and conventional power plants
5.4
Biogas production in a wastewater treatment plant
6.1 	Indicative shares of final energy consumption for the food sector globally and for
high and low Gross Domestic Product countries
7.1
Urban and rural populations by development group, 1950–2050
7.2
Water consumption and per capita income in selected Asian cities
7.3 	Typical energy footprint of the major steps in water cycle management with examples
from different treatment plants using specific technologies
7.4
A three-phase model of the water–energy nexus (without energy recovery)
8.1
Primary energy use: All USA manufacturing
9.1
Simplified diagram of some major interlinkages between ecosystem services, energy and water
9.2
Global total final energy consumption versus share of renewable energy
10.1 Pumped storage capacity in Europe (data from the beginning of 2011)
14.1 Trends in hydropower consumption in Africa (1998–2012)
14.2 Recent trends in electricity production for world regions including Africa
14.3 Global electricity access rate

WWDR 2014

12
13
24
24
26
27
29
30
32
33
34
34
35
36
38
39
41
48
48
51
52
56
62
63
64
66
72
77
79
86
98
99
100

133

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
Volume 2

This flagship report is a comprehensive review that gives an overall picture of the world’s freshwater resources. It
analyses pressures from decisions that drive demand for water and affect its availability. It offers tools and response
options to help leaders in government, the private sector and civil society address current and future challenges. It
suggests ways in which institutions can be reformed and their behaviour modified, and explores possible sources of
financing for the urgently needed investment in water.
The WWDR4 is a milestone within the WWDR series, reporting directly on regions and highlighting hotspots, and it
has been mainstreamed for gender equality. It introduces a thematic approach – ‘Managing Water under Uncertainty
and Risk’ – in the context of a world which is changing faster than ever in often unforeseeable ways, with increasing
uncertainties and risks. It highlights that historical experience will no longer be sufficient to approximate the
relationship between the quantities of available water and shifting future demands. Like the earlier editions, the
WWDR4 also contains country-level case studies describing the progress made in meeting water-related objectives.
The WWDR4 also seeks to show that water has a central role in all aspects of economic development and social
welfare, and that concerted action via a collective approach of the water-using sectors is needed to ensure water’s
many benefits are maximized and shared equitably and that water-related development goals are achieved.
—

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

he
ctives.

al
ater’s

was
UN
s by

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

—

The UniTed naTions World WaTer
developmenT reporT 4
9 789231
042355
Volume
1

The UniTed naTions World WaTer
developmenT reporT 4
Volume 2

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

20/02/12 15.58

To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications
please email:
wwap@unesco.org

20/02/12 15.59

To download the PDF, e-book (.epub format), associated publications, previous
WWDRs as well as material for the media please visit:
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap

Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk: Facing the Challenges

and it
ertainty
easing

Knowledge
Base

Volume 3

the

To purchase a printed copy of the book (55,00 €) please visit:
http://publishing.unesco.org

—

PD0015 - UN Water Cover volume 2.indd 1-3

s. It
ponse
es. It
ces of

The UniTed naTions World WaTer developmenT reporT 4

The UniTed naTions World WaTer developmenT reporT 4

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for all freshwater related issues. It was
formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. It currently counts 29 UN
Members and 25 other international Partners. UN-Water complements and adds value to existing UN initiatives by
facilitating synergies and joint efforts among the implementing agencies. See www.unwater.org

ISBN 978-92-3-104235-5
© UNESCO 2012
Set of three volumes
904 pages
Full colour, with photographs, tables, figures, maps, boxes, notes, references, abbreviations
list, glossary and index as well as forewords by Ban-Ki Moon, Irina Bokova and Michel Jarraud
Available in English

Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk: Knowledge Base
—

Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk
—

Volume 1

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted by UNESCO and brings together the
work of 28 UN-Water members and partners in the triennial World Water Development Report (WWDR).

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk

The UniTed naTions World WaTer developmenT reporT 4

Contents in PDF:
WWDR4:
Volume 1: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk
Volume 2: Knowledge Base
Volume 3: Facing the Challenges

Facing
the Challenges

Associated publications:
Overview of Key Messages from the WWDR4
Facts and Figures from the WWDR4
Stakeholder Messages from the WWDR4

Facing
the Challenges

United
Nations
Education
Cultural al, Scientific and
Organiza
tion

To order a copy of the book please visit http://www.unesco.org/publishing
Report

More information on WWAP publications can be found at
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/publications/
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

—

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

Manag
in
under U g Water
ncert
and Ris ainty
k

Knowledge
Base

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk

© UNESCO
-WWAP
2012
Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

The Un

iTed na
develo Tions World
pmenT
WaTer
reporT
4

—

The UniTed naTions World WaTer
developmenT reporT 4
The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme
Volume 3

The UniTed naTions World WaTer
developmenT reporT 4

© UNESCO-WWAP 2012

21/02/12 10.20

DVD sleeve_v3.indd 1

13/02/12 10.01

ASSOCIATED PUBLICATIONS
01_WWAP_BN_Educational print.pdf

Overview of
Key Messages

012,
nder
ways,
ers serve
sources.
studies

ptions to
ailability.
a central
pproach
nd that

DVD labe

l_v2.indd

from The UniTed naTions World
WaTer developmenT reporT 4

Facts and
Figures

Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk

1

27/2/12

2:42 PM

from The UniTed naTions World
WaTer developmenT reporT 4

Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk

1

scussion
as a

ExEcutivE Summary

United
s

13/02/12

C

09.55

M

Y

CM

Part 1:
Recognizing the centrality of
water and its global dimensions

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk
—
The UniTed naTions World WaTer
developmenT reporT 4

Executive Summary
64 pages
Currently available in
English

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

access to water is critical to the well-being of people
in all domains – personal, familial and social. Water
also makes an essential contribution to economic output. it underpins the sound functioning of natural environmental and ecological systems. many economic
sectors compete for finite water resources. Water is
the only medium through which major global crises
(food, energy, health and climate change, as well as
economic crises) can be jointly addressed. explicit
trade-offs may need to be made to allocate water
to uses which maximize achievable benefits across
a number of developmental sectors. This is a critical
challenge, but one whose achievement is difficult and
complex in practice.

protecting water resources, optimizing their use across
these activities, and ensuring an equitable distribution of benefits from water-intensive activities should
be at the centre of public policy and regulation. This is
true for all levels of water governance: local, regional,
river basin and central. failure to deal strategically with
these issues of allocation, resulting in a fragmented
approach to water management, will jeopardize future
availability and sustainability of water resources and is
likely to reduce economic and social welfare below attainable levels.
The task of delivering sufficient quantities of water for
social, economic and environmental needs has traditionally been regarded as the responsibility of those
directly involved in its extraction, collection and use
– the ‘water sector’. however, the availability of water
throughout the hydrological cycle is influenced by
many factors that lie outside the direct control of water authorities. effective and sustainable management
of water resources and allocation requires cooperation
and coordination between diverse stakeholders and
sectoral ‘jurisdictions’.
in future, global water resources are likely to come under increased pressure. The demand for water is growing at the same time as climate change is expected to

MY

Chapter 1
Recognizing the centrality of
water and its global dimensions
• Water for irrigation and food production constitutes
one of the greatest pressures on freshwater resources.
agriculture accounts for ~70% of global freshwater
withdrawals (up to 90% in some fast-growing
economies).
• Global population growth projections of 2–3 billion
people over the next 40 years, combined with changing diets, result in a predicted increase in food demand
of 70% by 2050.
• many of the impacts of natural hazards on socioeconomic development occur through water. Between
1990 and 2000, in several developing countries natural
disasters had caused damage representing 2–15% of
their annual Gdp (World Bank, 2004; WWap, 2009).

• of all energy produced globally, 7–8% is used to lift
groundwater and pump it through pipes and to treat
both groundwater and wastewater (hoffman, 2011) –
a figure that rises to ~40% in developed countries
(Wef, 2011a).
• in 2009, the number of people without access to
electricity was 1.4 billion or 20% of the world’s population (iea, 2010b).
• Biofuels are an increasingly prominent component
of the energy mix, as exemplified by the eU target for
biofuels to constitute 10% of transport fuel by 2020
(eU, 2007). This target has been hotly debated as it
acts as a driver for conversion of land from food to
biofuel production, placing upward pressure on food
prices, and in some cases leading to the conversion of
forest ecosystems to land to grow biofuels.
• even modest projections of biofuel production indicate that if by 2030 – as the iea suggests – just 5%
of road transport is powered by biofuels, this could
amount to at least 20% of the water used for agriculture globally (Comprehensive assessment of Water
management in agriculture, 2007).

CY

CMY

K

Beyond the basin: The international and
global dimensions of water governance
• The cost of adapting to the impacts of a 2°C rise in
global average temperature could range from Us$70

Overview of Key Messages
from the WWDR4

Facts and Figures
from the WWDR4

Stakeholder Messages
from the WWDR4

16 pages
Available in Arabic,
Chinese, English, French,
Portuguese, Russian and
Spanish

16 pages
Available in English and
French

Targetted to various audiences:
1.	Educational, technological and scientific community
2.	International finance institutions and commercial
financiers
3.	Water service providers (utilities and companies)
4.	Central government (ministers, politicians and senior
officials) and local government mayors
and officials
5. Lay public, civil society and faith leaders
6.	Donors and development NGOs
7. Business community
2 pages each
Available in English

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme has coordinated the
development and production of the WWDR 2014, and has prepared the chapters
in Part 1 and Part 4.

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater-related issues, including sanitation. It was formally
established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UN-Water is comprised of UN entities with a focus on, or
interest in, water-related issues as Members and other non-UN international organizations as Partners.
The work of UN-Water is organized around Thematic Priority Areas and Task Forces as well as awareness-raising campaigns such as World
Water Day (22 March) and World Toilet Day (19 November).

The following agencies and regional commissions led and prepared the chapters
in Part 2, Thematic Focus, and Part 3, Regional Aspects:

The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating synergies and joint efforts,
so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. By doing so, UN-Water seeks to increase the effectiveness of the support
provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving international agreements on water.

World Water Development Report (WWDR)
UNECA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP,
UNESCWA

We wish to thank the other UN-Water Members for their intellectual guidance,
useful revisions and timely endorsements:
CBD
IAEA
IFAD
ILO
OHCHR
UN Women
UNCCD
UNCTAD
UNDESA
UNDP
UNESCO
UNFCCC
UNHCR
UNICEF
UNISDR
UNITAR
UNU
UNWTO
WFP
WHO
WMO

Preparation of this report was made possible thanks to the generous financial support of
the Italian Government to UNESCO for the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme

is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater resource. The Report
is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water Members and Partners and it represents
the coherent and integrated response of the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging
challenges. The Report’s production is coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme and the
theme is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day (22 March). From 2003 to 2012, the WWDR was
released every three years and from 2014 the Report is released annually to provide the most up to date
and factual information of how water-related challenges are addressed around the world.

Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS)
is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) on behalf of UN-Water. It provides a global
update on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements, human resource base, and international
and national finance streams in support of sanitation and drinking water. It is a substantive input into
the activities of Sanitation and Water for All (SWA).

The progress report of the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)
is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring of progress towards MDG 7
target C: to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinkingwater and basic sanitation. Monitoring draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually
supported by national statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria.

 Strategic outlook
 State, uses and management
of water resources
 Global
 Regional assessments
 Triennial (2003–2012)
 Annual (from 2014)
 Links to the theme of World
Water Day (22 March)

 Strategic outlook
 Water supply and sanitation
 Global
 Regional assessments
 Biennial (since 2008)

 Status and trends
 Water supply and sanitation
 Global
 Regional and national
assessments
 Biennial (1990–2012)
 Annual updates (since 2013)

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2014–2015
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

UN-Water Technical Advice on a Possible Post-2015 Global Goal for Water
UN-Water Analytical Brief on Wastewater Management
UN-Water Report on the International Year of Water Cooperation
UN-Water Report on the International Decade for Action ‘Water for Life’ 2005–2015
UN-Water Country Briefs
UN-Water Policy Brief on Discrimination and the Right to Water and Sanitation
UN-Water Policy Brief on Water Security

More information on UN-Water Reports at: http://www.unwater.org/publications

Cover_Vol1.indd 2

27/02/14 17.53

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted and led by UNESCO and brings
together the work of 31 UN-Water Members as well as 34 Partners in the United Nations World Water
Development Report (WWDR) series.
The WWDR 2014 marks the transition of the series to an annual publication cycle with a theme for each year
– ‘Water and Energy’ for 2014. This edition of the Report seeks to inform decision-makers within and beyond
the water–energy nexus about the interconnections and interdependencies between water and energy;
the inevitable trade-offs experienced when providing water and energy for basic human needs and to
support sustainable development; and the need for appropriate responses that account for both water and
energy priorities, particularly in the context of post-2015 targets on increasing access to water and energy. It
provides a detailed overview of major and emerging trends from around the world, with examples of how
some of these have been addressed and the implications for policy-makers, and actions that can be taken by
various stakeholders and the international community.
Like the earlier editions, the WWDR 2014 contains country-level case studies describing the progress made
in meeting water- and energy-related objectives. This edition also presents a Data and Indicators Annex of 41
indicators, which benchmark actual conditions and highlight trends related to water and energy around the
world.

INCLUDES DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX
FOR WATER AND ENERGY

VOLUME 2

Published in 2014 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07
SP, France
© UNESCO 2014
Chapter 5, ‘Infrastructure’, © by International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.
ISBN 978-92-3-104259-1
ePub ISBN 978-92-3-904259-3
Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme).
2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014:
Water and Energy. Paris, UNESCO.

This publication is available in Open Access under the
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound
by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository
(http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
----The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those
of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do
not commit the Organization.
The contents of Parts 2 and 3 were contributed by the UNWater Members and Partners listed on the title pages of the
chapters therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors
in the content provided or for discrepancies in data and content
between contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as
authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in Parts 2 and 3.
WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.
The views expressed in Chapter 6, ‘Food and agriculture’ are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014 has
been published on behalf of the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme by UNESCO with the support of the
following organizations:
United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women (UN Women)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner
(OHCHR)
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
United Nations University (UNU)
Specialized United Nations Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
World Food Programme (WFP)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(UNESCAP)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA)
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR)
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)

--------Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid
A/S, an ISO 14001 (environmental management) and a DS 49001
(corporate social responsibility) certified and approved carbon
neutral company.
Printed by UNESCO CLD, Paris.
This publication is printed with vegetable inks on FSC Mixed
Sources paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves. This
is a carbon neutral print product. UNESCO Printing will contribute
funds to a project replanting trees in Europe or Africa for this
publication.
Printed in France

Preparation of this report was made possible thanks to the
financial support of the Italian Government.

Table of Contents

Preface

iii

by Michela Miletto, WWAP Coordinator a.i. and Engin Koncagül, WWDR 2014 Volume 2 Author

PART

5

PART

6

CASE STUDIES
Highlights of the findings

137

Chapter 17. Green energy generation in Vienna, Austria
Chapter 18. The Three Gorges project on the Yangtze River in China
Chapter 19. Hydropower development in Eastern Herzegovina:
The Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem
Chapter 20. Desalination in Gulf Cooperation Council countries
Chapter 21. Water use efficiency in thermal power plants in India
Chapter 22. A science-based tool for integrating geothermal resources
into regional energy planning in Umbria, Italy
Chapter 23. The role of hydroelectric power stations in the aftermath
of the Great East Japan Earthquake
Chapter 24. Green energy production from municipal sewage sludge in Japan
Chapter 25. The role of geothermal energy in Kenya’s long-term development vision
Chapter 26. The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as a part of
the National Green Growth Strategy in Republic of Korea
Chapter 27. Solar powered wastewater treatment plant in Mexico
Chapter 28. Water and energy linkage in Austin, Texas, USA
Chapter 29. The use of and prospects for geothermal energy in Turkey

139
141

Boxes, tables and figures
Photo credits		

174
204

154
156
158
160
163
166
168
171

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX
Demographics
I-1:
Demographic projections
I-2:
Urban and rural populations by development group (1950–2050)
State of freshwater resources
I-3:
Total actual renewable water resources per capita (2011)
I-4:
Total actual renewable water resources per capita: Trends and projections
I-5:
Annual average monthly blue water scarcity in the world’s major river basins
(1996–2005)
Water demand
I-6:
Water withdrawal by sector (around 2006)
I-7:
Water demand at the global level and in country groups
(Baseline Scenario 2000 and 2050)

WWDR 2014

144
147
150

176
176

177
177
178

178
179

i

i

Human well-being
I-8:
Population using solid fuel for cooking and without access to electricity,
improved water and sanitation in a selection of countries
I-9:
Access to improved drinking water (1990–2011)

180
182

Energy
I-10:
I-11:
I-12:
I-13:
I-14:
I-15:
I-16:
I-17:
I-18:

184
184
185
186
187
187
188
188
189

World total primary energy supply by source
World primary energy demand: Trends and projections
Trends in electricity generation in the world and in selected countries (1971–2012)
Trends in world electricity generation by energy source
Trends in electricity consumption (2000–2011)
Share of people without electricity access in developing countries (2011)
Global electricity access rate: Trends and projections
Energy consumption per capita (2010)
Trends in electricity consumption per capita (2000–2011)

Dams and hydropower
I-19:
Use of dams by purpose
I-20:
Total dam capacity per capita by region (around 2010)
Hydropower: Technical potential and installed capacity by region (2009)
I-21:
I-22:
Trends in hydropower production in selected regions and countries
Water ‚) Energy
Global water use for energy production by scenario
I-23:
I-24:
Energy requirement to deliver 1 m3 water safe for human consumption from
various water sources
I-25:
Indicative energy use of municipal water and wastewater services
I-26:
Energy requirements and cost implications of desalination by technology
I-27:
Global cumulative contracted versus commissioned daily
desalination capacity (2013)
I-28:
Power consumption trends in seawater reverse osmosis desalination (1985–2009)
I-29:
Water footprint of energy generation by fuel
I-30:
Water use for electricity generation by cooling technology

193
193
193
194
194
194
195
195

ISO certification
I-31:
Trends in ISO 14001 certification (1999–2012)
I-32:
ISO 50001 certification on energy management

196
198

Geothermal electricity
I-33:
Trends in geothermal electricity output (2000–2011)
I-34:
Worldwide installed capacity for geothermal electricity generation (2010)

200
200

Bioenergy
I-35:
I-36:
I-37:

201
201
202

Global trends in ethanol and biodiesel production (1975–2010)
Indicative yields and water requirements for some major biofuel crops
Global total final energy consumption versus share of renewable energy

Water and energy in national policy
I-38:
The importance of water for energy
I-39:
Perceived change over the past 20 years in the importance of water for energy
I-40:
National energy policy/strategy/plan with water resources management component
I-41:
Infrastructure development and mobilizing financing for energy/hydropower

ii

189
190
191
192

Table of Contents

202
202
203
203

Preface
by Michela Miletto, WWAP Coordinator a.i.
and Engin Koncagül, WWDR 2014 Volume 2 Author

The fifth edition of the United Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR 2014) examines the close
interdependency between water and energy, both of which are indispensable for the sustainable development of nations
and the well-being of societies.
Despite their centrality to our lives, these two resources are not treated on an equal footing: while energy is considered as
an important commercial industry, with great leverage due to market forces, freshwater is taken as public good, scaling
relatively low in comparison to energy in broader policy circles. However, the need for energy in providing water services
and the use of water in energy production form a critical nexus that requires a holistic approach by decision-makers. The
common denominator in this difficult task is the alleviation of poverty: worldwide, the number of people whose right to
water is not satisfied could be as high as 3.5 billion and more than 1.3 billion people still lack access to electricity, the lack
of both of which are among the root causes of persistent human suffering.
Although little economic value is attributed to water resources, their irreplaceable role in the functioning of all sectors
and in helping national economies to prosper is incontestable. In spite of ongoing efforts to improve water use efficiency,
however, a business-as-usual approach has pushed the envelope beyond the limits of what is sustainable. And water
demand will continue to grow in the foreseeable future, fuelled by population growth and consumption patterns that will
simply add to the increasing competition for water resources, which the energy sector forms only one part of.
The WWDR 2014 concludes that the challenge for twenty-first century governance is to embrace the multiple aspects,
roles and benefits of water, and to place water at the heart of decision-making in all water-dependent sectors. In
particular, it calls for more coordinated planning between energy and water policies.
The thirteen case studies featured in this volume bolster the critical findings of the report by illustrating that an array
of opportunities exists to exploit the benefits of synergies, such as energy recovery from sewerage water, the use of
solar energy for wastewater treatment, and electricity production at ‘drinking water power plants’. These examples also
showcase alternatives to fossil fuel-based energy production, including hydropower development, geothermal energy,
solar power and biogas.
Real-life examples clearly demonstrate that human creativity and an enabling environment – created by political
guidelines that are adapted to national needs and realities – provide the right responses to these challenges.
The World Water Assessment Programme Secretariat is grateful to the country partners who contributed to the
preparation of this volume by sharing their valuable experiences. We would like to invite others, too, to join us in
forthcoming editions towards achieving global coverage. We are confident that you will find this compilation of case
studies interesting and informative.

Michela Miletto		

WWDR 2014

		

Engin Koncagül

iii iii

An investment in knowledge
pays the best interest
Benjamin Franklin

iv

PART 5

WWDR 2014

CASE STUDIES

Chapter title

135

136

Highlights of the findings
The fifth report in the United Nations World Water
Development Report series (WWDR 2014) focuses on the
close link between water and energy. As with previous
reports, the in-depth treatment given to the subject in
WWDR 2014 is accompanied by a volume of case studies,
prepared by institutional and national partners who have
assumed full ownership of this reporting process. The
thirteen case studies (see map) presented in this volume
provide real-life examples, from five regions, of responses to
current water and energy challenges and imminent problems.
Regardless of the geographical setting or the level of national
development, the overarching theme of the WWDR 2014 is
highly relevant to all countries around the world, not only to
the case study partners. Parallel to increasing living standards,
the sustainability of escalating consumption of both water
and energy resources has become a worldwide concern, with
many national agendas recognizing the need to prioritize
the decoupling of water use from energy generation. India,
for example, has banned the construction of thermal power
plants with open-loop wet cooling systems, which rely on
high water consumption. As part of its national action plan
on climate change, India has also targeted a 20% increase in
water use efficiency in all sectors by 2017.
Fossil fuels remain the major source of energy worldwide,
but renewable energy resources are gaining in popularity.
Solar, geothermal, biogas, biochar and hydropower are
just some of the technologies highlighted in this case
study volume. Although the initial investments required to
construct renewable energy generation facilities can be high,
the long-term benefits of using environmentally friendly
and sustainable methods to harness energy from natural
processes – mostly with very low or zero carbon emission –
can be advantageous.
Among the case studies featured, the ones from Mexico
and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) highlight the
experimental use of solar energy for wastewater treatment
and desalination. Desalination has become a necessity to
meet increasing freshwater demand in the Gulf region. The
energy intensive nature of this operation presents alarming
projections: by 2035, Kuwait, for example, may have to
allocate as much as 2.5 million barrels of oil per day for
water desalination, equal to the country’s entire 2011–2012
oil production. This business-as-usual scenario, to varying

WWDR 2014

degrees, applies to other GCC countries. One notable
response is the King Abdullah Initiative in Saudi Arabia,
which has the ultimate goal of ensuring that all seawater
desalination in the country will rely on solar energy alone
by 2019.
Energy demands are rising across the globe and notably
in developing countries, in parallel with industrialization,
population growth and higher living standards. While
fossil fuels continue to supply the biggest portion of this
energy, mounting pollution and the financial burden of
ever-increasing energy prices have spurred countries to
reassess their use of energy resources. The case studies
from Italy, Kenya and Turkey focus on geothermal energy,
presenting different ways these countries have capitalized
on this pollution-free resource, against a shared backdrop of
increasing challenges in meeting national energy demands
and achieving sustainable development without sacrificing
the environment. For example, Turkey – an emerging market
country and the world’s seventeenth largest economy – spent
US$60 billion on energy imports in 2012, a figure that seems
likely to increase in coming years. Faced with this situation,
the Turkish government introduced laws to incentivize
development of renewable energy sources, especially the
country’s rich geothermal potential. With the participation of
the private sector, Turkey’s geothermal electricity production
capacity doubled between 2009 and 2013. If fully utilized,
geothermal resources can now meet 14% of Turkey’s total
energy needs. As well as the economic benefits, geothermal
technologies offer many environmental advantages over
conventional power. The Umbria region of Italy estimates that
using geothermal heat to its full potential in its region alone
would provide a reduction of more than four million tonnes
of carbon dioxide emissions per year. In Kenya, geothermal
energy is opted as a key response to overcome the country’s
energy bottleneck and to elevate its economy.
Hydropower is among the most common sources of
renewable energy used today. This volume features three
hydropower projects: the Three Gorges project in China,
the Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the Four Major Rivers Restoration project
in the Republic of Korea. Together, these provide interesting
examples of hydropower usage at very different scales. The
Three Gorges Dam power station is the world’s largest. In
addition to generating electricity, the dam provides other

Highlights of the findings

137

advantages, including flood prevention, drought relief and
improved inland water navigation. On a far more modest
scale, the Four Major Rivers Restoration project in the
Republic of Korea is the centrepiece and the most visible part
of a larger national green growth strategy that prioritizes
ecosystems and environmental sustainability. The Trebišnjica
Multipurpose Hydrosystem in Eastern Herzegovina is
designed to bring multiple benefits to a water scarce region
that lies over a complex karst system.
One of the two case studies from Japan also highlights the
versatility of dams, by illustrating how hydropower stations
bridged the gap in electricity generation following the
shutdown of numerous nuclear and thermal power stations
in the aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011.

of generating renewable energy while reducing water
pressure, which is essential for the longevity of the water
supply infrastructure.
The case study from Austin, Texas, USA, is a good example of
productive collaboration between public water and electricity
utilities to identify and exploit synergies and develop
integrated programmes and policies. Through research
and pilot projects, the city is exploring better and more
sustainable uses of both its water and its energy resources.
This fruitful cooperation has allowed both utilities to increase
their supply capacity in a controlled fashion without the need
for major expansion efforts.
Clearly, in spite of growing efforts, water is yet to be
decoupled from the complex energy equation. Nevertheless
the case studies presented in this volume illustrate some
of the options currently available to reduce this looming
water and energy crisis. The handful of examples provided
remind us, moreover, of the stark truth that the full value of
water is still unrecognized, and that there is much room for
improvement if we are to curb the unsustainable businessas-usual approaches that have brought us to the situation
we find ourselves in today. That said, these positive and
often ingenious developments also give us reason to remain
cautiously optimistic. It is our heartfelt belief that building
the momentum in such initiatives will bring incommensurate
rewards: environmental sustainability and poverty alleviation
at the global level.

Wastewater is commonly discharged into rivers, lakes or seas
with little (if any) treatment, but the case studies from Austria
and Japan highlight innovative ways to harness the potential
of waste and turn it into a rich energy source. Gasification
in Tokyo, biochar production in Hiroshima, the use of
biogas in Kobe and the development of energy self-sufficient
wastewater treatment plants in Vienna are good examples of
ways that technology can contribute to making our societies
more sustainable.
The drinking water power plants in and around
Vienna demonstrate some of the potential of resource
conservation, which in this case provides the dual benefits
Regional distribution of the case studies

7
9 8
12

10

6

11

3

2

5

PA C IF IC
OC E A N

4
ATLA NTIC
OCE A N

1
PA CIF IC
OC E A N
INDIA N
OC E A N

AFRICA
1. Kenya

138

ARAB STATES
2. Gulf Cooperation Council

ASIA and the PACIFIC
3. China
4. India
5. Japan
6. Korea

EUROPE and NORTH AMERICA
7. Austria (Vienna)
8. Bosnia and Herzegovina
(Eastern Herzegovina)
9. Italy (Umbria Region)
10. Turkey
11. USA (Austin, Texas)

LATIN AMERICA and the CARIBBEAN
12. Mexico (Nogales, Sonora)
Countries included in both Africa and Arab States
Regions of UNESCO
Countries included in both Europe/North America
and Asia/Pacific Regions of UNESCO

CASE STUDIES

CHAPTER

17

Green energy generation in Vienna, Austria

Vienna’s drinking water comes from mountain springs
through two long-distance pipelines. The elevation
drop allows the gravity flow to turn turbines installed
within what are commonly referred to as drinking
water power plants (DWPPs), which generate electricity
while reducing the water pressure to levels suitable for
the city’s drinking water infrastructure. This provides
the energy necessary to operate the system itself, as
well as surplus electricity which is then sold to utility
companies.
The use of such energy-generating systems was
temporarily suspended in the 1970s due to economic
considerations mainly arising from stagnant energy
prices. New pipes with valves to control water pressure
were installed to bypass the turbines. In the mid-1990s,
however, electricity prices recovered and renewable
energy resources became increasingly sought in
Austria. This led to the re-operationalization of Vienna’s

BOX

17.1

abandoned water turbines and the construction of new
plants.
The DWPP at Mauer, along the Second Mountain Spring
Pipeline, was the first new plant to be constructed,
while the older DWPP at Reithof, located along the
First Mountain Spring Pipeline, was upgraded to boost
its initial capacity of 45 kW (in 1929) to 340 kW. The
turbines neither alter water quality nor block water flow
to jeopardize reliable water supply.
By 2011, more than 65 million kWh electricity was
being generated annually by 14 such plants located
within and around the city of Vienna, contributing
towards achieving the European Community target of
a 20% share of energy from renewable sources by 2020
(Directive 2009/28/EC). The city is actively seeking
further potential sites for such plants, as well as drawing

An energy self-sufficient wastewater treatment plant
Ebswien, Vienna’s main wastewater treatment plant, purifies approximately 220 million m3 sewage per year. The power used
by the plant accounts for almost 1% of the city’s total electricity consumption. Confronted by rising energy costs, however, city
officials have turned to innovative approaches to reduce Ebswien’s energy consumption.
The plant uses a number of renewable energy technologies, such as hydropower, solar energy (thermal and photovoltaic), wind
power and methane, to lessen dependency on carbon-based energy sources and to decrease greenhouse gas emissions.
These technologies have been carefully implemented to function in an integrated manner. A turbine installed at the point of
discharge, where the treated effluent is drained into the Danube River, generates approximately 1.5 GWh electricity annually.
Solar thermal and photovoltaic power units are also built into the compound, and a small wind turbine generates sufficient
current to power the exterior lighting. An integrated block heat and power station utilizes approximately 20 million m3 methane
that has been recovered during the treatment process, producing 78 GWh electricity and 82 GWh heat output per year. In
addition, the plant’s energy consumption has been reduced significantly through process optimization and infrastructural
measures such as using energy saving bulbs and efficient heating technologies.
As a result of these combined technologies, the Ebswien wastewater treatment plant is not only energy self-sufficient until 2020,
but also produces a surplus of approximately 15 GWh electricity and 42 GWh heat output annually. The reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions is estimated at approximately 40,000 tonnes per year, equivalent to that of a town of 4,000 inhabitants.
Source: Adapted from Ebswien hauptkläranlage (n.d.) and Umwelttecnik.at (2012).

WWDR 2014

Green energy generation in Vienna, Austria

139

on other renewable energy technologies to boost its
green energy generation potential (Box 17.1).

Conclusion

Vienna features a number of innovative green energy
approaches. The city’s many DWPPs are prime examples
of resource conservation, providing the dual benefits
of renewable energy generation and water pressure
reduction (which also enhances the longevity of
water supply infrastructure). In addition, the Ebswien
wastewater treatment plant incorporates various
renewable energy technologies to generate more than
sufficient energy to power the plant. This highlights an
energy-aware approach to wastewater management.
The two projects featured in this case study result in
a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions of tens of
thousands of tonnes per year when compared to the
generation of electricity through carbon-based energy
sources. Environmental protection, cost efficiency and
curbing climate change are all valuable advantages of
these approaches.

140

Chapter 17

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
European Commission. n.d. Renewable Energy. Brussels,
European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/energy/
renewables/targets_en.htm (Accessed Jul 2013)

Vienna Water. n.d. Generating Energy with Drinking Water: The
Mauer Small-Scale Hydropower Plant. Vienna, Vienna City
Administration. http://www.wien.gv.at/english/environment/
watersupply/energy.html (Accessed Jul 2013)
***********
Ebswien hauptkläranlage. n.d. EOS: Energie-Optimierung
Schlammbehandlung. Vienna, Ebswien hauptkläranlage GmbH.
http://www.ebswien.at/hauptklaeranlage/hauptklaeranlage/
abwasser-energie/projekt-eos/ (Accessed Sep 2013)
Umwelttecnik.at. 2012. Main Wastewater Treatment Plant
in Vienna Becomes Energy-Self-Sufficient. Vienna, Green
Jobs Austria. http://www.umwelttechnik.at/en/water-andwastewater/wastewater-management/good-practise/mainwaste-water-treatment-plant-in-vienna-becomes-energy-selfsufficient/

CASE STUDIES

CHAPTER

18

The Three Gorges project on the
Yangtze River in China

The Yangtze River originates in the Qinghai–Tibetan
Plateau and runs from west to east through 11 provinces.
With its main stream extending more than 6,300 km, it
is the longest river in China and the third longest in
the world. Its basin area covers about 20% of China’s
landmass and holds more than one-third of the country’s
population (Figure 18.1). Economic activities in the
basin generate nearly 40% of Gross Domestic Product.
The Three Gorges project was designed to tame the
Yangtze River, which floods frequently and severely.
The project commenced in 1993 and was completed
in 2010. The project’s main structure is the 181 m high
Three Gorges Dam. It not only regulates the river’s flow,
but also is used to generate electricity and for water
navigation. The dam is well known for its hydroelectric
power station, which is the world’s biggest in terms of
installed capacity.
The dam reservoir stores approximately 39.3 billion m3
water and covers an area of 1,084 km2. The Three Gorges’
reservoir, which includes a number of ship locks and

Before the Three Gorges project, droughts and floods
frequently affected the Yangtze River basin. According
to records, on average, each province in the basin
suffered from flood disaster every ten years and from
drought every two to three years. The most recent
example is the 2011 drought in the lower Yangtze
River, which corresponded to the severity of a 100-year
frequency drought. To offset the severely reduced natural
water flow, about 5.5 billion m3 water was released
from the dam reservoir, mainly for irrigation and
municipal use. This reduced the effects of the drought,
ensuring navigation safety and meeting environmental
requirements.
In central and eastern China, periodic floods cause
considerable economic losses. The Three Gorges project
has significantly enhanced the flood control capability
in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River.
Between 2003 and 2012, a total of 75 billion m3 floodwater

The Yangtze River basin

Figure

18.1

a ship lift, improved water navigability over a 660 km
stretch of the Yangtze River (Box 18.1).

100 km

Zigui

Yichang

Wuhan

ng
Ya

Three Gorges Dam

t ze

Ri

ver

Shanghai

Area of
detail

Chongqing

WWDR 2014

The Three Gorges project on the Yangtze River, China

141

was controlled and stored in the dam reservoir. Of this,
approximately 27 billion m3 was stored during the 2010
floods.
The project has also allowed easy and permanent access
by boat to the beautiful scenery along the Yangtze River.
The dam itself, the hydroelectric power station and the
ship locks are new man-made attractions that draw
tourists from all over the world. In 2012, 1.8 million
tourists visited the area. A stretch of the Yangtze River
that flows through deep gorges in western Yunnan is a
UNESCO World Heritage site.
The highlight of the project is its large installed capacity
for hydroelectric power production, which provides
electricity to eastern, southern and central China –
where power shortages used to be a severe problem.
Thirty-four generating units with a total installed
capacity of 22,500 MW make the hydroelectric power
station in the Three Gorges dam the world’s biggest. Its
daily power production accounts for 2% of China’s total.
From 2003, when the dam started operation up to 2012,
a total of 630 billion kWh electricity was generated. In
2012, electricity production reached 98.1 billion kWh,
equivalent to 14% of the country’s total hydroelectric
power output. At this rate, the annual electric power
generation is equivalent to several large-scale thermal
power stations, consuming as much as 50 million tonnes
of coal per year. From this perspective, the Three Gorges

BOX

18.1

hydroelectric power station could reduce annual carbon
dioxide emissions by up to 100 million tonnes. Its
strategic location and great capacity have made it the
main hub of the national power grid. The hydroelectric
power generated at the Three Gorges brings direct
benefits to more than half of China’s population.
Even though a great deal of preparation and planning
went into the project’s preliminary phase, it has brought
about changes in the area’s social and environmental
fabric. In 2011, China's State Council acknowledged
that ‘the project has provided great benefits in terms of
flood prevention, power generation, river transportation
and water resource utilization, but it has also brought
about some urgent problems in terms of environmental
protection, the prevention of geological hazards and
the welfare of relocated communities’ (Central People’s
Government of the People’s Republic of China, 2013).
The Chinese government pledged to establish disaster
warning systems, reinforce riverbanks, boost funding for
environmental protection and improve benefits for the
resettled communities (Hays, 2011).

Conclusion

The Three Gorges project is a multipurpose water
resources development scheme. The actual investment
in the construction and the resettlement amounted to
approximately US$29 billion. However, this cost will
be rapidly paid off through the cumulative benefits

Navigation on the Yangtze River
Also known as ‘the golden waterway’, the Yangtze River has been used by boats for centuries, especially along the middle and
lower reaches of the river’s main stream. However, before the construction of the Gezhouba and Three Gorges dams, some
sections were only navigable seasonally. This hindered the economic development of the western region because it limited
trade between the south-west and the more developed eastern regions of the country.
Located in the Xiling Gorge, one of the Three Gorges of the Yangtze River, the Three Gorges dam improves waterway conditions
from Yichang as far west as Chongqing City. As a result, ships from inland ports are now able to transport goods all the way to
the sea at Shanghai. The navigational infrastructure, established as part of the project, includes double-way, five-tier ship locks
with the highest water head and the most steps in the world. The total length of the ship locks’ main structure is 1,607 m and it
can accommodate barge fleets weighing up to 10,000 tonnes. In 2011, the cargo that passed through the ship locks reached 100
million tonnes for the first time – which is six times the cargo weight of 2003. Overall, from June 2003 to the end of 2011, over
half a billion tonnes of cargo was transported through the ship locks, providing a huge boost to the economic development of
China’s western and middle-eastern regions. The navigation industry alone created 150,000 jobs in the Chongqing area. Other
navigation-related activities created more than 500,000 jobs. All in all, over two million people have been employed.
The lower cost of transporting boats has helped to reduce fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions substantially. In
2009 for example, 500,000 tonnes of fuel was saved thanks to water transport departing from Chongqing City. This, in practical
terms, translates into a reduction of 1.5 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions.

142

Chapter 18

CASE STUDIES

obtained, notably in minimizing the impact of floods
and droughts. To give an example, the economic damage
caused by the 1998 flood in the Yangtze River basin was
practically equal to the total investment in the Three
Gorges project. Other dimensions, such as electricity
generation and river navigation, make the project even
more cost-efficient. The revenue generated by electricity
sales alone is expected to cover the investment by 2015.
The production of hydroelectricity and improvements
in river transport also contributed to significant
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. The project’s
role in regulating flow has improved water quality in
the river during drought periods through dilution.
However, the Three Gorges project has also caused new
environmental problems: the inundation of arable lands
and rare plants; weakened self-purification capacity in
certain tributary sections of the river basin; and changed
aquatic ecosystems in the reservoir area, as well as in the
middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River. These
and other emerging problems have been acknowledged
by the Chinese government, which has pledged to take
improvement measures.

WWDR 2014

Acknowledgement

Three Gorges Corporation

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
China Three Gorges Corporation. 2013. Three Gorges Project
Case Study. Beijing, China Three Gorges Corporation.
(Unpublished)

***********
Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China.
2013. [The State Council Adopted the Three Gorges Follow-up
Plan.] http://www.gov.cn/ldhd/2011-05/18/content_1866289.
htm (In Chinese)
Hays, J. 2011. Three Gorges Dam: Benefits, Problems and Costs.
Facts and Details. http://factsanddetails.com/china/cat13/
sub85/item1046.html

The Three Gorges project on the Yangtze River, China

143

CHAPTER

19

Hydropower development in Eastern Herzegovina:
The Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem

geographic depressions which, under natural conditions,
remain flooded for between 150 and 250 days per year.
With an estimated 100,000 inhabitants living in the region
in 2006, the population of Eastern Herzegovina remains
low. Difficult living conditions have been driving people
out of this region over many decades.

Eastern Herzegovina is a region of some 7,500 km2 in
the south-eastern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
the purposes of this case study, it refers to the area
delineated by the Neretva River in the west, Montenegro
in the east and Croatia in the south-west. In spite of
abundant rainfall that ranges from 1,250 mm to about
2,450 mm per year, access to water is a challenge as a
result of the karst terrain which allows almost 80% of
rainwater to immediately percolate deep into the ground,
making permanent surface flow rare. Four of the five
rivers in Eastern Herzegovina (the Trebišnjica, Zalomka,
Bregava, Mušnica and Buna rivers) disappear into
complex underground structures within relatively short
distances of their sources and reappear as permanent
or temporary springs in various locations (Figure 19.1).
Water availability becomes an even more pressing issue
during dry summer periods when demands for domestic
use and irrigation are highest. In remote areas, villagers
rely on rainwater collected during winter and groundwater
from siphonal lakes in natural karst shafts. The region’s
only agricultural land is in the karst poljes – flat-floored

Groundwater flow directions in
Eastern Herzegovina including the
border areas of Montenegro and
Croatia

er

Mostar

Nevesinjsko
Polje
850

Riv

Zalo

Nevesinje

Buna River

mka

Rive

Ne

ret

va

Figure

19.1

In contrast to the limited surface water resources in
Eastern Herzegovina, there is a considerable amount
of groundwater available in the region. However, this
has not been sufficiently investigated. This is why the
economic and social development of the region currently
depends on being able to optimize the use of its scarce
surface water resources. Among these, the Trebišnjica
River is the most important; it is the longest sinking
river in Europe with a total length of 90 km, of which
about 30 km is permanent. The Trebišnjica Multipurpose
Hydrosystem (TMH) aims to harness the potential
energy of this river. The project, which was initiated in
1959, consists of seven dams, six artificial reservoirs, six
tunnels and four channels (see also Box 19.1). Producing

Čapljina

Dubrava
280
Bregava

Opačica River

Lukavačko Polje

R i v er

Stolac
Deransko
Metkovic
Jezero
Embankment Krupa
RPP Čapljina
Lower and upper
compensation Reservoir

Neretva River

Slato Polje

Reservoir
Gacko Vrba
Gatačko Klinje
Dam
Polje
950

Dabarsko Polje
470

Krupa River

Croatia

r

Fatničko Polje
Obod
Ljubinje
Ljubinjsko Polje
470
Bilećko Polje
450
Montenegro
Bilecá
Popovo Polje
Ljubomirsko Polje
250
Tre
550
Reservoir Bilecá
bi
šnj

Adriatic Sea

ica

Riv

er

PP Trebinje II Grančarevo Dam
Trebinje
PP Trebinje I
Gorica
Trebinjsko Polje Dam
Reservoir Sušica River
270
Dubrovnik
Trebinje
Ombla

Note: Ponor is a natural surface opening that may be
found in karstic areas.
Source: Adapted from DIKTAS (2011).

144

Chapter 19

Town
Ponor
Spring
Dam
Power plant

Intermittent river
River
Tunnel
Underground connection
International Boundary

PP Dubrovnik
Konavli
50

CASE STUDIES

hydropower is the main priority of the TMH because
exporting electricity to neighbouring countries is
Eastern Herzegovina’s main source of income. However,
the project also aims to provide water for all sectors,
including for fish farming, for recreational purposes and
for the prevention of deforestation.

Table

19.1

The TMH has not been fully implemented yet and only
the lower part – from sea level up to an elevation of
400 m – is in operation. Four dams (Table 19.1) in this
section have, between them, an installed capacity of
818 MW, enabling them to generate around 2,700 GWh
electricity per year. The finalization of the upper part of

Technical characteristics of water reservoirs and power plants on the lower section of the Trebišnjica
Multipurpose Hydrosystem (TMH)
Hydropower plant

Reservoir capacity
(million m3)

Installed capacity
(MW)

Average annual electricity
generation
(GWh)

Trebinje I

1 280.0

180

571

Trebinje II

15.9

8

22

Dubrovnik

–*

210

1 564

Čapljina

5.2

420

620

Note: * Dubrovnik does not have reservoir capacity as the water for hydropower production flows via a tunnel from the reservoir of Trebinje II.

BOX

19.1

The Dinaric Karst and the DIKTAS project
The Dinaric Karst covers a large area extending from Italy to Greece. Highly porous rock formations in this system serve as
conduits that allow groundwater to cover long distances. Eastern Herzegovina, including the Trebišnjica River basin, is a part
of this extensive karst formation.
The main water-related challenge in Eastern Herzegovina is to deal with the regularly alternating summer droughts and
winter and spring floods. One of the aims of the Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem (TMH) is to minimize this challenge,
while providing other benefits to the residents of the region. Four hydropower plants (Table 19.1) were built between 1954
and 1981 as a part of the lower section of the project (Figure 19.1). These power plants are currently situated in two countries,
Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which formed following the break-up of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s. The technical
challenges of water resources development in a complex karst system were further compounded by the political difficulties
that set in in the aftermath of the civil war that broke out in 1992. Consequently, the realization of the upper section of TMH
has been slowed down substantially as a result of limited cooperation among political entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as among neighbouring countries.
Similar challenges are present in the broader setting of the Dinaric Karst, as it is the major source of freshwater for Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Albania. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) funded the Protection and
Sustainable Use of the Dinaric Karst Aquifer System (DIKTAS) project, which is a pioneering effort that aims to introduce
sustainable integrated water resources management principles in such an extensive transboundary karst aquifer system.
DIKTAS is implemented by UNEP and executed by UNESCO’s International Hydrological Programme. The core DIKTAS project
partners – Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro – agreed to create two mechanisms to facilitate
enhanced consultation and the exchange of information between the government entities that are involved in water
resources management: national inter-ministerial committees (NICs) in each of the project countries and a consultation
and information exchange (CIE) body at the regional level. The NICs and CIE together represent the key combination of
technical and political experts involved in the project who will discuss, comment and approve the project’s products, such
as transboundary diagnostic analysis (TDA), environmental quality objectives, and environmental status indicators and their
long-term monitoring. The NICs and CIE will have a central role in the preparation and implementation of the Strategic Action
Programme aimed at harmonizing existing policy and institutional frameworks.
Source: Adapted from DIKTAS (2013).

WWDR 2014

Hydropower development in Eastern Herzegovina:
The Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem

145

the TMH at elevations between 400 m and 1,000 m above
sea level has been pending for years, delayed as a result
of the civil war. Hydropower plants due to be built at
Nevesinje, Dabar and Bileća in the highlands will, when
they come online, boost power capacity by almost
250 MW and augment the benefits that the TMH has
already brought to the people of the region. Prevailing
political stability and growing cooperation will certainly
facilitate the construction of these plants resuming
without a long delay.
Unconventional structures such as underground dams
and water collecting galleries are being considered to
make the best use of underground water resources, which
so far have not been tapped. One such technically challenging
project in the region is the Ombla underground dam near
Dubrovnik in Croatia, which is currently under consideration
for construction. The Ombla River rises as a karst spring
and is fed by groundwater that is partly replenished by the
Trebišnjica River.

Conclusion

Temporarily flooded karst poljes, ephemeral rivers,
numerous caves and deep underground flows
characterize the terrain of Eastern Herzegovina. In
spite of abundant rainfall, karst terrain and the uneven
distribution of precipitation makes its inhabitants
vulnerable to frequent floods and droughts. The
TMH was initiated in the early 1950s to improve the
livelihoods of the people in the region by regulating
water supply to make it available all year round for

146

Chapter 19

multiple uses, most notably electricity generation. The
hydropower plants that were built as a part of the TMH
are the most important agents of economic development
in Eastern Herzegovina. However, the complex karstic
system and the state borders that dissect the region make
the integrated management of water resources complex.
In the face of increasing demand for water and energy,
optimizing the use of water resources using a holistic
approach calls for a common effort to be made by all
stakeholders in the region. In this context, DIKTAS is
a noteworthy project that contributes to the process
of building a bridge of cooperation between political
entities and countries in the Dinaric Karst region.

Acknowledgements

Petar Milanović, Neno Kukurić

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter summary is adapted from:
Milanović, P. and Kukurić, N. 2013. Hydropower and
Groundwater in Karst. Delft, the Netherlands, International
Groundwater Resources Assessment Centre (IGRAC). http://
www.un-igrac.org/publications/478

***********
DIKTAS (Protection and Sustainable Use of the Dinaric
Karst Aquifer System). 2011. Waters of the Trebišnjica River
(brochure). DIKTAS.
––––. 2013. Project Website. DIKTAS. http://diktas.iwlearn.org/
(Accessed Sep 2013)

CASE STUDIES

CHAPTER

20

Desalination in Gulf Cooperation
Council countries

Water and energy are crucial for development. The Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) countries (Saudi Arabia,
Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Bahrain and Kuwait),
situated in one of the most water scarce regions of the
world, are facing a critical challenge in addressing growing
interdependency between these two resources. Without
energy, mainly in the form of electricity, water cannot be
delivered for its multiple uses. Water is also needed for
energy production, notably for cooling and enhanced
oil recovery processes in the region, in addition to other
applications.
The population of the GCC countries is almost 45 million
(Markaz, 2012), and is projected to reach 70 million by
2050. This demographic growth, along with accelerated
socio-economic development, has led to a substantial
increase in water demand, placing further stress on
scarce and mainly non-renewable water resources in the
region. Growing water demand has also necessitated
the use of more energy for the provision of water supply.
It is estimated that water services currently account

Figure

20.1

Current (2010) and contracted (2016)
desalination capacity in the Gulf Cooperation
Council countries

Desalination capacity
(million m3/day)

25
20
15

Given the region’s limited endowment of renewable water
resources, desalination, mainly through cogeneration
power desalting plants (CPDPs), has become a common
but energy intensive method of satisfying the increasing
demand for water. In fact, about 50% of the world’s
desalination capacity is installed in the GCC countries
(Dawoud and Al Mulla, 2012), and combined annual
capacity in the region is projected to reach 19 billion m3
by as early as 2016 (GWI, 2010) (Figure 20.1). In 2005, the
average share of desalinated water destined for municipal
use in the GCC countries was around 55% (World Bank
and AGFUND, 2005). This ratio is expected to increase
gradually because of the ongoing deterioration of the
quality of the groundwater.

10
5

te
d

a
bi

ud
iA

ra

te
s

Ar
Source: GWI (2010).

2016

Un
i

2010

Sa

Em

ira

ait

r

ab

Ku
w

ta
Qa

an
Om

Ba

hr

ain

0

WWDR 2014

for at least 15% of national electricity consumption in
most of the Arab countries. This share is continuously
on the rise (Khatib, 2010). Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) assessments show that the
limited amount of water that is available in the region is
expected to further decline as a result of climate change
and human-induced quality problems (Bates et al., 2008).
Consequently, more energy will be required to treat poor
quality water for drinking and food production, or to
pump water from greater depths or transfer it from greater
distances. The main concern linked to growing water–
energy interdependency is the increasing greenhouse gas
emissions which, based on current trends, are expected to
double to 9% of global emissions by 2035 (Khatib, 2010).
In other words, climate change is expected to increase
both water and energy needs, thus creating a feedback
loop of environmental deterioration.

Although GCC countries are rich in fossil fuels, meeting
escalating demand for water by expanding desalination
has become a very hydrocarbon intensive process,
claiming a sizeable portion of the main export of these
countries. For example, in Saudi Arabia, which has more
than 18% of the world’s desalination capacity, 25% of
domestic oil and gas production is used to produce water
through CPDPs. If the current trend continues, this share

Desalination in Gulf Cooperation Council countries

147

will reach as high as 50% by 2030 (Al-Hussayen, 2009).
Similarly, in Kuwait electricity and desalinated water
consumption have been on the rise – practically doubling
every decade as a result of population growth and the rise
in living standards. Projections show that in a business-asusual scenario, the energy demand of desalination plants
will be equal to the country’s 2011–2012 oil production
(2.5 million barrels of oil per day) by the year 2035
(Darwish et al., 2009).
Undoubtedly, these projections are alarming both from
a sustainability point of view as well as in the light of
environmental concerns such as greenhouse gas emissions
and seawater pollution by discharged brines, a by-product
of desalination (Abderrahman and Hussain, 2006). While
the impact of discharges from thermal desalination plants
has not been studied in depth at the regional level, given
the enclosed nature of the Gulf, the GCC countries are
increasingly concerned by the potential damage to the
fragile marine ecosystem (Al-Jamal and Schiffler, 2009).
In general, the information that is currently available

BOX

20.1

148

The King Abdullah Initiative for Solar Water
Desalination
In the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) region, there
are a number of initiatives related to the water–energy
nexus. Probably one of the most important on the
supply side is the King Abdullah Initiative for Solar
Water Desalination, which was launched in 2010.
The initiative aims to use solar energy to desalinate
seawater at a low cost to contribute to Saudi Arabia’s
water security and the national economy (Al Saud,
2010). The implementation of the initiative will be done
in three stages over nine years. The first phase, which
will last three years, aims to build a desalination plant
with a production capacity of 30,000 m3/day to meet
the drinking water needs of the town of Al Khafji. The
plant will use reverse osmosis technology and will be
powered by solar energy farms that are currently being
constructed. The second phase aims to build another
solar desalination plant with a production capacity
of 300,000 m3/day. The third phase would involve the
construction of several solar plants for desalination in
all parts of the country. The ultimate goal is to enable all
seawater desalination in the country to be carried out
using solely solar energy by 2019, and at a significantly
lower cost of US$0.4/m3 compared to the current
cost of between US$0.67/m3 and US$1.47/m3 when
using thermal methods. The technology developed
here would also be licensed outside Saudi Arabia
(Sustainable Energy, 2010).

Chapter 20

indicates that there is a need for a comprehensive
environmental evaluation of all major desalination
projects at the global level (Lattemann and Höpner, 2003).
From the sustainable development aspect of coastal areas,
the integration of desalination activities into regional
water resources management plans is an important
consideration (UNEP-MAP/MED POL, 2003).
Using solar energy as a vast renewable resource in
the region is being considered as a way of decoupling
expanding desalination projects’ dependence on
hydrocarbon energy sources (Box 20.1). The use of other
potential energy sources, such as biogas (methane) that
has been recovered from wastewater treatment plants, is
one of the viable solutions to reducing the environmental
footprint of producing more energy to keep pace with
rising demands for water provision and services.
The GCC countries have recognized that good water
management is just as important as technical solutions
are in trying to ease water scarcity. In their thirty-first
summit in 2010, the GCC heads of state issued the Abu
Dhabi Declaration, which acknowledged the strong link
between water and energy. The Declaration, among other
matters, called for a comprehensive long-term strategy
for water resources in the GCC countries that would take
into account the interdependencies between water, energy
and agriculture, the effects of climate change, and the
environmental impact of desalination, emphasizing water
demand management and conservation. The Declaration
consisted of many recommendations on using water
and energy efficiently, including the use of economic,
technological, legislative and societal awareness tools.
Most importantly, the Declaration linked water security
with energy security and considered both as crucial
strategic priorities for the future of the GCC countries.

Conclusion

Addressing water scarcity is considered a major challenge
in the GCC countries, which are situated in one of the
most water-stressed regions of the world. These countries
have so far been able to alleviate the challenge by
tapping fossil groundwater resources and using seawater
desalination as a complementary source. However, an
increase in the amount of water being used has led to
the depletion of some aquifers and a deterioration of
quality in others. This has made desalination necessary
to meet various water demands, notably municipal uses.
In 2005, desalinated water accounted for more than half
of the drinking water supply in the GCC countries and

CASE STUDIES

this ratio is expected to grow. The total installed capacity
of desalination plants in the region has reached almost
half of worldwide production at the expense of intensive
fossil fuel use as the main source of energy. However,
environmental impacts, such as greenhouse gas emissions
and the by-products of desalination require careful
consideration to be able to achieve water security without
sacrificing the environment. Projects aimed at using
alternative and renewable energy sources such as solar,
wind and biogas from wastewater can help to decouple
carbon intensive energy production and the growing
need for water desalination. The importance of integrated
management approaches to water and energy resources
as well as conservation efforts have been recognized by all
countries at the highest level.

Dawoud, A.M. and Al Mulla, M.M. 2012. Environmental
impacts of seawater desalination: Arabian Gulf case study.
International Journal of Environment and Sustainability, 1(3):
22–37.
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2010. Desalination Markets
2010: Global Forecast and Analysis. Oxford, UK, GWI.
Al-Hussayen, A. 2009. Inaugural speech by the Minister of Water
and Electricity, Saudi Arabia. Jeddah, Saudi Water and Power
Forum.
Al-Jamal, K. and Schiffler, M. 2009. Desalination opportunities
and challenges in the Middle East and North Africa region.
N. V. Jagannathan et al. (eds), Water in the Arab World:
Management Perspectives and Innovations, pp. 479–494.
Washington DC, World Bank.
Khatib, H. 2010. The water and energy nexus in the Arab region.
Arab Water Report: Towards Improved Water Governance.
Nairobi, UNDP. (Unpublished)

Acknowledgement

Lattemann, S. and Höpner T. 2003. Seawater Desalination:
Impacts of Brine and Chemical Discharges on the Marine
Environment. L’Aquila, Italy, Balaban Desalination Publications.

References

Markaz (Kuwait Financial Centre). 2012. GCC Demographic
Shift: Intergenerational Risk-Transfer at Play. Kuwait, Markaz.
http://www.markaz.com/DesktopModules/CRD/Attachments/
DemographicsResearch-MarkazResearch-June%202012.pdf

Waleed K. Al-Zubari

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:

Al-Zubari, W.K. 2013. The Water Energy Nexus in the GCC
Countries. Bahrain, Water Resources Management Program,
College of Graduate Studies, Arabian Gulf University.
(Unpublished)
***********
Abderrahman, W. and Hussain, T. 2006. Pollution impacts of
desalination on ecosystems in the Arabian Peninsula. Amer,
K.M. et al. (eds), Policy Perspectives for Ecosystem and Water
Management in the Arabian Peninsula. Paris/Hamilton,
Canada, UNESCO/UNU-INWEH. http://www.unesco.org/
ulis/cgi-bin/ulis.pl?catno=150698&set=529F1AF4_0_476&gp
=1&lin=1&ll=1
Bates, B., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. 2008.
Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Geneva,
IPCC. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/technical-papers/climatechange-water-en.pdf
Darwish, M.A., Al-Najem, N.M. and Lior, N. 2009. Towards
sustainable seawater desalting in the Gulf area. Desalination,
235(1–3): 58–87.

WWDR 2014

Al Saud, T.M. 2010. King Abdullah Initiative for Solar Water
Desalination. Presentation at the Saudi International Water
Technology Conference, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 21 November
2011. http://kacstwatertech.org/eng/presentatoins/Day1/
Session_1_1/Turki.pdf
Sustainable Energy. 2010. Regional news and trends: Saudi
Arabia. Sustainable Energy, 1(3): 25. Nicosia, Middle East
Economic Survey (MEES). http://www.mees.com/system/
assets/000/000/628/original_issue3.pdf
UNEP-MAP/MED POL. 2003. Sea Water Desalination in the
Mediterranean: Assessment and Guidelines. MAP Technical
Reports Series No. 139. Athens, United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP)-Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP).
http://195.97.36.231/acrobatfiles/MTSAcrobatfiles/mts139eng.
pdf
World Bank and AGFUND. 2005. A Water Sector Assessment
Report on the Countries of the Cooperation Council of the
Arab States of the Gulf. World Bank Report No. 32539M. Washington DC, World Bank. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/8719/325390ENGLIS
H01eport0Clean006125105.pdf?sequence=1

Desalination in Gulf Cooperation Council countries

149

CHAPTER

21

Water use efficiency in thermal power plants
in India

With more than 1.2 billion people, India is the second
most populous country in the world – and according to
estimates, it will be the most crowded nation by 2025. In
parallel to its rapid population growth and increase of
water consumption in all sectors, the country’s per capita
water availability declined threefold over the past six
decades (from over 5,000 m3 in 1951 to 1,600 m3 in 2011).
Agriculture, which accounts for 85% of all water use,
continues to be the national priority. Taking these factors
into consideration, the combined demand for water
is likely to reach or outstrip availability by 2050. This
alarming projection calls for water to be mainstreamed
in all planning activities nationwide.

Figures demonstrate that India’s thermal power plants
(TPPs) account for about 88% of the total industrial
water demand in the country (CSE, n.d.). These mostly
older generation TPPs run on open loop–wet (OLW)
cooling systems with an average water use intensity
around 40 to 80 times higher than the current world
average for closed loop systems. Table 21.1 shows water
use intensity in electricity generation under different
fuel use categories and cooling types in India. While the
national energy portfolio is complemented by increasing
shares of natural gas and renewable energy resources,
the abundance of national coal reserves means that the
dominance of coal-based TPPs is not likely to change.

A sustainable supply of energy is vital if India is to
keep its momentum as one of the fastest growing major
economies in the world. In fact, the country is the fifth
largest electricity producer at the global level. And yet
more than half the population lacks access to electricity,
and India’s per capita electricity consumption is less
than one-quarter of the world average (IEA, 2011). In
an attempt to close this gap in a modernizing society,
electricity generation is expected to increase rapidly
to reach around 4,900 TWh a year by 2050 – about
six times the 2010 level. Nevertheless, India’s installed
capacity is dominated by coal-based and gas-based
thermal power (56%) followed by hydropower (23%).

The environmental impact of TPPs, especially those
equipped with OLW cooling systems, is a concern. These
plants release above-ambient temperature cooling water
into rivers and canals, causing thermal pollution and
adversely affecting the aquatic ecosystems. To minimize
potential damage, India’s Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MOEF) banned the construction of TPPs with
OLW cooling systems in June 1999. The only exceptions
allowed are power plants set up in coastal areas that can
use seawater as a coolant. The recently introduced Zero
Discharge policy also obliges operators to recirculate
and reuse water in TPPs. These two regulations help
to reduce the amount of water used in thermal power

Table

21.1

Water use intensity of thermal power plants according to fuel type and cooling system
Fuel type

Cooling type

Water use intensity of thermal power generation
(m3/MWh)

Coal

Wet cooling–open loop

80.0–160 a

Wet cooling–closed loop

2.8–3.4 b
(World average: 1.2–1.5 c)

Natural gas

Dry cooling

0.45–0.65 b

Wet cooling–closed loop

1.10–1.5 b
3.0 d

Sources: a CSE (n.d.) and IL&FS (2009); b IGES (2012); c based on data collected from literature review and experts’ interviews and compiled by the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA, personal communication, 1 August 2012); and d NEERI (2006).

150

Chapter 21

CASE STUDIES

generation. However, it has been estimated that around
25% of TPPs are still using OLW cooling with high water
demand. Retrofitting cooling systems that conserve
water in these old plants is not considered economical.
Therefore, these plants will continue to function until
they eventually reach the end of their designed lifespans.
As Figure 21.1 shows, switching to more efficient cooling
methods in TPPs would allow a reduction in water
demand of about 145 billion m3 per year by 2050.
The current problem is that national planning for power
generation does not fully take into account the issue of
long-term water availability in the country. The findings
of various basin-level studies illustrate that water
availability may put the operational continuity of power
plants in jeopardy. In fact, the geographical distribution
of existing TPPs shows that more than 80% of these are
set up in either water scarce or water stressed regions
where electricity demand is expected to remain very
high (Figure 21.2). Given the priority that irrigation
has, followed by water for domestic use, TPPs are facing
a considerable challenge to secure their required water

Clearly, the relative severity of water scarcity will
vary depending on the availability of renewable
freshwater resources at the local level, the trends in
demographics and land use, and the political influence
of water user groups. However, the fact remains that
the rapid depletion of limited water resources calls
for more investment in research and development.
Such investment is needed notably to promote waterefficient technologies in all sectors, to carry out periodic

21.2

Projected water demand for electricity
generation

Figure

Figure

21.1

supply, especially during the dry season. Consequently,
rainwater harvesting has become a standard proposal to
win government approval for the construction of new
power plants. Various scenarios (which assume mediumlevel economic and technological development with no
stringent climate target) show that overall water demand
may exceed the usable annual water availability in the
country by 2050. This could further intensify existing
conflicts between sectors on water use (Box 21.1). In
view of the worsening situation, realigning long-term
water use plans with water availability becomes a priority
to avoid any potential crisis.

250

The water stress level of major river basins
and the distribution of thermal power plants

Water demand
(billion m3)

200

340

Nepal
Brahmaputra

100
WFR
incl
Sabarmati
Luni

50

Mahi

Narmada
Mahanadi

NCIWRD

IGES estimate
(with policy)

2050

2025

2010

2050

2025

2010

2050

2025

Godavari

2010

0

IGES estimate
(without policy)

WFR

Subernarekha
Brahmani and Baitarani

EFR
EFR

Krishna

EFR

Bay of Bengal

Pennar

Arabian Sea

EFR
WFR

Note: The base year of the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies
(IGES) model study was set at 2005 and water demand projection
for electricity generation was estimated for 2010, 2025 and 2050 for
comparison with National Commission on Integrated Water Resources
Development (NCIWRD) projections. IGES estimates water demand
for the electricity sector based only on the water use intensity of power
plants. The electricity sector’s water demand with policy intervention is
basically considering the closed loop–wet cooling system installed after
1 June 1999 and without policy water demand is a reference estimate
of continuation of use of open loop–wet cooling systems in the thermal
power stations.

Bangladesh Barak

Ganga

Tapi

WWDR 2014

0 km

Indus

Pakistan

150

170

Cauvery
EFR

Per capita water availability (2010)
Absolute scarcity [<500 m3]
Scarcity [500−1000 m3]
Stress [1000−1700 m3]

Based on Falkenmark Index
[derived from average annual surface water potential]
EFR: East Flowing River
WFR: West Flowing River

No Stress [>1700 m3]
Thermal power plants
Basin

Sources: Water scarcity map developed by the Water and Resources
Institute using Central Water Commission (2010) and IDFC (2011) data;
and power plant location plotting done by the Institute for Global
Environmental Strategies (IGES) using the Global Energy Observatory
database.

Water use efficiency in thermal power plants in India

151

water-use auditing that allows the prioritization of water
conservation strategies in TPPs, and to foster better cost
recovery for water services. Some positive developments
indicate that there is a growing awareness of how to
use limited water resources better and how to protect
the environment. For example, National Water Mission
(one of the key elements of the National Action Plan
on Climate Change) aims to achieve a 20% increase in
efficiency in water use in all sectors by 2017, and the
National Green Tribunal asked MOEF to revise its area
selection criteria for setting up TPPs in environmentally
sensitive areas.

Conclusion

With rapid population growth, the per capita water
availability in India has dipped below the alarming
threshold of water stress (1,700 m3). The situation
will worsen in coming years with increasing demands
from the agricultural, domestic and industrial sectors.
Projections made in the light of current trends
show that by 2050, water demand will surpass water
availability. Agriculture is, by far, the largest water
user in the country and any reduction in agricultural
consumption will translate into a substantial increase

BOX

21.1

Some reported conflicts in India on the
water–energy trade-off
In Madhay Pradesh, power cuts were imposed to alleviate the
water shortage in the region in 2006 (Hindustan Times, 2006).
In Kerala, power cuts were imposed to deal with water
scarcity in 2008 when monsoon rainfall was 65% less than
normal (Thaindian News, 2008).
In Orissa, farmers protested against the increasing rate of
water allocation for thermal power generation and industrial
use. In response to the protest, the state government decided
to give conditional permission to construct a thermal power
plant that had applied to use seawater for cooling purposes
rather than river water to avoid placing further pressure on
the Mahanadi River basin (UNEP Finance Initiative, 2010).
Opposition to Adani power projects is growing in Nagpur.
The local community believes that this power plant poses a
threat to the Pench Tiger Reserves and endangers drinking
water and irrigation water availability (The Times of India,
2011).
All six units of the Parli thermal power plant in the Beed
district of Maharashtra were shut down because of a severe
water shortage in the Marathwada region. The plant had
previously received water from the Khadka dam, but the
supply was stopped because the water level in the dam had
almost dried up (NDTV, 2013).

152

Chapter 21

in water availability for other sectors and the
environment. However, the energy sector also has
room for improvement in reducing its water footprint.
From one perspective, TPPs form the backbone of the
national power supply, generating almost 60% of India’s
electricity. From another, almost one-quarter of existing
TPPs are equipped with open loop–wet cooling systems
that use 40 to 80 times more water than the world
average. A gradual transition to more water-efficient
cooling systems in TPPs will reduce water demand and
lessen the impact on the environment. To maintain its
position among the fastest growing major economies in
the world, India will have to reassess its long-term water
use projections in view of general water availability, and
continue to improve its water use efficiency in all sectors.

Acknowledgements

Bijon Kumer Mitra, Anindya Bhattacharya

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Mitra, B.K. and Bhattacharya, A. 2013. A Critical Review of Long
Term Water–Energy Nexus in India: Case Study. Kanagawa,
Japan, Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES).
(Unpublished)

***********
Central Water Commission. 2010. Water and Related Statistics.
New Delhi, Ministry of Water Resources.
CSE (Center for Science and Environment). n.d. To use or to
misuse: That is the question industries need to think over.
Down to Earth Supplement. New Delhi, CSE. http://www.
cseindia.org/dte-supplement/industry20040215/misuse.htm
(Accessed 12 Dec 2011)
Hindustan Times. 2006. Power cuts to take care of water scarcity:
Mayor. Hindustan Times, 22 April. http://www.hindustantimes.
com/News-Feed/NM9/Powercuts-to-take-care-of-waterscarcity-Mayor/Article1-89774.aspx
IDFC (Infrastructure Development Finance Company). 2011.
Water: Policy and performance for sustainable development.
India Infrastructure Report 2011. New Delhi, Oxford
University Press. http://www.idfc.com/pdf/report/IIR-2011.
pdf
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2011. Technology
Development Prospects for the Indian Power Sector. Paris,
OECD/IEA. http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/
publication/technology_development_india.pdf
IGES (Institute for Global Environmental Strategies). 2012.
Survey of Indian power plants conducted during 2012. Water
Availability for Sustainable Energy Policy: Assessing Cases in
South and South East Asia. Kanagawa, Japan, IGES.

CASE STUDIES

IL&FS (Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Ltd).
2009. Technical EIA Guidance Manual for Thermal Power
Plants. Prepared for the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Government of India. Hyderabad, India, IL&FS
Ecosmart. http://environmentclearance.nic.in/writereaddata/
Form-1A/HomeLinks/TGM_Thermal%20Power%20
Plants_010910_NK.pdf
NCIWRD (National Commission on Integrated Water Resource
Development). 1999. Report of the National Commission for
Integrated Water Resources Development. New Delhi, Ministry
of Water Resources.
NDTV (New Delhi Television). 2013. Maharashtra: Parli
power plant shuts down after severe water crisis. NDTV
website, 17 February. http://www.ndtv.com/article/india/
maharashtra-parli-power-plant-shuts-down-after-severewater-crisis-331952

Thaindian News. 2008. Kerala set to face water storage due to
poor monsoon. Thaindian News, 7 July. http://www.thaindian.
com/newsportal/business/kerala-set-toface-water-shortagedue-to-poor-monsoon_10068608.html
The Times of India. 2011. Opposition to Adani power
plant in Chhindwara grows. The Times of India, 17 July.
http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2011-07-17/
nagpur/29784634_1_adani-group-adani-power-power-plant
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme) Finance
Initiative. 2010. Power Sector. Chief Liquidity Series, Issue 2.
Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unepfi.org/fileadmin/documents/
chief_liquidity2_01.pdf

NEERI (National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute). 2006. Summary Report of the Study on Postclearance Environmental Impacts and Cost-Benefit Analysis of
Power Generation in India. Nehru Marg, India, NEERI. http://
mospi.nic.in/research_studies_post_clearance.htm

WWDR 2014

Water use efficiency in thermal power plants in India

153

In many regions of the world and under a variety of
geological settings, high and low temperature geothermal
resources can provide concrete answers to the need for
sustainable energy. Without science-based assessments
however, decision-makers lack an understanding of the
geothermal resources of their territories, and so are
unable to take them into consideration as part of energy
planning. This case study reports on the development of
a science-based assessment – or ‘reconnaissance’– of the
geothermal potential of the Umbria region in central Italy.
It can be used as an example for governments, regional
and local administrations, and stakeholders from the
private sector who want to integrate geothermal energy
into their energy budgets. The science-based methodology
that tested successfully in Umbria can help decisionmakers and the private sector to (a) respond to increasing
demands for energy; (b) improve sustainable economic
development through the use of this renewable and
environmentally safe energy source; and (c) become more
involved in developing green economy approaches and
technologies for power production and for other uses.
Technologies currently on the market provide commercially
viable solutions for the exploitation of a wide range of
geothermal waters. They cater for resources across the
spectrum from low and very low enthalpy geothermal
resources – which are practically ubiquitous in the earth’s
subsurface and can be used with geothermal heat pumps
to both heat and cool – to the highly competitive and
environmentally safe use of the more localized medium
and high enthalpy geothermal resources for agroindustrial purposes and for power production. For
example, modern, binary cycle geothermal power plants,
with nearly zero emissions (Box 22.1), are able to produce
electricity and heat starting from fluids at temperatures as
low as about 100°C, while the conventional ‘flash’
geothermal power plants need fluids with temperatures
of 180–200°C or above.
The assessment of the science-based methodology in
Umbria followed an integrated research approach that
included geological, geochemical, geophysical, threedimensional geological and thermo-fluid-dynamic

154

Chapter 22

modelling. It was largely based on existing accessible data
collected since the early 1960s. It resulted in a preliminary,
reconnaissance-level conceptual model of the geothermal
systems located in Umbria, which will facilitate the
development of projects by a wide range of potential
users. The Umbria Regional Administration is using the
results of this assessment to integrate geothermal energy
potential into the regional sustainable energy plan, to
promote its implementation by providing information
and incentives, and to act as guarantor for environmental
protection in the use of geothermal energy.
From the outset, the assessment was conducted with
the systematic involvement of stakeholders, including
local communities as well as local administrators and
representatives of the private sector. A public workshop
was held in March 2012 to present the objectives and
the methodologies. The goal was to get feedback from
local communities and stakeholders on the issues of
demand and the need for thermal energy, and to listen to
suggestions and proposals.
Under Italian law, geothermal resources and hydrocarbons
are owned by the state and can be exploited only
according to specific regulations and subject to specific

22.1
BOX

CHAPTER

22

A science-based tool for integrating
geothermal resources into regional energy planning
in Umbria, Italy

Potential for achieving significant
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
Numerical modelling simulations carried out in the five most
promising areas in Umbria show that there is rich geothermal
potential for electricity production as well as for providing
direct heating in local districts, in agriculture (where it can
be used in greenhouses, for example) and in industry. This
important geothermal energy potential would deliver equally
important benefits from an environmental perspective.
Producing electricity with binary cycle power plants would
provide annual savings equivalent to a reduction of 700,000
tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions. And using geothermal
heat to its full potential to provide direct heating for the
domestic, agricultural and industrial sectors would provide
savings equivalent to a reduction of more than four million
tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions per year. So by exploiting
its geothermal resources, the Umbria Region of Italy could
achieve a significant reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
as well as gaining substantial economic benefits.

CASE STUDIES

safeguards. To address this, the assessment also set out
strategies for the sustainable management of the resource,
including the fluid reinjection programmes. Italian
law also takes into account the visual impact on the
landscape and natural hazards that might be triggered
by exploiting geothermal resources. To this end, they
prescribe mandatory environmental and seismic life-cycle
monitoring. So before any authorization is given to exploit
these resources, an environmental impact evaluation is
carried out. Both local authorities and representatives
from local communities must be involved in this
environmental impact assessment, and this was indeed the
case in Umbria.
The assessment had already catalysed some developments
on the ground. In fact, activities had been initiated for
the use of geothermal fluids for power production at
temperatures over 100°C. This substantially increased
the percentage of power being produced from renewable
sources in the Umbria region – including the direct use of
the produced heat in a ‘cascade’ of decreasing temperature
requirements.

WWDR 2014

Conclusion

The geothermal energy potential assessment realized
in Umbria aims to integrate geothermal energy into
the local energy budget and serve as a tool to support
informed decision-making on the cost-effective use and
management of the natural heat stored in aquifers. It
shows how it can be harnessed for different uses, from
the direct use of low temperature resources for domestic
and agro-industrial purposes, to the transformation
into electricity of middle to high temperature
resources. The science-based methodology applied and
successfully tested in Umbria will facilitate responses to
society’s increasing energy needs in a sustainable and
environmentally friendly way.

Acknowledgements

The Regional Administration of Umbria, University of
Perugia, University of Pisa

References

Information in this chapter is adapted from:
Regional Administration of Umbria, University of Perugia and
University of Pisa. 2013. Reconnaissance of the Geothermal
Resources of Umbria: A Science-based Tool for the Integration
of Geothermal Resources into Regional Energy Planning.
(Unpublished)

A science-based tool for integrating geothermal resources
into regional energy planning in Umbria, Italy

155

CHAPTER

23

The role of hydroelectric power stations in the
aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake

The Great East Japan Earthquake of March 2011 caused
unprecedented damage to a large part of eastern Japan,
particularly to the regions of Tohoku and Kanto. The
majority of the damage was caused by a giant tsunami
that was triggered by the earthquake. Almost 18,000
people died and 400,000 buildings suffered damage. The
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant was severely
flooded, causing it to malfunction and shut down. For
similar reasons, ten other reactors also went offline
almost consecutively. Furthermore, the reactors, which
were already shut down at the time of disaster due to
their periodic inspection, remained non-operational as a
result of political pressure in the aftermath of the nuclear
accident in Fukushima Daiichi. As a result, nuclear power
generation dropped by almost 65% compared with same
period in 2010 (Figure 23.1). The earthquake and the
tsunami also affected the energy output of thermal power
plants in the affected regions. Consequently, ten days
of rolling blackouts started three days after the natural
disaster. Radioactive contamination made recovery efforts
that were already hampered by widespread blackouts even
more complex.
In view of the sharp decline in the supply of power, the
government requested the public in affected areas to
reduce their electricity consumption by 15%. Also in line
with the Electricity Business Act, a limit was put on the
amount of power being consumed by commercial entities.
To alleviate the energy crisis, dams in the service area of

Change in domestic energy supplied by
nuclear power plants between 1990 and 2011

Energy (Petajoules)

Figure

23.1

3 000
2 000
1 000
0
1990

156

Chapter 23

1995

2000

2005

2010

the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant and those in
the vicinity of Tohoku (the main disaster region) were
instructed to give priority to producing the maximum
amount of hydroelectricity possible.
A number of dams in the Kitakami River basin followed
this directive and prioritized power generation. The
Shijushida Dam operated for 24 hours on 17 March and
18 March, generating 349 MWh – or about twice its preearthquake output. The Gosho Dam increased its power
output to 216 MWh – about 1.7 times its pre-earthquake
output. The Naruko Dam, which usually stores water in
mid-March (which was when the earthquake hit) for the
irrigation of paddy fields, also prioritized the generation
of hydroelectric power. In total, 16 dams, all directly
managed by the Tohoku Regional Development Bureau
at the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and
Tourism (MLIT) shifted their main use from irrigation
to electricity generation to help overcome the power
shortage in the afflicted areas.
To maintain a stable power supply, the Kanto Regional
Development Bureau also initiated flexible dam operations
on 17 March 2011 in all dams on the Sagami River
basin. And by diverting flow to the Tsukui Channel, they
managed to generate about 230,000 kWh of hydroelectric
power – enough to meet the energy requirements of 510
households. This plan remained in operation for 45 days,
until 30 April 2011.
Dams on the upper Tone River, which were originally
designed to supply water to downstream areas and to
maintain the river environment, were also switched
to maximizing their power output. The Fujiwara
hydroelectric power plant, for example, generated
sufficient power for about 9,000 households. All these
emergency dam operations involved careful planning that
factored in reservoir replenishment by snowmelt. Weather
forecasts were also monitored closely to ensure that as
much power as possible could be generated and that the
electricity output could be sustained.

CASE STUDIES

Conclusion

The Great East Japan Earthquake and the subsequent
tsunami caused an unprecedented disaster. Almost
18,000 people died or are permanently unaccounted for
and 400,000 buildings were damaged. In addition to
the challenge of supplying drinking water to evacuees
in emergency shelters, power shortages were extremely
serious, and affected the entire nation. The Fukushima
Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, the main supplier of Tokyo’s
power, went offline after the earthquake and tsunami, and
other nuclear plants were shut down soon afterwards
for safety reasons. To reduce the impact of the power
shortage, a series of government-led emergency measures
was implemented immediately after the disaster, calling
for the utmost effort on both the supply and the demand
sides. The emergency dam operations in the Tohoku
and Kanto regions demonstrated the versatile nature of
dams that allowed a switch of priority from irrigation
to power generation to alleviate electricity shortage in
overwhelming circumstances.

WWDR 2014

Acknowledgements

Toshio Okazumi, Tatsuto Nakane, Takeshi Kamadai,
Takashi Fukuwatari, Kazuaki Yoshida

References

Information in this chapter is adapted from:
Okazumi, T. 2013. Water Action to Solve Energy Shortage
during Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011. Ibaraki, Japan,
International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management
(ICHARM), Public Works Research Institute. (Unpublished)

The role of hydroelectric power stations in the aftermath of
the Great East Japan Earthquake

157

CHAPTER

24

Green energy production from municipal
sewage sludge in Japan

A 15 m high tsunami, triggered by the magnitude nine
Great East Japan Earthquake on 11 March 2011, caused
a nuclear accident by damaging the cooling systems of
three reactors in the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power
Plant. This event required more than 100,000 people to be
evacuated from their homes (WNA, 2013). In the wake
of this major incident, the promotion of green energy
became one of Japan’s national goals. In this process,
municipal sewage sludge was identified as an untapped
resource with great potential. The Japanese government
was prompted to implement policies to support the
development of suitable technologies to benefit from the
sludge to the greatest possible extent. This case study
features three leading projects where green energy is
produced from municipal sewage sludge: gasification
in the Tokyo Metropolitan Area, biochar production in
Hiroshima City and the use of biogas as vehicle fuel and
city gas in Kobe City.

24.1 Gasification in Tokyo

In 2006, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government
implemented a programme to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions in the area by 25% by 2020 (the year 2000
was taken as the baseline). Wastewater service activities,
generating 40% of the emissions, were identified as
the main challenge. The gasification of sewage sludge
was proposed as an effective solution. This process
converts the organic materials in wastewater into a gas
mixture, which is then used as fuel for drying sludge
and generating power. The high temperature in the heat
recovery furnace helps to minimize the emission of
nitrous oxide, which is an even more potent greenhouse
agent than carbon dioxide. With the exception of a period
following the Great East Japan Earthquake, the project
has remained operational and met the targets set for the
generation of power. However, the energy output of the
dewatered sludge has been less than expected, which
means that natural gas has had to be added to the fuel
mix to achieve stable power generation. This aspect will
require further enhancement to reduce the cost of the
operation as well as to improve its environmental benefits.

158

Chapter 24

24.2 Biochar production in Hiroshima

Hiroshima City had started considering biochar
production as early as 2007, some four years before the
2011 earthquake. The amount of sewage sludge being
generated at that time was 58,000 tonnes per year. Of
this sludge, 31,000 tonnes was recycled as either compost
or cement. The remainder was incinerated and used
for land reclamation. However, it was subsequently
considered that reclamation was not an environmentally
conscious practice, and site capacity was limited. In
addition, the incinerators had reached the end of their
designed life and it would have been too costly to renew
them. Most importantly, the unsecure disposal of sewage
sludge remained a risk in view of the fluctuating need
for compost and cement. Under these circumstances,
Hiroshima City contracted private companies in a joint
venture on a design–build–operate basis. The design and
construction of the facility lasted three years and ended in
March 2012. The operational period will run for 20 years –
up to 2032.

The contractor handles 28,000 tonnes of dewatered sludge
per year in a plant that has a daily capacity of 100 tonnes.
The project uses low-temperature (250°C to 350°C)
carbonization technology, which allows the production
of biochar that has a high calorie, low risk of self-ignition
and a low odour level. In the first six months of operation
(April to September 2012), 14,000 tonnes of dewatered
sludge was processed and 2,300 tonnes of biochar was
produced. From an environmental perspective, the
use of biogas (which is generated as part of the sludge
dewatering process) as a fuel to produce biochar reduced
the annual greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide) of
the city’s wastewater services by 12%. Furthermore, using
biochar at coal-fired power plants is expected to reduce
yearly greenhouse gas emission by another 9%.

24.3 Biogas as vehicle fuel and city gas in
Kobe

Six wastewater treatment plants in Kobe treat
approximately 500,000 m3 sewage per day, generating
37,000 m3 biogas. Because of its poor quality, this
combustible gas was mainly used on site to heat digester

CASE STUDIES

tanks. But in an attempt to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions in the city, the Kobe City authorities started to
supply biogas as an auto fuel and also mixed it into the
city’s gas supply in purified form.
One example of how this works is the wastewater
treatment plant at Higashinada, which generates 10,000
Nm3 (normal cubic metres)1 biogas per day. Following
the purification process, 20% of the biogas is used to fuel
vehicles, 45% is used in the in the wastewater treatment
plant in which it is generated, and the remainder goes
through a second level of purification before being fed
into the city gas supply. Overall, the project produces
800,000 Nm3 biogas per year, which is equivalent to the
annual gas consumed by 2,000 households. The project
has resulted in a reduction of 1,200 tonnes of carbon
dioxide emissions per year.

Acknowledgements

Yosuke Matsumiya, Kazuaki Yoshida

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Matsumiya, Y. 2013. Green Energy Production from Municipal
Sewage Sludge in Japan. Prepared by the International Division,
Technical Department, Japan Sewage Works Association.
Tokyo, Global Center for Urban Sanitation (GCUS). http://
tinyurl.com/oe5frsv (Accessed Jul 2013)

***********
WNA (World Nuclear Association). n.d. Fukushima Accident.
London, WNA. http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/Safetyand-Security/Safety-of-Plants/Fukushima-Accident (Accessed
Oct 2013)

Conclusion

The nuclear disaster at Fukushima Daiichi in 2011 brought
renewed attention to ways of producing green energy.
Three case studies – from the Tokyo Metropolitan Area,
Hiroshima City and Kobe City – show innovative ways
of generating energy by using biogas and biochar derived
from municipal sewage. The methods being used have also
helped to reduce environmental pollution by reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and decreasing the amount of
waste that these municipalities need to dispose of into
nature. Technological improvement is likely to further
increase efficiency in the methods described and pave
the way for a wider adoption of programmes that turn
common waste into a rich green energy resource.

1

WWDR 2014

Normal cubic metres (Nm3) describes the volume of gas under standard
temperature and pressure conditions.

Green energy production from municipal sewage sludge in Japan

159

CHAPTER

25

The role of geothermal energy in Kenya’s
long-term development vision

In Kenya, the rate of electrification is around 16%, among
the lowest rates in sub-Saharan Africa. The state-owned
Kenya Electricity Generating Company Limited (KenGen)
is the major energy utility and produces 80% of the
electricity used in the country. Its 14 hydroelectric power
stations account for almost half of the national electricity
supply. Heavy reliance on hydropower has, however, made
Kenya’s power supply susceptible to variations in rainfall.
With droughts becoming more frequent, water and power
shortages are affecting all sectors of the economy. For
example, the drought that occurred between 1999 and
2002 had a drastic impact on the hydropower plants
and caused a 25% reduction in the amount of electricity
generated in 2000 (Karekezi et al., 2009). The resultant
cumulative economic loss was estimated to be about 1% to
1.5% of the total Gross Domestic Product, roughly US$442
million (Karekezi and Kithyoma, 2005).
As a stop-gap measure, the government engages private
energy companies that generate electricity using imported
fossil fuels such as coal and diesel. This option has proved
to be costly because of the rising prices of such fuels in
international markets. It also leads to considerable air
pollution from diesel generators (GDC, 2013).

BOX

25.1

Vision 2030 and the role of energy
Launched in June 2008, Vision 2030 is Kenya’s
development programme for the period from 2008
to 2030. It will be implemented in successive five-year
medium-term plans. The Vision identifies energy
as a key foundation and one of the infrastructural
enablers upon which the economic, social and
political pillars of this long-term development
strategy will be built. Vision 2030 sets an ambitious
goal of increasing the capacity of the national power
supply to approximately 21,000 MW (Table 25.1).
This corresponds to a more than tenfold increase in
Kenya’s current installed capacity of 1,500 MW (Kianji,
2012).
Source: Adapted from Ketraco (n.d.).

160

Chapter 25

While only one in five Kenyans has access to electricity
(IEA, 2011), rapidly rising demand is expected to outstrip
supply over the coming years. To address this challenge
– while still keeping a low carbon footprint – the energy
sector has focused on renewable resources in line with
Vision 2030, which is the blueprint for the country’s
transformation into a middle income nation by 2030
(Box 25.1).
The successful implementation of the Vision greatly
depends on the supply of adequate, reliable, clean and
affordable energy. The energy sector is expected to remain
a key player in the overall improvement of the general
welfare of the population, which includes the international
goal of halving poverty by 2015. The Ministry of Energy
will facilitate this by creating an enabling environment
for private sector-led growth in energy supply. The key
steps in achieving this target are identified as licensing
firms to explore geothermal fields, formulating policy and
developing an appropriate legal and regulatory framework.
The exploitation of geothermal resources is one of the
critical elements of Kenya’s Vision 2030 growth strategy.
Its main advantages over other sources of energy are that it
is indigenous, output is not affected by climatic variability
and it has no adverse effects on the environment.
Geothermal fields located within the country’s Rift Valley
have the potential to produce an estimated 14,000 MW.
This rich source has not been adequately tapped: the
installed geothermal capacity corresponds to just 1.5% of
the country’s potential (ERC, n.d.). Ongoing projects are
geared towards meeting the Vision 2030 medium-term
target of 1,600 MW by 2016, and eventually 5,000 MW
of geothermal power by 2030 (Table 25.1). This would
account for one-quarter of Kenya’s total installed capacity,
and would be a substantial increase on the 2012 figure
of 10%.
To attract investment in energy production, the
government introduced the Energy Act in 2006. The
Act established the Energy Regulatory Commission
(ERC), set up to enforce and review environmental
quality standards in coordination with other statutory

CASE STUDIES

agencies. The Geothermal Development Company (GDC)
was formed in 2009 under the same Act and under the
National Energy Policy Sessional Paper 4 of 2004. The
GDC is a government body that aims to promote the
rapid development of geothermal resources in Kenya to
meet the 2030 geothermal energy target. In this critical
function, the GDC aims to cushion investors from the
high capital investment risks associated with drilling
geothermal wells. The GDC is expected to drill as many as
1,400 wells to explore steam prospects and make productive
wells available to successful bidding investors from both
public and private power companies. It is envisaged that
the successful bidders will use them to generate electricity
or for other uses, such as in greenhouses that use heat
and carbon dioxide for photosynthesis and hydrogen
sulphide fumigation to improve plant productivity. The
Menengai Crater lies at the centre of the GDC’s most recent
exploration activities. This geothermal field is estimated
to have the potential to produce 1,600 MW (Daily Nation,
2010), practically equivalent to the current national power
supply (GDC, 2011).
Ongoing public and private investments are planned to
increase geothermal power production by 500 MW by the
end of 2014. It is estimated that reaching the goal of 5,000
MW geothermal power by 2030 will require an investment
of US$20 billion (Ecomagination, 2011). In the fiscal year
budget for 2012–2013, geothermal and coal exploration
and development activities were allocated US$340 million
(Kivuva, 2012). Of this amount, the GDC was allocated
only US$20 million (Republic of Kenya, 2012).

Kenya set an ambitious Vision in 2008 that aims to raise
the country out of poverty and turn it into a middle
income nation by 2030. In Vision 2030, energy plays
a key role as one of the infrastructural enablers upon
which the economic, social and political pillars of the
country’s development will be built. While energy is very
important for Kenya’s development, the country’s reliance
on hydropower as the major supply for electricity has
caused frequent blackouts and power rationing linked
to droughts and variations in water availability in dam
reservoirs. This has left the government without any
choice but to use expensive emergency generators that run
on imported fuels. The Kenyan government has opted for
the development of geothermal energy as a key response
to overcome the country’s energy bottleneck. This option
is not only environmentally friendly, but also provides
additional benefits such as reducing the cost of imported
fuel, and stimulating the economy through investing
in clean energy. In line with the Vision 2030 document,
the Ministry of Energy set a specific target that by 2030,
geothermal power would account for one-quarter of
Kenya’s total installed capacity – up from the current level
of 10%. This target will require considerable investment
that calls for private sector involvement. To tackle this
challenge, the GDC was created in 2009 to cover the high
cost of steam well exploration, thereby reducing the risk
for potential investors. Achieving its plans for geothermal
energy is critical if Kenya is to elevate its economy into
middle income status and set an example for the rest of
the region.

Vision 2030 energy generation projection by source

Table

25.1

Conclusion

Energy source

Capacity (MW)

Percentage of total

Geothermal

5 530

26

Nuclear

4 000

18

Coal

2 720

13

Gas turbines/natural gas

2 340

11

Diesel turbines

1 955

9

Import

2 000

9

Wind

2 036

9

Hydropower

1 039

5

Total

21 620

100

Source: Kianji (2012).

WWDR 2014

The role of geothermal energy in Kenya’s long-term development vision

161

Acknowledgements

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2011. World Energy Outlook
Electricity Access Database. Paris, OECD/IEA. http://www.iea.
org/media/weowebsite/energydevelopment/WEO-2011_new_
Electricity_access_Database.xls

References

Karekezi, S., Kimani, J., Onguru, O. and Kithyoma, W. 2009.
Large Scale Hydropower, Renewable Energy Adaptation and
Climate Change: Climate Change and Energy Security in
East and Horn of Africa. Occasional Paper No. 33. Nairobi,
Energy, Environment and Development Network for Africa
(AFREPREN/FWD). http://www.ke.boell.org/downloads/
RenewableEnergyandAdaptationtoClimateChangePublication.
pdf

Ezekiel Kemboi, Chrispine Omondi Juma

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Kemboi, E. (Kenya Electricity Generating Company Limited)
and Juma, C.O. (Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Kenya).
2013. Water Resources and Geothermal Energy Development in
Kenya. (Unpublished)

***********
Daily Nation. 2010. All set for Kenya geothermal project. Daily
Nation, 24 October. http://www.nation.co.ke/business/
news/All%20set%20for%20Kenya%20geothermal%20
project/-/1006/1039550/-/jriv2y/-/
Ecomagination. 2011. Full Steam Ahead: Kenya’s Geothermal
Production Picks Up Speed. Fairfield, CT, General Electric.
http://www.ecomagination.com/full-steam-ahead-kenyasgeothermal-production-picks-up-speed
ERC (Energy Regulatory Commission). n.d. Geothermal Energy,
Renewables home page. Nairobi, ERC. http://www.erc.go.ke/
index.php?option=com_fsf&view=faq&catid=2&Itemid=649
(Accessed Sep 2013)
GDC (Geothermal Development Company). 2011. Kenya
Geothermal Company Finds Exploitable Steam in Menengai.
Nairobi, GDC. http://tinyurl.com/o982ebk
––––. n.d. Home page. Nairobi, GDC. http://www.gdc.co.ke/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=139&Item
id=203 (Accessed Sep 2013)

162

Chapter 25

Karekezi, S. and Kithyoma, W. (eds). 2005. Sustainable Energy in
Africa: Cogeneration and Geothermal in the East and Horn of
Africa: Status and Prospects. Nairobi, AFREPREN/FWD.
Ketraco (Kenya Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd). n.d. Vision
2030. Nairobi, Ketraco. http://www.ketraco.co.ke/about/
vision2030.html (Accessed Sep 2013)
Kianji, C.K. 2012. Kenya’s Energy Demand and the Role of Nuclear
Energy in Future Energy Generation Mix. Paper presented at
the Joint JAPAN–IAEA Nuclear Energy Management School
in Tokai-mura, Japan, 11–29 June 2012. http://www.iaea.org/
nuclearenergy/nuclearknowledge/schools/NEM-school/2012/
Japan/PDFs/week2/CR6_Kenya.pdf
Kivuva, E. 2012. Is Infrastructure Budget the Solution to Economic
Growth? Nairobi, Kenya Engineer. http://www.kenyaengineer.
co.ke/index.php/mr/77-top-projctes/559-is-infrastructurebudget-the-solution-for-economic-growth
Republic of Kenya. 2012. Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.
Nairobi, Ministry of Finance.

CASE STUDIES

CHAPTER

26

The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as a
part of the National Green Growth Strategy in
Republic of Korea

Since the 1960s, the Republic of Korea has enjoyed
rapid development. Throughout this period, water use
has increased sixfold and the intensive industrialization
efforts have made Korea the world’s fourth largest
energy importer (IEA, 2012). In view of the swiftly
growing demands for both resources, the government
has taken concrete steps to develop policies to adopt
an integrated approach to managing water and energy.
Among those policies is the Green New Deal, introduced
in 2009 with a US$38 billion investment portfolio over
four years. In broad terms, it focuses on four main
themes: environmental protection, energy conservation,
information technology infrastructure for the future and
green neighbourhoods and housing (UNESCAP, 2012).
This case study on the Four Major Rivers Restoration
Project (4MRRP) features one of the projects conducted
under the first theme, and puts the emphasis particularly
on the small hydropower plants that were put into
operation in 16 weirs.
The country’s green growth strategy, which started in
2008, sets out a new vision to reduce energy dependency
by diversifying energy sources. As a part of this approach,
the First National Energy Master Plan (2008–2030)
introduced an Act encouraging the promotion of new and

Similar to energy, water resources development has
always been a national priority. This necessity stems
from the challenge that seasonal distribution of rainfall
shows a large discrepancy (more than 70% of annual
average precipitation falls in four months during the flood
season between June and September) thus limiting the
availability of this precious resource throughout the year
(MLTM, 2011). Consequently, from the mid-1960s up
to the 1980s, government policies centred on developing
large infrastructure, including construction of numerous
multipurpose dams to supply water and generate
hydroelectricity. Now, facing the challenges caused
by climate change and in a bid to reduce the country’s
dependence on imported energy, additional dams and
hydraulic structures are being built while existing ones
are being revisited to improve their efficiency and to bring
further functionality.

Primary energy demand and supply targets for 2030 by source

Table

26.1

renewable sources of energy. The aim was to increase the
proportion of energy derived from renewable resources
fivefold – from 2.2% in 2006 to 11% by 2030 (Table 26.1).
Among the renewable energy sources that are being
considered are hydropower, solar power, geothermal
power and energy from organic sources.

Demand

Oil (%)

Coal (%)

Liquefied natural Nuclear (%)
gas (%)

Other (%)

2006

43.6

24.3

13.7

15.9

2.5

2030BAU

34.2

24.7

15.8

19.5

5.9

2030target

33.0

15.7

12.0

27.8

11.5

Supply

New and renewables excluding hydropower (%)

2006

2.2

2030target

11

Note: BAU, business as usual. ‘Other’ consists of hydropower and new and renewable sources.
Source: Third National Energy Committee (2008).

WWDR 2014

The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as a part of
the National Green Growth Strategy, Republic of Korea

163

The 4MRRP (Box 26.1) is a recent example of such
efforts. As part of this multipurpose green growth project,
16 weirs each with a small hydropower plant were built
on the Han, Nakdong, Geum and Yeongsan rivers. The
total installed capacity of 50 MWh provided by the
16 hydropower plants’ 41 generators is equivalent to onequarter that of the largest hydropower plant in Korea.
Annual electricity generation is sufficient to meet the
energy requirements of more than 58,000 households.
The capacity replaces use of over 60,000 tonnes (450,000
barrels) of oil per year – or an emission reduction of
some 180,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide. Aside from
its environmental and economic benefits, the project
also allows for the development of domestic green

BOX

26.1

technologies. In January 2013, the small hydropower
plants on the four rivers were registered as Clean
Development Mechanism projects with the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).

Conclusion

Water-related disasters have become more frequent
and severe in Korea as a result of global climate change.
These disasters have caused fluctuations in freshwater
availability and have also brought about financial losses
for the country. The other side of the coin is that as the
fourth largest energy importer in the world, Korea itself
is contributing to climate change through greenhouse gas

The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project
The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project (4MRRP), which is the showcase element of Korea’s Green New Deal plan, involved both
improving existing waterworks and building complementary ones (see highlights below). The project was completed for the
most part in December 2012. One of its main functions, flood protection, had been put to the test when Typhoon Meari caused
extensive damage to the west of the country in June 2011. In spite of the heavy downpour – which brought over 200 mm of
rain (about 16% of the annual average) to much of the country over six days – there was no significant flood damage.
The project also created jobs. According to the Ministry of Labour, 90,000 new positions were put in place thanks to the 4MRRP.
Its economic benefits are expected to grow as investment into research and development for the project as well as into its
operation and management continues.
Highlights of the 4MRRP

50 km

Project period:
October 2009–December 2012

East Sea

Seoul
Han River

Ipo
Yeoju
Gangcheon

Project area:
Han, Nakdong, Geum and Yeongsan rivers
(see the map to the right)

*Yeongju

Chapter 26

Sangju
Nakdan

er

164

Daejeon

Gumi

Nakdong River

*Bohyeonsan

Yellow Sea

Chilgok
Gangjeong
Goryeong

Daegu
Dalseong
Hapcheon Changnyeong

Damyang

m

nR

i ve
r

o

Budget:
US$19 billion

*Andong-Imha
connection

Geu
m

Se

Gwangju
Seungchon

gs
a

Ye
on

Major works:
• 450 million m3 sediment removed by dredging
• 16 weirs constructed
• 784 km of river banks reinforced
• Two new dams built
• Two flood retention reservoirs constructed

Sejong
Gongju
Baekje

Ri v

Core tasks:
• Securing freshwater availability
• Flood protection
• Water quality improvement and restoration of
river ecosystems
• D
 evelopment of recreational areas and
multi-purpose spaces
• Community development centred on rivers

Juksan

ji n

R iv e r

Changnyeong
Haman

Busan

East Sea

Hwasun

Flood retention
reservoir
Weir
Dam

River
Tributary
Town

* Under construction
All the dams and weirs shown on this map
generate hydropower

CASE STUDIES

emissions. As a result, since 2008, the government has
been formulating policies for green growth to reduce its
carbon footprint, prepare the country to deal with the
effects of climate change, and maintain its good water
management practices. The Green New Deal, initiated in
2009, comes with an economic package for investment in
green growth. A part of the Green New Deal, the 4MRRP
aims to revitalize the Han, Nakdong, Geum and Yeongsan
rivers to improve water availability and quality, control
floods, restore ecosystems and promote nature-conscious
development. The 16 weirs and 41 hydropower-generating
units that were built during the project constitute an
important part of the 4MRRP. They are designed to store
optimal amounts of water for generating energy, without
interrupting the natural flow of the rivers. While the
amount of electricity generated is modest, the project
represents Korea’s firm commitment to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions as a part of its low carbon green growth
policies.

Acknowledgements

Kyung-Jin Min, Tae-sun Shin, Ji-eun Seong

WWDR 2014

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Min, K-J., Shin, T-s. and Seong, J-e. 2013. Small Hydro
Power Plants of the 4 Major Rivers: Korea’s Green Growth

Initiatives in the Water-Energy Sector. Daejeon, Korea, Korea
Water Resources Corporation (K-Water) Research Institute.
(Unpublished)

***********
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. Selected indicators
for 2010. Key World Energy Statistics 2012, pp. 48–57. Paris,
OECD/IEA.
MLTM (Ministry of Land Transport and Marine Affairs, Korea).
2011. [The Ministry of Land, Transport, and Maritime Affairs
releases directions for water policy by field until 2020.] Press
release, 28 December. (In Korean)
Third National Energy Committee. 2008. First National Energy
Master Plan: 2008–2030. Seoul, Government of the Republic of
Korea. (In Korean)
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific). 2012. Low Carbon Green Growth
Roadmap for Asia and the Pacific. Fact Sheet: Green New
Deal. Bangkok, UNESCAP. http://www.unescap.org/esd/
environment/lcgg/documents/roadmap/case_study_fact_
sheets/Fact%20Sheets/FS-Green-New-Deal%20.pdf

The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project as a part of
the National Green Growth Strategy, Republic of Korea

165

CHAPTER

27

Solar powered wastewater treatment plant
in Mexico

throughout the country, albeit seldom utilized. To date,
solar technologies have most commonly been used in
rural communities that lack access to centralized water
supply and electricity services. To promote further
developments in this area, however, Mexico’s Environment
and Natural Resources Sector Program established
guidelines on renewable energy sources. This was followed
in 2008 by Mexico’s Law on the Use of Renewable Energies
and Energy Transition Funding, which encouraged
mainstream public policies to promote the development
and use of renewable energy sources.

The city of Nogales in Sonora, Mexico, shares the
international border to the north with the United States
city of Nogales in Santa Cruz County, Arizona. From
1951, both municipalities relied on a wastewater treatment
plant in neighbouring Rio Rico, Arizona, adjacent to the
confluence of the Santa Cruz River and the Nogales Wash.
Both countries funded the plant proportionally, on the
basis of their respective flow contributions to the facility
(IBWC, n.d.).
Approximately 80% of the wastewater treated at the
facility came from the much larger Mexican Nogales. Cost
considerations led the city in 2010 to initiate construction
of the Los Alisos Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP)
on Mexican territory – a US$20 million project that
now benefits 70,000 inhabitants. The plant’s effluent is
discharged into the Los Alisos stream, which flows to
the south where it is utilized for irrigation and aquifer
recharge.

Drawing on the National Water Commission’s
(CONAGUA) experience with renewable energies, a solar
panel farm was incorporated into the Los Alisos WWTP
project, offering financial and environmental benefits.
Design of the photovoltaic segment began in May 2011
with a detailed study of various configuration alternatives.
The selected project covers an area of 15,000 m2, in which
3,920 solar panels will generate 1,500,000 kWh/year.
Although the electricity output of solar panel farm will
vary throughout the year depending on solar radiation
intensity (Figure 27.1), the annual average energy

Environmental sustainability is an important, crosscutting public policy issue in Mexico, and solar energy
has long been a recognized alternative energy option

Figure

27.1

Average energy budget of Los Alisos Wastewater Treatment Plant upon completion of the solar
panel farm
150
Electricity from
national grid
(CFE)

120

MWh

90

Solar energy
generation

60

Monthly
difference

30
0
-30
-60
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Note: Negative values denote that solar energy generation is not sufficient for the operation of the Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP). The difference is
obtained from the national power grid. Positive values signify that the solar panels generate more energy than required by the WWTP. The excess amount is
fed into the national grid.

166

Chapter 27

CASE STUDIES

generation will be approximately equal to that required
to power the WWTP. A permanent connection to the
national power grid (managed by the Federal Electricity
Commission of Mexico) will serve a dual purpose: feeding
energy into the plant to ensure that Los Alisos functions
24 hours a day throughout the year (including night time,
cloudy periods and winter months) and feeding excess
energy generated in the summer months back into the
national grid.
The Los Alisos WWTP is already operational; however,
construction of the solar panel farm began in November
2012 and is expected to be completed by early 2014, at an
estimated cost of US$5 million. Currently, no comparable
projects have been initiated in Mexico or elsewhere in
Latin America.

Conclusion

The Los Alisos WWTP in Mexico demonstrates a practical
implementation of the use of solar energy. Due to ongoing
construction of the solar panel farm, the plant is currently
running on electricity from Mexico’s national power
grid, but it will be practically energy self-sufficient on

WWDR 2014

completion of its photovoltaic segment. Serving over
70,000 habitats by cleaning and reclaiming approximately
6.5 million m3 wastewater per year, the Los Alisos WWTP
is the first of its kind in Latin America. This innovative
project and the development of similar WWTPs in the
future will help communities to become more sustainable.

Acknowledgement

The National Water Commission of Mexico (CONAGUA)

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
CONAGUA (National Water Commission of Mexico). 2013.
Solar Power for the Wastewater Treatment Plant ‘Los Alisos’
in Nogales, Sonora: Case Study. Mexico DF, CONAGUA.
(Unpublished)

***********
IBWC (International Boundary and Water Commission, United
States and Mexico). n.d. Nogales Field Office and Wastewater
Treatment Plant. http://www.ibwc.state.gov/Organization/
Operations/Field_Offices/Nogales.html (Accessed Oct 2013)

Mexico: Solar powered wastewater treatment plant

167

CHAPTER

28

Water and energy linkage in Austin, Texas, USA

Austin, home of the state government, is situated near
the centre of energy-rich and water-stressed Texas. It has
been among the fastest growing major cities in the United
States of America (USA) for much of the past decade,
with an estimated population in 2011 of 820,000 – which
represents growth of more than 80% since 1990 (Toohey,
2012). This rapid growth continues to put pressure on
the public electricity and water suppliers, Austin Energy
and Austin Water, to provide reliable services while
also promoting environmental sustainability and fiscal
responsibility. Communication and cooperation between
these two entities, while also enabling public engagement,
helps to drive innovation in the fields of energy and water
conservation.
Historically, Austin has relied on the Colorado River,
which runs through the state, as its sole water source.
A new, reclaimed water programme is now providing
around 2% of supply. The city has pre-purchased rights to
divert 360 million m3 water per year from the Colorado
River for municipal use. A new treatment plant is under
construction and is expected to be in operation in 2014.
This will add 200,000 m3 capacity to the water supply
system each day. Austin Water serves 200,000 connections
over an area of approximately 1,400 km2.
Austin Energy is the eighth-largest public electricity
utility in the USA, with a diverse generation capacity

Table

28.1

168

Austin Energy resources and generation
capacities in 2013
Type

Capacity (MW)

Coal

600

Nuclear

400

Gas

1 544

Biomass

12

Wind

560

Solar

31

Chapter 28

of over 3,100 MW (Table 28.1). The utility serves more
than 400,000 customers, approximately 90% of whom are
residential users.
Austin Water is Austin Energy’s fifth-largest consumer,
using 210,000 MWh electricity to pump and treat 300
million m3 water, including 100 million m3 wastewater
(Austin Energy, n.d.).
Energy and water conservation initiatives have their
origins in both city policy and citizen-led efforts. For
example, housed within Austin Energy, the Green
Building programme has guided resource use efficiency
in Austin since 1990. A citizen driven effort to stop a
large development being built over a local aquifer the
same year catalysed the adoption of the city’s Save Our
Springs ordinance in 1992 – an initiative that has shaped
development patterns while also ensuring sustainable use
of water resources and protecting their quality.
To optimize water and energy use while keeping costs
down, both supply-side and demand-side measures are
taken at the city level. For example, Austin Water and
Austin Energy constantly measure critical parameters such
as the amount of energy used in providing water services,
water use in thermoelectricity generation and the average
water use in water and energy services. Ongoing efforts in
place since the 1980s conserve water and electricity. They
have brought about a reduction in demand (Box 28.1) and
this has allowed both Austin Energy and Austin Water
to postpone building major new facilities. In fact, Austin
Energy has invested in demand-side conservation of
700 MW with an additional 800 MW peak-day demand
target by 2020. Over the same period, comprehensive
water conservation efforts, including a tiered rate
structure and weekly watering schedules for landscaped
areas, have helped to reduce peak seasonal demand and
keep daily residential water consumption levels below
400 litres per person on average. The city’s free
distribution of high-efficiency kitchen and bathroom
aerators and showerheads, along with rebates to eligible
groups buying high-efficiency dishwashers, washing
machines, auxiliary water and irrigation system upgrades,

CASE STUDIES

has added further energy savings by reducing customers’
end-use energy for heating and on-site pumping (ACEEE,
n.d.).
The two utilities also collaborate in generating renewable
energy and reducing greenhouse gas emissions: an
innovative thin-film rooftop solar panel system has offset
the energy demand of the Austin Water service centre
(approximately 7,000 m2) since late 2010. Likewise, a
cogeneration system that uses biogas generated at the
city’s Hornsby Bend wastewater sludge treatment plant
meets that facility’s entire energy requirements for
electricity and heat. It also has the additional real potential
– which is still being investigated – to provide compressed
natural gas for its own equipment and transport demands,
which would result in an essentially net-zero-energy
facility. To further reduce its carbon emissions, Austin
Water switched in 2011 to Austin Energy’s 100% wind
energy programme, Green Choice. This allowed an
85% reduction in the water utility’s greenhouse gas
emissions. The remaining 15% is related to transport
and direct emissions of methane and nitrous oxide from
the treatment processes. As a part of its environmentally
conscious service policy, Austin Water reduces its energy
requirement during times of peak electricity demand in
order to reduce grid loads.
Finally, Austin Water and Austin Energy are both
participants in the Pecan Street Project, an integrated
smart-grid demonstration and research effort based
in Austin and run in partnership with the University
of Texas at Austin and other key stakeholders in energy,

BOX

28.1

water and sustainability (Pecan Street Research Institute,
2010). In a study being conducted over a five-year period,
project participants are testing how smart metering of the
consumption of electricity, water and gas, in concert with
interventions like smart appliances, management systems
and pricing models, can change the way households use
utility services – and may change the way utilities engage
with each other and with their customers.

Conclusion

The Austin, Texas case study illustrates how a fastgrowing major US city with publicly owned water and
electricity utilities can craft integrative and strategic
programmes and policies that help to meet the needs
of the public while also helping each sector. Initiatives
promoting the efficient use of water and electricity over
the past two decades have allowed utilities to postpone
major supply expansion efforts; although with the city’s
continued growth, both water and electricity utilities are
expanding their supply capacity while carrying on with
their demand reduction and management efforts. Several
recent and ongoing projects highlight the cooperation
between the two utilities and the opportunities for
synergies across sectors. Austin Water’s reclaimed water
programme reduces overall surface water withdrawals
and provides water at a low cost to energy generation
facilities operated by Austin Energy and the University
of Texas. Austin Water has tracked its energy use both
spatially and temporally in order to come to a better
understanding of the energy embedded in its services
and to identify opportunities in emerging energy markets.
Austin Energy reports on the energy savings associated

Water and energy conservation efforts in Austin
Since 2006, reclaimed water has been pumped to Austin Energy’s Sand Hill Energy Center from the nearby South Austin
Regional wastewater treatment plant. Once on site, the water is further processed to be used as coolant for the combinedcycle power generation unit. Austin Energy completed a pilot study in January 2013 to test the feasibility of using reclaimed
water for other systems that currently require tap water. The results were favourable, and by 2015, the percentage of reclaimed
water being used is expected to increase. In addition to consuming less water, the subsidized rate of the reclaimed water,
which is approximately 10% of the cost of tap water, will save the Sand Hill Energy Center money (Jake Spelman, Austin
Energy, personal communication). And because Sand Hill is located next to the South Austin Regional wastewater treatment
plant, Austin Water estimates the energy needed to transport the reclaimed water is around 40% less than the energy needed
to provide potable water from more distant facilities.
Another notable example of water and energy working together is at the University of Texas flagship campus in Austin,
which operates its own 140 MW power plant. The campus was connected to Austin Water’s reclaimed water programme in
April 2013, which allowed it to use reclaimed water for irrigation on the campus, to cool its power plant and to provide air
conditioning to the campus through a chilled water infrastructure.

WWDR 2014

Water and energy linkage in Austin, Texas, USA

169

with reduced water consumption. Both utility companies
are participating in smart grid demonstration efforts
such as the Pecan Street Project, which will provide
residential customers with consumption information and
management technologies for better and sustainable use of
valuable water and energy resources.

ACEEE (American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy).
n.d. City of Austin: Multifamily Energy and Water Efficiency
Program. Washington DC, ACEEE. http://aceee.org/w-eprogram/city-austin-multifamily-energy-and-wat (Accessed
Oct 2013)

Acknowledgements

Austin Energy. n.d. Austin Energy FY2014–2018 Financial
Forecast. Austin, TX, Austin Energy. http://www.yumpu.com/
en/document/view/13766054/austin-energy (Accessed Oct
2013)

References

Pecan Street Research Institute. 2010. What is Pecan Street?
Austin, TX, Pecan Street Inc. http://www.pecanstreet.org/
about/what-is-pecan-street-inc/

David Greene, Jake Spelman, Jill Kjelsson

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Greene, D. (Austin Water), Spelman, J. (Austin Energy) and
Kjelsson, J. (University of Texas, Austin). 2013. Water and
Energy in Austin, Texas. (Unpublished)

170

***********

Chapter 28

Toohey, M. 2012. Austin Property Taxes Jump 38% Over Past
Decade. Statesman.com. http://www.statesman.com/news/
news/local/austin-property-taxes-jump-38-over-past-decade/
nRprf/

CASE STUDIES

CHAPTER

29

The use of and prospects for geothermal
energy in Turkey

Turkey is an emerging market country, and the world’s
seventeenth largest economy (MFA, 2013). As part of its
process of rapid growth and industrialization, Turkey’s
energy demand is forecast to grow by 6% to 8% annually
by 2020, requiring an additional 50,000 MW to be added
to the national grid (Lally, 2011).
However, the country is energy poor, and the vast majority
of domestic demand is met by importing fossil fuel.
This imposes a significant burden on the economy. The
national energy bill in 2012 was US$60 billion, which
was an 11% increase on 2011 (Hürriyet, 2013). Because
this trend seems certain to continue, the diversification
of Turkey’s energy supply is critical. In contrast to its
limited oil and gas reserves, Turkey has a range of
renewable energy resources, including access to wind
power, hydropower, solar power, geothermal energy and
biomass. Notably, Turkey is ranked as the seventh most
promising country in the world in terms of geothermal
energy potential (GEA, 2012). With proper planning
and sufficient investment, its rich geothermal resources
can help to lessen its dependence on external sources of
energy (Box 29.1). The advantage of geothermal energy
is that it is clean and releases negligible amounts of
greenhouse gas – if any at all – into the atmosphere. Its
use in homes and in commercial operations has shown
that it can account for savings as high as 80% when
compared with using fossil fuels (US DOE, 2013).

BOX

29.1

WWDR 2014

Turkey’s first ventures into geothermal research were
initiated by the national institutions in the 1960s. While
a thorough exploration and evaluation is yet to be
completed, over 200 low to medium enthalpy geothermal
fields have been discovered in various locations. These
fields contain fluid and steam at temperatures lower
than 200°C, which makes them suitable for direct use
applications such as district heating, space heating,
balneology, aquaculture and greenhouse heating. Of
these, district heating is one of the main applications of
geothermal energy in Turkey. The first of these systems
was set up in 1983. Then, between 1991 and 2006, 19
additional district heating systems were installed (Serpen
et al., 2010). The biggest one in İzmir-Balçova has
equivalent heating capacity for 35,000 residences.
In view of the growing demand for electricity, the Turkish
government introduced Law 5346 and Law 5686. Law
5346, the Renewable Energy Law, entered into force in
2005 and deals with the use of renewable energy resources
for the purpose of electrical power generation. It sets
a fixed feed-in tariff for various energy resources, and
gives incentives for renewables. It also encourages the
local governorships and municipalities to benefit from
the geothermal resources within their jurisdictions
by building and operating geothermal district heating
systems. The Amending Law 6094 came into effect in 2011
to introduce further incentives to encourage investments.

The importance of geothermal energy in Turkey
Almost 80% of Turkey’s energy consumption is met by imports. The extent of this reliance – particularly on natural gas
– threatens the essentials of the country’s sustainable development model seriously. Added to this, Turkey's continued
dependence on fossil fuels will contribute to global warming and to rapid worsening of the environment and air quality in
the country. In this context, geothermal energy has a major contribution to make to Turkey’s energy diversification strategy.
If it were to use its geothermal potential fully, Turkey would be capable of meeting 5% of its electricity needs and 30% of its
heat requirements from geothermal sources – which corresponds to 14% of its total energy needs. Generally speaking, the
cost of producing geothermal power is higher than that of classic fuels (US EIA, 2013). However, cost comparisons are highly
subject to fluctuation, and the ongoing efforts for advances in geothermal power production technologies may make this cost
relationship more favourable for geothermal energy (Erdoğdu, 2009).

The use of and prospects for geothermal energy in Turkey

171

Law 5686, known as the Geothermal Law, was passed
in 2007. It deals with geothermal resources and natural
mineral waters. Among the purposes of this Law are to
set rules and principles for the search for and exploration,
development and production of geothermal resources.
It also sets rules for the protection of these resources,
including regulations that govern how to make economic
use of them in compliance with environment protection
guidelines, and sets out how they should be reclaimed
after use.
As a result of these laws, Turkey’s capacity for geothermal
electricity production has increased by more than 100%
since 2009 (Figure 29.1). Most of this growth has been
realized by the private sector. The installed capacity is
expected to reach 750 MWe by the end of 2018 (Table 29.1).
Concerning other uses of geothermal energy, at the end of
2012, Turkey had an installed capacity of 2,705 MWt for
direct use applications – a 30% increase on 2010 values.
Overall, geothermal district heating projects have been

Trend in geothermal electricity production
Geothermal electricity
production (MWe)

Figure

29.1

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2006 2007 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Source: Mertoğlu and Başarır (2013).

Table

29.1

put into use in 16 cities and are expected to grow fivefold
in capacity between 2014 and 2018. While reaching
the 2018 targets (Table 29.1) requires an investment of
approximately US$5 billion, the economic value to be
generated is estimated to be around US$32 billion per
year. It is also expected to create employment for 300,000
people.
The use of geothermal energy has proved to be
environmentally friendly and economically competitive
when compared with fossil fuel alternatives. For example,
in Turkey, geothermal heating typically costs 60% less
than its natural gas equivalent. Overall, the country’s
current installed capacity of geothermal energy allows an
annual saving of approximately US$1 billion, which would
otherwise have to be spent on importing natural gas.

Conclusion

In 2012, Turkey spent US$60 billion on gas and oil
imports to meet the energy demands of its swiftly growing
economy. This bill will continue to rise in parallel with
increasing energy use in the country and the price of
fuel on the international markets. Given its considerable
potential to generate energy from wind, hydropower,
solar power, geothermal resources and biomass,
renewable energy constitutes a plausible alternative to
fossil fuels. Among these, geothermal energy deserves
special attention as Turkey is ranked the seventh most
promising country in the world in terms of its rich
potential. As a result of the legal framework set by Law
5346, Law 5686 and Law 6094, the private sector has
been actively involved in developing geothermal fields to
generate electricity and for direct-use applications such
as district heating, greenhouse heating and in thermal

Use of geothermal resources in Turkey, and projections for 2018
Type of utilization

Installed capacity (2012)

2018 Projections

Geothermal district heating

89 443 residences equivalence
(805 MWt)

500 000 residences equivalence
(4 000 MWt)

Greenhouse heating

2 832 000 m2
(612 MWt)

6 000 000 m2
(2 040 MWt)

Balneological use

350 thermal facilities equivalence
(870 MWt)
(16 million visitors annually)

400 thermal facilities equivalence
(1 100 MWt)

Electricity generation

168 Mwe

750 MWe

Note: 1 residence equivalent = 100 m2.
Source: TMD (2013).

172

Chapter 29

CASE STUDIES

and balneological facilities. While tapping the remaining
potential and reaching targets set for 2018 will require an
investment of US$5 billion, the constant rise of oil and
gas prices is likely to make the investment feasible. In
the Turkish context, geothermal energy has proved to be
cleaner and much cheaper than fossil fuels. Nevertheless, a
number of challenges need to be dealt with to ensure the
development and widespread use of this renewable energy
source. These include investigating geothermal resources
thoroughly, making incentives in district heating more
attractive to the private sector and promoting the transfer
of expertise.

Acknowledgements
Nilgün Başarır

References

Except where other sources are cited, information in this
chapter is adapted from:
Başarır, N. 2013. Existing Geothermal Situation and Projections in
Turkey: Case Study. Ankara, Turkish Geothermal Association.
(Unpublished)

***********
Erdoğdu, E. 2009. A snapshot of geothermal energy potential
and utilization in Turkey. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 13(9): 2535–2543.
GEA (Geothermal Energy Association). 2012. Geothermal:
International Market Overview Report. Washington DC, GEA.
http://geo-energy.org/pdf/reports/2012-GEA_International_
Overview.pdf

WWDR 2014

Hürriyet. 2013. Her dört dolarlık ithalatın 1 doları
enerjiye. Hürriyet, 5 March. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/
ekonomi/22741785.asp (In Turkish)
Lally, M. 2011. US Companies See Growth Potential
in Turkey. RenewableEnergyWorld.com. http://
www.renewableenergyworld.com/rea/news/
article/2011/08/u-s-companies-see-growth-potential-in-turkey
Mertoğlu, O. and Başarır, N. 2013. Significant Progress of
Geothermal Development Activities in Turkey: A Success Story.
Paper presented at the European Geothermal Congress, Pisa,
Italy, 3–7 June 2013.
MFA (Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs). 2013. Economic
Outlook of Turkey. Ankara, MFA. http://www.mfa.gov.tr/
prospects-and-recent-developments-in-the-turkish-economy.
en.mfa
Serpen, U., Aksoy, N. and Öngür, T. 2010. 2010 Present Status of
Geothermal Energy in Turkey. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth
Workshop on Geothermal Reservoir Engineering, Stanford,
CA, 1–3 February 2010. http://es.stanford.edu/ERE/pdf/
IGAstandard/SGW/2010/serpen.pdf
TMD (Turkish Ministry of Development). 2013. 10. Kalkınma
Planı (2014-2018) Madencilik Politikaları Özel İhtisas
Komisyonu Enerji Hammaddeleri Grubu Jeotermal Çalışma
Alt Grubu Raporu. Ankara, Turkish Ministry Of Development,
Geothermal Studies Sub Committee, Mining Policies Special
Commission for the 10th National Development Plan. http://
www.onuncuplan.gov.tr/oik11/K%20alma%20Belgeleri/
Jeotermal%20Raporu%2030.11.pdf (In Turkish)
US DOE (United States Department of Energy). 2013. Direct Use
of Geothermal Energy. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.
Washington DC, Geothermal Technologies Office, US DOE.
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/geothermal/directuse.html
US EIA (United States Energy Information Administration).
2013. Levelized Cost of New Generation Resources in the
Annual Energy Outlook 2013. Independent Statistics and
Analysis. Washington DC, US EIA. http://www.eia.gov/
forecasts/aeo/er/electricity_generation.cfm

The use of and prospects for geothermal energy in Turkey

173

BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES

Boxes
17.1
18.1
19.1
20.1
21.1
22.1
25.1
26.1
28.1
29.1

Austria An energy self-sufficient wastewater treatment plant
China Navigation on the Yangtze River
Eastern Herzegovina The Dinaric Karst and the DIKTAS project
Gulf Cooperation Council countries The King Abdullah Initiative for Solar Water Desalination
India Some reported conflicts in India on the water–energy trade-off
Italy Potential for achieving significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
Kenya Vision 2030 and the role of energy
Republic of Korea The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project
USA Water and energy conservation efforts in Austin
Turkey The importance of geothermal energy in Turkey

139
142
145
148
152
154
160
164
169
171

Tables
19.1
21.1
25.1
26.1
28.1
29.1

Eastern Herzegovina Technical characteristics of water reservoirs and power plants on
the lower section of the Trebišnjica Multipurpose Hydrosystem
India Water use intensity of thermal power plants according to fuel type and cooling system
Kenya Vision 2030 energy generation projection by source
Republic of Korea Primary energy demand and supply targets for 2030 by source
USA Austin Energy resources and generation capacities in 2013
Turkey Use of geothermal resources in Turkey, and projections for 2018

145
150
161
163
168
172

Figures
18.1
19.1
20.1
21.1
21.2
23.1
27.1
29.1

China The Yangtze River basin
Eastern Herzegovina Groundwater flow directions in Eastern Herzegovina including
the border areas of Montenegro and Croatia
Gulf Cooperation Council countries Current (2010) and contracted (2016) desalination capacity
in the Gulf Cooperation Council countries
India Projected water demand for electricity generation
India The water stress level of major river basins and the distribution of thermal power plants
Japan Change in domestic energy supplied by nuclear power plants between 1990 and 2011
Mexico Average energy budget of Los Alisos Wastewater Treatment Plant
upon completion of the solar panel farm
Turkey Trend in geothermal electricity production

Figure in Box 26.1 Republic of Korea The Four Major Rivers Restoration Project

174

BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES

141
144
147
151
151
156
166
172
164

PART 6

WWDR 2014

DATA AND
INDICATORS ANNEX

175

Data and indicators annex
Compiled by WWAP | Engin Koncagül and Sisira Saddhamangala Withanachchi

Demographic projections

indicator

1

Population growth
rate (%)

Population projection
(million)

Urban population
(%)

2015– 2020– 2025– 2015
2020 2025 2030

2020

2025

2030

2015

2020

2025

2030

Africa

2.36

2.24

2.15

1 166 239

1 312 142

1 467 973

1 634 366

41.1

43.2

45.3

47.7

Asia

0.88

0.72

0.57

4 384 844

4 581 523

4 748 915

4 886 846

47.6

50.5

53.1

55.5

Europe

0.01

-0.07

-0.13

743 123

743 569

741 020

736 364

73.8

74.9

76.1

77.4

LAC

0.98

0.86

0.73

630 089

661 724

690 833

716 671

80.2

81.5

82.5

83.4

North
America

0.79

0.74

0.68

361 128

375 724

389 939

403 373

83.1

84.1

85.0

85.8

Oceania

1.33

1.23

1.12

39 359

42 066

44 734

47 317

70.8

70.9

71.1

71.4

World

1.04

0.93

0.83

7 324 782

7 716 749

8 083 413

8 424 937

53.9

56.0

58.0

59.9

Note: LAC, Latin America and the Caribbean.
Source: WWAP, with data for population growth rate (medium variant) from UNDESA (2013, see specifically http://esa.un.org/wpp/unpp/panel_
indicators.htm); for population projection (medium variant) from UNDESA (2013, see specifically http://esa.un.org/wpp/unpp/panel_population.
htm) and for urban population (percentage of population residing in urban areas), UNDESA (2012, see specifically http://esa.un.org/unup/CD-ROM/
WUP2011-F02-Proportion_Urban.xls).
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs), Population Division. 2012. World Urbanization Prospects, The 2011 Revision.
New York, UN.
––––. 2013. World Urbanization Prospects, The 2012 Revision. New York, UN. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm

Urban and rural populations by development group (1950–2050)

indicator

2

6 000

Population (millions)

5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

More developed regions – Urban population

Less developed regions – Urban population

More developed regions – Rural population

Less developed regions – Rural population

2050

Source: UNDESA (2012, fig. 1, p. 3).
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2012. World Urbanization Prospects, The 2011 Revision: Highlights. New York, UN.
http://esa.un.org/unup/pdf/WUP2011_Highlights.pdf

176

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Total actual renewable water resources per capita (2011)

indicator

3

Absolute
scarcity

0

Stress

Scarcity

500

1 000

Vulnerability

1 700

2 500

7 500

15 000

50 000

Note: The map shows m3 per capita per year.
Source: WWAP, with data from FAO AQUASTAT database (aggregate data for all countries except Andorra and Serbia, external data)
(website accessed Oct 2013), and using UN-Water category thresholds.

Total actual renewable water resources per capita: Trends and projections

indicator

4

2000

2010

2030

2050

World

6 936

6 148

5 095

4 556

Africa

4 854

3 851

2 520

1 796

Northern Africa

331

284

226

204

Sub-Saharan Africa

5 812

4 541

2 872

1 983

Americas

22 930

20 480

17 347

15 976

Northern America

14 710

13 274

11 318

10 288

Central America and the Caribbean

10 736

9 446

7 566

6 645

Southern America

35 264

31 214

26 556

25 117

Asia

3 186

2 845

2 433

2 302

Middle East

1 946

1 588

1 200

1 010

Central Asia

3 089

2 623

1 897

1 529

Southern and Eastern Asia

3 280

2 952

2 563

2 466

Europe

9 175

8 898

8 859

9 128

Western and Central Europe

4 258

4 010

3 891

3 929

Eastern Europe

20 497

21 341

22 769

24 874

Oceania

35 681

30 885

24 873

21 998

Australia and New Zealand

35 575

30 748

24 832

22 098

Other Pacific Islands

36 920

32 512

25 346

20 941

Source: WWAP, with data from FAO AQUASTAT database (for water resources) (website accessed Dec 2013) and UNDESA (2011) (for population).
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs), Population Division. 2011. World Urbanization Prospects, The 2010 Revision. New York, UN.
WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

177

Annual average monthly blue water scarcity in the world’s major river basins (1996–2005)

indicator

5

0.0–0.25
0.25–0.5
0.5–1.0
1.0–1.5
1.5–2
>2
No data

Note: Annual average monthly blue water scarcity in the world’s major river basins is calculated by equally weighting the twelve monthly blue water
scarcity values per basin.
Source: Hoekstra et al. (2012, fig. 7, p. 23).
Hoekstra, A.Y. and Mekonnen, M.M. 2011. Global Water Scarcity: Monthly Blue Water Footprint Compared to Blue Water Availability for the World’s Major
River Basins. Value of Water Research Report Series No. 53. Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE.
http://www.waterfootprint.org/Reports/Report53-GlobalBlueWaterScarcity.pdf

Water withdrawal by sector (around 2006)

indicator

6

Total withdrawal by sector
Muncipal

km3/year

Industrial

%

km3/year

%

Agricultural

Total water Total water
withdrawal * withdrawal
per
inhabitant

Total water
freshwater
withdrawal

km3/year

%

km3/year

km3/year

3 902

World

469

12

731

19

2 702

69

Africa

28

13

11

5

175

82 214

m3/year

Freshwater
withdrawal
as % of
IRWR

593

3 753

9

230

202

5

Northern Africa

9

10

6

6

79

84

94

607

82

176

Sub-Saharan Africa

19

16

6

5

95

80

120

155

120

3

Americas

135

16

285

34 409

49

829

927

825

4

Northern America

86

14

259

43 259

43

604

1 373

600

10

Central America and the
Caribbean

7

23

4

12 20

65

31

390

31

4

Southern America

42

22

22

11 130

67

194

517

194

2

Asia

228

9

244

10 2 035

81 2 507

628

2 376

20

Middle East

25

9

20

7

231

84

276

986

268

55

Central Asia

7

5

10

7

128

89

145

1 675

136

56

Southern and Eastern Asia

196

9

214

10 1 676

80

2 086

575

1 973

18

Europe

72

22 188

57 73

22

333

455

331

5

Western and Central Europe

53

22

128

54 58

24

239

457

237

11

Eastern Europe

20

21

60

64 15

16

95

450

95

2

Oceania

5

26

3

15 11

60 18

657

18

2

Australia and New Zealand

5

26

3

15 11

60

18

710

18

2

Other Pacific Islands

0.03

33

0.01

11 0.05

56

0.1

40

0.1

0.1

Note: * Includes use of desalinated water, direct use of treated municipal wastewater and direct use of agricultural drainage water.
IRWR, internal renewable water resources.
Source: WWAP, with data from FAO AQUASTAT database (accessed Dec 2013).

178

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

indicator

7

Water demand at the global level and in
country groups (Baseline Scenario 2000 and
2050)
6 000

Note: BRIICS, Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa; OECD,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; ROW, rest of
the world. This graph only measures ‘blue water’ demand and does not
consider rainfed agriculture.
Source: OECD (2012, fig. 5.4, p. 217, output from IMAGE). OECD
Environmental Outlook to 2050 © OECD.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2012.
OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Paris,
OECD. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264122246-en

5 000

km3

4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000

0

2000 2050 2000 2050 2000 2050 2000 2050
OECD
BRIICS
ROW
World
Irrigation

Domestic

Manufacturing

WWDR 2014

Livestock
Electricity

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

179

indicator

8

Population using solid fuel for cooking and without access to electricity,
improved water and sanitation in a selection of countries
Electricity
(national)

Water
(national)

Sanitation
(national)

Cooking fuel
(national)

Population
(2011)a
(million)

Population
without access
to electricity
(2011)b (%)

Population
without access
to improved
water
(2011)a (%)

Population
without access
to improved
sanitation
(2011)a (%)

Population
using solid fuel
for cooking*, c
(%)

Burkina Faso

17.0

86.9

20.0

82.0

93.0 (2007)

Cameroon

20.0

46.3

25.6

52.2

75.0 (2005)

DR Congo

67.8

91.0

53.8

69.3

95.0 (2007)

Ethiopia

84.7

76.7

51.0

79.3

95.0 (2005)

Ghana

25.0

28.0

13.7

86.5

83.0 (2008)

Kenya

41.6

80.8

39.1

70.6

82.0 (2006)

Malawi

15.4

93.0

16.3

47.1

99.0 (2005)

Nigeria

162.5

52.0

38.9

69.4

75.0 (2007)

Senegal

12.8

43.5

26.6

48.6

56.0 (2006)

South Africa

50.5

15.3

8.5

26.0

17.0 (2007)

Togo

6.2

73.5

41.0

88.6

98.0 (2005)

Uganda

34.5

85.4

25.2

65.0

96.0 (2006)

Bangladesh

150.5

40.4

16.8

45.3

91.0 (2007)

Cambodia

14.3

66.0

32.9

66.9

92.0 (2005)

China

1 347.6

0.2

8.3

34.9

55.0 (2000)

India

1 241.5

24.7

8.4

64.9

57.0 (2006)

Indonesia

242.3

27.1

15.7

41.3

55.0 (2007)

Mongolia

2.8

11.8

14.7

47.0

77.0 (2005)

Myanmar

48.3

51.2

15.9

22.7

95.0 (2004)

Nepal

30.5

23.7

12.4

64.6

83.0 (2006)

Pakistan

176.7

31.4

8.6

52.6

67.0 (2006)

Sri Lanka

21.0

14.6

7.4

8.9

78.0 (2006)

Thailand

69.5

1.0

4.2

6.6

34.0 (2005)

Africa

Asia

Note: * The reference year for the data is given in parentheses. ** Excludes coal.
Source: Compiled by Engin Koncagül and Sisira Saddhamangala Withanachchi (WWAP), with data from a WHO/UNICEF (2013, see http://www.wssinfo.
org/data-estimates/table/); b OECD/IEA (World Energy Outlook 2013 Electricity Access Database at http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/
weowebsite/energydevelopment/WEO2013Electricitydatabase.xlsx); and c WHO Global Health Observatory Data Repository – Solid cooking fuels by
country at http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.136?lang=en.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris, OECD/IEA.
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund). 2013. Data Resources and Estimates. New York, WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. http://www.wssinfo.org/

180

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Electricity
(national)

Water
(national)

Sanitation
(national)

Cooking fuel
(national)

Population
(2011)a
(million)

Population
without access
to electricity
(2011)b (%)

Population
without access
to improved
water
(2011)a (%)

Population
without access
to improved
sanitation
(2011)a (%)

Population
using solid fuel
for cooking*, c
(%)

Argentina

40.8

2.8

0.8

3.7

5.0 (2001)

Bolivia

10.1

13.2

12.0

53.7

29.0 (2007)

Brazil

196.7

0.7

2.8

19.2

13.0 (2003)

Colombia

46.9

2.6

7.1

21.9

15.0 (2005)

Guatemala

14.8

18.1

6.2

19.8

62.0 (2003)

Haiti

10.1

72.1

36.0

73.9

94.0 (2005)

Nicaragua

5.9

22.3

15.0

47.9

57.0 (2006)

Peru

29.4

10.3

14.7

28.4

37.0 (2007)

Iraq

32.7

2.0

15.1

16.1

5.0 (2005)

Syrian Arab Republic

20.8

7.2

10.1

4.8

0.3 (2005)

Yemen

24.8

60.1

45.2

47.0

36.0 (2006)

World

6 950.7

18.1

11.1

35.9

38.0 (2012) **

Latin America

Middle East

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

181

indicator

9

Access to improved drinking water (1990–2011)
Region*

Caucasus and Central
Asia

Developed countries

Eastern Asia

Latin America and the
Caribbean

North Africa

Oceania

Southern Asia

South-East Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Western Asia

Year

Population

Urban Improved

Urban Unimproved

x 1 000

Urban
(%)

Rural
(%)

Total
Improved
(%)

Piped on
premises
(%)

Other
Improved
(%)

Surface
water
(%)

Total
Unimproved
(%)

1990

66 627

48.0

52.0

97.0

85.0

12.0

1.0

3.0

2000

71 294

44.0

56.0

96.0

84.0

12.0

1.0

4.0

2011

78 177

44.0

56.0

96.0

84.0

12.0

1.0

4.0

1990

1 149 636

72.0

28.0

99.0

97.0

2.0

0.0

1.0

2000

1 195 732

74.0

26.0

100.0

97.0

3.0

0.0

0.0

2011

1 249 022

78.0

22.0

100.0

97.0

3.0

0.0

0.0

1990

1 216 664

29.0

71.0

97.0

92.0

5.0

1.0

3.0

2000

1 347 625

38.0

62.0

98.0

93.0

5.0

0.0

2.0

2011

1 430 886

52.0

48.0

98.0

95.0

3.0

0.0

2.0

1990

443 031

70.0

30.0

94.0

86.0

8.0

1.0

6.0

2000

521 429

75.0

25.0

96.0

90.0

6.0

1.0

4.0

2011

596 628

79.0

21.0

97.0

94.0

3.0

0.0

3.0

1990

119 693

49.0

51.0

94.0

86.0

8.0

0.0

6.0

2000

141 978

52.0

48.0

94.0

89.0

5.0

0.0

6.0

2011

168 355

55.0

45.0

95.0

91.0

4.0

0.0

5.0

1990

6 458

24.0

76.0

92.0

74.0

18.0

3.0

8.0

2000

8 092

24.0

76.0

93.0

75.0

18.0

2.0

7.0

2011

10 141

23.0

77.0

95.0

74.0

21.0

2.0

5.0

1990

1 195 984

26.0

74.0

90.0

51.0

39.0

1.0

10.0

2000

1 460 201

29.0

71.0

92.0

53.0

39.0

1.0

8.0

2011

1 728 477

33.0

67.0

95.0

54.0

41.0

0.0

5.0

1990

445 361

32.0

68.0

90.0

41.0

49.0

2.0

10.0

2000

523 831

38.0

62.0

92.0

45.0

47.0

2.0

8.0

2011

600 025

45.0

55.0

94.0

51.0

43.0

0.0

6.0

1990

515 587

28.0

72.0

83.0

43.0

40.0

3.0

17.0

2000

669 117

32.0

68.0

83.0

39.0

44.0

3.0

17.0

2011

877 563

37.0

63.0

84.0

34.0

50.0

3.0

16.0

1990

127 091

61.0

39.0

95.0

85.0

10.0

1.0

5.0

2000

161 477

64.0

36.0

96.0

87.0

9.0

1.0

4.0

2011

211 443

68.0

32.0

96.0

88.0

8.0

0.0

4.0

Note: * Millennium Development Goal (MDG) regions.
Source: WWAP, with data from WHO/UNICEF (2013a, b).
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund). 2013a. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-Water: 2013 Update. New York,
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
——. 2013b. Data Resources and Estimates. New York, WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
http://www.wssinfo.org/data-estimates/table/

182

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Rural Improved

Rural Unimproved

National Improved

National Unimproved

Piped on
premises
(%)

Total
Improved
(%)

Surface
water
(%)

Total
Piped on
Unimproved premises
(%)
(%)

Total
Improved
(%)

Surface
water
(%)

Proportion
of the 2011
Total
population that
Unimproved gained access
(%)
since 1995 (%)

31.0

81.0

7.0

18.8

56.0

89.0

4.0

11.0

29.0

77.0

12.0

23.4

53.0

85.0

7.0

15.0

29.0

78.0

10.0

21.5

53.0

86.0

6.0

14.0

69.0

94.0

0.0

6.3

89.0

98.0

0.0

2.0

77.0

95.0

0.0

5.0

92.0

98.0

0.0

2.0

79.0

97.0

1.0

2.8

93.0

99.0

0.0

1.0

12.0

56.0

10.0

43.6

35.0

68.0

7.0

32.0

29.0

71.0

6.0

29.2

53.0

81.0

4.0

19.0

45.0

85.0

2.0

15.0

71.0

92.0

1.0

8.0

38.0

64.0

20.0

36.4

72.0

85.0

7.0

15.0

50.0

72.0

14.0

27.9

80.0

90.0

4.0

10.0

64.0

82.0

7.0

18.1

88.0

94.0

2.0

6.0

32.0

80.0

3.0

19.9

58.0

87.0

2.0

13.0

51.0

84.0

4.0

16.2

71.0

89.0

2.0

11.0

73.0

89.0

5.0

11.4

83.0

92.0

2.0

8.0

12.0

36.0

40.0

63.5

27.0

50.0

31.0

50.0

12.0

41.0

39.0

58.9

27.0

53.0

31.0

47.0

11.0

45.0

41.0

54.9

25.0

56.0

32.0

44.0

7.0

66.0

5.0

33.9

19.0

72.0

4.0

28.0

11.0

76.0

4.0

23.8

23.0

81.0

3.0

19.0

15.0

88.0

2.0

12.0

28.0

90.0

1.0

10.0

5.0

62.0

12.0

37.9

17.0

71.0

9.0

29.0

10.0

72.0

9.0

27.9

24.0

80.0

6.0

20.0

13.0

84.0

3.0

15.7

30.0

89.0

2.0

11.0

4.0

35,.0

33.0

64.9

15.0

49.0

24.0

51.0

4.0

42.0

26.0

58.0

15.0

55.0

19.0

45.0

5.0

51.0

19.0

49.3

15.0

63.0

13.0

37.0

41.0

69.0

7.0

30.7

68.0

85.0

3.0

15.0

53.0

73.0

7.0

26.7

75.0

87.0

3.0

13.0

66.0

78.0

4.0

21.5

81.0

90.0

1.0

10.0

WWDR 2014

10

7

25

23

23

21

32

28

28

32

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

183

indicator

10

World total primary energy supply by source
(a) 1973

(b) 2011

Hydro 1.8%
Biofuels and waste 10.6%
Nuclear 0.9%
Other 0.1%

Hydro 2.3%
Biofuels and waste 10.0%
Nuclear 5.1%
Other 1.0%

Natural gas
16.0%

Natural gas
21.3%

Coal and peat
24.6%

Coal and peat
28.8%

Oil 31.5%

Oil 46.0%

(a) Fuel share 1973: 6 109 Mtoe total
(b) Fuel share 2011: 13 113 Mtoe total
Note: Mtoe, million tonnes of oil equivalent. ‘Other’ includes geothermal, solar, wind, heat, etc.
Source: IEA (2013, p. 6, bottom panel). Key World Energy Statistics 2013 © OECD/IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. Key World Energy Statistics 2013. Paris, OECD/IEA.

indicator

11

World primary energy demand: Trends and projections
New Policies

Current Policies

450 Scenario

2000

2010

2020

2035

2020

2035

2020

2035

Total

10 097

12 730

14 922

17 197

15 332

18 676

14 176

14 793

Coal

2 378

3 474

4 082

4 218

4 417

5 523

3 569

2 337

Oil

3 659

4 113

4 457

4 656

4 542

5 053

4 282

3 682

Gas

2 073

2 740

3 266

4 106

3 341

4 380

3 078

3 293

Nuclear

676

719

898

1 138

886

1 019

939

1 556

Hydro

226

295

388

488

377

460

401

539

Bioenergy*

1 027

1 277

1 532

1 881

1 504

1 741

1 568

2 235

Other renewables

60

112

299

710

265

501

340

1 151

Fossil fuel share in TPED

80%

81%

79%

75%

80%

80%

77%

63%

Note: All values are in Mtoe unless otherwise noted. * Includes traditional and modern biomass uses. TPED, total primary energy demand.
Source: Adapted from IEA (2012, table 2.1, p. 51).
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris, OECD/IEA.

184

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Trends in electricity generation in the world and in selected countries (1971–2012)

indicator

12

1971

1980

1990

2005

2011

2012

Australia

53.3

96.1

155.0

228.7

252.6

252.3

Brazil

51.6

139.4

222.8

403.0

531.8

–

Canada

222.0

373.4

482.2

626.1

637.0

645.8

People's Republic of China

138.4

300.6

621.2

2 502.5

4 715.7

–

France

155.9

258.0

420.7

576.2

562.0

561.2

Germany

329.1

467.6

550.0

620.6

608.7

617.6

India

66.4

119.3

289.4

698.2

1 052.3

–

Japan

385.6

576.3

842.0

1 099.8

1 051.3

1 033.8

Korea

10.5

37.2

105.4

389.4

523.3

531.0

Russian Federation

–

–

1 082.2

953.1

1 054.8

–

United States of America

1 703.4

2 427.3

3 218.6

4 294.4

4 350.0

4 299.8

OECD total

3 847.6

5 684.0

7 672.4

10 575.1

10 867.0

10 833.5

European Union-27

–

–

2 586.3

3 310.6

3 279.2

–

World

5 256.5

8 297.8

11 865.7

18 335.8

22 201.0

–

Note: All figures are in TWh. –, data not available.
Source: WWAP, with data from IEA (2013).
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. World Indicators. World energy statistics and balances database. Paris, OECD/IEA.
doi: 10.1787/data-00510-en (Accessed Dec 2013)

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

185

indicator

13

Trends in world electricity generation by energy source
(a)
24 000
20 000

TWh

16 000
12 000
8 000
4 000
0
1971

1975
Fossil thermal

1980

1985

1990

1995

Nuclear

(b) 1973

2000

Hydro

2005

2011

Other*

(c) 2011
Wind 2.0%
Other* 0.6%

Solar PV 0.3%
Hydro 21.0%

Geothermal
0.3%

Biofuels, waste
and other sources 1.9%
Hydro 15.8%
Nuclear
11.7%

Nuclear 3.3%
Coal and peat
38.3%

Coal and peat
41.3%
Natural gas
12.2%
Natural gas
21.9%
Oil 24.6%

Oil 4.8%

(a) 1971–2011
(b) 1973: 6 115 TWh total
(c) 2011: 22 126 TWh total
Note: Excludes pumped storage. * ‘Other’ includes geothermal, solar, wind, biofuels and waste, and heat. PV, solar photovoltaic.
Source: IEA (http://www.iea.org/statistics/statisticssearch/report/?&country=WORLD&year=2011&product=ElectricityandHeat) and (2013, p. 24). Key
World Energy Statistics 2013 © OECD/IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. Key World Energy Statistics 2013. Paris, OECD/IEA.

186

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Trends in electricity consumption (2000–2011)

indicator

14

21 000

Electricity consumption (TWh)

18 000

15 000

12 000

6 000

3 000

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

World

OECD Europe

Africa

Asia (excluding China)

China (PR of China and Hong Kong)

India

Russian Federation

United States of America

Source: WWAP, with data from IEA (2013).
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. World Indicators. World energy statistics and balances database. Paris, OECD/IEA.
doi: 10.1787/data-00514-en (Accessed Dec 2013)

Share of people without electricity access in developing countries (2011)

indicator

15

Note: Data are given as a percentage of the population.
Source: ChartsBin.com (http://chartsbin.com/view/10471, based on source cited therein [original data from IEA World Energy Outlook statistics at
http://www.iea.org/stats/index.asp]) (Accessed Oct 2013) and updated with data from the IEA World Energy Outlook 2013 Electricity Access Database
(http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/energydevelopment/WEO2013Electricitydatabase.xlsx) for India and Nicaragua.

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

187

Source: Cosgrove-Davies (2006).

Global electricity access rate:
Trends and projections

Cosgrove-Davies, M. 2006. Energy Access in Sub-Saharan Africa – A World
Bank Action Plan: Programme Of Action For The Least Developed Countries
(2001–2010). Presentation, Geneva, 18–19 July 2006. Africa Energy Unit,
The World Bank. http://www.unohrlls.org/UserFiles/File/LDC%20
Documents/Workshop/worldbank2006.pdf

100
Percentage of population
with access to electricity

indicator

16

75

50

25

0

1970
Latin America

1990
Mid-East/North Africa
South Asia

2020
(forecast)

East Asia and Pacific

Africa

Energy consumption per capita (2010)

indicator

17

2004

Note: BTU, British Thermal Unit. One million BTU approximately equals the energy derived from 30 litres of petrol.
Source: Burn: An Energy Journal (http://burnanenergyjournal.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/WorldMap_EnergyConsumptionPerCapita2010_v4_
BargraphKey.jpg, from sources cited therein) (Accessed Oct 2013). Produced by Anrica Deb for SoundVision Productions®, used with permission.

188

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

1

Trends in electricity consumption per capita (2000–2011)

indicator

18

Electricity consumption (TWh per capita)

14 000

12 000

8 000

6 000

4 000

2 000

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

World

OECD Europe

Africa

Asia (excluding China)

China (PR of China and Hong Kong)

India

Russian Federation

United States of America

Source: WWAP, with data from IEA (2013).

19

Use of dams by purpose

indicator

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. World Indicators. World energy statistics and balances database. Paris, OECD/IEA.
doi: 10.1787/data-00514-en (Accessed Dec 2013)

(a)

Navigation and
fish farming 0.6%

(b)

Other 5.0%

Navigation and
fish farming 8.0%

Other 4.0%

Recreation
5.0%
Flood control
10.0%

Water supply
12.0%

Irrigation
24.0%

Recreation
12.0%
Irrigation
50.0%
Flood control
20.0%

Hydropower 18.0%

Hydropower
16.0%
Water supply 17.0%

(a) Single purpose dams
(b) Multi purpose dams
Source: WWAP, with data from ICOLD (n.d.).
ICOLD (International Commission on Large Dams). n.d. General Synthesis. Paris, ICOLD.
http://www.icold-cigb.net/GB/World_register/general_synthesis.asp (Accessed Dec 2013)

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

189

190
35 000

30 000

25 000

20 000

15 000

10 000

5 000

0

America and Oceania

50 000
8 000

45 000

40 000
7 000

Ira

rea

n(
IR)
(D
PR
Ge )
or
Th gia
aila
Tu
rkm nd
en
is
La tan
o(
PD
R
Tu )
A z r k ey
er b
aij
an
Ira
Ka
zak q
hs
tan
Ko

ia
ina

0

Ch

1 000

I nd

2 000

an
y
ing
do
m
Cz
ec Fran
hR
c
ep e
ub
Ro l i c
ma
Ne
n
the ia
rla
nd
Uk s
rain
e
Sp
ain
Alb
an
Ru
ia
ssi
S
an w e
d
Fe
e
n
de
rat
ion
No
rw
ay

3 000

rm

4 000

Ge

7 000

ed
K

5 000

Dam capacity per capita
(m3/inhabitant)

6 000

Dam capacity per capita
(m3/inhabitant)

Eth
io
Na pia
mi
M bia
So oroc
uth co
Afr
ica
Ma
Le
li
Cô soth
te
d'I o
vo
ire
Eg
yp
t
U
M o gan
zam da
biq
u
Gh e
an
Za a
Zim mbi
ba a
bw
e

Dam capacity per capita
(m3/inhabitant)
8 000

Un
it

ara
gu
a
P
Un
Ho eru
ite
nd
dS
ura
tat
s
M
es
of exico
Am
eri
ca
Bra
zil
A
Ne ustr
ali
w
Ve Zea a
ne
l
zu and
ela
(B
Ur R)
ug
Pa uay
rag
ua
Ca y
na
Su da
rin
am
e

Nic

Dam capacity per capita
(m3/inhabitant)

indicator
20

Total dam capacity per capita by region (around 2010)
Africa
Asia

6 000

5 000

4 000

3 000

2 000

1 000
0

Europe

6 000

5 000

4 000

3 000

2 000

1 000

0

Source: WWAP, with data from FAO AQUASTAT database (accessed Dec 2013).

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Hydropower: Technical potential and installed capacity by region (2009)

indicator

21

North America

388 1659
61%*
GW TWh/year

Latin America

608 2856
74%*
GW TWh/year

Europe

338 1021 47%*
GW TWh/year

Africa

283 1174
92%*
GW TWh/year

Asia

2037 7681
80%*
GW TWh/year

Australasia/
Oceania

67
185
80%*
GW TWh/year

World Hydropower
Technical Potential:
14 576 TWh/year
Technical Potential
Capacity (GW)
Generation (TWh/year)
Installed (%)
*Undeveloped (%)

Source: Kumar et al. (2011, fig. 5.2, p. 445, based on source cited therein). © IPCC.
Kumar, A., Schei, T., Ahenkorah, A., Caceres Rodriguez, R., Devernay, J-M., Freitas, M., Hall, D., Killingtveit, A. and Liu, Z. 2011. Hydropower. O. Edenhofer,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schlomer and C. von Stechow (eds),
IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. Cambridge, UK and New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 437–496.

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

191

22

Trends in hydropower production in selected regions and countries

indicator

(a)
300 000

ktoe

250 000

200 000

50 000

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

World

OECD Europe

Africa

Asia (excluding China)

China (PR of China and Hong Kong)

India

Russian Federation

United States of America

(b) 1973

(c) 2011

Asia* 4.3%
Non-OECD
Americas
6.8%

China 2.9%

Asia* 7.7%

Non-OECD
Europe and
Eurasia 11.6%
Middle East
0.3%

Africa
2.2%

China 19.6%
Non-OECD
Americas
20.1%
Non-OECD
Europe and
Eurasia 8.1%

Africa
3.2%

Middle East
0.6%

OECD 71.9%

OECD 40.7%

(a) Regional shares 1999–2010
(b) Regional shares 1973: 1 294 TWh total
(c) Regional shares 2011: 3 566 TWh total
Note: Values for (b) and (c) include pumped storage. * Excludes China.
Source: WWAP, with data for (a) from IEA (2013a) and for (b, c) from IEA (2013b, p. 18, bottom panel). Key World Energy Statistics 2013 © OECD/IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013a. Extended World Energy Balances. World energy statistics and balances database. Paris, OECD/IEA.
doi: 10.1787/data-00513-en (Accessed Dec 2013)
---- 2013b. Key World Energy Statistics 2013. Paris, OECD/IEA.

192

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

800

24

Energy requirement to deliver 1 m3 water
safe for human consumption from various
water sources

indicator

Global water use for energy production
by scenario

bcm

indicator

23

600

Lake or river: 0.37 kWh/m3

400

Groundwater: 0.48 kWh/m3
Wastewater treatment: 0.62–0.87 kWh/m3

200

Wastewater reuse: 1.0–2.5 kWh/m3

0
2010
Current Policies
Scenario

2020
New Policies
Scenario

2035
450 Scenario
Consumption

Source: WWAP, with data from IEA (2012).
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012.
Paris, OECD/IEA.

Note: This diagram does not incorporate critical elements such as the
distance the water is transported or the level of efficiency, which vary
greatly from site to site.
Source: WBSCD (2009, fig. 5, p. 14, based on source cited therein).
WBCSD (World Business Council on Sustainable Development).
2009. Water, Energy and Climate Change: A Contribution from the
Business Community. Geneva, WBCSD. http://www.wbcsd.org/pages/
edocument/edocumentdetails.aspx?id=40&nosearchcontextkey=true

Indicative energy use of municipal water and wastewater services

indicator

25

Seawater: 2.58–8.5 kWh/m3

Energy using activity

Indicative share

Comments

Water supply
Raw water extraction

Pumping
Building services

Surface water: 10%
Groundwater: 30%

Treatment

Mixing
Other treatment processes
Pumping (for backwash etc.)
Water sludge processing and
disposal
Building services

Surface water: 10%
Groundwater: 1%

Clean water
transmission and
distribution

Pumping

Surface water: 80%
Groundwater: 69%

Dependent on the share of
gravity-fed water supply

Wastewater management (activated sludge treatment process)
Wastewater collection

Pumping

10%

Dependent on the share of
gravity-induced collection

Treatment

Aeration
Other treatment processes
Building services

55%

Mostly for aeration of
wastewater

Sludge treatment and
disposal

Centrifugal and press dewatering
Sludge pumping, storing and
residue burial
Building services

35%

Energy can be produced in
sludge processing

Source: World Bank (2012, table 2.1, p. 12). © World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012. A Primer on Energy Efficiency for Municipal Water and Wastewater Utilities. Energy Sector Management Assistance Program Technical
Report 001/12. Washington DC, World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/02/16253058/primer-energy-efficiency-municipal-water-wastewater-utilities

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

193

indicator

26

Energy requirements and cost implications of desalination by technology
Thermal processes

Membrane separation processes

Technology

Multi stage flash
(MSF)

Multi effect
distillation (MED)

Reverse osmosis (RO)

Electrodialysis (ED)

Typical total energy use
(kWh/m3)

5

2.75

2.5

2.75

Operation temperature (°C)

90–110

70

Room temperature

Room temperature

Market share (%)

27

8

60

4

Capital cost per
unit of capacity

USD 800–1,500/m3/day; large variations depending on local labour cost, interest rates and
technology

Freshwater production cost

USD 1–2/m3 (USD 0.5/m3 for large plants); largely dependent on energy cost and plant location

Note: Desalination requires a considerable amount of energy. The table shows key typical energy data for different desalination technologies.
Taking into account the average energy demand of desalination processes, the global desalination capacity (i.e. 65.2 million m3/day) requires the
use of approximately 206 million kWh/day, equivalent to 75.2 TWh/year.
Source: Adapted from IEA-ETSAP and IRENA (2012, table 5, p. 21).
IEA-ETSAP and IRENA. 2012. Water Desalination Using Renewable Energy. Technology Brief I12. Paris/Abu Dhabi, IRENA/IEA-ETSAP.
http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA-ETSAP%20Tech%20Brief%20I12%20Water-Desalination.pdf

100
80
60
40
20
0
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Global cumulative
contracted capacity, 2013:
85.9 million m³/day

Global cumulative
commissioned capacity, 2013:
80.9 million m³/day

Source: Global Water Intelligence/Desaldata.

194

28

Power consumption trends in seawater
reverse osmosis desalination (1985–2009)

Power consumption per unit volume
(kWh/m3)

Global cumulative contracted versus
commissioned daily desalination capacity
(2013)

indicator

indicator

27

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

Source: Global Water Intelligence/Desaldata.

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Conventional
gas
Coal
Shale
gas
Refined oil
(conventional)*

Water use for electricity generation by
cooling technology
Wind

Other/none

30
indicator

Water footprint of energy generation by fuel

Solar PV
CSP*
Geothermal**

Dry

Refined oil
(oil sands)**

Gas CCGT
Gas CCGT

Coal-to-liquids

Gas CCGT (CCS)
Cooling tower

Gas-to-liquids

Refined oil
(EOR)***
Lignocellulosic
ethanol****
Palm oil
biodiesel
Rapeseed
biodiesel
Soybean
biodiesel

Coal IGCC
Coal IGCC (CCS)
Fossil steam

Fossil steam (CCS)

Cooling
pond

Nuclear

Corn
ethanol
Sugar cane
ethanol
<1

101 102

103

104

105 106 107
Litres per toe

Withdrawal
Consumption

Note: * The minimum is for primary recovery; the maximum is for
secondary recovery. ** The minimum is for in-situ production, the
maximum is for surface mining. *** Includes carbon dioxide injection,
steam injection and alkaline injection and in-situ combustion.
**** Excludes water use for crop residues allocated to food production.
toe, tonne of oil equivalent (1 toe = 11.63 MWh = 41.9 GJ). Ranges
shown are for ‘source-to-carrier’ primary energy production, which
includes withdrawals and consumption for extraction, processing
and transport. Water use for biofuels production varies considerably
because of differences in irrigation needs among regions and crops;
the minimum for each crop represents non-irrigated crops whose
only water requirements are for processing into fuels. EOR, enhanced
oil recovery.
For numeric ranges, see http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org.
Source: IEA (2012, fig. 17.3, p. 507, based on sources cited therein).
World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook 2012.
Paris, OECD/IEA.

Oncethrough

indicator

29

Gas CCGT
Fossil steam
Nuclear
Gas CCGT
Fossil steam
Nuclear

Withdrawal
Consumption

<1

10

1

10

2

10

3

4

5

10
10
10
Litres per MWh

6

Note: * Includes trough, tower and Fresnel technologies using
tower, dry and hybrid cooling, and Stirling technology. ** Includes
binary, flash and enhanced geothermal system technologies
using tower, dry and hybrid cooling.
Ranges shown are for the operational phase of electricity
generation, which includes cleaning, cooling and other process
related needs; water used for the production of input fuels is
excluded. Fossil steam includes coal-, gas- and oil-fired power
plants operating on a steam cycle. Reported data from power
plant operations are used for fossil-steam once-through cooling;
other ranges are based on estimates summarized in the sources
cited. Solar PV, solar photovoltaic; CSP, concentrating solar power;
CCGT, combined-cycle gas turbine; IGCC, integrated gasification
combined-cycle; CCS, carbon capture and storage. For numeric
ranges, see http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org.
Source: IEA (2012, fig. 17.4, p. 510, from sources cited therein).
World Energy Outlook 2012 © OECD/IEA.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. World Energy Outlook
2012. Paris, OECD/IEA.

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

195

indicator

31

Trends in ISO 14001 certification (1999–2012)
Overview
Year

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

13 994

22 847

36 464

49 440

64 996

90 554

Africa

129

228

311

418

626

817

Central and South America

309

556

681

1 418

1 691

2 955

North America

975

1 676

2 700

4 053

5 233

6 743

Europe

7 253

10 971

17 941

23 305

30 918

39 805

East Asia and Pacific

5 120

8 993

14 218

19 307

25 151

38 050

Central and South Asia

114

267

419

636

927

1 322

Middle East

94

156

194

303

450

862

Year

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Africa

0.9%

1.0%

0.9%

0.8%

1.0%

0.9%

Central and South America

2.2%

2.4%

1.9%

2.9%

2.6%

3.3%

North America

7.0%

7.3%

7.4%

8.2%

8.1%

7.4%

Europe

51.8%

48.0%

49.2%

47.1%

47.6%

44.0%

East Asia and Pacific

36.6%

39.4%

39.0%

39.1%

38.7%

42.0%

Central and South Asia

0.8%

1.2%

1.1%

1.3%

1.4%

1.5%

Middle East

0.7%

0.7%

0.5%

0.6%

0.7%

1.0%

Year

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

8 853

13 617

12 976

15 556

25 558

Africa

99

83

107

208

191

Central and South America

247

125

737

273

1 264

North America

701

1 024

1 353

1 180

1 510

Europe

3 718

6 970

5 364

7 613

8 887

East Asia and Pacific

3 873

5 225

5 089

5 844

12 899

Central and South Asia

153

152

217

291

395

Middle East

62

38

109

147

412

Regional share

Annual growth: Absolute numbers

Source: WWAP, with data from ISO (2012).
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). ISO Survey 2102. Geneva, ISO.
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/certification/iso-survey.htm#

196

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

111 163

128 211

154 572

188 574

222 974

251 548

261 926

285 844

1 130

1 079

1 096

1 518

1 531

1 675

1 740

2 109

3 411

4 355

4 260

4 413

3 748

6 999

7 105

8 202

7 119

7 673

7 267

7 194

7 316

6 302

7 450

8 573

47 837

55 919

65 097

78 118

89 237

103 126

101 177

113 356

48 800

55 428

72 350

91 156

113 850

126 551

137 335

145 724

1 829

2 201

2 926

3 770

4 517

4 380

4 725

4 946

1 037

1 556

1 576

2 405

2 775

2 515

2 425

2 934

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

1.0%

0.8%

0.7%

0.8%

0.7%

0.7%

0.7%

0.7%

3.1%

3.4%

2.8%

2.3%

1.7%

2.8%

2.7%

2.9%

6.4%

6.0%

4.7%

3.8%

3.3%

2.5%

2.8%

3.0%

43.0%

43.6%

42.1%

41.4%

40.0%

41.0%

38.6%

39.7%

43.9%

43.2%

46.8%

48.3%

51.1%

50.3%

52.4%

51.0%

1.6%

1.7%

1.9%

2.0%

2.0%

1.7%

1.8%

1.7%

0.9%

1.2%

1,0%

1.3%

1.2%

1.0%

0.9%

1.0%

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

20 609

17 048

26 361

34 002

34 400

28 574

10 378

23 918

313

-51

17

422

13

144

65

369

456

944

-95

153

-665

3 251

75

1 128

376

554

-406

-73

122

-1 014

1 148

1 123

8 032

8 082

9 178

13 021

11 119

13 889

-1 949

12 179

10 750

6 628

16 922

18 806

22 694

12 701

10 784

8 389

507

372

725

844

747

-137

345

221

175

519

20

829

370

-260

-90

509

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

197

indicator

32

ISO 50001 certification on energy management
Africa

Europe

Year

2011

2012

Year

2011

2012

Total

0

13

Total

364

1 758

Egypt

0

6

Austria

4

29

Ethiopia

0

1

Belgium

0

16

Malawi

0

1

Bulgaria

0

1

Mozambique

0

1

Croatia

0

4

South Africa

0

1

Czech Republic

1

10

Tanzania, UR

0

1

Denmark

26

85

Uganda

0

1

Finland

1

6

Zambia

0

1

France

3

35

Germany

42

1 115

Greece

2

9

Central and South America
Year

2011

2012

Hungary

0

2

Total

11

7

Ireland

0

35

Argentina

0

1

Italy

30

66

Brazil

2

3

Netherlands

0

15

Chile

0

3

Norway

9

9

Grenada

9

0

Poland

2

10

Portugal

1

3

Romania

66

54

North America
Year

2011

2012

Russian Federation

1

8

Total

1

4

Serbia

0

2

United States of America

1

3

Slovakia

0

1

Mexico

0

1

Slovenia

3

8

Spain

95

120

Sweden

62

72

East Asia and Pacific

198

Year

2011

2012

Switzerland

3

14

Total

49

134

2

0

3

The Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia

0

China
Hong Kong, China

1

4

Turkey

2

1

Macau, China

0

1

Ukraine

0

2

Taipei, Chinese

11

37

United Kingdom

11

24

Japan

8

15

Republic of Korea

19

21

Malaysia

0

2

Philippines

0

1

Singapore

0

4

Thailand

10

41

Viet Nam

0

5

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Source: WWAP, with data from ISO (2012).
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). ISO Survey 2102.
Geneva, ISO.
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/certification/iso-survey.htm#

Middle East
Year

2011

2012

Total

8

18

Iran, Islamic Republic

0

1

Israel

4

9

Saudi Arabia

0

2

United Arab Emirates

4

6

Year

2011

2012

Total

26

47

India

25

45

Kazakhstan

0

1

Sri Lanka

1

1

Central and South Asia

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

199

Trends in geothermal electricity output (2000–2011)

indicator

33

70 000

Geothermal electricity output (GWh)

60 000

50 000

40 000

20 000

10 000

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

World

Africa

Asia (excluding China)

Indonesia

Italy

Mexico

New Zealand

Phillippines

United States of America

OECD Total

Source: WWAP, with data from IEA (2013).
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013a. World Energy Balances. World energy statistics and balances database. Paris, OECD/IEA.
doi: 10.1787/data-00512-en (Accessed Dec 2013)

indicator

34

Worldwide installed capacity for geothermal electricity generation (2010)
Germany
7 MW

Austria
1 MW

Turkey
91 MW

USA
3098 MW

Russia
82 MW

Iceland
575 MW

France
16 MW
Nicaragua
88 MW
Mexico
958 MW

China
24 MW

Portugal
29 MW

Japan
535 MW

Italy
843 MW

Guatemala
52 MW
El Salvador
204 MW

Philippines
1904 MW

Thailand
0.3 MW
Costa Rica
166 MW

Ethiopia
7 MW
Kenya
202 MW

Papua
New Guinea
56 MW

Indonesia
1197 MW
Australia
1 MW

New Zealand
762 MW

Note: Worldwide total: 10.9 GW.
Source: Bertani (2012, fig. 2, p. 3).
Bertani, R. 2012. Geothermal Power Generation in the World, 2005–2010 Update Report. Geothermics, 41: 1–29.

200

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

Source: Shrank and Farahmand (2011, fig. 1, from source cited
therein).

Global trends in ethanol and biodiesel
production (1975–2010)

Shrank, S. and Farahmand, F. 2011. Biofuels regain momentum.
Vital Signs Online, 29 August. Washington DC, WorldWatch Institute.
http://vitalsigns.worldwatch.org/vs-trend/biofuels-regain-momentum

120 000
100 000
Million litres

indicator

35

80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000

Biodiesel

indicator

36

2005
2008

2002

1996
1999

1993

1990

1984
1987

1981

1975
1978

0

Ethanol

Indicative yields and water requirements for some major biofuel crops
Crop

Fuel
product

Annual
Energy
obtainable yield
yield
(GJ/ha)
(L/ha)

Potential
Evapocrop
transpiration
evapo(L/L fuel)
transpiration
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigated
Rainfed
or rainfed
conditions
production

Water resource
implications under
irrigated conditions
(assuming an
irrigation efficiency
of 50%)

Actual
rainfed crop
evapotranspiration
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigation
water used
(in mm,
indicative)

Irrigation
water used
(in L/L fuel,
indicative)

Sugarcane

Ethanol
(from
sugar)

6 000

120

1 400

2 000

Irrigated/
rainfed

1 100

600

1 000

Sugar
beet

Ethanol
(from
sugar)

7 000

140

650

786

Irrigated/
rainfed

450

400

571

Cassava

Ethanol
(from
starch)

4 000

80

1 000

2 250

Rainfed

900

–

–

Maize

Ethanol
(from
starch)

3 500

70

550

1 360

Irrigated/
rainfed

400

300

857

Winter
wheat

Ethanol
(from
starch)

2 000

40

300

1 500

Rainfed

300

–

–

Palm oil

Biodiesel

6 000

193

1 500

2 360

Rainfed

1 300

–

–

Rapeseed/
mustard

Biodiesel

1 200

42

500

3 330

Rainfed

400

–

–

Soybean

Biodiesel

450

14

500

10 000

Rainfed

400

–

–

Note: 1 GJ/h = 277.8 kW.
Source: Hoogeveen et al. (2009, table II, p. S153, adapted from source cited therein).
Hoogeveen, J., Faurès, J-M. and van de Giessen, N. 2009. Increased biofuel production in the coming decade: To what extent will it affect global
freshwater resources? Irrigation and Drainage, doi:10.1002/ird.479
WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

201

Note: RE, renewable energy; TFEC, total final energy consumption.
Source: Banerjee et al. (2013, fig. 4.5, p. 209, based on IEA data cited therein).
© World Bank, Washington, DC.

Global total final energy consumption versus
share of renewable energy
70
60
Global TFEC (petajoule)

indicator

37

16.6%

17.2%

17.4%

17.0%

1995

2000

2005

Banerjee, S.G., Bhatia, M., Azuela, G.E., Jaques, I., Sarkar, A., Portale, E.,
Bushueva, I., Angelou, N. and Inon, J.G. 2013. Global tracking framework.
Global Tracking Framework, Vol. 3. Sustainable Energy for All. Washington
DC, The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/2013/05/17765643/global-tracking-framework-vol-3-3-main-report

18.0%

50
40
30
20
10
0
1990
Other RE

Hydro

Modern Biomass

Traditional Biomass

indicator

38

2010

RE share in TFEC

The importance of water for energy
Low HDI 3%

7%

23%

60%

10%

Medium HDI

37%
17%

High HDI

23%

15%

Very high HDI

9%

Global

7%

37%
17%

24%

17%
29%

30%

16%

27%

Not a problem

Low

14%
21%

9%

36%
Medium

High

12%
Highest priority

Note: The indicator shows the current status in responding countries by Human Development Index (HDI) groups.
Source: UNEP (2012, fig. 8.9, p. 65).
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2012. The UN-Water Status Report on the Application of Integrated Approaches to Water Resources
Management. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/un_water_status_report_2012.pdf

indicator

39

Perceived change over the past 20 years in the importance of water for energy
Low HDI

10%

Medium HDI

10%

13%

High HDI 3% 3%
Very high HDI 3%
Global

4%

19%
29%

35%

38%

29%
39%
36%

33%
Significant decrease

21%

35%
42%

6%
8%

23%

32%

Slight decrease

Unchanged

9%
20%

Slight increase

Significant increase

Note: The indicator shows current status in responding countries by Human Development Index (HDI) groups.
Source: UNEP (2012, fig. 8.10, p. 65).
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2012. The UN-Water Status Report on the Application of Integrated Approaches to Water Resources
Management. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/un_water_status_report_2012.pdf

202

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

National energy policy/strategy/plan with water resources management component

indicator

40

16%

Low HDI
Medium HDI
High HDI

35%

6%

10%

45%

6%

10%

18%

Very high HDI

13%

Global

10%

29%
23%

30%
13%

10%

18%
13%

28%

3%

16%
24%

29%

15%

Not relevant
Implementation started

6%

3%
23%

19%

21%

7%

Developed, not implemented
Fully implemented

Under development
Implementation advanced

Note: The indicator shows the current status in responding countries by Human Development Index (HDI) groups.
Source: UNEP (2012, fig. 8.11, p. 65).
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2012. The UN-Water Status Report on the Application of Integrated Approaches to Water Resources
Management. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/un_water_status_report_2012.pdf

Infrastructure development and mobilizing financing for energy/hydropower

indicator

41

Low HDI
Medium HDI
High HDI
Very high HDI
Global

8%

12%

Under development
Implementation advanced

21%

14%
50%

25%

13%

8%

10%
34%

21%

21%

10%
4%

13%

53%

17%

10%

10%

40%

33%

7%

7%

20%

39%
Developed, not implemented
Fully implemented

Implementation started

Note: The indicator shows the current status in responding countries by Human Development Index (HDI) groups.
Source: UNEP (2012, fig. 8.12, p. 65).
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2012. The UN-Water Status Report on the Application of Integrated Approaches to Water Resources
Management. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/un_water_status_report_2012.pdf

WWDR 2014

DATA AND INDICATORS ANNEX

203

PHOTO CREDITS

Table of Contents: Part 5: © Geothermal Resources Council/Olga Borozdina; Part 6: © isaravut/iStock/Thinkstock.
Part 5: page 135 (clockwise from top-left): © SeanPavonePhoto/iStock/Thinkstock, © StevanZZ/iStock/Thinkstock, © China
Three Gorges Corporation, © Richard Semik/iStock/Thinkstock, © Neno Kukurić, © Geothermal Reources Council/Sertac
Akar; page 136 (clockwise from top-left): © joel-t/iStock/Thinkstock, © Kuzihar/iStock/Thinkstock, © Falk Kienas/iStock/
Thinkstock, © Jupiterimages/Stockbyte/Getty Images/Thinkstock, © Top Photo Corporation/Top Photo Group/Thinkstock,
© renacal1/iStock/Thinkstock, © Green Bahrain, Miracle Publishing.
Part 6: page 175 (clockwise from top-left): © Alex Kokoulin/iStock/Thinkstock, © Digital Vision/Photodisc/Thinkstock,
© Sad?k Güleç/iStock/Thinkstock, © Ingram Publishing/Thinkstock, © Temistocle Lucarelli/iStock/Thinkstock.

204

PHOTO CREDITS

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted and led by UNESCO and brings
together the work of 31 UN-Water Members as well as 34 Partners in the United Nations World Water
Development Report (WWDR) series.
The WWDR 2014 marks the transition of the series to an annual publication cycle with a theme for each year
– ‘Water and Energy’ for 2014. This edition of the Report seeks to inform decision-makers within and beyond
the water–energy nexus about the interconnections and interdependencies between water and energy;
the inevitable trade-offs experienced when providing water and energy for basic human needs and to
support sustainable development; and the need for appropriate responses that account for both water and
energy priorities, particularly in the context of post-2015 targets on increasing access to water and energy. It
provides a detailed overview of major and emerging trends from around the world, with examples of how
some of these have been addressed and the implications for policy-makers, and actions that can be taken by
various stakeholders and the international community.
Like the earlier editions, the WWDR 2014 contains country-level case studies describing the progress made
in meeting water- and energy-related objectives. This edition also presents a Data and Indicators Annex of 41
indicators, which benchmark actual conditions and highlight trends related to water and energy around the
world.

