The United Nations World Water Development Report 2017

WASTEWATER
THE UNTAPPED RESOURCE

Published in 2017 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2017
This report is published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water. The list of UN-Water Members and Partners
are available on: www.unwater.org
Chapters 2, 4 and 7: The author is a staff member of the World Health Organization. The author alone is
responsible for the views expressed in this publication and they do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or
policies of the World Health Organization. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a waiver of any of the
privileges and immunities enjoyed by WHO to any national court jurisdiction.
Chapter 7: The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
or policies of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Chapter 9: by Annukka Lipponen; contributor to Chapter 3: Nataliya Nikiforova © United Nations
Chapters 12, 15, 16, 17: The opinions expressed and arguments employed herein are solely those of the author(s)
and not necessarily reflect the official views of the OECD or of its member countries.
ISBN 978-92-3-100201-4

Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2017. The United Nations World Water Development
Report 2017. Wastewater: The Untapped Resource. Paris, UNESCO.
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license
(creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be
bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-useccbysa-en).
The present license applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use of any material not clearly
identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested from: publication.copyright@unesco.org or
UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP France.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of
UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. The contents were contributed by the UN-Water Members and
Partners listed on the title pages of the chapters therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content provided or for discrepancies in data and content
between contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in
this publication. WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.
Original cover design by Phoenix Design Aid
Printed by UNESCO CLD
This publication is printed in vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves, 100%
recycled, acid-free and chlorine-free.
Printed in France

TABLE OF CONTENT
FOREWORD												
by Irina Bokova												
Director-General of UNESCO										

v
v
v

FOREWORD												
by Guy Ryder												
Chair of UN-Water and Director-General of International Labour Organization				

vii
vii
vii

PREFACE												
viii
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator								viii
and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief									viii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS										

x

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY										

1

PROLOGUE | STATE OF WATER RESOURCES: AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY				

9

PART I BASELINE AND CONTEXT
CHAPTER 1 | INTRODUCTION							16
1.1
1.2

Wastewater flows								
Wastewater as a resource: Seizing the opportunities				

20
21

CHAPTER 2 | WASTEWATER AND THE SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT AGENDA								23
2.1
2.2

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development					
Potential synergies and conflicts						

24
26

CHAPTER 3 | GOVERNANCE							

29

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

30
31
35
36

Actors and roles								
Policy, law and regulation							
Financing									
Socio-cultural aspects								

CHAPTER 4 | TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF WASTEWATER				

37

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4

38
40
42
46

Wastewater sources and components						
Impacts of releasing untreated or inadequately treated wastewater		
Wastewater collection and treatment						
Data and information needs							

i
P RE FAC E

PART II THEMATIC FOCUS
CHAPTER 5 | MUNICIPAL AND URBAN WASTEWATER			

48

5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6

49
50
51
52
55
57

Urbanization and its impact on wastewater production			
Urban forms								
Sources of wastewater in municipal and urban systems			
Composition of municipal and urban wastewater			
Urban form and the potential for municipal and urban wastewater use
Managing urban runoff							

CHAPTER 6 | INDUSTRY							58
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4

Extent of industrial wastewater generation				
Nature of industrial wastewater						
Addressing the resource challenge					
Wastewater and sustainable industrial development			

59
61
62
68

CHAPTER 7 | AGRICULTURE						69
7.1
7.2

Agriculture as a source of water pollution				
Agriculture as a user of wastewater					

70
74

CHAPTER 8 | ECOSYSTEMS							78
8.1
8.2
8.3

The role and limits of ecosystems in wastewater management		
Planned use of wastewater for ecosystem services			
Operational and policy aspects						

79
80
82

PART III REGIONAL ASPECTS
CHAPTER 9 | AFRICA							84
9.1
9.2
9.3

ii

Water and wastewater in Sub-Saharan Africa				
Critical challenges							
The way forward							

W W D R

85
85
88

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 10 | THE ARAB REGION						 91
10.1
10.2
10.3

Context									
Challenges								
Responses								

92
92
94

CHAPTER 11 | ASIA AND THE PACIFIC					 96
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4

Context and challenges							
Building resilient infrastructure						
A systems approach to wastewater by-product recovery			
Regulatory and capacity needs						

97
97
99
99

CHAPTER 12 | EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA				

100

12.1
12.2
12.3

Context									
Challenges								
Responses								

101
101
103

CHAPTER 13 | LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN			

106

13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5
13.6

107
108
109
109
110
110

The urban wastewater challenge					
Recent expansion of urban wastewater treatment			
Ongoing concerns and expanding opportunities				
Benefits of urban wastewater treatment					
Other sources of wastewater						
Lessons learned								

PART IV RESPONSE OPTIONS
CHAPTER 14 | PREVENTING AND REDUCING WASTEWATER
GENERATION AND POLLUTION LOADS AT THE SOURCE		

112

14.1
14.2
14.3

113
115
118

Mechanisms for controlling and monitoring pollution			
Technical responses							
Financial approaches and behavioural change				

iii

CHAPTER 15 | ENHANCING WASTEWATER COLLECTION
AND TREATMENT								119
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7

Sewers and waterborne sanitation					
Low-cost sewerage							
Combined sewerage							
Decentralized treatment (DEWATS)					
Decentralized stormwater management					
Evolution of treatment technologies					
Sewer mining and component separation				

120
120
121
121
121
122
123

CHAPTER 16 | WATER REUSE AND RESOURCE RECOVERY		

124

16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5
16.6

125
129
132
133
135
136

Beneficial reuse of water						
Resource recovery from wastewater and biosolids			
Business models and economic approaches				
Minimizing risks to human health and the environment			
Regulations for water reuse						
Social acceptance of wastewater use					

CHAPTER 17 | KNOWLEDGE, INNOVATION, RESEARCH
AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT						137
17.1
17.2
17.3
17.4

Trends in research and innovation					
Knowledge, research, technology and capacity-building gaps		
Future trends in wastewater management				
Capacity building, public awareness and collaboration
among stakeholders 							

138
138
141

CHAPTER 18 | CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT		

143

18.1
18.2
18.3
18.4
18.5
18.6
18.7

144
145
146
147
148
149
149

142

Technical options							
Legal and institutional frameworks					
Financing opportunities							
Enhancing knowledge and building capacity				
Mitigating human and environmental health risks			
Fostering social acceptance						
Coda									

References

								150

Annex 1 – Lexicon								172
Abbreviations and acronyms							175
Boxes, figures and tables							177
Photo credits									180

iv

W W D R

2 0 1 7

by Irina Bokova
Director-General of UNESCO

OREWOR

FOREWORD

In a world where demands for freshwater are ever growing, and where limited water
resources are increasingly stressed by over-abstraction, pollution and climate change,
neglecting the opportunities arising from improved wastewater management is nothing less
than unthinkable.
This is how the 2017 World Water Development Report concludes, highlighting the vital
importance of improving the management of wastewater for our common future.

Continuing ‘business as usual’ means allowing overwhelming neglect to worsen. It is
estimated that well over 80 per cent of wastewater worldwide (over 95 per cent in some
developing countries) is released into the environment without treatment. The consequences
are alarming. Water pollution is worsening in most rivers across Africa, Asia and Latin
America. In 2012, over 800,000 deaths worldwide were caused by contaminated drinking
water, inadequate handwashing facilities and inappropriate sanitation services. In the seas
and ocean, de-oxygenated dead zones caused by the discharge of untreated wastewater are
growing rapidly, affecting an estimated 245,000 km2 of marine ecosystems, impacting on
fisheries, livelihoods and food chains.

When not ignored, used water has long been seen as simply a burden for disposal. With
rising water scarcity in many regions, this is changing, and we see increasing recognition of
the importance of wastewater collection, treatment and reuse. Infrastructure is a central issue
in all countries. Data availability remains a persisting challenge, particularly in developing
countries. Recent analysis shows that out of 181 countries, only 55 had information on the
generation, treatment and use of wastewater, and the remaining ones had no or only partial
data. In the majority of countries where data were available, it was outdated. This information
bottleneck impedes the research and development necessary to craft innovative technologies
and adapt existing ones to local specificities and needs.
The 2017 World Water Development Report shows that improved wastewater management
is as much about reducing pollution at the source, as removing contaminants from
wastewater flows, reusing reclaimed water and recovering useful by-products. Together, these
four actions generate social, environmental and economic benefits for all society, contributing
to overall well-being and health, water and food security, and sustainable development. The
cross-cutting importance of wastewater is highlighted in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, through Sustainable Development Goal 6 on water and sanitation, and
especially Target 6.3 on halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling, and safe reuse globally.

Forewo rd

v

OREWOR

Raising social acceptance of the use of wastewater is essential to moving forward. This is
the importance of education and training, and new forms of awareness-raising, to change
perceptions of health risks and address socio-cultural concerns, to bolster public acceptance.

This is also good business. As an essential component of a circular economy, wastewater use
and by-product recovery can generate new business opportunities and help to recover the
costs of new, innovative and adapted installations, allowing us to recover energy, nutrients,
metals and other by-products.

For its part, UNESCO, through its ‘water family,’ is working to support Member States in
responding to water quality challenges – including the World Water Assessment Programme
of UNESCO, the International Hydrological Programme, the UNESCO-IHE Institute for
Water Education in Delft, and numerous Category II Centres and Chairs around the world.
Our action stretches across the board, from promoting scientific research, mobilizing
and disseminating knowledge, and facilitating the exchange of technological and policy
approaches to building capacity and raising awareness on risks caused by emerging pollutants
in water and wastewater.
As always, the 2017 Report is the result of partnership across the United Nations system
and among the 31 members of UN-Water, for which I am deeply grateful. I wish to thank
the Government of Italy for its support to the Secretariat of the World Water Assessment
Programme, to ensure its long-term sustainability and productivity. In this spirit, I invite all
to take ownership over this Report and its conclusions, to raise the flag for new, just and
sustainable approaches to water as a driver for a better future for all.

Irina Bokova

vi

W W D R

2 0 1 7

OREWOR

FOREWORD

by Guy Ryder
Chair of UN-Water and Director-General of International Labour Organization

In the fifth century BC, Heraclitus is quoted as saying “change is the only
constant in life.” Today, this holds true more than ever. As populations and urban
settlements grow, so do our demands; transforming our societies and planet before
our eyes.
The 2017 edition of the United Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR)
explores the issue of wastewater and its potential as a sustainable resource.
However, the findings show how much work we have to do: “Worldwide, the vast
majority of wastewater is neither collected nor treated. Furthermore, wastewater
collection per se is not synonymous with wastewater treatment. In many cases,
collected wastewater is merely discharged directly into the environment without any
treatment. Agricultural runoff is almost never collected or treated, so that metrics for
these types of wastewater flows are practically non-existent.”
Of course, as well as being a squandered opportunity, releasing most wastewater
back into the ecosystem without being treated is having deep impacts on human
health and the natural world.
The 2017 edition of the WWDR, the flagship publication of UN-Water, conveys
to readers that wastewater has long been a neglected resource – it is not only
a solution to address growing water scarcity but also a rich source of nutrients,
minerals and energy, all of which can be cost-efficiently extracted. Expanding on
the 2015 UN-Water Analytical Brief on Wastewater Management, the WWDR also
discusses the circular economy, innovation and many regional aspects.
The report clearly reflects the consensus among 31 Members and 38 Partners
of UN-Water that issues related to wastewater extend beyond Sustainable
Development Goal 6 and its wastewater target and cuts across many SDG targets.
I would like to thank all my UN-Water colleagues for their contributions,
including UNESCO and its World Water Assessment Programme for coordinating
the production of this high-quality report, which could have such far-reaching
ramifications for progress across the Sustainable Development Goals.

Guy Ryder

Forewo rd

vii

PREFACE
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator
and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief

The 2017 edition of the United Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR), the fourth in
a series of annual, theme-oriented reports, addresses an often overlooked issue that is critical to
water resources management and the provision of basic water-related services: wastewater.
Wastewater is not merely a water management issue – it affects the environment and all living
beings, and can have direct impacts on economies, both mature and emerging. Furthermore,
wastewater flows contain a number of useful materials, such as nutrients, metals and organic
material that, much like the water itself, can be extracted and used to for other productive
purposes. As such, wastewater constitutes a valuable resource that, if sustainably managed, is set
to become a central pillar of the circular economy. The upside to improving the way we manage
wastewater is huge, with potential co-benefits to societies and the environment.
The entire notion of wastewater is itself somewhat of an oxymoron. Once water has been
used for any purpose, it should not be seen as ‘wasted’. In other languages it is called ‘used
water’ (eaux usées in French), ‘residual water’ (aguas residuales in Spanish) or ‘after-use water’
(Abwasser in German). Indeed, making the case for moving away from the notion that used
water is a waste to be disposed of – towards wastewater as a resource – is the central message
of this report.
In preparing the WWDR 2017, we quickly became aware of the wide variety of definitions
of wastewater, which can mean many different things to different people. Engineers, urban
planners, environmental managers and academics, not to mention several fellow UN Agencies,
have addressed various aspects of wastewater in numerous reports, each offering their own
insightful perspectives and vocabularies. We have endeavoured to draw upon many of these
documents – as evidenced by the sheer length of the reference list – to present a balanced,
fact-based and neutral account of the current wealth of knowledge, covering the most recent
developments pertaining to wastewater management, and the various benefits and opportunities
it offers in the context of a circular economy.
Improved wastewater management will be critical for green growth, especially in the context of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Target 6.3 of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) explicitly focuses on reducing pollution and improving the disposal, management and
treatment of wastewater and its impact on ambient water quality. This target is highly relevant to
achieving several other SDGs.
Maximizing wastewater’s potential as a valuable and sustainable resource will require creating
an enabling environment for change, including suitable legal and regulatory frameworks,
appropriate financing mechanisms and social acceptance. We remain confident that, with
the political will to do so, current obstacles, such as the lack of knowledge, capacity, data and
information about wastewater, can be quickly and effectively overcome.

viii

W W D R

2 0 1 7

re f a c e

Although primarily targeted at national-level decision-makers and water resources managers, we
hope that this report will also be of interest to the broader developmental community, academics
and anyone interested in building an equitable and sustainable future for all.
This latest edition of the WWDR is the result of a concerted effort between FAO, UNDP, UNECE,
UNEP, UNESCAP, UNESCO, UNESCWA, UN-Habitat, UNIDO and WWAP. Furthermore, the
report benefited from the inputs and contributions of several UN-Water members and partners,
members of WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee, as well as from dozens of scientists,
professionals and NGOs who provided a wide range of relevant material. The report has been
gender-mainstreamed similar to the earlier editions.
On behalf of the WWAP Secretariat, we would like to extend our deepest appreciation to the
afore-mentioned agencies, members and partners of UN-Water, and to the writers, editors
and other contributors for collectively producing this unique and authoritative report that will,
hopefully, have multiple impacts worldwide.
We are profoundly grateful to the Italian Government for funding the Programme and to the
Regione Umbria for hosting the WWAP Secretariat in Villa La Colombella in Perugia. Their
contributions have been instrumental to the production of the WWDR.
Our special thanks go to Ms Irina Bokova, Director General of UNESCO, for her vital support to
WWAP and the production of the WWDR. The guidance of Mr Guy Ryder, Director-General of
the International Labour Organization, as Chair of UN-Water, has made this publication possible.
Last but not least, we extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues at the WWAP
Secretariat, whose names are listed in the acknowledgments. The report could not have been
completed without their dedication and professionalism, especially in light of the challenges
and difficulties related to the 2016 earthquakes in Umbria and the surrounding regions of Italy.

Stefan Uhlenbrook

p refa ce

Richard Connor

ix

2017
WWDR 2017 TEAM
Director of the Publication
Stefan Uhlenbrook
Editor-in-Chief
Richard Connor

Process Coordinator
Engin Koncagül

Research Officer
Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara
Publications Officer
Diwata Hunziker
Publications Assistant
Valentina Abete
Graphic Designer
Marco Tonsini
Copyeditor
Simon Lobach
WWAP Technical Advisory Committee
Uri Shamir (Chair), Dipak Gyawali (Deputy Chair), Fatma Abdel Rahman Attia, Anders Berntell, Elias
Fereres, Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, Daniel P. Loucks, Henk van Schaik, Yui Liong Shie, Lászlo
Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini and Albert Wright
United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) Secretariat in 2016
Coordinator: 			
Deputy Coordinator: 		
Programmes: 			
				
Publications: 			
Communications: 		
Administration and support:
IT and Security: 			

x

Stefan Uhlenbrook
Michela Miletto
Richard Connor, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara, Francesca Greco,
Engin Koncagül and Lucilla Minelli
Valentina Abete, Diwata Hunziker and Marco Tonsini
Simona Gallese and Laurens Thuy
Barbara Bracaglia, Lucia Chiodini, Arturo Frascani and Lisa Gastaldin
Fabio Bianchi, Michele Brensacchi and Francesco Gioffredi

W W D R

2 0 1 7

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
recognizes the valuable contributions of FAO, UNDP, UNECE, UNEP,
UNESCAP, UNESCO, UNESCWA, UN Habitat and UNIDO whose inputs as
chapter lead agencies made the content preparation of this report possible.
We also would like to thank those UN-Water members and partners, all the
organizations, institutions and individuals, who provided useful inputs and
comments during multiple rounds of review.
The WWDR 2017 benefitted from the reviews, comments and guidance of
WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee.
We wish to express our earnest thanks to Irina Bokova, Director-General of
UNESCO, whose support was instrumental in preparing the report. Flavia
Schlegel, Assistant Director General of UNESCO for Natural Sciences, Blanca
Jiménez-Cisneros, Director of the Division of Water Sciences and Secretary
of the International Hydrological Programme (IHP), and colleagues at IHP
deserve special recognition for their valuable encouragement and assistance.
We greatly appreciate the generous help extended to us by the UNESCO
Field Offices in Almaty, Beijing, Brasilia, Cairo and New Delhi for the
translation of the Executive Summary into Russian, Chinese, Portuguese,
Arabic and Hindi languages, respectively. The German translation was made
possible, thanks to the German Commission for UNESCO.
WWAP is grateful for the generous financial contribution of the Italian
Government, and for the facilities provided by Regione Umbria. The report is
also financially supported by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

a c k n ow l e d ge m e nts

cknowledgement

7

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

xi

Wastewater treatment plant

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
Most human activities that use water produce
wastewater. As the overall demand for water
grows, the quantity of wastewater produced
and its overall pollution load are continuously
increasing worldwide.
In all but the most highly developed countries,
the vast majority of wastewater is released
directly to the environment without adequate
treatment, with detrimental impacts on human
health, economic productivity, the quality of
ambient freshwater resources, and ecosystems.
Although wastewater is a critical component
of the water management cycle, water after it
has been used is all too often seen as a burden
to be disposed of or a nuisance to be ignored.
The results of this neglect are now obvious. The
immediate impacts, including the degradation
of aquatic ecosystems and waterborne illness
from contaminated freshwater supplies, have
far-reaching implications on the well-being
of communities and peoples’ livelihoods.
Continued failure to address wastewater as a
major social and environmental problem would
compromise other efforts towards achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In the face of ever-growing demand,
wastewater is gaining momentum as a reliable
alternative source of water, shifting the
paradigm of wastewater management from
‘treatment and disposal’ to ‘reuse, recycle and
resource recovery’. In this sense, wastewater

E xe c u ti ve

Su m m a r y

is no longer seen as a problem in need of a
solution, rather it is part of the solution to
challenges that societies are facing today.
Wastewater can also be a cost-efficient and
sustainable source of energy, nutrients, organic
matter and other useful by-products. The
potential benefits of extracting such resources
from wastewater go well beyond human and
environmental health, with implications on
food and energy security as well as climate
change mitigation. In the context of a circular
economy, whereby economic development
is balanced with the protection of natural
resources and environmental sustainability,
wastewater represents a widely available and
valuable resource.
The outlook is undeniably optimistic, provided
action is taken now.

The world’s water:
Availability and quality
Globally, water demand is predicted to increase
significantly over the coming decades. In
addition to the agricultural sector, which is
responsible for 70% of water abstractions
worldwide, large increases in water demand are
predicted for industry and energy production.
Accelerated urbanization and the expansion of
municipal water supply and sanitation systems
also contribute to the rising demand.

1

Climate change scenarios project an exacerbation
of the spatial and temporal variations of water
cycle dynamics, such that discrepancies between
water supply and demand are becoming
increasingly aggravated. The frequency and
severity of floods and droughts will likely change
in many river basins worldwide. Droughts
can have very significant socio-economic and
environmental consequences. The crisis in Syria
was, among other factors, triggered by a historic
drought (2007–2010).
Two thirds of the world’s population currently
live in areas that experience water scarcity for
at least one month a year. About 500 million
people live in areas where water consumption
exceeds the locally renewable water resources by
a factor of two. Highly vulnerable areas, where
non-renewable resources (i.e. fossil groundwater)
continue to decrease, have become highly
dependent on transfers from areas with
abundant water and are actively seeking
affordable alternative sources.
The availability of water resources is also
intrinsically linked to water quality, as the
pollution of water sources may prohibit
different type of uses. Increased discharges of
untreated sewage, combined with agricultural
runoff and inadequately treated wastewater
from industry, have resulted in the degradation
of water quality around the world. If current
trends persist, water quality will continue to
degrade over the coming decades, particularly
in resource-poor countries in dry areas, further
endangering human health and ecosystems,
contributing to water scarcity and constraining
sustainable economic development.

Wastewater: Global trends
On average, high-income countries treat about
70% of the municipal and industrial wastewater
they generate. That ratio drops to 38% in
upper middle-income countries and to 28% in
lower middle-income countries. In low-income
countries, only 8% undergoes treatment of any
kind. These estimates support the often-cited
approximation that, globally, over 80% of all
wastewater is discharged without treatment.
In high-income countries, the motivation for
advanced wastewater treatment is either to
maintain environmental quality, or to provide
an alternative water source when coping
with water scarcity. However, the release of
untreated wastewater remains common practice,

2

especially in developing countries, due to
lacking infrastructure, technical and institutional
capacity, and financing.

Wastewater, sanitation and
the sustainable development
agenda
Access to improved sanitation services can
contribute significantly to the reduction of
health risks. Further health gains may be realized
through improved wastewater treatment. While
2.1 billion people gained access to improved
sanitation facilities since 1990, 2.4 billion still
do not have access to improved sanitation and
nearly 1 billion people worldwide still practice
open defecation.
However, improved sanitation coverage does not
necessarily equate with improved wastewater
management or public safety. Only 26% of urban
and 34% of rural sanitation and wastewater
services effectively prevent human contact with
excreta along the entire sanitation chain and can
therefore be considered safely managed.
Building on the experience of the MDGs, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
a more comprehensive goal for water, going
beyond the issues of water supply and sanitation.
SDG Target 6.3 states: By 2030, improve water
quality by reducing pollution, eliminating
dumping and minimizing release of hazardous
chemicals and materials, halving the proportion
of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally. The
extremely low level of wastewater treatment
reveals an urgent need for technological
upgrades and safe water reuse options to
support the achievement of Target 6.3, which
is critical for achieving the entire Agenda. The
efforts required to achieve this Target will place
a higher financial burden on low-income and
lower middle-income countries, putting them at
an economic disadvantage compared to highincome and upper middle-income countries.

Governance challenges
The benefits to society of managing human
waste are considerable, for public health as well
as for the environment. For every US$1 spent
on sanitation, the estimated return to society is
US$5.5.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Overcoming the practical difficulties of
implementing water quality regulations can
be particularly challenging. In order to realize
the goals of water quality improvement and
water resources protection, individuals and
organizations responsible for various aspects of
wastewater management need to comply and
act in the collective interest. Benefits are only
realized once everyone abides by the rules to
protect water resources from pollution.
Involving citizens in decision-making at all levels
promotes engagement and ownership. This
includes decisions as to what types of sanitation
facilities are desirable and acceptable, and how
they can be securely funded and maintained over
the long term. It is especially important to reach
out to marginalized groups, ethnic minorities and
people living in extreme poverty, in remote rural
areas or in informal urban settlements. It is also
essential to engage with women, as they bear
the brunt of the health consequences stemming
from the unsafe management of human waste.

Technical aspects of the
wastewater management
cycle
Wastewater is roughly composed of 99% water
and 1% suspended, colloidal and dissolved solids.
The consequences of releasing untreated
or inadequately treated wastewater can be
classified into three groups: i) harmful effects
on human health; ii) negative environmental
impacts; and iii) adverse repercussions on
economic activities.
Controlling and regulating various wastewater
flows is the ultimate purpose of wastewater
management. The wastewater management
cycle can be broken down into four basic
interconnected phases:

1. Prevention or reduction of pollution
at the source
Approaches to water pollution control that focus
on wastewater prevention and minimization
should be given priority over traditional endof-pipe treatment whenever possible. These
approaches include prohibiting or controlling the
use of certain contaminants to eliminate or limit
their entering into wastewater streams through
regulatory, technical and/or other means. Remedial
actions to clean up polluted sites and water bodies
are generally much more expensive than measures
to prevent pollution from occurring.

E xe c u ti ve

Su m m a r y

Monitoring and reporting of pollutant discharges
to the environment and ambient water quality are
necessary to achieve progress. If something is not
measured, the problem cannot be defined and
the effectiveness of policies cannot be assessed.

2. Wastewater collection and
treatment
Centralized waterborne waste disposal remains
the prevalent method for sanitation and
for evacuating wastewater from domestic,
commercial and industrial sources. Globally,
about 60% of people are connected to a sewer
system (although only a small proportion of the
collected sewerage is actually treated). Other
sanitation options, such as on-site systems, are
well-suited to rural areas and low population
density settings, but can be expensive and
difficult to manage in dense urban environments.
Large-scale centralized wastewater treatment
systems may no longer be the most viable option
for urban water management in many countries.
Decentralized wastewater treatment systems,
serving individual or small groups of properties,
have shown an increasing trend worldwide. They
allow for the recovery of nutrients and energy,
save freshwater and help secure access to
water in times of scarcity. It has been estimated
that the investment costs for these treatment
facilities represent only 20–50% of conventional
treatment plants, with even lower operation and
maintenance costs (in the range of 5–25% of
conventional activated sludge treatment plants).
Low-cost sewerage systems have become a
method of choice for neighbourhoods of all
income levels. They differ from those used in
conventional sewer design and focus on the
concept that solid-free sewage is conveyed in
the system. These systems lend themselves to
community management and are very wellsuited to extend and expand existing systems or
to connect satellite communities to centralized
systems. They have also been used in refugee
settings. One drawback is that they are not
suitable for stormwater drainage.
Ecosystems can be effective in terms of providing
economical wastewater treatment services,
provided that these ecosystems are healthy, the
pollutant load (and types of contaminants) in
the effluent is regulated and the ecosystem’s
pollution assimilation capacity is not exceeded.

3

3. Using wastewater as an alternative
source of water
The use of untreated or diluted wastewater
for irrigation has taken place for centuries.
Reclaimed water also offers opportunities for
a sustainable and reliable water supply for
industries and municipalities, especially with
a growing number of cities relying on more
distant and/or alternative sources of water to
meet increasing demand.
In general, water reuse becomes more
economically feasible if the point of reuse
is close to the point of production. Treating
wastewater to a water quality standard
acceptable by a user (i.e. ‘fit-for-purpose’
treatment) increases the potential for cost
recovery. Wastewater use becomes all the more
competitive when freshwater prices also reflect
the opportunity cost of using freshwater and
pollution charges reflect the cost of removing
pollutants from wastewater flows.
The planned use of treated and partially treated
wastewater for ecosystem services can increase
resource efficiency and provide benefits to
ecosystems through reducing freshwater
abstractions, recycling and reusing nutrients,
allowing fisheries and other aquatic ecosystems
to thrive by minimizing water pollution, and
recharging depleted aquifers.

4. The recovery of useful by-products
Wastewater’s vast potential as a source of
resources, such as energy and nutrients,
remains underexploited.
Energy can be recovered in the form of biogas,
heating/cooling and electricity generation.
Technologies exist for on-site energy recovery
through sludge/biosolids treatment processes
integrated in wastewater treatment plants,
allowing them to transition from major energy
consumers to energy neutrality, or even to
net energy producers. Energy recovery can
also help facilities reduce operational costs
and their carbon footprint, enabling increased
revenue streams through carbon credits and
carbon trading programmes. There are also
opportunities for combined energy and nutrient
recovery. Off-site energy recovery involves
sludge incineration in centralized plants through
thermal treatment processes.
The development of technologies for recovering
nitrogen and phosphorus from sewage or sewage
sludge is advancing. Phosphorus recovery from

4

on-site treatment facilities such as septic tanks and
latrines can be technically and financially feasible
by transforming septage into organic or organicmineral fertilizer. Moreover, faecal sludge presents
a relatively lower risk of chemical contamination
compared to sewerage biosolids.
It is likely that urine collection and use will
become an increasingly important component
of ecological wastewater management, as it
contains 88% of the nitrogen and 66% of the
phosphorus found in human waste – essential
components for plant growth. With extractable
mineral phosphorus resources predicted to
become scarce or even exhausted over the next
decades, its recovery from wastewater offers a
realistic and viable alternative.

Municipal and urban
wastewater
The composition of municipal wastewater
can vary considerably, reflecting the range of
contaminants released by various domestic,
industrial, commercial and institutional sources.
Wastewater from domestic sources is usually
relatively free of hazardous substances, but
there are growing concerns about emerging
pollutants including commonly used
medications that, even at low concentrations,
may have long-term impacts.
Accelerated urban growth poses several
challenges, including dramatic increases in
the generation of municipal wastewater.
However, this growth also offers opportunities
to break away from the past (inadequate) water
management practices and adopt innovative
approaches, which include the use of treated
wastewater and by-products.
Wastewater generation is one of the biggest
challenges associated to the growth of informal
settlements (slums) in the developing world.
There were more slum dwellers in 2012 than
in 2000, a trend that will likely continue in the
future. Slum dwellers frequently have to rely on
unsewered communal toilets, use open spaces
or dispose of faeces in polythene bags (i.e.
flying toilets). Communal toilets are not widely
used, due to a lack of water, poor maintenance,
and the cost to the user. Finding a suitable
place to go to the toilet is especially problematic
for women, causing risks related to personal
security, embarrassment and hygiene.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Industry
The toxicity, mobility and loading of industrial
pollutants have potentially more significant
impacts on water resources, human health
and the environment than actual volumes of
wastewater. The first step is to keep the volumes
and toxicity of pollution to a minimum at the
point of origin, from concept to design and
in operations and maintenance. This includes
substitution with more environmentally friendly
raw materials and biodegradable process
chemicals, as well as staff education and training
to address pollution-related issues. The second
step is to recycle as much water as possible within
a plant, thus minimizing discharge.
Small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and informal industries often discharge their
wastewater into municipal systems or directly
into the environment. Industries discharging
into municipal systems or surface water have to
meet discharge regulations to avoid fines, so in
many cases end-of-pipe treatment is required
at the plant before release. In some situations,
however, industries may find it more economical
to pay fines than to invest in treatment to meet
regulations.
One notable opportunity for industrial
wastewater use and recycling is the cooperation
between plants through industrial symbiosis. This
is best seen in eco-industrial parks that locate
industries adjacent to one another in such a
way as to take advantage of various wastewater
flows and water and by-product recycling. For
SMEs, this can be a significant way to save on
wastewater treatment costs.

the last 20 years, new agricultural pollutants have
emerged, such as antibiotics, vaccines, growth
promoters and hormones that may be released
from livestock and aquaculture farms.
If adequately treated and safely applied,
domestic wastewater is a valuable source of both
water and nutrients. In addition to enhancing
food security, water reuse for agriculture can
have significant health benefits, including
improved nutrition. The use of municipal
wastewater is a common pattern in countries
of the Middle East and North Africa, Australia,
and the Mediterranean, as well as in China,
Mexico and the USA. The practice has been
most successful in urban and peri-urban areas,
where wastewater is easily available, generally
free of charge, and where there is a market for
agricultural products.

Regional perspectives
One of the main challenges related to wastewater
in Africa is the overall lack of infrastructure
for collection and treatment, which results
in the pollution of often-limited surface and
groundwater resources. African cities are growing
quickly, and their current water management
systems cannot keep up with the growing
demand. However, this situation provides
opportunities from improved urban wastewater
management using multi-purpose technologies
for water reuse and the recovery of useful byproducts. Strong advocacy is needed to convince
policy-makers of the phenomenal ‘cost of
inaction’ in terms of socio-economic development,
environmental quality and human health.

Water pollution from agriculture occurs when
fertilizers (nutrients) and other agrochemicals
are applied more heavily than crops can absorb
them or when they are washed away. Efficient
irrigation schemes can greatly reduce both water
and fertilizer loss. Nutrients can also be released
by livestock production and aquaculture.

The use of safely treated wastewater has
become a means of increasing water availability
in several Arab states and has been included
as a core component of water resources
management plans. In 2013, 71% of the
wastewater collected in Arab States was safely
treated, of which 21% is being used, mostly
for irrigation and groundwater recharge.
Integrated water resources management and
nexus approaches that consider the linkages
between water, energy, food and climate change
provide a framework for considering avenues
for supporting the improved collection, transfer,
treatment and use of wastewater in the Arab
region from a water security perspective.

Agriculture can be a source of several other
types of pollutants, including organic matter,
pathogens, metals and emerging pollutants. Over

By-products from domestic wastewater, such as
salt, nitrogen and phosphorus, have potential
economic value that can be used to improve

Agriculture
Over the past half century, the area equipped for
irrigation has more than doubled, total livestock
has more than tripled and inland aquaculture has
grown more than twentyfold.

E xe c u ti ve

Su m m a r y

5

livelihoods in the Asia-Pacific region. Case studies
in South-East Asia have shown that revenues
from wastewater by-products, such as fertilizer,
are significantly higher than the operational costs
of wastewater systems that harvest by-products,
providing evidence that resource recovery from
wastewater is a viable and profit-producing
business model. More needs to be done across the
region to support municipal and local governments
in managing urban wastewater and capturing its
resource benefits.
The level of access to improved sanitation across
the European and North American region is
relatively high (95%) and wastewater treatment
levels have improved during the last 15–20
years. Although tertiary treatment has increased
gradually, significant volumes of wastewater are
still collected and discharged without treatment,
particularly in Eastern Europe. Demographic
and economic changes have rendered the
effectiveness of some of the larger centralized
systems suboptimal, as exemplified by several
oversized and maladapted systems in parts of the
former Soviet Union. Cities throughout the region
are facing the financial burden associated with
repairing or replacing ageing infrastructure.
The coverage of urban wastewater treatment
in Latin America and the Caribbean has almost
doubled since the late 1990s and is now estimated
to have reached between 20% and 30% of
the wastewater collected in urban sewerage
systems. This improvement is mainly attributed to
increasing levels of water and sanitation coverage,
the improved financial situation of many service
providers (which in recent years have made
important advances towards cost recovery), and
strong socio-economic growth in the region over
the past decade. A further contributing factor
was the integration of regional economies into
global markets. Treated wastewater could be an
important source of water supply in some cities,
particularly those located in arid areas (e.g. Lima)
or where long-distance transfers are required
to meet growing demands, particularly during
drought (e.g. São Paulo).

Creating an enabling
environment for change
Improved wastewater treatment, the increase
in water reuse and the recovery of useful byproducts support the transition to a circular
economy by helping reduce water withdrawals
and the loss of resources in production systems
and economic activities.

6

Suitable legal and regulatory
frameworks
An effective regulatory framework requires that
the implementing authority has the necessary
technical and managerial capacity and performs
in an independent fashion, with sufficient powers
to enforce rules and guidelines. Transparency
and access to information motivates compliance
by promoting trust among users with respect to
the implementation and enforcement processes.
Achieving progress will require a flexible and
incremental approach.
Policies and regulatory instruments are
implemented locally and need to be adapted to
varied circumstances. It is therefore important
that political, institutional and financial support
be given to ‘bottom-up’ initiatives and small-scale
local (i.e. decentralized) provision of wastewater
management services.
New regulations regarding water reuse and the
recovery of wastewater by-products are also
required. There is often little or no legislation on
quality standards for these products, creating
market uncertainties that can discourage
investment. Markets for these products could be
stimulated by financial or legal incentives (e.g.
compulsory blending of recovered phosphates in
artificial fertilizer).

Cost recovery and appropriate financing
mechanisms
Wastewater management and sanitation are
generally considered to be expensive and capitalintensive. This is especially the case of large
centralized systems, which require a large degree
of up-front capital expenditure and relatively high
operation and maintenance costs over the medium
and long term to avoid rapid deterioration. The
problem is further exacerbated by chronically
lacking investment in the development of
institutional and human capacity. However, the
costs of inadequate investment in wastewater
management are far greater, particularly when
the direct and indirect damages to health, socioeconomic development and the environment are
taken into consideration.
Decentralized wastewater treatment systems
can be used to offset some financial problems
generated by centralized systems. When properly
designed and implemented, such low-cost
technologies can provide satisfactory results in
terms of effluent quality, although they too require
an appropriate level of operation and maintenance
in order to avoid system failure.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Wastewater use can add new revenue streams to
wastewater treatment, particularly under conditions
of recurring or chronic water scarcity. Several
different business models have been implemented
where cost and value recovery offer a significant
advantage from a financial perspective. However,
revenues from the sale of treated wastewater
alone are not generally adequate to cover the
operational and maintenance costs of the water
treatment facility itself. The recovery of nutrients
(mainly phosphorus and nitrogen) and energy can
add significant new value streams to improve the
proposition of cost recovery.
Although revenues from wastewater use and
resource recovery may not always cover their extra
costs, the benefits from investments in water
reuse may compare well with the cost of dams,
desalination, inter-basin transfers, and other options
to increase water availability.
Even when delivered to the tap, potable water
remains generally undervalued and underpriced
when compared to the total cost of the service.
Treated wastewater must itself be priced lower than
potable water in order to gain public acceptance.
Pricing water from all sources to better reflect its
actual cost enables investments that can translate
into affordable service delivery to all members of
society, including the poor.

Minimizing risks to people and the
environment
The discharge of untreated wastewater can have
severe impacts on human and environmental health,
including outbreaks of food-, water- and vectorborne diseases, as well as pollution and the loss of
biological diversity and ecosystem services. Exposure
of vulnerable groups, especially women and children,
to partially treated or untreated wastewater requires
specific attention. Limited awareness of health risks
associated with wastewater use, due to poverty and
low education, further contributes to these risks, in
particular in developing countries. Whenever human
exposure is considered likely (i.e. via food or direct
contact), more rigorous risk management measures
are required.

Building knowledge and capacity
Data and information on wastewater generation,
treatment and use is essential for policy-makers,
researchers, practitioners and public institutions in
order to develop national and local action plans
aimed at environmental protection and the safe
and productive use of wastewater. Knowledge
concerning the volumes and, perhaps even more
importantly, the constituents of wastewater

E xe c ut i ve

Su m m a r y

are necessary tools for protecting human and
environmental health and safety. However, there is a
pervasive lack of data relating to virtually all aspects
of water quality and wastewater management,
particularly in developing countries.
Appropriate and affordable technologies, both
new and well-established, need to be transferred
from developed to developing countries. Research
is needed to improve the understanding of the
dynamics of emerging pollutants and improve
methods to remove these pollutants from
wastewater. It is also essential to understand how
external factors like climate change will impact
wastewater management.
In order to enhance wastewater management, it
is essential to ensure that the appropriate levels
of human capacity are in place. Organizational
and institutional capacity in the wastewater
management sector is often lacking and, therefore,
any investment – large-scale centralized wastewater
management systems or smaller, on-site systems – is
at stake.

Public awareness and social acceptance
Even if wastewater use projects are technically welldesigned, appear financially realizable, and have
incorporated appropriate safety measures, water
reuse schemes can fail if planners do not adequately
account for the dynamics of social acceptance.
Generally, the use of wastewater encounters strong
public resistance due to a lack of awareness and trust
with regard to human health risks. Awareness raising
and education are the main tools to overcome social,
cultural and consumer barriers. Such awareness
campaigns need to be tailored to consumers with
different cultural and religious backgrounds.
The health risks associated with water reuse need to
be assessed, managed, monitored and reported on a
regular basis in order to gain public acceptance and
to maximize the benefits of using wastewater while
minimizing the negative impacts. In the case of
drinking water (i.e. potable water reuse), extensive
information campaigns are required to build trust in
the system and overcome the so-called ‘yuck’ factor.

Coda
In a world where demands for freshwater are
continuously growing, and where limited water
resources are increasingly stressed by overabstraction, pollution and climate change,
neglecting the opportunities arising from improved
wastewater management is nothing less than
unthinkable in the context of a circular economy.

7

PROLOGUE
WWAP | Stefan Uhlenbrook, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara and Richard Connor
With contributions from: Sara Marjani Zadeh (FAO)

STATE OF WATER RESOURCES:

Collecting water from a river in Bor (South Sudan)

AVAILABILITY
AND
QUALITY

The Prologue provides a brief overview of two core aspects of the state of the world’s water resources
that are directly related to wastewater: water availability and ambient water quality. While adequately
treated wastewater is a resource that can be used to address water supply shortages, the level of
wastewater treatment directly affects ambient water quality, with implications on water availability.
The external drivers that will dictate future trends in water availability and quality are described, with
a special focus on demographic dynamics and climate change.

Global wastewater
production and treatment
Although data on wastewater generation,
collection and treatment is grossly lacking,
it is clear that, worldwide, the vast
majority of wastewater is neither collected
nor treated. Furthermore, wastewater
collection per se is not synonymous with
wastewater treatment. In many cases,
collected wastewater is merely discharged
directly into the environment without any
treatment. Agricultural runoff is almost
never collected or treated, so that metrics
for these types of wastewater flows are
practically non-existent.
The AQUASTAT database of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) estimates global freshwater
withdrawals at 3,928 km³ per year. An
estimated 44% (1,716 km3 per year) of this
water is consumed, mainly by agriculture

through evaporation in irrigated cropland.
The remaining 56% (2,212 km3 per
year) is released into the environment
as wastewater in the form of municipal
and industrial effluent and agricultural
drainage water (see Figure 1).
A country’s level of industrial and
municipal wastewater treatment is
generally a reflection of its income level.
On average, high-income countries
treat about 70% of the wastewater
they generate, while that ratio drops to
38% in upper middle-income countries
and to 28% in lower middle-income
countries. In low-income countries,
only 8% of industrial and municipal
wastewater undergoes treatment of any
kind (Sato et al., 2013). This exasperates
the situation for the poor, particularly in
slums, who are often directly exposed to
wastewater due to a lack of water and
sanitation services.

Figure 1 Fate of freshwater withdrawals: Global consumption and wastewater production by major water
use sector (circa 2010)
16%
3%
8%

38%
Agricultural water consumption
Agricultural drainage
Municipal water consumption

3%

Municipal wastewater
Industrial water consumption

32%

Industrial wastewater

Source: Based on data from AQUASTAT (n.d.a.); Mateo-Sagasta et al. (2015); and Shiklomanov (1999).
Contributed by Sara Marjani Zadeh (FAO).

Prolog u e

9

Figure 2 Number of months per year in which the volume of surface water and groundwater that is
withdrawn and not returned exceeds 1.0 at 30 x 30 arc min resolution (1996–2005)*

Number of months
in which water
scarcity is >100%
0
1
2—3
4—5
6—7
8—9
10—11
12
No data
*Quarterly averaged monthly blue water scarcity at 30 × 30 arc min resolution. Water scarcity at the grid cell level is defined as the ratio of
the blue water footprint within the grid cell to the sum of the blue water generated within the cell and the blue water inflow from upstream
cells. Period: 1996–2005.
Source: Mekonnen and Hoekstra (2016, Fig. 3, p. 3).

These estimates support the often-cited approximation
that, globally, it is likely that over 80% of wastewater
is released to the environment without adequate
treatment (WWAP, 2012; UN-Water 2015a).
There also appears to be significant variability across
different regions. In Europe, 71% of the municipal and
industrial wastewater generated undergoes treatment,
while only 20% is treated in the Latin American
countries. In the Middle East and North Africa (MENA),
an estimated 51% of municipal and industrial
wastewater is treated. In African countries, the lack of
financial resources for the development of wastewater
facilities is a major constraint in managing wastewater,
while 32 out of 48 Sub-Saharan African countries
had no data available on wastewater generation and
treatment (Sato et al., 2013).
The treatment of wastewater and its use and/or
disposal in the humid regions of high-income countries
(e.g. North America, northern Europe and Japan) are
motivated by stringent effluent discharge regulations
and public awareness about environmental quality.
The situation is different in high-income countries in
drier regions (e.g. parts of North America, Australia,
the Middle East and southern Europe), where treated
wastewater is often used for irrigation, given the
increasing competition for water between agriculture
and other sectors.
The persistent expansion of sewerage and the
consequent increases in wastewater volume generate
pressure on existing treatment facilities, and in some
cases can lead to suboptimal performance.

10

Even when wastewater is collected and treated, the final
quality of the wastewater discharged may be affected
by poor operation and maintenance, as well as overflow
during storm events, when wastewater is allowed
to bypass the treatment plant. Thus, much of the
wastewater is not treated (or inadequately treated) and
discharged in water bodies, and subsequently affects the
water quality (and its availability) for users downstream.

Global water availability –
Scarcity growing more severe by
the year
Water resources (surface water and groundwater) are
renewed through the continuous cycle of evaporation,
precipitation and runoff. The water cycle is driven by
global and climatic forces that introduce variability in
precipitation and evaporation, which in turn define
runoff patterns and water availability over space and
time (modulated by natural and artificial storage).
Observations over the past decades and projections
from climate change scenarios point towards an
exacerbation of the spatial and temporal variations
of water cycle dynamics (cf. IPCC, 2013). As a result,
discrepancies in water supply and demand are
becoming increasingly aggravated.
Recent research has demonstrated that two-thirds
of the world’s population currently live in areas that
experience water scarcity for at least one month a
year (see Figure 2). Noteworthy is that about 50%
of the people facing this level of water scarcity live in

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 3 Projected changes in flood frequency*

Increase

Decrease

* Illustrated as the change of the return period of a 100-year flood. The simulations show the median of the outputs of 11 Global Circulation
Models (GCMs) under the future scenario RCP 8.5 and the difference between periods 2071–2100 and 1971–2000 are compared.
Source: Hirabayashi et al. (2013, Fig. 1a).
Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Climate Change, © 2013

China and India. Such a month-by-month assessment
of water scarcity is essential, as the water stress that
results from dry periods can be masked by annual
averages of water availability. Grid-based assessments,
as shown in Figure 2, can be easily aggregated to
the country scale, and provide more insights into the
variability within the country. Average numbers can be
misleading, particularly in countries with distinct spatial
variations of water resources and uses as, for instance,
Australia, Brazil, Chile, Russia and the USA.
About 500 million people live in areas where water
consumption exceeds the locally renewable water
resources by a factor of two (Mekonnen and Hoekstra,
2016). This includes parts of India, China, the
Mediterranean region and the Middle East, Central
Asia, arid parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, Australia,
Central and Western South America, and Central and
Western North America. Areas, where non-renewable
resources (i.e. fossil groundwater; never a sustainable
source) continue to decrease, have become highly
vulnerable and dependent on water transfers from
areas with abundant water.
Even though floods and droughts are a natural
phenomenon and part of the spatio-temporal variable
water cycle dynamics, the frequency and severity

Prolog u e

of floods and droughts have changed in many river
basins worldwide, often due to a combination of
climate change and human activities. Land use
changes, including urbanization, river channelization
and other human activities, modify the storage
capacity of catchments and impact high flows as well
as groundwater recharge and low flows. Changed
storage capacity and runoff generation processes can
increase the occurrence of water-related disasters.
The frequencies of floods (Hirabayashi et al., 2013)
and droughts (IPCC, 2013) are likely to change with
increasing temperatures. The results of an ensemble
of projections (see Figure 3) show a large increase in
flood frequency (represented by the blue areas, where
events that are now considered 100-year floods would
increase in frequency) in many areas, including India,
Southeast Asia and Central and Eastern Africa, while
in other areas the projected flood frequency decreases
(represented by the yellow/red areas).
Having too much (floods) or too little (drought) water,
which is often accompanied by too dirty water (higher
pollution concentrations in both extremes), make the
necessity for wastewater use even greater.
The economic costs arising from river flooding
worldwide could increase twentyfold by the end of the

11

Figure 4 Estimated in-stream concentrations of faecal coliform bacteria (FC) for Africa, Asia and Latin
America (February 2008–2010)*

© CESR, University of Kassel, April 2016, WaterGAP3.1

Latin
America

February 2008–2010
FC [cfu/100ml]
Not computed

Moderate pollution (200<x=1000)

Low pollution (=200)

Severe pollution (>1000)

Africa

Asia

Notes: Low: Suitable for primary contact; Moderate: Suitable for irrigation; Severe: Exceeds thresholds

0

200 000

400 000

600 000

800 000

1 000 000

river km
Minimum

Maximum

* Bar charts show minimum and maximum monthly estimates of river stretches in the severe pollution class per continent in the period
from 2008 to 2010.
Source: UNEP (2016, Fig. 3.3, p. 20).

twenty-first century, if no further actions on flood risk
reduction are taken. Over 70% of this increase can be
attributed to economic growth in flood-prone areas, in
addition to climate change (Winsemius et al., 2016).
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD, 2015a) cites climate scenarios
based on modelling undertaken by Winsemius and Ward
(2015), which shows that the flood damage in urban
areas could reach US$0.7-1.8 trillion per year by 2080.
Globally, drought is arguably the greatest single
threat from climate change but locally, sea-level rise
(affecting coastal areas) or other threats could be larger
(e.g. areas that are extremely vulnerable to floods or
landslides). Consequences of drought can be very
significant from a socio-economic and environmental
perspective. Its impacts range from lower agricultural
productivity and disruptions of ecosystem functioning
to increased food prices, while insecurity and famine
can trigger mass migration. The crisis in Syria was
triggered, among other factors, by a historic drought
in 2007–2010, which saw very little winter rainfall
(partially due to climate change), and which made
farming impossible on about 60% of the agricultural

12

land, in spite of the knowledge and technology
that were available. The livelihoods of thousands of
farmers were impacted, which led to a rural-to-urban
migration accompanied by an increased dependence
on food imports, and to higher food prices, informal
settlements, unemployment and social unrest.
Consequently, brought about by civil war and
other reasons, a large-scale migration movement
started (Kelley et al., 2015). Some of the measures
to increase the resilience to drought events include
the acceptance of wastewater as a reliable source of
water for agriculture and many other uses.
Global water demand is predicted to increase
significantly over the coming decades. In addition
to demand from the agricultural sector, which is
currently responsible for 70% of water abstractions
worldwide, large increases are predicted for industry
and energy production (WWAP, 2015). Changing
consumption patterns, including shifting diets
towards highly water-intensive foods such as meat
(i.e. 15,000 litres of water are needed for 1 kg
of beef) will worsen the situation. It is therefore
unsurprising that the World Economic Forum (WEF)

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 5 Estimated in-stream concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for Africa, Asia and
Latin America (February 2008–2010)*

© CESR, University of Kassel, April 2016, WaterGAP3.1

Latin
America

February 2008–2010
BOD [mg/l]
Not computed
Low pollution (=4)

Moderate pollution (4<x=8)
Severe pollution (>8)

Note: Levels adapted from German water quality standards.

Africa
Asia
0

100 000

200 000

300 000

river km
Minimum

Maximum

* Bar charts show minimum and maximum monthly estimates of river stretches in the severe pollution class per continent in the period
from 2008 to 2010.
Source: UNEP (2016, Fig. 3.13, p. 33).

has consecutively assessed the water crisis as one of the
major global risks over the past five years. In 2016, the
water crisis was determined as the global risk of highest
concern for people and economies for the next ten
years (WEF, 2016).

Ambient water quality1
The availability of water resources is intrinsically linked
to water quality. The pollution of surface water and
groundwater may prohibit its different uses in the
absence of costly pre-treatment. The deterioration
of water quality is expected to increase further in the
next decades, particularly in resource-poor countries
in dry areas, which will further endanger human
health and the environment, while constraining
sustainable economic development (Veolia/IFPRI,
2015). The release of untreated wastewater from
expanding human settlements and increasing industrial

1

This section is largely based on the Snapshot report (UNEP, 2016),
which provides a comprehensive overview of the current water
quality

Prolog u e

production generates physical, chemical and
biological pollution, impacting both human and
environmental health.
The presence of faecal coliforms, which originate
from human and animal excreta, is used as an
indicator of the presence of all potential pathogens
in surface waters. Early findings from the global
water quality monitoring programme show that
severe pathogen pollution affects around onethird of all river stretches in Africa, Asia and
Latin America (see Figure 4), putting the health
of millions of people at risk (UNEP, 2016). Even
though sanitation coverage has increased and
treatment levels have improved in some countries
(UNICEF/WHO, 2015), such improvements need to
happen simultaneously in order to avoid increased
contaminant loadings. This could probably explain
the increased loadings of faecal coliform bacteria
(FC) observed in Africa, Asia and Latin America
over the last two decades.
Organic pollution (measured in terms of
biochemical oxygen demand – BOD) can have
significant impacts on inland fisheries, food

13

Figure 6

Trend in BOD concentrations in rivers between 1990–1992 and 2008–2010*

© CESR, University of Kassel, April 2016, WaterGAP3.1

Trend of BOD in-stream concentration

Not computed

Increasing trend

Not increasing

Increasing trend of particular concern

* River stretches marked with orange or red have increasing concentrations between these two periods. River stretches marked with red have
an “increasing trend of particular concern” meaning that in these stretches, the pollution level increased into the severe pollution category in
2008–2010, or that they were already in the severe pollution category in 1990–1992 and further increased in concentration by 2008–2010.
Source: UNEP (2016, Fig. 3.15, p. 34).

14

Globally, it is likely that
over 80% of wastewater
is released to the
environment without
adequate treatment

The release of nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus
and potassium) and agrochemicals from
intensive agriculture and animal waste can
further accelerate the eutrophication of
freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems
and increase groundwater pollution. Most
of the largest lakes in Latin America and
Africa have seen increasing anthropogenic
loads of phosphorus, which can accelerate
eutrophication processes.

security and livelihoods, severely affecting
poor rural communities that rely on
freshwater fisheries. Severe organic
pollution already affects around oneseventh of all river stretches in Africa, Asia
and Latin America (see Figure 5), and has
been steadily increasing for years (see
Figure 6) (UNEP, 2016).

Increased discharges of inadequately treated
wastewater, resulting from economic and
industrial development, intensification and
expansion of agriculture, and growing volumes
of sewage from rapidly urbanizing areas are
contributing to the further degradation of
water quality in surface and groundwater
around the world. As water pollution critically
affects water availability, it needs to be
properly managed in order to mitigate the
impacts of increasing water scarcity.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

PART I

W O R L D

W A T E R

D E V E L O P M E N T

R E P O R T
2017

BASELINE
AND CONTEXT

Chapter 1 | Introduction
Chapter 2 | Wastewater and the
Sustainable Development Agenda
Chapter 3 | Governance
Chapter 4 | Technical aspects of
wastewater

CHAPTER 1
WWAP | Richard Connor, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara, Engin Koncagül and Stefan Uhlenbrook
With contributions from: Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo (UNEP); Sara Marjani Zadeh (FAO); and
Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH)

Wastewater treatment plant

INTRODUCTION

This introductory chapter frames the report by presenting the main issues and
challenges related to the management of wastewater flows in the broader context
of water resources management, underlying the importance of wastewater as a
neglected but valuable resource, particularly under conditions of water scarcity.

Wastewater is a critical component of the
water cycle and needs to be managed
across the entire water management cycle:
from freshwater abstraction, treatment,
distribution, use, collection and posttreatment to its reuse and ultimate return to
the environment, where it replenishes the
source for subsequent water abstractions
(see Figure 1.1). More often than not,
however, attention to the management
of water after it has been used has often
been an overlooked component of the
water management cycle. Wastewater
management generally receives little social
and political attention in comparison to
water supply challenges, especially in the
context of water scarcity. Yet, the two are
intrinsically related – neglecting wastewater
can have highly detrimental impacts on
the sustainability of water supplies, human
health, the economy and the environment.
Wastewater remains an undervalued
resource, all too often seen as a burden
to be disposed of or a nuisance to be
ignored. This perception needs to change to
correctly reflect its value – wastewater is a
potentially affordable and sustainable source
of water, energy, nutrients, organic matter
and other useful by-products. Improved
wastewater management, including the
recovery and safe reuse of water and other
key constituents, provides a great deal of
opportunities. This is especially true in the
context of a circular economy,2 whereby
economic development is balanced with the
protection of resources and environmental
sustainability, and where a cleaner and more
sustainable economy has a positive effect on
water quality.
Wastewater, which is also been referred to
as ‘used water’ or ‘effluent’, can and has
been defined in several different ways. As
such, there is no single universally accepted
definition for the term. For example,

2

wastewater has been defined as “water that
has been used and contains dissolved or
suspended waste materials” (US EPA, n.d.a.),
or “water that has been adversely affected in
quality by anthropogenic activity” (Culp and
Culp, 1971, p. 614). The term wastewater
has also been equated with sewage,
implying that the definition is limited to
used water (from domestic, industrial or
institutional sources) carried off by sewers,
thus excluding the uncollected runoff from
urban settlements and agricultural systems.
However, as urban and agricultural runoff
can be heavily polluted (and potentially
become mixed with other wastewater
streams), they are also important elements of
the wastewater management cycle.
This report adopts a broad and inclusive
definition of wastewater, adapted from
Raschid-Sally and Jayakody (2008), which is
used notably in the document ‘Sick Water’
produced by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), the United Nations
Human Settlement Programme (UN-Habitat)
(Corcoran et al., 2010) and the UN-Water
Analytical Brief on Wastewater Management
(UN-Water, 2015a):

Wastewater is regarded as a combination
of one or more of: domestic effluent
consisting of blackwater (excreta, urine
and faecal sludge) and greywater (used
water from washing and bathing); water
from commercial establishments and
institutions, including hospitals; industrial
effluent, stormwater and other urban
runoff; and agricultural, horticultural and
aquaculture runoff (Raschid-Sally and
Jayakody, 2008, p. 1).
Several other related terms are equally
difficult to define. For example, the terms
‘reused’, ‘recycled’ and ‘reclaimed’ have
in some cases been used synonymously,
whereas in other cases each has been
specifically defined – albeit in different ways.

Definition provided in Lexicon (Annex 1).

Int ro d u c ti o n

17

The terms used in this report reflect the definitions
adopted in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (see Chapter 2) and several
other international ‘standards’. These are described
in the Lexicon (see Annex 1). Unfortunately, these
terms do not always distinguish between treated,
partly treated or untreated wastewater, which is
essential information in many contexts. Attempts
have therefore been made throughout this report
to explicitly specify the existing or required ‘level’ of
treatment where appropriate. However, it is important
to acknowledge the existing dilemma regarding

multiple terminologies and to recognize that efforts
will be required to develop a clear set of definitions
in order to ensure consistency in monitoring and
reporting related to wastewater. This is particularly
critical for the selection of suitable indicators (see, for
example, Box 1.1: The terms ‘safe’ and ‘improved’ in
the MDG context (WWAP, 2015, p. 15)).
Historically, surface waters have been used as a means
for the direct disposal of wastewater and other forms
of waste, polluting water bodies downstream from
cities, towns and villages (see Box 1.1). This practice

BOX 1.1 ARCHAEOLOGICAL WASTEWATER SYSTEMS: THE CASE OF ANCIENT ROME
Wastewater management has been practised for several millennia, evolving and improving throughout
human history. The Etruscans, for example, developed channel systems to collect different water flows,
and the Romans subsequently assimilated these techniques, improving and adapting them to their needs.
The first sewers of ancient Rome were built by Tarquinius Superbus around the seventh century BC. They
consisted of an open-air channel system that drained water from the marshes at the bottom of the valleys
of the seven hills (inhabitable land at the time) and conveyed it to the Tiber. These drainage systems slowly
evolved and the Romans eventually built a complex system of sewers covered by stones, similar to modern
drains. The exhaust of the latrines was sent into the main sewage system and then, through a central
channel, into the closest river or stream.
The most advanced segment of the Roman sewage system was the covered Cloaca Maxima, the largest
among the various wastewater collectors. First built as an open freshwater canal, it was transformed around
the second and first centuries BC into a monumental underground tunnel with tuff walls and vaults.
Known as the “greatest sewer” (literal translation of its name) of Rome, the Cloaca Maxima is a
masterpiece of hydraulic engineering and architecture. It is one of the most impressive sanitation artefacts
of the ancient world, which provided the necessary drainage for the creation of the Roman Forum and
became the central piece of a sanitation network that delivered hygiene services to the hills around Rome.
An engraving by Piranesi shows the manifold, as it appeared in 1778, where wastewater was discharged
into the Tiber River near Ponte Palatino.
However, the Tiber River eventually became highly polluted, creating a severe problem for the Romans
who used its water for drinking, cooking, washing and other purposes. Discharging sewers downstream
of the city were not sufficient to guarantee adequate water quality upstream. Furthermore, because the
drainage system conveyed sewage and urban runoff (i.e. a ‘combined sewer system’), reflux from the
large openings along the streets would often occur during heavy precipitation events, thus exposing
Romans to raw sewage.
To drain the rainwater from the streets into the Cloaca, the Romans built special circular drains shaped as
large masks, representing river gods swallowing water (the famous Mouth of Truth was probably one of
these). Another distinctive feature of the Roman sewage system was the required fee for using the public
latrines or renting chamberpots, making it one of the first historical examples of a user-pays approach to
sanitation services.
An 1889 study of the Cloaca Maxima and some other sewers led to the restoration of parts that could be
connected to the ‘modern’ sewer system and used in a project that continues to benefit Rome to this day.
Sources: Ammerman (1990); Bauer (1993); Narducci (1889); Lanciani (1890); and Bianchi (2014).
Contributed by Chiara Biscarini and Lucio Ubertini (UNESCO-IHP Italy).

18

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 1.1 Wastewater in the water cycle

agriculture

WTP

municipal water

WWTP

fit-for-purpose

residential
commercial
institutional

Industrial

recreational desalination

surface water

ocean

Groundwater

LEGEND:
natural water cycle

raw water source

treated wastewater

agricultural runoff

groundwater flow

treated water

untreated wastewater

urban runoff

wtp = water treatment plant

wwtp = wastewater treatment plant

Source: WWAP

has decreased in most developed countries since the
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with the
development of wastewater collection and treatment
systems (UNEP, 2015a) and advances in solid waste
management, which led to significantly public
health benefits. However, the release of untreated
wastewater into the environment remains common
practice, especially in developing countries, with
direct impacts on human health (with notably greater
risks to women), the environment and economic
productivity (see Table 1.1).
With so little wastewater undergoing treatment,
and even less being used after treatment, there
remains an enormous opportunity to reuse treated
water in a sustainable way, and to extract some of
the recoverable by-products that it contains. Under
appropriately controlled conditions, the use of
untreated wastewater also offers great potential for
lessening the burden on surface and underground
freshwater supplies, especially in arid and semi-arid
regions, and other locations that experience chronic
or recurring water scarcity.

Int ro d u c ti o n

1.1

Wastewater flows

Wastewater flows are as varied as its sources and the
types of constituents they contain, with the latter
being a function of the former. Figure 1.2 provides
an overview of the main wastewater flows, from
their generation at the source to their ultimate fate.
Uncollected wastewater (and all its constituents)
ultimately ends up in the aquatic environment. This
is also the case for wastewater that is collected and
disposed of without treatment, the proportion of
which can in some cases be considerable (see Figures
4.4 and 4.5). Wastewater treatment can allow for the
separation of water and other constituents, which can
then be reused or disposed of.

1.1.1 The wastewater management cycle
Controlling and regulating the various wastewater
flows is the ultimate purpose of wastewater
management. The wastewater management cycle
can be broken down into four basic interconnected
phases or steps:

19

Table 1.1 Examples of negative impacts of untreated wastewater on human health, the environment and
productive activities
Impacts on

Examples of impacts

Health

•
•
•
•

Increased burden of disease due to reduced drinking water quality
Increased burden of disease due to reduced bathing water quality
Increased burden of disease due to unsafe food (contaminated fish, vegetables and other
produce irrigated)
Increased risk of disease when working or playing in wastewater-irrigated area

Environment

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Decreased biodiversity
Degraded aquatic ecosystems (e.g. eutrophication and dead zones)
Foul odours
Diminished recreational opportunities
Increased greenhouse gas emissions
Increased water temperature
Bioaccumulation of toxins

Economy

•
•
•
•

Reduced industrial productivity
Reduced agricultural productivity
Reduced market value of harvested crops, if unsafe wastewater is being used for irrigation
Reduced opportunities for water-based recreational activities (reduced number of tourists, or
reduced willingness to pay for recreational services)
Reduced fish and shellfish catches, or reduced market value of fish and shellfish
Increased financial burden on healthcare
Increased barriers to international trade (exports)
Higher costs of water treatment (for human supply and other uses)
Reduced prices of properties near contaminated water bodies

•
•
•
•
•

Source: Adapted from UNEP (2015b, Table 1, p. 15).

Figure 1.2 Wastewater flows

WASTEWATER FLOWS
Monitoring and Inspection
Red list of contaminants
Product formulation
product use
Regulation
incentives
Penalties

wastewater
Treatment
components

Not collected

Collected

WASTEWATER SOURCES
Municipal sewerage
households
urban runoff
industry
energy
landfills
other sources

wastewater
(treated for purpose)

Solid wastes
Pathogens
Radioactivity
Toxins

Heavy metals
emerging pollutants
Sediments/sludge
other

Nutrients
Heat
Energy

untreated
discharge

Agricultural runoff
urban runoff
households
industry
energy
landfills
other sources

Uncontrolled discharge,
runoff and percolation

Dilution
or

diversion

safe
discharge

direct
use

recovery

safe
disposal

indirect
use

rivers
lakes
ocean
aquifers
estuaries
wetlands

Agriculture
energy
industry
municipal
other uses

Burial
Incineration
composting
Other methods

direct
use

Source: WWAP.

20

W W D R

2 0 1 7

a)

b)

c)

d)

The prevention or reduction of pollution at
the source, in terms of pollution load and
volume of wastewater produced. Prohibiting
or controlling the use of certain contaminants to
eliminate or limit their entering into wastewater
streams through regulatory, technical and/or
other means. This step also includes measures
to reduce the volumes of generated wastewater
(e.g. demand management and increased water
use efficiency).
The removal of contaminants from
wastewater streams. Operational systems
(including collection infrastructure) and treatment
processes that remove various constituents of
wastewater (i.e. contaminants) so that it can be
safely used or returned to the water cycle with
minimal environmental impacts. There are several
types and levels of wastewater treatment, the
choice of which is dependent on the nature of
the contaminants, the pollution load and the
anticipated end use of the effluent.
The use of wastewater (i.e. water reuse).
Safe use of treated or untreated wastewater
under controlled conditions for beneficial
purposes. Historically used primarily for irrigation,
wastewater treatment technologies have
now advanced to allow for the use of treated
wastewater for other uses, provided that the
level of treatment and the quality of the effluent
are ‘fit-for-purpose’.
The recovery of useful by-products: Various
constituents of wastewater can be extracted,
either directly (e.g. heat, nutrients, organic
matter and metals) or via supplementary
transformation processes (e.g. biogas from
sludge or biofuels from microalgae). There is a
growing number of potentially cost-effective
opportunities for extracting useful materials from
wastewater, such as nitrogen and phosphorus,
that can be transformed into fertilizer.

An additional role of the wastewater management
cycle is to mitigate any negative impacts on human
health, the economy and the environment.
When taking into account the multiple benefits of
improved wastewater management, several of these
processes can be considered cost-effective, thus
adding value across the wastewater management
cycle while supporting the further development of
water supply and sanitation systems.
Based on the assumption that it is possible to align
water quality requirements with water use locations,
multiple use systems with cascading reuse of water
from higher to lower water quality can make water

Int ro d u c ti o n

reuse more affordable than providing extensive water
treatment at each point of abstraction along a river
basin (UNEP, 2015c).

1.2 Wastewater as a resource:
Seizing the opportunities
In practice, the goal is to go beyond mere pollution
abatement and to seek to gain value from wastewater,
if for no other reason, as an additional means
of paying for wastewater management and for
enhancing the economic sustainability of the system.
However, wastewater management is already an
important part of several different resource cycles
and is well-positioned to play a central role in the
circular economy. Using appropriately treated water
for agriculture and power generation enhances
opportunities for food and energy security, and
can help alleviate the stresses brought about by
increasing demand for water. This will have positive
repercussions on freshwater supplies, human and
environmental health, income generation (livelihoods)
and poverty alleviation. Furthermore, water reuse can
generate new business opportunities and support the
advancement of a green economy.
Aquatic ecosystems (e.g. ponds, wetlands and lakes)
offer additional, low-cost solutions for enhancing
wastewater management, provided they are
managed sustainably. Although planned use and
functional markets of wastewater for ecosystem
services is a relatively recent phenomenon, the
valuation of treated wastewater use for ecosystem
services reveals favourable environmental and
economic benefits.
The informal use of untreated wastewater is already
occurring widely, out of simple convenience or as
a matter of sheer need, and all too often in the
absence of appropriate safety control measures.
While measures that promote the direct use of certain
types of untreated wastewater may be relatively
easy to implement, the cost of developing treatment
systems for recovering wastewater from certain
specific human activities may be prohibitive in some
cases. There can also be a mismatch between the
location and timing of the source of wastewater,
and its eventual use. Wastewater management
systems, therefore, need to be designed based on
its characteristics (e.g. origin, components and level
of contaminants) and the intended end use of the
effluent stream, including any useful by-products, as
these will dictate the most appropriate and practical
wastewater source.

21

Figure 1.3 Framing wastewater management from a resource perspective
Resources in
excreta and
wastewater

Resource management options

Technical system options

Multiple potential
benefits

Water reuse and recycling

Potable and non-potable water / industrial use / recharge of water bodies

Water

Combined water and nutrient reuse

Nutrients
Energy content
Organic matter

Agricultural irrigation / forestry irrigation / aquaculture

Nutrient reuse or combined organic matter/nutrient reuse

Waterborne vs non-waterborne
excreta management

Environmental protection
Livelihoods

Solid and liquid fertilizer and soil conditioner for agriculture and forestry

Separate greywater management

Gender equity

Energy generation

Sludge management

Water security

Biogas generation / incineration / Biomas production

Off-site vs on-site treatment

Food security

Ecosystem services

Wastewater treatment

Energy security

Excreta and sludge treatment

Climate mitigation and
adaptation

i.e. constructed wetland

Other

Health protection

Centralized vs decentralized

Other outputs

i.e. protein feed for livestock / building material

Source: Andersson et al. (2016, Fig. 3.1, p. 27).

There are strong economic arguments in
favour of optimizing freshwater-use efficiency,
managing wastewater as a resource and
eliminating (or at least reducing) pollution
at the point of use. Utilizing wastewater
at, or as close as possible to, its source
generally increases cost-efficiency due to the
lower costs of conveyance. The fact that so
little wastewater management is currently
occurring, particularly in developing countries,
means that there are vast opportunities for
water reuse and for the recovery of useful byproducts, provided the appropriate incentives
and business models are in place to help cover
the substantial costs. Recent market studies
also show that there is a positive trend in
water and wastewater treatment investments
in developing countries. Worldwide, the
annual capital expenditures on water
infrastructure and wastewater infrastructure
by utilities have been estimated at US$100
billion and US$104 billion, respectively
(Heymann et al., 2010).
Since wastewater management is
implemented at the local level, responses and
technical solutions will need to be locationspecific (see Chapter 3). In this respect,
there are opportunities in further integrating
wastewater management, including sanitation
and faecal sludge management (FSM), with
water resources and solid waste management.
This requires governance structures that foster
collaboration across institutional boundaries,

22

as well as accountability and compliance with
regulations for wastewater use and the extraction/
use of recovered by-products. Above all, wastewater
management needs to be planned from ‘upstream’,
at the source, in order to complement end-of-pipe
solutions ‘downstream’.
A number of pressures on water resources
are driving the need for the enhanced use of
wastewater. Population growth, urbanization,
changing consumption patterns, climate
change, loss of biodiversity, economic growth
and industrialization all have an impact on
water resources and wastewater streams, with
repercussions on atmospheric, land and water
pollution. An improved approach to wastewater
management will help alleviate the impact of some
of these pressures.
From a resource perspective (see Figure 1.3),
sustainable wastewater management requires:
i) supportive policies that reduce the pollution
load upfront; ii) tailored technologies that enable
fit-for-purpose treatment to optimize resource
utilization; and iii) taking account of the benefits of
resource recovery. Such a perspective promotes the
implementation of innovative financial mechanisms,
while embracing a precautionary approach and
the polluter-pays principle. It is the responsibility
of national governments to provide the policy
environment for equitable tariff structures that help
ensure the operation and maintenance of existing
infrastructure, and attract new investments along
the wastewater management cycle.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 2
WWAP | Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara and Richard Connor
With contributions from: Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo (UNEP); Marianne Kjellén (UNDP);
Carlos Carrión-Crespo and María Teresa Gutiérrez (ILO); Pay Drechsel (IWMI);
Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH); Kate Medlicott (WHO); and Shigenori Asai (Japan Water Forum)

WASTEWATER

SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
AGENDA

Rooftop garden in The University of Warsaw (Poland)

and the

This chapter examines wastewater management in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with particular attention given to the efforts required in promoting synergies and
addressing potential conflicts between the water goal and other SDGs.

2.1 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development
On 25 September 2015, 193 Member
States of the United Nations (UN) General
Assembly adopted the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development with a set of goals
to end poverty, protect the environment,
and ensure prosperity for all. The Agenda
includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) (see Figure 2.1), each with specific
targets to be achieved over a 15-year period
(UNGA, 2015a). The SDGs are interlinked
and indivisible, and build on the progress
and lessons learned from the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs, 2000-2015).

Figure 2.1 The Sustainable Development Goals

Source: UN (n.d.a.).

Within the MDG framework, MDG Target
7c called on Member States to halve the
proportion of people without sustainable
access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation by 2015. Whereas the target
related to drinking water was reported
as achieved three years ahead of time
(UNICEF/WHO, 2012), the sanitation
target was not achieved. In fact, while 2.1
billion have gained access to improved
sanitation facilities since 1990, 2.4
billion people still do not have access to
improved sanitation and nearly 1 billion
people worldwide still practice open
defecation (UNICEF/WHO, 2015).
The experience of the MDGs showed that
a broader, more detailed and context-

24

specific goal was needed for water, going beyond
the issues of supply and sanitation, which SDG 6
of the 2030 Agenda has addressed by calling for
the improvement of water resource management
in a broad, inclusive and integrated way. As
such, it places a particular emphasis on: drinking
water, sanitation and hygiene; water quality and
wastewater; water use efficiency and scarcity;
integrated water management; protection of
ecosystems; international cooperation and
capacity building; and stakeholder participation
(see Table 2.1).
Goals and targets will be monitored and reviewed
using a set of global indicators, but it is up to
each country to define its national objectives
concerning both wastewater treatment and water
quality (UNGA, 2015a).
Measuring progress in the 2030 Agenda depends
on how specific, measurable, attainable, relevant
and time-bound (SMART) the indicators are
for this task. The Inter-agency Expert Group on
SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) was established to
develop an indicator framework for measuring
progress towards monitoring the goals and
targets of the 2030 Agenda at the global level,
and to support its implementation. Member
States will also likely develop their own nationaland regional-level indicators to complement the
proposed global level indicators to be approved
by the UN General Assembly.
Two global-level indicators have been proposed
to track progress for SDG Target 6.3, which is the
most closely related to wastewater management
(UN-Water, 2016a):
6.3.1 Proportion of wastewater safely
treated: Safely treated wastewater generated
by households (sewage and faecal sludge) and
economic activities (e.g. industries) in proportion
to total wastewater generated by households
and economic activities.
6.3.2 Proportion of water bodies with
good ambient quality: Proportion of water
bodies (area) in a country with good ambient
water quality compared to all water bodies
in the country. ‘Good’ indicates an ambient
water quality that does not damage ecosystem

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Improved wastewater treatment and the increase in water
reuse, as called for in SDG Target 6.3, will support the
transition to a circular economy
Table 2.1 SDG 6 targets and indicators

SDG 6

Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
TARGET

INDICATORS

6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and
affordable drinking water for all

6.1.1 Proportion of population using safely
managed drinking water services

6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation
and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special
attention to the needs of women and girls and those in
vulnerable situations

6.2.1 Proportion of population using safely
managed sanitation services, including a
handwashing facility with soap and water

6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution,
eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous
chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe
reuse globally

6.3.1 Proportion of wastewater safely treated

6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water use efficiency across
all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of
freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce
the number of people suffering from water scarcity

6.4.1 Change in water use efficiency over time

6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management
at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as
appropriate

6.5.1 Degree of integrated water resources
management implementation (0–100)

6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems,
including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and
lakes

6.6.1 Change in the extent of water-related
ecosystems over time

6a

By 2030, expand international cooperation and capacitybuilding support to developing countries in water- and
sanitation-related activities and programmes, including
water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater
treatment, recycling and reuse technologies

6.a.1

6b

Support and strengthen the participation of local communities
in improving water and sanitation management

6.b.1 Proportion of local administrative units
with established and operational policies
and procedures for participation of local
communities in water and sanitation
management

6.3.2 Proportion of bodies of water with good
ambient water quality

6.4.2 Level of water stress: freshwater withdrawal
as a proportion of available freshwater
resources

6.5.2 Proportion of transboundary basin area
with an operational arrangement for water
cooperation

Amount of water- and sanitation-related
official development assistance that is part
of a government-coordinated spending plan

*Source of indicators: UN-Water (2016a).
Source: UNGA (2015a).

Was tewate r

a n d

th e

Su s ta i n a b l e

Development

Agen da

25

Figure 2.2 Percentage of untreated wastewater in 2015 in countries with different income levels and
aspirations for 2030 (50% reduction over 2015 baseline)
46

Low-income countries

92

36

Lower middle-income countries

72
31

Upper middle-income countries

62
15

High-income countries
0

20

Untreated wastewater in 2030 (Aspiration)
Untreated wastewater in 2015 (Baseline)

30
40

60

80

100

Wastewater treatment (%)
Source: Based on data from Sato et al. (2013).

functions and human health according to core
ambient water quality indicators.
One of the challenges to monitoring SDG Target
6.3 indicators is the lack of data relating to virtually
all aspects of water quality and wastewater
management, particularly in developing countries.
Reliable data generate social, economic and
environmental benefits in both public and private
sectors as they can underpin advocacy, stimulate
political commitment and investments, and inform
decision-making on all levels (UN-Water, 2016a).
In order to achieve SDG Target 6.3, significant
investments will be required in new infrastructure
(grey and green, in locally appropriate
combinations) and appropriate technologies to
increase the treatment and use of wastewater.
Investments are also needed to upgrade the
current infrastructure, operate and maintain
existing and new infrastructure, develop capacity
in water resources management, and monitor
and control the quality of water and wastewater
(UN-Water, 2015a). Due to the differences in the
current levels of wastewater treatment overall,
the efforts required to achieve SDG Target 6.3 will
place a higher financial burden on low-income
and lower middle-income countries (see Figure
2.2), putting them at an economic disadvantage
compared to high-income and upper middleincome countries (Sato et al., 2013).

26

2.2 Potential synergies and
conflicts
Achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development will require concerted efforts to manage
the potential conflicts and synergies between SDG 6
and other SDGs. A careful analysis of goals and targets
may highlight conditions, where the achievement of
one goal may favour the achievement of another.
Conversely, situations where achieving one goal may
hinder the achievement of another will require the
identification of acceptable trade-offs (UN-Water,
2016b).

2.2.1 Potential synergies
SDG 6 cannot be fully achieved by addressing each
target independently. For example, “increased access
to sanitation (6.2) must be harmonised with increased
wastewater treatment (6.3) in order to support good
ambient water quality (6.3) and to guarantee healthy
water-related ecosystems (6.6). Similarly, good ambient
water quality (6.3) greatly facilitates the provision of safe
drinking water (6.1), which must be provided sustainably
(6.4), without negative consequences for water-related
ecosystems (6.6). Increasing recycling and safe reuse (6.3)
and water-use efficiency (6.4) make more water available
for drinking (6.1) and other uses (6.4), and can reduce
impacts on water-related ecosystems (6.6). Sustainable
water supply and use (6.4), good ambient water quality
(6.3), and healthy water-related ecosystems (6.6) are interdependent” (UN-Water, 2016b).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 2.1 POVERTY, WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT– MULTIPLE
CONNECTIONS
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (UNGA, 2015a) recognizes that eradicating poverty is the greatest
of all global challenges. Poverty is multidimensional and includes deprivations, such as poor health and nutrition,
lack of access to services, deficient schooling, and the psychological trauma of having to cope with rudeness and
humiliation (Narayan et al., 2000; UNDP, 2010). Populations living in the poorest regions of the world are most
affected by environment-related health issues (WHO, 2016a).
Diarrhoeal disease prevalence is linked to problems related to water, sanitation and hygiene (Prüss-Üstün et al.,
2014). Access to improved sources of water and to sanitation is remarkably lower among poorer communities in
low-income countries (UNICEF/WHO, 2015; UNICEF/WHO, 2014).
The health burden of poor sanitation and wastewater management is primarily borne by children: among children
under 5 years old, 361,000 deaths could have been prevented in 2012 through reduction of risks related to inadequate
hand hygiene, sanitation and water (Prüss-Üstün et al., 2014), while daily collection of water is mainly undertaken by
girls and women (UNICEF/WHO, 2011). Household duties are more onerous under conditions of poverty, implying that
the maintenance of family health falls disproportionately on women.
The most vulnerable and poorest members of society have the most to gain from improved sanitation and
wastewater management. Investments in rural and urban sanitation as well as wastewater collection and treatment
can therefore have high returns in terms of social and economic development. The average return on investments
in sanitation is US$5.5 for each US$1 invested (Hutton and Haller, 2004). Certain solutions to the wastewater
problem, such as recycling nutrients or extracting energy, can also bring in new opportunities for income generation
and enlarge the resource base available to poor households (Winblad and Simpson-Hébert, 2004). An example is
composting toilets, which have the potential of providing a low-cost solution to improved agricultural productivity
alongside increased nutrition and the reduction of health and environmental impacts from open defecation
(Kvarnström et al., 2014).
Contributed by Marianne Kjellén (UNDP) and Johanna Sjödin (UNDP Water Governance Facility at SIWI).

The achievement of SDG Target 6.3 is also a
precondition to the achievement of other SDGs and the
overarching goal of eradicating poverty (see Box 2.1).
Appropriate wastewater collection and treatment helps
protect the water quality in river basins and the goods
and services that these provide, while significantly
reducing the number of people exposed to waterrelated diseases (SDG Targets 3.3 and 3.9), providing
related health and economic benefits and contributing
to poverty alleviation (SDG Targets 1.1 and 1.2).
Water-related diseases and malnutrition prevent
people from working and attending school, both of
which strengthen the cycle of poverty (UNDP, 2006).
Investing in water and wastewater management
would provide particularly high returns by breaking
the link between unsafe water and diseases that
causes diarrhoea, particularly in developing countries.
Prolonged diarrhoea intensifies poor health and
malnutrition in children, and often leads to stunted
growth due to poor nutrient absorption and loss of
appetite (UNICEF/WHO, 2009). Therefore, improved
sanitary conditions and wastewater management
contribute to the success of nutrition enhancement
strategies (SDG Target 2.2), reduces preventable
deaths among children (SDG Target 3.2) and
enhances children’s attendance and performance in
school (SDG Target 4.7).

Was tewate r

a n d

th e

Su s ta i n a b l e

BOX 2.2 GENDER ROLES AND THE
INTRODUCTION OF SAFE WASTEWATER USE
Where wastewater treatment is insufficient and
wastewater irrigation common, safety measures
can be implemented at critical control points along
the food chain (from ‘farm to fork’) as described by
the World Health Organization (WHO, 2006a) and
illustrated by Amoah et al. (2011), among others.
Care has to be taken about gender roles which can
change from the farm level to wholesale, and to
retail (Drechsel et al., 2013). Where risk awareness
is low and not easy to develop, it is important
to determine how best to motivate and trigger
behaviour change, and encourage the adoption of
gender-sensitive risk mitigation measures (Drechsel
and Karg, 2013). In many cultures, women do
not only carry the main responsibility for hygiene
and health, but are also in charge of greywater
or wastewater use, as seen for example in Jordan
(Boufaroua et al., 2013), Tunisia (Mahjoub, 2013)
and Vietnam (Knudsen et al., 2008). This connection
offers significant potential for innovative training
approaches to improve the social acceptance of safe
wastewater use (Boufaroua et al., 2013).
Contributed by Carlos Carrión-Crespo and María Teresa Gutiérrez (ILO).

Development

Agen da

27

Reducing the burden of disease also reduces the time
spent taking care of sick family members, leaving
more time to participate in the formal economy
(SDG 8) and in social and political decision-making.
Women, who are often the main caregivers and
who are responsible for the water supply within
households, would also benefit from improved
sanitation conditions and wastewater management,
as they are frequently responsible for the
management and use of greywater or wastewater
in agriculture (see Box 2.2). Inclusive and gendersensitive water management policies also support the
achievement of gender equality (SDG 5).
Improved wastewater treatment and the increase
in water reuse, as called for in SDG Target 6.3, will
support the transition to a circular economy by helping
reduce water withdrawals and the loss of resources
in production systems and economic activities. The
exchanges of energy, water and material flows
in wastewater by-products can allow businesses
to enhance their environmental performance
and competitive capacity. These exchanges are
often mutually beneficial, favouring a reduction
in production costs, water consumption and/or
wastewater treatment costs (SDG Targets 8.2 and 8.4).
Building climate-resilient wastewater infrastructure
networks can decrease the direct economic losses
caused by disasters (SDG Target 11.5), while
increasing the capacity of human settlements to
recover from natural hazards such as floods and
droughts (SDG Target 13.1). Improved wastewater
management also has great potential for reducing
GHG emissions (SDG Target 13.2). Wastewater
can be considered a reliable source of water in the
planning and development of new settlements and
water resource projects (SDG Target 11.6).
The achievement of SDG Target 6.3 also contributes
to the reduction of land-based pollution in terrestrial
and marine ecosystems (SDGs 14 and 15).

2.2.2 Potential conflicts
In cases where interlinkages between SDG Target
6.3 and the other SDGs are not mutually beneficial,
it will be important to balance conflicting needs and
manage trade-offs.
Ending hunger, increasing food sufficiency (SDG
Target 2.1), and doubling smallholders’ productivity
and incomes (SDG Target 2.3) are essential to
support poverty eradication (SDG 1). However,
the achievement of SDG 2 also implies an increase
in agricultural productivity, which may lead to an
increase in water demand and the use of herbicides,

28

BOX 2.3 WATER ‘LOSS’ FROM FOOD WASTAGE
Agriculture is the world’s largest consumer of water.
Several types of food, like vegetables, have very high
water content (in some cases well above 90%). In
Europe, for example, the manufacturing of food
products consumes on average about 5 m3 of water
per person per day (Förster, 2014). At the same time,
with as much as 1.3 billion tonnes of food wasted
annually (WWF, 2015), 250 km3 of water is being
‘lost’ per year due to food waste worldwide (FAO,
2013a). Food waste can be defined as the discarding
of food that was fit for human consumption but has
become spoiled, expired or otherwise unwanted (FAO,
2015). It can also include crops that are not harvested
(because of low market prices, for example). At the
global level, meat and cereals clearly stand out in
the global proportion of food waste by 21.7% and
13.4%, respectively (Lipinski et al., 2013).
Contributed by University of Kassel.

pesticides and fertilizers, with a consequent decline in
water quality and quantity if resources are not properly
managed. The use of best agricultural practices needs
to be promoted in parallel with the reduction of food
waste (see Box 2.3).
Improving drinking water coverage in formal
and informal settlements (SDG 11) is a matter of
fundamental importance to the fulfilment of the
human right to water and sanitation. This needs to
go alongside the expansion of wastewater collection
and treatment so as to avoid impacts on water quality,
human health and the environment.
Increasing economic growth (SDG 8) and the
development of small-scale industries (SDG Target 9.3)
also present potential conflicts with the achievement
of SDG Target 6.3 where pollution and the release
of untreated wastewater are concerned. Economic
development or improving ‘the access of small-scale
industries in developing countries to financial services’
needs to occur in compliance with environmental health
and safety regulations. The creation of an enabling
environment where small-scale industries are required to
respect environmental regulations in order to access to
financial services can be a positive incentive.
Finally, reducing inequality within and between countries
(SDG Target 10.1) means that ensuring adequate
wastewater management services are available to
all. This is one of the keys to achieving sustainable
development and ensuring that enough water of good
quality will be available for future generations.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 3
UNDP | Marianne Kjellén and Johanna Sjödin
Centre for Water Law Policy and Science (under the auspices of UNESCO), University of Dundee | Sarah Hendry
With contributions from: Erik Brockwell and Anna Forslund (SIWI); Florian Thevenon and Lenka Kruckova (WaterLex); and
Nataliya Nikiforova (UNECE)

GOVERNANCE

Regional meeting on sustainable development in Uganda

This chapter describes the governance frameworks through which wastewater is managed, including
the many actors and their different roles, legal and regulatory instruments, financial challenges and
opportunities for financing, and social and cultural aspects.

Wastewater management presents numerous
challenges. In cases where wastewater is
discharged untreated, those affected may be
geographically or temporally far away from the
polluter. For this and other reasons, society must
act collectively to promote human health and
protect water resources from pollution. The related
governance challenges involve legal, institutional,
financial, economic and cultural issues.
This chapter delves into the processes for policymaking, regulation and financing, and the
related socio-cultural challenges of compliance
and policy implementation.

3.1

Actors and roles

In order to realize the goals of water quality
improvement and the protection of water
resources, individuals and organizations must
comply and act in the collective interest. The
policy intentions, or wastewater management
goals, are translated into laws and regulations,
with responsibilities assigned to different actors.
Policy outcomes depend largely on the way in
which such responsibilities are implemented,
at all levels, taking account of costs. Table 3.1
gives an overview of the governance functions
relating to wastewater management. Ranging
from policy-making and legislation to research
and capacity development, it outlines typical
primary and secondary roles and the necessary
cross-collaborations in order to achieve
coordinated policy implementation. Most roles
relate to the more centralized solutions for
managing wastewater, where alternative and
local sanitation and drainage may involve many
additional actors. Moreover, in relation to lowincome or remote areas, there may be a lack
of responsible or capable actors to lead policy
development and implementation, requiring
special support and attention from policy-makers.
Everywhere, regulation must be well-designed
and resources need to be made available for
enforcement. Overcoming the practical difficulties
of implementing water quality regulations can
be particularly challenging for public sector
organizations, even in highly developed countries.

30

The coordination of actors across sectors is a
challenge that goes well beyond wastewater
management. There are several integrated and
intersectoral approaches towards water and land
management (upstream-downstream dynamics,
urban water resources, etc.) that help to
overcome ‘silo’ thinking, without which actors
may pursue narrow or conflicting interests (cf.
UNDESA, 2004; GWP, 2013). The coordination
of systems with multiple technologies or patchy
coverage is a particular challenge, which can
be resolved either by ensuring that sewer
connections are extended to all parts of a service
area, or by integrating the actual solutions on
the ground (e.g. FSM by vehicles or latrines
managed by households into a coherently
functioning system).
Public-private partnerships in the provision of
wastewater services have spurred a wave of
revisiting regulation, particularly during the
1990s. In order to contract private local or
international firms to conduct services previously
carried out by government departments
or parastatals, new ways of licencing and
overseeing operations were instituted in many
countries (Finger and Allouche, 2002). It is
increasingly recognized that improved regulatory
oversight is required for both private and public
service providers (Kjellén, 2006; Gerlach and
Franceys, 2010).
Important differences exist in the scale of
operations. Large-scale infrastructure, which
is predominant in high-income countries,
benefits from economies of scale, but requires
strong centralized management and technical
capacities. In low-income countries, largescale centralized systems have a tendency to
bypass informal or low-income settlements.
Decentralization can be a strategy to overcome
the patchy service coverage of centralized
systems, but also occurs as a community
response to incomplete service coverage (see
Chapter 15).
About two thirds of the world’s population
have access to improved sanitation (UNICEF/
WHO, 2015). Sewer connections to large
centralized systems are most common in high-

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Policy-making

Figure 3.1 Institutional levels of policy-making and implementation
Sustainable development:
Equality, efficiency and environmental sustainability

Polluter pays principle

Universal access
to basic sanitation

Policy: Wastewater management goals
Precautionary and
preventive principles

Inter- and intragenerational equity

Cause no significant harm

Policy implementation

Laws
Regulations
Plans, programmes and policy instruments in implementation
REGULATORY
INSTRUMENTS
•
•
•
•

Standards
Bans
Permits/quotas
Zoning

ECONOMIC
INSTRUMENTS
•
•
•
•

AGREEMENTS AND
INFORMATION INSTRUMENTS

DEVELOPMENT OF NEW
SERVICES

• Advocacy campaigns
• Self-regulation by industry
• Guidelines

• National plans and
programmes
• Projects by external
support agencies
• Household investment

Changes
Tariffs
Subsidies
Water quality
markets

Source: Developed by authors; design by Johanna Sjödin.

income countries, and in urban areas in China and
middle-income countries of Latin America (Kjellén et al.,
2012). The majority of people rely on some form of
decentralized or self-provided services, sometimes with
NGO support but commonly without any assistance from
central authorities (see Figure 5.1). SDG 6 (see Chapter
2) sets a target of ‘access to adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene for all’ by 2030 (UNGA, 2015a),
recognizing that waterborne systems are unlikely to
become universal.

other global policy instruments for water, environment
and development as well as environmental principles,
such as the prevention and precautionary principles
and the polluter pays principle (UNCED, 1992). The
global recognition of the human right to water and
sanitation (UNGA, 2010; UNGA, 2015b) also has
implications for wastewater policy, by calling upon
Member States to adopt policies to increase access
to sanitation and to ensure that water resources are
protected from pollution (UNGA, 2014).

The planning, construction, financing and operation
of alternative systems should attentively involve the
inhabitants themselves, which helps the development
of local leadership, entrepreneurship and practical
engineering. Property owners can take action, and
may have responsibilities to reduce runoff volumes and
impacts, but issues like drainage are not easy to manage
at the local level. Municipal authorities or public works
departments tend to have the primary responsibility for
urban runoff. Yet, to avoid pollution, littering and the
dumping of waste, the collaboration of all residents and
businesses is crucial – and this requires a combination
of advocacy, incentives and regulation. The Orangi Pilot
Project in Karachi, Pakistan is a classic example where
the community, aided by philanthropists, managed to
construct an affordable condominium sewage system
paid for by the local community (Hasan, 1988).

Regional bodies and national governments reflect
these global agendas in their policies on water
resource management, the provision of water
services, and the management of wastewater and
solid waste. Policy-makers set goals, embracing or
relating to more general principles (see the circles in
Figure 3.1), which may be enshrined into general law
and detailed regulations (see layers in Figure 3.1).

3.2

1.

Policy, law and regulation

Global policy frameworks for wastewater include the
2030 Agenda (UNGA, 2015a), which builds further on

Gove r n a n ce

3.2.1 Legal frameworks
Like the policies discussed above, the applicable laws
also operate at different levels.
International obligations can become relevant when
wastewater (e.g. effluents or agricultural runoff)
flows into international rivers and lakes or aquifers.
There are two main global treaties addressing the
management of transboundary freshwater:
The UN Convention on the Law of the NonNavigational Uses of International Watercourses
(UN, 1997, entered into force in 2014) requires
that States take all appropriate measures to

31

Table 3.1 Actors, roles and functions to govern wastewater

Actors
Functions

Legislator/politician/
policy-maker

Regulators (environment,
health, economic)

System owner (city, ministry,
basin agency)

Law-making

Define and adopt laws
through inclusive consultative
process

Share expectations as to
governance role

Share expectations as to
governance role

Policy-making

Define and adopt policies to
implement the law through
inclusive consultative
processes

Share information
info on current
on situation
current
and policy
situation
preferences
and policy
preferences

Share information
info on current
on situation
current
and policy
situation
preferences
and policy
preferences

Planning, coordination and
budgeting

Define modalities for planning,
coordination and budgeting

Share preferences through
constructive participation

Lead consultations, define
standards for service delivery;
allocate and disburse budget

Financing wastewater
management

Decide on subsidies and
modalities for financing

Regulate tariffs and service
quality

Strategic financial planning,
decision on tariffs

Wastewater infrastructure
development and operation
of wastewater services and
facilities

Guide standards/regulations
for construction and operation
of infrastructure

Regulate tariffs and service
quality

Coordinate spatial planning,
siting/zoning decisions;
prepare call for tenders,
depending on the type of
services/goods

Regulation – monitoring and
enforcement

Define regulatory framework

Implementation of regulatory
framework (including
collection of information from
service providers and permit
holders, ensuring compliance,
inspections, etc.)

Report suspect actions

Redress mechanisms
(including judiciary)

Define competent authorities
for redress

Accountable or party to
complaint

Accountable or party to
complaint

Compliance and pollution
prevention

Develop incentives for
prevention and disincentives
for pollution

Implement incentives
(including monitoring and
advocacy for pollution
prevention and water-use
efficiency)

Support implementation

Advocacy and
communications

Define policy goals and defend
space for communication

Advocacy for pollution
prevention and water-use
efficiency

Awareness-raising and
information to the public;
solicit compliant behaviours
from industry and households

Capacity development

Defining policy goals for
sector; and develop capacities

Monitor capacities and
incentivize development

Support development

Research and innovation

Highlight research needs,
ensure support to research
and development (R&D)

Highlight research needs;
incentivize R&D

Highlight research needs; guide
and engage in R&D

*Shading relates to typical level of responsibility: darkest = leading, lightest = least involved
Source: Developed by authors and contributors.

32

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Operator/service provider

Academia/policy institutes/
think tanks

Producer/consumer
(agriculture, industry,
households)

Civil society, NGOs

Share expectations as to
governance role

Provide input for law design

Share expectations as to
governance role through
participation

Share civil society opinions as
to governance processes to
provide input into law design

Share information
info on current
on situation
current
and policy
situation
preferences
and policy
preferences

Share evidence-based input
for policy design

Share information
info on current
on situation
current
and policy
situation
preferences
and policy
preferences

Share information
info on current
on situation
current
and policy
situation
preferences
and policy
preferences

Share preferences through
constructive participation

Share preferences through
constructive participation

Share preferences through
constructive participation

Share preferences through
constructive participation

Collect information on
investment needs and supply
costs

May provide information and
advice

Pay tariffs and provide
information on willingness and
ability to pay

Monitor financial
accountability; raise
awareness regarding the cost
of services.

Construction; maintenance;
maintenance,
operation; billing; revenue
collection,
collection; customer relations

Can monitor processes
and act as social witness in
integrity pacts (corruption
prevention tool)

Should be involved in issues
like siting/zoning decisions,
acceptability, etc.

Can monitor processes
and act as social witness in
integrity pacts (corruption
prevention tool)

Provide information on
request

Conduct long-term studies
and analyse processes

Industry to provide
information on request

Report suspect actions to law
enforcement authorities

Accountable or party to
complaint

Expert (amicus curiae)

Accountable or party to
complaint

Party to complaint and/or
expert (amicus curiae)

Comply with regulation;
improve technology and
organization

Support implementation

Implement cleaner production
and reuse technology; correct
waste disposal; improve
agricultural practices

Advocacy for pollution
prevention and water use
efficiency

Advocacy for pollution
prevention and water use
efficiency

Long-term studies and analysis
of processes; awarenessraising

Dialogue with partners and
general audience about policy
messages

Raise awareness

Skills development and
professionalization of
wastewater management and
services delivery

Provide training and education

Participate in research,
development and test new
technology solutions

Research on contaminants,
pollution loads, ecological
functions, system interactions,
human behaviour

Participate in research,
development and testing of
new technology solutions

Highlight research needs,
participate in research

*Shading relates to typical level of responsibility: darkest = leading, lightest = least involved

Gove r n a n ce

33

prevent causing ‘significant harm’ to other States
sharing an international watercourse (Art. 7) and
that States cooperate to protect international
watercourses (Art. 8). Many regional conventions
also use these principles as they reflect customary
international law.
2.

The Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International
Lakes (the Water Convention) was developed
as a regional instrument by the UN Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE, 1992). It has
come into force in 1996 and has been open to UN
member states from across the globe since 2013.
The Water Convention addresses transboundary
impacts, the sustainability, precautionary and
polluter pays principles (Art. 2), and includes
obligations to control emissions of pollutants and
for the prior licensing of wastewater discharges.

These Conventions have framed the development
of regional and bilateral treaties and agreements.
International environmental law is applicable to the
management of solid waste, including hazardous
waste, and the management of air pollution, all of
which may affect water quality, sometimes far from the
point of discharge.
At the regional level, the European Union (EU) Water
Framework Directive (2000/60/EC) (EU, 2000) applies
to the management of water quality, including
wastewater. The Framework Directive on Waste uses
the ‘3R’s’ approach – reduce, recycle, reuse – as well
as the precautionary and polluter pays principles
(2008/98/EC) (EU, 2008). Solid waste legislation is
highly relevant to non-waterborne sanitation and to
the management of sludge. The Protocol on Water
and Health to the Water Convention (UNECE/WHO,
1999, entry into force in 2005) requires Parties to set
national and local targets covering the entire water
cycle, including sanitation, with the aim of protecting
human health and well-being through improved water
management, protection of water ecosystems, and
preventing, controlling and reducing water-related
diseases. Other regional water treaties, such as the
Protocol on Shared Watercourses in the Southern
African Region, first signed by the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in 1995 and revised
in 2000 (SADC, 2000), and the Agreement on the
Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the
Mekong River Basin (MRC, 1995), reflect the general
provisions of the UN Watercourses Convention (UN,
1997) and customary international law, such as the noharm rule and notification of planned measures, but do
not have the level of detail with regard to cross-border
wastewater management.
Most pollution control laws are developed and enforced
at national or local levels. However, in a transboundary
river basin, wastewater discharged in one country
may have downstream effects in another country.

34

BOX 3.1 INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL
FRAMEWORK FOR JOINTLY PROTECTING
WATER QUALITY IN THE DANUBE AND THE
BLACK SEA
The Danube River Basin is Europe’s second longest
river, draining water from 19 states into the Black
Sea. Historically, the International Commission for
the Protection of the Danube River* dealt with
navigational uses. The cooperation in the Danube /
Black Sea area is an example of partnerships working
at different scales to meet multiple objectives,
involving different actors and within the frameworks
of transboundary, regional and national laws.
The Commission, being the overarching management
group, has produced a Participation Strategy
to involve stakeholders. Significant funding has
been provided through the International Waters
projects of the Global Environment Facility (GEF).
This has included working with States and with the
Commission to identify and implement an investment
portfolio of nearly 500 projects, representing
pollution reduction investments totalling over US$5
billion (Hudson, 2012).
Lack of wastewater treatment was an important
driver in this investment programme. In 2010, the
Budapest Central Wastewater Treatment Plant began
operation as part of the ‘Living Danube’ project. It
ensures that 95% of the wastewater from Budapest
is treated before its return to the environment, whilst
also recovering nutrients and energy.
*For further information, see www.icpdr.org/main/danube-basin

International and regional frameworks can assist states
in managing these cross-border effects. Box 3.1 shows
an example of action taken at the regional, national and
local levels to manage water and wastewater.

3.2.2 Regulation
In relation to environmental protection, regulation usually
relates to the use of permits and licenses, the application
of emission or wastewater quality standards, or zoning
for land use (Sterner, 2003). Regulation also underpins
the establishment of collection systems and treatment
facilities by setting appropriate standards for treatment
and reuse for different purposes. ‘Economic’ regulation
is used in urban services, which includes the provision of
drinking water and municipal wastewater management.
This ensures that technical and service standards are
met, and that tariffs and investment levels are sufficient
to cover the costs of the service, while providing a
reasonable rate of return for future investments (Groom
et al., 2006). Solutions also need to be context-specific
and reflect the different stages of development.
Controlling or banning the use of certain substances
is another means of preventing them from entering
wastewater flows (see Box 4.2 and Section 5.4.1).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Regulations may address the treatment level or the
process itself, by specifying ‘secondary treatment’,
or the use of ‘best available techniques’ that may
then be further defined. These may also regulate the
quality of the effluent by setting emission standards.
If there are downstream ambient standards for the
receiving waters, these can be made to address trends
and cumulative effects.
Where a State has little or no regulation regarding
wastewater and its resources are limited, the WHO
recommends measuring a small number of key
parameters that have the highest relevance to water
quality, rather than a wider set of standards that cannot
be enforced (Helmer and Hespanhol, 1997). Guidelines
can be issued that include a wider range of parameters,
in order to help manage impacts downstream.
Large centralized systems benefit from economies of
scale, but they take time to develop and are difficult
to adapt to different socio-economic circumstances
(see Chapter 12). In low-income countries, it is
common to find that the practices described in
policy intentions and regulatory instructions differ
considerably from what is actually taking place on the
ground (Ekane et al., 2012 and 2014).
Informal urban settlements across the globe also face
particular challenges. Wastewater-related services
(e.g. pit emptier and desludging companies) may
be provided by informal private providers without
appropriate control or support from relevant
authorities. If the collection and transport, or recycling,
of faecal sludge is not managed properly, this can have
significant repercussions on human health.
Industrial wastewater may be treated on-site and
recycled immediately, or discharged into the municipal
wastewater stream (see Chapter 6).
The feasibility of water reuse depends on its origin and
the intended reuse. In Australia, several states have
targets for wastewater use and the Commonwealth
government provides extensive guidance on the reuse
of water (NRMMC/EPHC/NHMRC, 2009). Some States
have developed regulatory frameworks, including for
direct potable use (ATSE, 2013).
Safety precautions are particularly important in the
case of wastewater reclamation for drinking water
purposes. It requires the use of multiple barriers,
using several techniques in series in order to secure
water quality, as well as advanced control systems
and, above all, excellent water quality records. As
a result, these systems often present higher water
quality standards than other (raw) water sources.
Notwithstanding, extensive information campaigns
and participation by the public are required to build
trust in the system (see Chapter 16).
Untreated wastewater is regularly used for agricultural
irrigation and for aquaculture (see Chapters 7 and 16).

Gove r n a n ce

While blackwater use may provide valuable nutrients, it
can also present hazards, not only for workers but also for
the consumers of food products (WHO, 2006a).

3.3

Financing

Wastewater management is costly and suffers from
collective action problems; the benefits accrue to the
public and future generations, rather than directly to
those who invest in improved treatment or reduced
pollution. Further, the real benefits are only realized
once everyone (or a sufficient number of actors) abides
by the rules to protect water resources from pollution.
In this way, sanitation and wastewater management is
significantly more complicated and costly than drinking
water supply (Jackson, 1996; Hophmayer-Tokich, 2006).
Economic instruments can be used to incentivize
pollution prevention, but to be effective, they must be
combined with information, advocacy and effective
regulation. Liability rules for the release of pollutants or
taxes on effluent can be established in accordance with
the polluter pays principle (Olmstead, 2010).
Financing centralized wastewater infrastructure is
dominated by capital costs. In most countries, new
infrastructure has been financed through transfers
of public money (OECD, 2010). Several low-income
countries rely primarily on aid transfers to finance their
water and sanitation sectors (WHO, 2014a). Middleincome countries also rely on aid transfers. In Panama,
where strong political objection exists against tariff
increases, tariffs have remained the same for more than
two decades (WHO, 2014a; Fernández et al., 2009).
The reluctance to assign direct resources to sanitation and
wastewater is shown by the TrackFin3 initiative that was
piloted in Brazil, Ghana and Morocco. As reported in the
UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water (GLAAS) survey, most funds were
found to be directed to drinking water supply in the urban
sector, even though the rural sanitation service coverage
was much lower (WHO, 2014a). Pro-poor policies or
affordability measures can be applied across both water
and wastewater tariffs. According to the GLAAS survey,
more than 60% of countries indicated that affordability
schemes for sanitation are in place, but only in half of the
cases were they widely used (WHO, 2014a).
Once the infrastructure is in place, the operation,
maintenance and future capital costs are increasingly
being covered through user tariffs. Full cost recovery,
however, is often problematic. In low- and middleincome countries, it is more common that sanitation
operation and maintenance costs are covered by
government subsidies (WHO, 2014a). Alternatively, if
insufficient government subsidies are forthcoming, the

3

TrackFin: Tracking financing to sanitation, hygiene and drinking water.
For further information, see http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_
health/monitoring/investments/trackfin/en/

35

Figure 3.2 Financial flow model for faecal sludge management

Faecal
sludge
flow

Household
sanitation
technology

Financial
flow

Household

Emptying

Treatment

Use/
application

Public utility

End-use industry

Transport

Private enterprise

Emptying fee

Discharge fee

Purchase price

Source: Strande et al. (2014, Fig. 13.3, p. 279).

lack of financing may lead to deferred maintenance,
faulty operations and system deterioration.
The benefits to society of managing human waste
are considerable, both for public health and the
environment. For every US$1 spent on sanitation, the
estimated return is US$5.5 (Hutton and Haller, 2004).
Although often difficult to measure in monetary
terms, it is important to acknowledge and identify
ways to assess these wider social and environmental
benefits, and to funnel financial resources into the
realization of such investments (UNEP, 2015b).
The potential economic and environmental benefits
from wastewater use are substantial (UNEP, 2015b),
but it may be difficult to finance such projects
through tariffs, since users in most urban areas
are charged for drinking water, sewerage and
wastewater treatment in one bill (so it is not possible
to pay just for one service and not for the others)
and the benefits are difficult to capture in monetary
terms. Hence, most water reuse projects rely on taxfinanced subsidies (Molinos-Senante et al., 2011).
When it comes to nutrient recovery through FSM,
several business models are feasible (see Chapter
16). Figure 3.2 shows a simple one, where a utility
achieves full cost recovery through discharge fees
and revenues from selling treated faecal sludge
(Strande et al., 2014).
The cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is the most widely
used and accepted tool for economic analysis
for project evaluation. An analysis of the cost of
no action versus the cost of action is useful for
evaluating the economic benefits of investing in
wastewater (UNEP, 2015b). Guest et al. (2009)
emphasize the importance of early stakeholder
involvement in any decision-making to ensure
acceptance of proposals, independently of any
evidence of economic benefits or cost savings.

36

3.4

Socio-cultural aspects

Involving citizens in decision-making at all levels promotes
engagement and ownership. This includes decisions as
to what types of sanitation facilities are desirable and
acceptable, and how they can be securely funded and
maintained in the future (see Table 3.1). It is especially
important to reach out to marginalized groups, ethnic
minorities, people living in extreme poverty in remote rural
areas or in informal urban settlements, and to engage with
women who will bear the brunt of the health consequences
in case of unsafe management of human waste.
Public perception influences decision-making and limits
what is possible to implement, especially when it comes
to water reuse. Sometimes, economically rational reuse
options are not viable, for example because of the
perception that faecal material may still be present in
potentially insufficiently treated wastewater. Hence, it is
important to consider which uses are safe, appropriate
and acceptable with which type of water. Perceptions,
risk awareness and gendered divisions of labour are also
important determinants for how people will protect their
own and others’ health in relation to wastewater use in
food production (see Box 2.2).
Additionally, policy implementation can involve complex
socio-political problems. Corruption is common in water
and wastewater services, partly due to the monopoly
position of providers and the frequency of large-capital
projects (Transparency International, 2008). With regard
to pollution permits and monitoring and enforcement, the
incentives for corrupt practices are rife, and ‘turning a blind
eye’ allows the problem to persist. Where corruption is
common, it will be important to advocate for impartiality in
regulatory enforcement (Rothstein and Tannenberg, 2015).
Integrity in the process of water resources management
can be promoted by building systems that are more
resistant to corruption. By enhancing transparency,
accountability and participation in the sector, the
opportunities for corruption can be reduced (UNDP WGF at
SIWI/Cap-Net/Water-Net/WIN, 2009; WIN, 2016).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 4
WWAP | Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara and Richard Connor
With contributions from: Jack Moss (AquaFed); Kate Heal (IAHS); Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo (UNEP); Peter
van der Steen and Tineke Hooijmans (UNESCO-IHE); Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP); Manzoor Qadir
(UNU-INWEH); and Kate Medlicott (WHO)

TECHNICAL
ASPECTS of

Aerial view of biogas plant for sewage treatment

WASTEWATER

This chapter summarizes, for the non-water specialist, some basic technical aspects about
the different sources of wastewater, the potential impacts of inappropriate treatment,
collection and treatment technologies, and data and information needs.

4.1 Wastewater sources
and components
There is an often-cited statistic that
wastewater is roughly composed of 99%
water and 1% suspended, colloidal and
dissolved solids (see for example UN-Water,
2015a). Although the exact composition
of wastewater obviously varies between
different sources and over time, water
remains, by far, its principal constituent.
Different sources of wastewater can present
other types of components in varying
concentrations (see Table 4.1).
Domestic and municipal wastewater is likely
to contain high bacterial loads, though
most of the bacteria present in human
faeces are not inherently pathogenic.
However, when an infection occurs, a large
number of pathogenic microorganisms
(such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa and
helminths) are spread in the environment
through faeces. In order to reduce the
disease burden, the removal of pathogens
is often the primary objective of wastewater
treatment systems.
Wastewater from industrial and mining
activities, as well as from solid waste
management (e.g. landfill leachate), may
also contain toxic organic compounds such
as hydrocarbons, polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), persistent organic pollutants (POPs),
volatile organic compound (VOCs) and
chlorinated solvents. Very small amounts of
certain organic compounds can contaminate
large volumes of water. One litre of gasoline,
for example, is enough to contaminate one
million litres of groundwater (Government
of Canada, n.d.).
‘Emerging pollutants’ (see Box 4.1) can
be defined as “any synthetic or naturally
occurring chemical or any microorganism
that is not commonly monitored in the
environment but has the potential to
enter the environment and cause adverse
ecological and (or) human health effects”
(USGS, n.d.). The main categories of
emerging pollutants present in wastewater
are pharmaceuticals (e.g. antibiotics,
analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs,

38

BOX 4.1 EMERGING POLLUTANTS
Emerging pollutants are found in varying
concentrations in treated and untreated municipal
wastewater, industrial effluents and agricultural
runoff that seeps into rivers, lakes and coastal
waters (UNESCO, 2011). They have also been
detected in drinking water (Raghav et al., 2013),
as conventional wastewater treatment and
water purification processes are not effective in
removing them. Advanced wastewater treatment
technologies (membrane filtration, nanofiltration,
ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis) can partially
remove some chemicals and pharmaceutically
active compounds (González et al., 2016).
Potential human health risks of emerging
pollutants through exposure via drinking water, as
well as via agricultural products, remain a concern.
The effects of individual pollutants on human
and ecosystem health have been only marginally
evaluated, whereas the cumulative effects have
not been studied at all. There is scientific evidence
that many chemicals recognized as emerging
pollutants can potentially cause endocrine
disruption in humans and aquatic wildlife (causing
birth defects and developmental disorders, and
affecting fertility and reproductive health), even
at very low concentrations (Poongothai et al.,
2007), as well as cancerous tumours and the
development of bacterial pathogen resistance,
including multi-drug resistance.
Source: Adapted from Muñoz et al. (2009).
Contributed by Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP).

psychiatric drugs, etc.), steroids and hormones
(i.e. contraceptive drugs), personal care
products (e.g. fragrances, sunscreen agents,
insect repellents, microbeads and antiseptics),
pesticides and herbicides, surfactants and
surfactant metabolites, flame retardants,
industrial additives and chemicals and
plasticizers and gasoline additives. Emerging
pollutants are rarely controlled or monitored
and further research is needed to assess their
impacts on human health and the environment.
It is possible to reduce/mitigate the use and
release of certain types of emerging pollutants
through government regulation (see Box 4.2)
and private sector engagement.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 4.1

Advantages and disadvantages of selected types of wastewater treatment systems

Sources of wastewater

Typical components

Domestic wastewater

Human excreta (pathogenic microorganisms), nutrients and organic matter. May
also contain emerging pollutants (e.g. pharmaceuticals, drugs and endocrine
disruptors)

Municipal wastewater

Very wide range of contaminants, such as pathogenic microorganisms, nutrients
and organic matter, heavy metals and emerging pollutants

Urban runoff

Very wide range of contaminants, including incomplete products of combustion
(e.g. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and black carbon/soot from fossil fuel
combustion), rubber, motor oil, heavy metals, non degradable/organic trash
(especially plastics from roads and parking lots), suspended particulate and
fertilizers and pesticides (from lawns)

Agricultural runoff (surface flow)

Pathogenic microorganisms, nutrients from fertilizers applied to the soils, and
pesticides and insecticides derived from the agricultural practices

Livestock production

Organic loadings (often very high) and veterinary residues (e.g. antibiotics and
artificial growth hormones)

Land-based aquaculture

Effluents from settlement ponds are typically rich in organic matter, suspended
solids (particulates), dissolved nutrients, and heavy metals and emerging
pollutants

Industrial wastewater

Contaminants depend on the kind of industry (see Table 6.4 for details)

Mining activities

Drainage from tailings, often contains suspended solids, alkalinity, acidity (needs
pH adjustment) dissolved salts, cyanide and heavy metals. May contain also
radioactive elements, depending on the mine activity (see Table 6.4 for details)

Energy generation

Water generated in the energy sector is often a source of thermal pollution
(heated water) and usually contains nitrogen (e.g. ammonia, nitrate), total
dissolved solids, sulphate and heavy metals (see Table 6.4 for details)

Landfill leachate

Organic and inorganic contaminants, with potentially high concentrations of
metals and hazardous organic chemicals

Source: Based on US EPA (2015 and n.d.b.); UN (n.d.b.); Akcil and Koldas (2006); Government of British Columbia (1992); and Tchobanoglous et al.
(2003).

BOX 4.2 BANNING WASTEWATER CONTAMINANTS: THE EXAMPLE OF MICROBEADS
Microbeads are found in certain consumer products, such as facial cleansers and toothpaste. After use, these
spherical particles made of polyethylene or polypropylene end up in wastewater. Once microbeads enter the
wastewater system, few wastewater treatment facilities are able to remove them from the water streams. Risks
to aquatic life and public health are not yet well understood, but the particles themselves may contain toxins or
attract other toxins in the water (Copeland, 2015).
In December 2015, the US Government required US manufacturers to end the use of microbeads in products by
1 July 2017 and the sale of products containing microbeads by 1 July 2018. In June 2016, Canada added
microbeads to the list of toxic substances under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEPA), thus enabling
the government to regulate and ban the use of microbeads (Government of Canada, 2016). In September 2016,
the Government of the United Kingdom announced plans to ban microbeads in cosmetics and personal care
products (DEFRA, 2016).
Microbeads can easily be replaced with natural ingredients like almond and apricot shells, and several large companies
have already announced that they will end the use of these microplastic products. The joint action between public
and private sectors effectively eliminated economic arguments for delaying a ban on these substances.

Te c h n i c a l

a s p e c ts

of

wa s tewater

39

Figure 4.1 Wastewater components and their effects

4.2 Impacts of
releasing untreated or
inadequately treated
wastewater

Smelly

TOXICITY

Solid waste
Suffocate/block

Poisonous

Pharmaceutical
Corrosive
Inorganic
particular
material

Organic matter
Biological

Radioactive

Chemicals
Microbes

Heavy metals
Infectious

Decreased ecosystem health
(i.e. dead zones)
Contaminated
food

IMPACT
Increased production costs
Decreased
human health

Contaminated drinking
and bathing water

Figure 4.2 Faecal waste framework for estimating proportion of
safely managed sanitation and wastewater
Emptying

Transport

Treatment

Reuse and
disposal

Safe
reuse and
disposal
of faecal
wastes

Unsafe discharge of faecal wastes
Source: Adapted from UNICEF/WHO (2015, Fig. 39, p. 44).

40

The consequences of releasing
untreated or inadequately treated
wastewater can be classified into
three groups: adverse human health
effects associated with reduced water
quality; negative environmental effects
due to the degradation of water
bodies and ecosystems; and potential
effects on economic activities (UNEP,
2015b). Figure 4.1 shows wastewater
components and their effects.

4.2.1 Human health effects

Source: Adapted from Corcoran et al. (2010, Fig. 5, p. 21).

Containment

The discharge of untreated or
partially treated wastewater into the
environment results in the pollution of
surface water, soil and groundwater.
Once discharged into water bodies,
wastewater is either diluted and
transported downstream or it infiltrates
into aquifers, where it can affect the
quality (and therefore the availability)
of freshwater supplies. The ultimate
destination of wastewater discharged
into rivers and lakes is often the ocean.

Even though household sanitation
facilities have increasingly been
improved since 1990, risks to public
health remain due to poor containment,
leakages during emptying and
transport, and ineffective sewage
treatment (see Figure 4.2). It is
estimated that only 26% of urban and
34% of rural sanitation and wastewater
services effectively prevent human
contact with excreta along the entire
sanitation chain and can therefore be
considered safely managed (Hutton and
Varughese, 2016).
Sanitation and wastewater-related
diseases remain widespread in
countries where the coverage of
these services is low, where informal
use of untreated wastewater for
food production is high, and where
reliance on contaminated surface
water for drinking and recreational
use is common. In 2012, an estimated
842,000 deaths in middle- and lowincome countries were caused by

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 4.3 Sanitation transitions and associated reductions in diarrhoeal disease
UNIMPROVED SANITATION FACILITIES

HIGH

IMPROVED SANITATION
WITHOUT SEWER
CONNECTIONS

28%

69%*
63%*

GROUPED:
IMPROVED SANITATION
(INCLUDING SEWER CONNECTIONS)

COMMUNITY SANITATION OR
SEWER CONNECTIONS

RISK TO HEALTH

16%

LOW

*These estimates are based on limited evidence and should therefore be considered as preliminary, and
have not been used in the current burden of disease estimate.
Source: WHO (2014b, Fig. 11, p. 12).

contaminated drinking water, inadequate handwashing
facilities, and inappropriate or inadequate sanitation
services (WHO, 2014b).
Improving sanitation and wastewater treatment
is also a key intervention strategy to control and
eliminate many other diseases, including cholera
and some neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), such
as dengue fever, dracunculiasis, lymphatic filariasis,
schistosomiasis, soil-transmitted helminths and
trachoma (Aagaard-Hansen and Chaignat, 2010).
Access to improved sanitation facilities can contribute
significantly to the reduction of health risks (see Figure
4.3), and further health gains may be realized through
the provision of safely managed sanitation services and
safely treated wastewater.

4.2.2 Environmental effects
The discharge of untreated wastewater into the
environment has an impact on water quality, which in
turn affects the amount of water resources available
for direct use. Concerns over water quality are rising as
an important dimension of water security worldwide
(see Prologue). Since 1990, water pollution has been
increasing in most rivers in Africa, Asia and Latin
America, due to the increasing amounts of wastewater
as a result of population growth, increased economic
activity and expanding agriculture, as well as the
release of sewage with no (or only minimal levels
of) treatment (UNEP, 2016). Inadequate wastewater
management has also a direct impact on ecosystems

Te c h n i c a l

a s p e c ts

of

wa s tewater

and the services they provide (Corcoran et al., 2010)
(see Chapter 8).
Eutrophication, driven by excess nitrogen and
phosphorus, can lead to potentially toxic algal blooms
and declines in biodiversity. The discharge of untreated
wastewater into seas and oceans partially explains
why de-oxygenated dead zones are rapidly growing:
an estimated 245,000 km2 of marine ecosystems are
affected, and this affects fisheries, livelihoods, and food
chains (Corcoran et al., 2010).

4.2.3 Economic effects
As the availability of freshwater is critical to sustaining
the economic welfare of any human community, poor
water quality constitutes an additional obstacle to
economic development. Poor water quality hampers
agricultural productivity in rural and peri-urban settings.
Contaminated water can directly affect economic
activities that use water, such as industrial production,
fisheries, aquaculture and tourism (UNEP, 2015b), and
can indirectly limit the export of certain goods due to
restrictions (and even bans) on contaminated products.
For example, in the Caribbean, many small island
economies are almost entirely dependent on the
health of their reefs for tourism, fisheries and
shoreline protection (Corcoran et al., 2010), but these
reefs are threatened by the discharge of untreated
wastewater. While pollution of natural environments
may hinder economic activities, tourism itself and

41

When the discharge
of wastewater causes
environmental damages,
external costs (externalities)
are generated and the
potential benefits of using
wastewater are lost

the growing demand for environmentally friendly
facilities can provide leverage for investments in the
maintenance of natural environments, and therefore
act as an additional motivating factor for improved
wastewater management.
When the discharge of wastewater causes
environmental damages, external costs (externalities)
are generated and the potential benefits of using
wastewater are lost. An economic argument for
improved wastewater management can be made in
order to minimize the negative impacts it can cause and
to maximize the benefits it can generate. If wastewater
is recognized as an economic good, appropriately
treated wastewater can have a positive value to both
those producing it and those consuming it (UNEP,
2015b).

4.3 Wastewater collection and
treatment
While opportunities for enhancing wastewater
collection and treatment systems are discussed in
Chapter 15, this section describes the basic processes
from a more technical point of view. There are
essentially two types of wastewater collection and
treatment systems:
––

Off-site systems, where waste is transported
through a sewerage network to a treatment plant
or disposal point.

––

On-site systems, where waste is accumulated in
a pit or septic tank. This tank can be periodically
emptied or a new pit/septic tank can be opened
in another location. Certain on-site systems have
leaching beds that infiltrate the partiality treated
water from septic tanks into the ground (old and
overstressed systems are a significant cause of
pollution in some areas). In the case of emptying,
waste is transported for treatment and/or disposal.
On-site systems can also include small-scale
sewerage systems that convey wastewater to
treatment plants located nearby.

42

Wastewater generated in industries can be treated
on-site or released to municipal systems, but it is
necessary that discharge permissions have been
granted and that quality limits are being respected.
Wastewater generated in the agricultural sector (e.g.
livestock production, green houses), if collected and
treated, can be used within the establishment for
irrigation or other purposes.
Figures 4.4 and 4.5 show wastewater management
systems in Kampala (Uganda) and Dhaka
(Bangladesh), respectively, illustrating how they
can differ among countries. The illustrations also
reveal the urgent need to improve the efficiency
of wastewater management systems in order to
increase the proportion of wastewater that is safely
managed.

4.3.1 Wastewater collection
The sewerage network used for wastewater
transportation can be separated or combined. In
separate systems, different sets of pipes are used
to transport the sewage and urban runoff, while in
combined systems both flows are conveyed together.
Properly installed, operated and controlled, separate
systems are expected to reduce the amount of
sewage to be treated, to avoid overflows, and to
deal more effectively with periodic and potentially
large volumes of urban runoff occurring under storm
conditions. However, separate sewers do not always
operate as efficiently as expected, for example
when insufficient controls favour illegal sewage
connections to the runoff pipelines.
The endpoint of a sewerage network should be a
treatment plant, which aims to remove contaminants
from wastewater so that it can be either safely used
again (fit-for-purpose treatment) or returned to the
water cycle with minimal environmental impacts.
Wastewater treatment can follow a centralized or
decentralized approach. In centralized systems,
wastewater is collected from a large number of
users, like an urban area, and treated at one or
more sites. Collection costs account for over 60% of
the total budget for wastewater management in a
centralized system, particularly in communities with
low population densities (Massoud et al., 2009).
Decentralized systems employ a combination of
on-site and/or cluster systems for wastewater
treatment, and are often used for individual houses,
scattered and low-density communities, and rural
areas. Even though decentralized treatment systems
often reduce collection costs, they may not provide
the same level of benefits and still require a level
of operation and maintenance as effective as in
centralized systems.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 4.4 Water management system in Kampala (Uganda)
CONTAINMENT

EMPTYING

TRANSPORT

TREATMENT

REUSE/DISPOSAL

41%

Not effectively
treated

WC to sewer

Effectively
treated

Legally
dumped

Safely emptied

20%

Not effectively
treated

Illegally
dumped
Unsafely emptied

On-site
facility

Unsafely
abandoned when
full
Safely abandoned
when full
Open
defecation

21%
22%

1%

59%

28%

Residential
environment

2%

Drainage
system

Unsafely managed

4% 2%

Receiving
waters

Safely managed

Source: Peal et al. (2014, Fig. 6, p. 571).

Figure 4.5 Water management system in Dhaka (Bangladesh)
CONTAINMENT

EMPTYING

TRANSPORT

TREATMENT

Leakage

Not effectively
treated

WC to sewer

REUSE/DISPOSAL

2%

Effectively
treated
Safely
emptied

2%

Illegally
dumped

Unsafely
emptied

On-site
facility

Left to
overflow or
abandoned
Open
defecation

69%

9%

9%

1%

9%

1%

98%

Residential
environment

Unsafely managed

Drainage
system

Receiving
waters

Safely managed

Source: Peal et al. (2014, Fig. 4, p. 570).

Te c h n i c a l

a s p e c ts

of

wa s tewater

43

Emerging pollutants
are rarely controlled or
monitored and further
research is needed to assess
their impacts on human
health and the environment

4.3.2 Wastewater treatment
Wastewater treatment consists of a combination of
physical, chemical, and biological processes to remove
wastewater constituents.
Physical processes enable the removal of substances by
the use of natural forces (i.e. gravity) as well as physical
barriers, such as filters and membranes or ultraviolet
(UV), which are mainly used for disinfection. The
use of membranes is increasing because of the high
quality of effluent after treatment and for the effective
removal of organic micro-pollutants, from pesticides to
pharmaceuticals and personal care products (Liu et al.,
2009). Membrane systems are characterized by high
energy consumption and high levels of operation and
maintenance (Visvanathan et al., 2000).
Chemical processes are often used for disinfection and
for the removal of heavy metals. Chemically assisted
primary treatment, for example using ferric salts or
polyelectrolyte, can remove BOD and solids, but the
sludge generated is often difficult to treat and dispose
of (UN-Water, 2015a). Chemically advanced oxidation
has been shown to remove endocrine-disrupting
compounds (EDCs) (Liu et al., 2009).
Biological processes in wastewater treatment
reproduce the degradation that naturally occurs in
rivers, lakes and streams. These processes are used
in wastewater treatment plants where biological
reactors are engineered to boost biochemical
degradation under carefully controlled conditions,
therefore enhancing the removal of pollutants and the
stabilization of sludge.
The processes taking place in the bioreactors can be
aerobic or anaerobic. The former often needs more
energy in order to maintain the aerobic conditions
inside the reactor, and the organic waste is converted
into biomass (sludge) and carbon dioxide (CO2).
However, it prevents the formation of methane
(CH4), which has a greater climate warming potential
than CO2 (Cakir and Stenstrom, 2005). Anaerobic
treatment processes generally require less energy and

44

have a lower sludge production and generates CH4, but
this can be captured and used as an energy source.
Physical, chemical and biological processes are
combined to achieve different ‘levels’ of wastewater:
preliminary, primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary
(see Lexicon for a more detailed description).
The selection of the most appropriate technologies
depends on the kind of components, pollution load,
anticipated use of the treated wastewater and economic
affordability. Table 4.2 provides some examples of
technologies, the kind of wastewater they are generally
used for, and their advantages and disadvantages.
One of the by-products of wastewater treatment is
sewage sludge. The sludge generated is rich in nutrients
and organic matter, which gives it considerable potential
for use as a soil conditioner and fertilizer (see Chapter
16). In many cases, however, the beneficial value of
sewage sludge is not realized because of concerns
regarding the pathogens, heavy metals and other
compounds it may contain. Other useful by-products
from wastewater include biogas (i.e. CH4) and heat,
which can be recovered for beneficial use either in the
treatment plant or in the adjacent community.
The actual management and operation of wastewater
treatment systems is a complex activity that can benefit
from a risk assessment approach that evaluates the
chain of components that together make up the
system. Such assessments can help ensure their proper
functioning under expected levels of efficiency, and
highlight weak links in the chain that could cause
health and safety issues (see Box 4.3).

4.4

Data and information needs

Data on wastewater collection and treatment are
sparse, particularly (but not only) in developing
countries. According to Sato et al. (2013), only 55
out of 181 analysed countries had reliable statistical
information on generation, treatment, and use of
wastewater, 69 countries had data on one or two
aspects, and 57 countries had no information at all.
Moreover, data from approximately two thirds (63%)
of the countries were over five years old. FAO’s main
AQUASTAT database has a section on municipal
wastewater, where wastewater-related information can
be found under the ‘water resources’ and the ‘water
use’ sections of each country profile. However, some of
this data may be over five years old.
The key challenge with data collection relates to the
need of generating data at the national level that it is
sufficiently detailed, consistent and comparable with
other countries.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

The GLAAS, a UN-Water initiative implemented by
WHO, provides country profiles on sanitation and
drinking water coverage. The GLAAS also contains
information on topics related to governance, monitoring
water data and human resources. Starting with the
2016/2017 reporting cycle, financing will also be
included, which might unveil additional information on
some aspects of wastewater management.
The United Nations Statistical Division (UNSD) is
responsible for developing fundamental principles
of official statistics to guide the work of national
statistics agencies. In 2012, it adopted the System
of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Central
Framework (SEEA-CF), which includes the System
of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water
(SEEA-Water). SEEA-Water proposes a conceptual
framework for understanding the interactions
between the economy and the environment, and
addresses water data needs (UNSD, 2012). SEEAWater includes standardized tables to be completed
by countries on financial expenditures for wastewater
management, including measurement of wastewater
flows within the economy.
There are other global efforts to enhance data
collection related to wastewater at the regional level.
OECD and Eurostat conducted a joint survey on inland
waters that included questions on the capacity of
wastewater treatment plants, and the production
of sludge and chemical emissions from industry,
agriculture and human settlements (Eurostat, 2014).
UNSD and UNEP conduct a biennial environmental
data collection campaign in all countries, except those
that are covered by the Joint OECD/Eurostat survey.
The UNSD/UNEP survey acquires statistics on renewable
freshwater resources, freshwater abstraction and
use, wastewater generation and treatment, and the
population served by wastewater treatment (UNSD,
n.d.). Data on the general characteristics and quality of
industrial waste and wastewater can be found within
the countries’ Pollutant Release and Transfer Registries
(PRTRs) (see Chapter 14).
Beyond information on the generation, treatment and
use of wastewater, an examination of the wastewater
management literature by UN-Water (2015a) revealed
other relevant data gaps, including information on the
condition of the existing wastewater infrastructure,
the performance of wastewater treatment, the fate of
faecal sludge, and the volume, quality and location of
wastewater used in irrigation. A refined global dataset
for wastewater production is under development by
AQUASTAT (n.d.a.).

BOX 4.3 RISK ASSESSMENT IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
A managed wastewater treatment system often
constitutes a long and multifaceted chain of
interconnected components (pipes, pumps,
treatment facilities, etc.). Assessing and managing
the risks involved in these components requires
techniques that are similar to those employed in
environmental impact assessments, health and
safety assessments and asset management. The
objective is to identify potential risks (which can be
classified according to nature, severity, likelihood
of occurrence, consequences, etc.), and implement
control measures for each one.
A ‘follow the flow’ process is usually a good
way to proceed. This starts with making an
inventory of the type of pollutants (physical/
chemical/bacteriological composition, etc.), their
concentration, and the likely frequency of their
occurrence/discharge, which can be impacted by
the meteorological conditions and the behaviour
of the polluter. This step is essential for identifying
and predicting impacts and events throughout the
chain of components.
Each link in the chain (both assets and processes)
then needs to be examined in order to determine
how it should function, how it could malfunction,
how it could interact with the pollutant, what the
impacts of the malfunction would be, how long
it would take to solve a malfunction, and so on.
Some malfunctions can occur due to interactions
between the pollutant and the infrastructure. For
example, many pollutants can cause corrosion of
pipes and equipment, or block and jam pumps.
Others can arise from ‘external’ events, such as
electrical failure, traffic damage or vandalism.
There are also a considerable number of health
and safety risks that can affect both operational
personnel and the general public. These range from
the risks of drowning to the release of dangerous
gases, from physical injury to long-term diseases.
At the end of the chain are the points of discharge,
beyond which the sensitivity of downstream users
– either the natural environment or other water
users – also needs to be assessed. The effectiveness
and image of the wastewater management can
be seriously impacted if the interests of these
downstream users are not properly taken into
account in the risk assessment process.
An effective risk assessment process normally
requires several different and complementary skills
to be conducted in an appropriate manner.
Contributed by Jack Moss (AquaFed).

Te c h n i c a l

a s p e c ts

of

wa s tewater

45

Table 4.2 Advantages and disadvantages of selected wastewater treatment systems
Type

Nature of wastewater

Advantages

Disadvantages

Components
removed

Low treatment efficiency;
necessity of a secondary
treatment; effluent not
odourless; content must be
removed at frequent intervals

COD, BOD, TSS; grease

Septic systems

Domestic wastewater

Simple, durable, easy
maintenance, small area
required

Composting
toilets

Human excreta, toilet
paper, carbon additive,
food waste

Reduce waste consumption
and support the recycling of
nutrients (e.g. use of resulting
sludge in agriculture)

Need of proper design and
maintenance in order to
protect the environment and
human health

Volume reduced from
10 to 30%; pathogens

Anaerobic filter

Pre-settled domestic and
industrial wastewater of
narrow COD/BOD ratio

Simple and fairly durable,
if well constructed and
wastewater has been properly
pre-treated; high treatment
efficiency; little land area
required

Filter material can incur high
construction costs; clogging of
filter can occur; effluent not
odourless

BOD, TDS, TSS

Human excreta, animal
and agricultural wastes

Recycling of resource; gas
produced can be used for
power generation, cooking and
lighting

Complex operation and
maintenance, which can lead
to gas leakage or reduced
production and blockage of
the digester tank with solids;
anaerobic treatment often
provides little removal of
nutrients

COD, BOD, TSS; grease

Domestic, industrial and
agricultural wastewater;
good for small/medium
sized towns

Maturation ponds can achieve
good bacterial removal; need
to be desludged at intervals
– failing to do so can have
serious consequences; biogas
can be recovered as a source
of energy

Land-intensive; sometimes
high BOD and SS in effluent
from algae but relatively
harmless; sometimes seen as
warm weather process but can
be used in moderate climates

BOD, SS, TN, TP

Duckweedbased
wastewater
stabilizations
ponds

Domestic and agricultural
wastewater

No clogging risk; high nutrient
removal rates

Land-intensive; necessity of
constant harvesting; unsuitable
in very windy regions

BOD, SS, TN, TP, metals

Constructed
wetlands

Domestic and agricultural
wastewater; small
communities; tertiary
treatment for industries

Low or no energy
requirements; low
maintenance costs; provides
aesthetic, commercial and
habitat value

Land-intensive; clogging of the
system can occur

TSS, COD, TN, TP

Good removal of BOD, and
the plant can be operated to
facilitate N and P removal

High maintenance
requirements; ineffective
in deep water (therefore,
basins are generally shallow)
and under freezing weather
conditions

Anaerobic
treatment (e.g.
biodigestor,
UASB, etc.)

Stabilizations
ponds
Anaerobic,
facultative and
maturation
ponds

Domestic and industrial
wastewater
Aerobic
biological
treatment (i.e.
activated sludge)

Membrane
system
Microfiltration,
ultrafiltration,
nanofiltration,
RO

Aerators made from
stainless steel are
resistant to corrosive
wastewater, making
them suitable for
industrial pulp and
paper plants, chemical
industry and other rough
environments

Pre-settled wastewater;
can be used in
combination with
biological processes
(MBR, MBBR)

Rapid, economic compared to
other methods, odour-free

Processes that close the water
cycle and produce high-purity
water for reuse

BOD, SS, TN, TP.

Little removal of bacterial loads
and high sludge production

Higher costs and higher
requirements in operation,
maintenance and power
consumption

Microfiltration and
ultrafiltration eliminate
all biological agents
and macromolecules;
nanofiltration removes
simple organic
molecules; RO removes
inorganic ions

BOD Biological oxygen demand – COD Chemical oxygen demand – MBBR Moving bed biofilm reactor – MBR Membrane biological reactors –
RO Reverse osmosis– SS Suspended solids – TDS Total dissolved solids – TN Total nitrogen – TP Total phosphorus – TSS Total suspended solids –
UASB Upflow anaerobic sludge blanket
Source: Compiled by Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo (UNEP) and Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara (WWAP), based on WHO (2006) and UN-Water (2015a).

46

W W D R

2 0 1 7

PART II

W O R L D

W A T E R

D E V E L O P M E N T

THEMATIC
FOCUS

Chapter 5 | Municipal and
urban wastewater
Chapter 6 | Industry
Chapter 7 | Agriculture
Chapter 8 | Ecosystems

R E P O R T
2017

CHAPTER 5
UN-Habitat | Graham Alabaster, Andre Dzikus and Pireh Otieno

MUNICIPAL
AND URBAN

Wastewater in the Klong Ong Ang Canal in Bangkok (Thailand)

WASTEWATER

This chapter discusses the sources and impacts of municipal and urban wastewater,
highlighting the future prospects for wastewater production. In addition, the chapter
frames the opportunities for water reuse and recycling.

5.1 Urbanization and
its impact on wastewater
production

Municipal wastewater originates from
domestic, industrial, commercial and
institutional sources within a given
human settlement or community. Urban
wastewater includes both municipal
wastewater and urban runoff.

Urban areas around the world are facing
enormous challenges. The acceleration of
urban growth, changes in family and work
practices, and the expansion of informal
settlements will increasingly challenge the
provision of services. This is compounded
by the impact of extreme events, climate
change and migration in areas in conflict.
Changing patterns of urbanization have
resulted in more inequity, with the poor in
some developed regions facing the same
challenges as those from developing regions.
By 2030, global demand for energy and
water is expected to grow by 40% and
50%, respectively (UN-Habitat, 2016). Most
of this growth will be in cities, which will
require new approaches to wastewater
management. At the same time, wastewater
management may also provide some of the
answers to other challenges, including food
production and industrial development.

Since municipal and urban wastewater
production is heavily dependent on the
form and function of urban systems,
the current and future patterns of
urbanization must be critically examined
in order to develop more sustainable
approaches to wastewater management
in the coming decades.
Figure 5.1 shows a breakdown of
sanitation coverage by region, and hence
of formal wastewater collection. It is
clearly evident that sewers for wastewater
collection are the favoured choice for
much of the developed world, in spite of
the use of on-site services in many rural
areas and in areas undergoing unplanned
urbanization (see Chapter 15).

Figure 5.1 Percentage of population served by different types of sanitation systems

7
20

4

11 4
2

1

35

72

190
19

72

79

4

6
13

3

Sewer

1

5

17

25
61

193

Septic

17

7

21

1 105

41
23

144
13

2

18

57

40

28

5 12 0

593

5
1

13

44

439

Flush/pour flush pit
Pit - Dry

87

3

Current FSM need

Other
Environment (open defecation)
Current population of region with need for
faecal sludge management (FSM) (million)
Source: Cairns-Smith et al. (2014, Fig. 8, p. 25, based on data from WHO/UNICEF JMP). Courtesy of the Boston Consulting Group.

Mun i c i p a l

a n d

Ur b a n

Wa s tewater

49

BOX 5.1 SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL IN
LAGOS, NIGERIA

5.2

Urban forms

Although Lagos State generates 1.5 million m3 of
wastewater per day (about 550 million m3 per year),
there is no central sewage system in the megacity.
Less than 2% of the population is served by off-site
sewage treatment plants, and only toilet wastewater
is connected to septic tanks and soakaway systems.
Other household liquid waste is discharged directly
into the mostly open gutters in front of houses or
on the streets. The wastewater eventually percolates
or is washed into water bodies by rainstorms. Septic
tanks and soakaway systems used in the collection
of toilet wastewater often contaminate and pollute
the shallow groundwater—a vital source of water
to most low- and middle-income residents. Also,
there is no septage treatment plant in the megacity
and the untreated septage is mostly evacuated
into the Lagos Lagoon, especially in areas like Iddo,
Makoko, Ajegunle and other locations. The faecal
contamination of the megacity’s water system
and the environment through the inadequate
management of wastewater is an important
health concern. A combination of official neglect,
corruption and extreme poverty, coupled with rapid,
largely uncontrolled population growth has led to
the decay of Lagos’ existing city infrastructure. With
a current estimated population of 18 million and
a 3% annual growth rate, Lagos State is expected
to become home to over 23 million people by the
year 2020. Concerted efforts are needed urgently to
minimize further contamination of water resources.

The definition of rural and urban is most commonly
based on national technical definitions related to
geographical boundary considerations rather than
population density or other defining characteristics.
However, in order to understand municipal
wastewater production, it is necessary to consider
a further analysis of ‘urban’ as differing urban
forms do not only produce wastewater in different
ways, but also guide the potential choices for the
collection, treatment and use of wastewater (see
Table 5.1). Based on a review of typical urban forms,
the following typologies cover most situations in
developed and developing countries:
––

Large urban centres include megacities, urban
areas with a clear central business district (CBD)
and well-developed suburbs with varying levels
of progressively decreasing population density
with increasing distance from the CBD. The large
centre may be connected (or not) to smaller
satellite centres by transport corridors. These cities
often have extensive sewer networks, but some,
like Lagos, Nigeria, are poorly served by sewer
networks (see Box 5.1).

––

Large urban centres resulting from
conurbations, where two or more distinct
urban centres progressively grow and see their
population density increase, until they more or
less merge into one metropolitan area. These
areas have extensive sewer networks in developed
sections of each of the former city centres, which
may have formed in different ways, and often
have separate treatment facilities and municipal
administrations. These types of urban centres also
have large unsewered areas. Examples include
the Accra-Tema conurbation in Ghana or the
conurbation of smaller centres in Metro Manila.

Source: Major et al. (2011) and NLÉ (2012).

––

Rural areas are typically almost entirely served by
on-site systems, without any formal sewer systems.
Some urban runoff management may be practised.

––

Smaller urban centres typically are towns that
have a small CBD, possibly some small satellites
and radial linear expansion along the major
routes. These smaller urban centres often have
very limited sewer networks, mostly relying on
on-site sanitation. They may be physically close to
other centres, but they have different municipal
administrations, and therefore separated
institutional responsibility.

The classification of each centre is dependent on the
region. In China, for example, an urban centre with
a population of five million might be considered a
‘small’ city. In addition, each of the categories above
might include slum populations. The proportion of
slums tends to be greater in larger cities, due to the
increased opportunities for work and the need for lowcost housing (UN-Habitat, 2016), but they also pose a
challenge for smaller urban centres.

––

Large villages and small towns are typically
quite compact but differ from urban centres as
they have little fringe expansion. These could
also be settlements that have developed around
industrial or commercial activities. Examples
include college campuses, airports and mines.

In the next one or two decades, the largest rates of
urbanization will occur in the smaller urban centres
of between 500,000 and 1 million inhabitants (UNHabitat, 2016). This will greatly impact wastewater
production and the potential both for decentralized
treatment and use.

50

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 5.1 Urban typologies and wastewater, and sustainable urban drainage issues
Urban
typology

Likelihood
of extensive
sewer
networks

Presence
of on-site
systems

Slum
populations

Type of
treatment

SUDS*

Level of
wastewater
production

Reuse/
recovery
potential

Large urban
centres

Yes

Unlikely

Extensive

Centralised/
decentralized

Optimal

High

High

Large urban
centres
resulting from
conurbations

Yes, but not
separate for
each centre

Unlikely

Significant

Centralised

Optimal

High

High

Smaller urban
centres

Unlikely

Likely

Possible

Decentralised
or septic tank

Medium

High/
localized

Large villages
and small
towns

Very
unlikely

Very likely

Possible

Septic tank

Small

Possible

Rural areas

Not present

Very likely

Unlikely

Centralised

Negligible

Negligible/
in-house
reuse

* SUDS: Sustainable urban drainage systems
Source: Author.

5.3 Sources of wastewater in
municipal and urban systems
The composition of municipal wastewater
can vary considerably, reflecting the range
of contaminants released by the different
combination of domestic, industrial, commercial
and institutional sources.
The precise urban form and legislative/
institutional environment usually dictates
how this wastewater is collected and treated
(see Chapters 3, 4 and 15). However, in most
countries, only a proportion of the wastewater
is formally collected. A large proportion, mainly
from low-income settings, is typically disposed
of to the closest surface water drain or informal
drainage canal.
In economies that are heavily industrialized or in
the process of development and where legislative
environments are weak, much of the wastewater
is mixed together before treatment and
discharge. Where waterborne sewerage is the
norm, so-called ‘combined sewerage’ remains
common. This is a perfectly logical approach if
large volumes of water are used for flushing,
resulting in diluted sewage combined with few
other wastewater sources (UN-Habitat, n.d.).

Mun i c i p a l

a n d

Ur b a n

Wa s tewater

It is important to note that, in many cases,
large volumes of wastewaters that are legally
discharged to decaying and/or badly operated
sewerage networks, both combined and
separate, never actually reach a treatment
plant. Much is lost en route as a result of
broken pipes, or ends up in surface water
drains, polluting both groundwater and surface
watercourses. There are also many cases
of illegal water reuse by communities who
deliberately tamper with trunk sewer systems.

5.3.1 Sanitation and the production
of wastewater in slums
Wastewater generation is one of the biggest
challenges associated to the growth of informal
settlements (slums) in the developing world.
Although the proportion of slum dwellers in
urban areas has slightly decreased since 2000
in terms of percentages (see Figure 5.2), there
are more slum dwellers in 2012 than in 2000.
In Sub-Saharan African, 62% of the urban
population live in slums. The most alarming
statistics can be found in countries emerging
from conflict and in West Asia, where the
proportion living in slums has increased from
67% to 77% and 21% to 25%, respectively
(UN-Habitat, 2012).

51

Figure 5.2 Proportion of urban population living in slums 2000–2012
65.0
61.7

Sub-Saharan Africa
Southern Asia

35.0

South-Eastern Asia

39.6

31.0

Eastern Asia

28.2

Western Asia

20.6
24.6

Oceania

24.1
24.1

Latin America and the Caribbean

23.5

Northern Africa

13.3

45.8

37.4

29.2

20.3

66.6

Countries emerging from conflict
Developing regions

32.7

0.0

20.0

76.8

39.4

40.0

60.0

80.0

100.0

Note: Countries emerging from conflicts included in the aggregate figures as: Angola, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Sudan.
Source: Based on data from UN-Habitat (2012, Table 3, p. 127).

Slums vary in type, form and population
density. However, most are characterized by a
lack of paved roads, durable housing, water
and sanitation infrastructure and drainage. In
these situations, high levels of faecal matter
and solid waste are disposed of to surface
water drainage canals and ditches. Poor solid
waste disposal causes blockages in drainage
systems, resulting in flooding. Uncollected
wastewater and urban runoff flows are often
equivalent to sewered wastewater in terms
of toxicity and health risks. Although many
slums rely on on-site sanitation, faecal matter
is not usually contained and wastewater is
still produced as residents often use latrines
as bathrooms for personal ablutions with socalled ‘bucket showers’.
Slum dwellers frequently have to rely on
unsewered communal public toilets, use open
space or dispose of faeces in polythene bags (i.e.
flying toilet). Communal toilets are not widely
used, due to lack of water, poor maintenance,
and the cost to the user. A study in the slums
of Delhi found that the average low-income
family of five could spend 37% of its income on
communal toilet facilities (Sheikh, 2008). Finding
a suitable place to go to the toilet is especially
problematic for women, causing risks related to
personal security, embarrassment and hygiene.

52

5.4 Composition of municipal
and urban wastewater
The precise composition of wastewater varies
around the world and is governed by a wide range
of factors, including domestic water use and the
level of commercial/industrialization. Table 5.2 gives
selected parameters (UN-Water, 2015a). In developed
regions, the BOD:COD ratio4 is likely to be lower than
in the developing world, due to a higher proportion
of industrial wastewater. This will lower the water’s
suitability for biological treatment. In some areas, high
levels of inorganic substances, sulphates and alkalinity
for example, can affect the wastewater’s suitability
for post-treatment use. Sulphates tend to result in

4

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is the amount of dissolved
oxygen needed (i. e., demanded) by aerobic biological organisms
to break down organic material present in a given water sample at
a certain temperature over a specific time period.
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is the standard method for
indirect measurement of the amount of pollution (that cannot be
oxidized biologically) in a sample of water. The higher the chemical
oxygen demand, the higher the amount of pollution (mostly
inorganic) in the test sample.
If the BOD:COD ratio for untreated wastewater is 0.5 or greater,
the waste is considered to be easily treatable by biological means.
If the ratio is lower than 0.3 approximately, either the waste may
have some toxic components, or acclimated microorganisms may
be required for its stabilization.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 5.2 Composition of raw wastewater for selected countries
Parameters

USA

France

Morocco

Pakistan

Jordan

110—400

100—400

45

193—762

152

250—1 000

300—1 000

200

83—103

386

100—350

150—500

160

76—658

n.a.

Total potash and nitrogen

20—85

30—100

29

n.a.

28

Total phosphorus

4—15

1—25

4—5

n.a.

36

Biochemical oxygen demand
Chemical oxygen demand
Suspended solids

Source: UN-Water (2015a, Table 5, p. 28, based on Hanjra et al., 2012).

Table 5.3 Main wastewater pollutants, their source and effects
Source
Main
representative
parameters

Pollutant

Wastewater
Domestic

Industrial

Runoff
Urban

Possible effects of the pollutant

Agricultural
and pasture

Suspended
solids

Total
suspended
solids

xxx

xx

x

•
•
•
•

Aesthetic problems
Sludge deposits
Pollutant adsorption
Protection of pathogens

Biodegradable
organic matter

Biochemical
oxygen
demand

xxx

xx

x

• Oxygen consumption
• Death of fish
• Septic conditions

Nutrients

Nitrogen,
Phosphorus

xxx

xx

x

• Excessive algae growth
• Toxicity to fish (ammonia)
• Illness in new-born infants
(nitrate)
• Pollution of groundwater

Pathogens

Coliforms

xxx

xx

x

• Water-borne diseases

Nonbiodegradable
organic matter

Pesticides,
some
detergents,
others

xx

• Toxicity (various)
• Foam (detergents)
• Reduction of oxygen transfer
(detergents)
• Non-biodegradability
• Bad odour (i.e. phenols)

Metals

Specific
elements (As,
Cd, Cr, Cu,
Hg, Ni, Pb, Zn,
etc.)

Inorganic
dissolved
solids

Total dissolved
solids,
conductivity

x: small

xx: medium

x

xxx: high

x

x

x

xx

arrows: variable

• Toxicity
• Inhibition of biological sewage
treatment
• Problems in agriculture use of
sludge
• Contamination of groundwater

x

• Excessive salinity – harm to
plantations (irrigation)
• Toxicity to plants (some ions)
• Problems with soil permeability
(sodium)

empty: usually not important

Source: Von Sperling (2007, Table 1.2, p. 7).

Mun i c i p a l

a n d

Ur b a n

Wa s tewater

53

Table 5.4 Red List Substances
1

1.2-dichloroethane [1.2-DCE or EDC]

2

Aldrin

3

Atrazine

4

Azinphos methyl

5

Cadmium

6

DDT isomers

7

Dichlorvos

8

Dieldrin

9

Endrin

10

Fenitrothion

11

Hexachlorobenzene [HCB]

12

Hexachlorobutadiene [HCBD]

13

Hexachlorocyclohexane [HCH]

14

Malathion

15

Mercury

16

Pentachlorophenol [PCP]

17

Polychlorinated biphenyl [PCB]

18

Simazine

19

Tributyltin [TBT]

20

Trichlorobenzene [TCB]

21

Trifluralin

22

Triphenyltin [TPT]

Source: Environment Agency (2009, p. 4).

hydrogen sulfide production with implications
for sewer corrosion. High alkalinities, or water
hardness, are likely to cause limescale deposits and
will affect the suitability of the water for reuse as
process water, for example. Table 5.3 gives some
of the main pollutants that are likely to be found in
different sources of wastewater (see also Table 4.1).

5.4.1 Wastewater from particularly
hazardous sources
Wastewater from domestic sources is usually
relatively free from hazardous substances, but
there are growing concerns about commonly used
medications that, even at low concentrations, may
have long-term impacts: some known endocrine
disrupters in particular (Falconer, 2006).

54

Industries that use ‘Red List’ substances (see Table 5.4)
in their production processes are required to ensure that
discharge consents are adhered to, but this is often not
the case. Regulatory environments vary considerably. Of
particular relevance are small-scale cottage industries
and businesses, which are either ‘permitted’ to operate
or do so illegally. In informal settings, activities, such
as lead recovery from batteries, small-scale mining and
mineral processing, and the operation of motor garages
and car-washing stations can pose serious risks. There
is not much published information available concerning
these informal industries.
Small hospitals and clinics (and some of the larger
establishments), particularly in the developing world,
discharge medical waste untreated. Intensive farming
methods and the profligate use of antibiotics in animal
husbandry has resulted in high concentrations in
municipal wastewater when such installations discharge
to municipal sewers. This entails the additional risk of
antimicrobial drug resistance (AMR) (Harris et al., 2013).
Other point sources can include intensive agricultural
units and large stormwater outlets that serve
hazardous or industrial areas. Table 5.5 gives estimated
figures of wastewater production for commercial
establishments and industries. Although not shown
in this table, it is important to note that wastewater
from food and beverage processing establishments also
generally contain relatively high BOD concentrations.
This type of waste is not difficult to treat and
represents a great opportunity for energy recovery (see
Chapter 6).

5.5 Urban form and the
potential for municipal and urban
wastewater use
The potential for using municipal and urban
wastewater is governed by several issues: first, the level
of cross-contamination of wastewater and second,
the application and its location. Water scarcity and
the cost and availability of new water sources are also
important factors. Obviously, it is better to restrict
the discharge of hazardous substances to sewers,
particularly those that render the wastewater difficult
to treat. Urban runoff, for example, could be directly
reused for certain purposes, but once combined with
blackwater it would require additional treatment.
The drivers for reuse are legislative and principally
driven by economics. If used water is available at
a lower or a similar price (including the cost of
conveyance), it will be considered over and above
conventional freshwater sources. In some water-scarce
countries or regions, necessity dictates and favours
high levels of reuse.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 5.2 INDIRECT POTABLE REUSE IN PRACTICE, SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA
San Diego is drinking recycled water because it imports 85% of its water from Northern California and the
Colorado River, into which upstream communities like Las Vegas discharge wastewater that is later treated
for drinking purposes. San Diego, which recycles sewage water for irrigation, invested US$11.8 million into
an IPR study, because of recent restrictions on Northern California water and drought in the Colorado River.
The demo project at the North City Water Reclamation Plant ended in 2013. At that time, its Advanced Water
Purification Facility was producing one million gallons of purified water each day, though no water is being
sent to the reservoir.
IPR is more economical for San Diego than recycling more sewage for irrigation because irrigation water would
have to be conveyed through special purple pipes to separate it from potable water, and expanding the purple
pipe infrastructure would cost more than IPR. Recycled water is also less expensive than desalinating seawater.
In Orange County, for example, IPR costs US$800–850 to produce enough drinking water for two families
of four for a year. Desalinating an equal amount of seawater would require US$1,200–1,800 because of the
amount of energy needed.
To deal with its growing population and salt intrusion into the groundwater, the Orange County Water District
in California opened its US$480 million state-of-the-art water reclamation facility, the largest in the U.S., in
January 2008. It costs US$29 million a year to operate. After advanced water treatment, half the recycled
water is injected into the aquifer to create a barrier against saltwater intrusion. The other half goes to a
percolation pond for further filtration by the soils, and then after about six months, ends up in drinking water
well intakes. By 2011, it was estimated to be producing over 300 million litres a day.
Source: Extracted from Cho (2011).

Table 5.5 Examples of industrial wastewater data
Wastewater
generation
(m3/tonne)

Range
(m3/tonne)

COD
(kg/m3)

COD range
(kg/m3)

Alcohol refining

24

16—32

11

5—22

Beer and malt

6.3

5—9

2.9

2—7

Coffee

n.a.

n.a.

9

3—15

Dairy products

7

3—10

2.7

1.5—5.2

Fish processing

n.a.

8—18

2.5

Meat and poultry

13

8—18

4.1

2—7

Organic chemicals

67

0—400

3

0.8—5

Petroleum refineries

0.6

0.3—1.2

1.0

0.4—1.6

Plastic and resins

0.6

0.3—1.2

3.7

0.8—5

Pulp and paper (combined)

162

85—240

9

1—15

Soap and detergents

n.a.

1—5

n.a.

0.5—1.2

9

4—18

10

1.5—42

Sugar refining

n.a.

4—18

3.2

1—6

Vegetable oils

3.1

1—5

n.a.

0.5—1.2

Vegetables, fruits and juices

20

7—35

5.0

2—10

Wine and vinegar

23

11—46

1.5

0.7—3.0

Industry type

Starch production

n.a.: Not available
Source: Doorn et al. (2006, Table 6.9, p. 622, based on Doorn et al., 1997).

Mun i c i p a l

a n d

Ur b a n

Wa s tewater

55

BOX 5.3 SEWAGE-FED AQUACULTURE SYSTEMS OF KOLKATA:
A CENTURY-OLD INNOVATION OF FARMERS
Farmers around Kolkata city in India developed a technique of using domestic sewage for fish culture and other
agricultural purposes, almost a century ago. This technique is widely used to meet the growing demand for fish in
this densely populated Indian city. The technique is considered to be unique and is the largest operational system
in the world to convert waste into consumable products. Wastewater and urban runoff from Metropolitan Kolkata
(over 13 million inhabitants) generates about 600 million litres of sewage per day. Large-scale usage of sewage
for fish culture began in the 1930s. Early success of fish culture in stabilized sewage ponds, which were used as a
source of water for growing vegetables, provided stimulus for the large-scale expansion of sewage-fed fish culture
system. The area under this unique system of culture peaked at 12,000 ha, but in recent years there has been a
steep decline in the area due to the increasing pressure from urbanization. Currently, the area under the sewagefed culture system has been reduced to less than 4,000 ha and the poor people dependent on these wetlands
for their livelihood have been severely affected. However, even today, a considerable amount of fish consumed in
Kolkata city is produced from this system. There are appeals to the government to declare the existing sewagefed aquaculture area as sanctuaries and to protect them from further encroachment by the rapidly expanding
population of Kolkata city. In addition, 12,000 ha are also cultivated for growing vegetables.
Source: Extracted from Nandeesha (2002, p. 28).

The reuse of water in agriculture is one of the
areas of great potential. It is already practised
formally and informally in many countries (see
Chapters 6 and 16). Reuse in peri-urban areas
offers an opportunity to produce food close to
the area of consumption.

5.5.1 Potable water reuse
The use of treated municipal wastewater for
drinking is not quite so common, though
well-established in some places (see Section
16.1.2). The populations of some countries,
namely Australia, Namibia and Singapore, are
already drinking treated wastewater, as are some
populations in the USA, including in California,
Virginia and New Mexico. It is usually safe, but
public opinion is swayed by those who refer to
‘toilet to tap’ reuse as a way to discourage use.
Indirect potable reuse (IPR), whereby treated
wastewater is added to ground or surface sources
(where it receives additional treatment) and
eventually ends up as drinking water, has become
increasingly common (see Box 5.2). After tertiary
treatment, the water is discharged to a storage
reservoir for a period of six months or more. This
level of treatment seems to assuage public fears
about ‘toilet to tap’ concerns. In reality, a large
proportion of treated and untreated wastewater
ends up being discharged into a watercourse and
used downstream as a water supply.

56

5.5.2 Non-potable reuse: Industrial,
commercial, recreational and peri-urban
agriculture
Local reuse becomes more economically feasible
if the point of reuse is close to the point of
production. Many industrial and commercial
establishments are in need of process water, and
can institute better housekeeping procedures to
reduce their dependence on water consumption
and wastewater production, as well as the
associated costs. Businesses can directly reuse
some untreated wastewater, provided it is of
adequate quality. Good sources include process
water for cooling or heating, and rainwater from
industrial/commercial roof collection or airport
aprons and runways.
Industrial symbiosis (see Chapter 6) is often used
to describe partnerships and cooperation between
two or more different industries to enhance both
environmental performance and competitive
capacity by exchanging and optimizing mutual
material, energy and water flows. In the case of
water reuse, this occurs often at a local scale.
By-products of one industry become feedstocks
in another. Similarly, process cooling water may
be used for heat recovery or for productive use
(Industrial Symbiosis Institute, 2008). Sometimes,
partnerships share the management of utilities or
ancillary services (see Box 6.4).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

The United States Environmental Protection Agency
(US EPA, 2004) gives a good account of urban
reuse systems that provide partially treated (fitfor-purpose) wastewater for various non-potable
purposes, including:
––

irrigation of public parks and recreation
centres, athletic fields, school yards and
playing fields, highway medians and shoulders,
and landscaped areas surrounding public
buildings and facilities;

––

irrigation of landscaped areas surrounding
single-family and multi-family residences,
general washdown, and other maintenance
activities;

––

irrigation of landscaped areas surrounding
commercial, office and industrial
developments;

––

irrigation of golf courses;

––

commercial uses, such as vehicle washing
facilities, laundry facilities, window washing,
and mixing water for pesticides, herbicides and
liquid fertilizers; and

––

ornamental landscape uses and decorative
water features, such as fountains, reflecting
pools and waterfalls.

In dual distribution systems, the partially treated
wastewater is delivered to customers through a
parallel network of distribution pipes separate
from the community’s potable water distribution
system. The reclaimed water distribution system
becomes a third water utility, in addition to
wastewater and potable water. Reclaimed water
systems are operated, maintained and managed in
a way that is similar to the potable water system
(US EPA, 2012). Direct use of treated municipal
wastewater has been practised for some time, for
example in St. Petersburg, Florida, where reclaimed
water is provided for several residential properties,
commercial developments and industrial parks, as
well as a resource recovery power plant, a baseball
stadium and some schools (US EPA, 2004).
Supplying nutritionally adequate and safe food
to city dwellers poses a substantial challenge.
Peri-urban agriculture offers one solution but
requires adequate water. Municipal wastewater is
often (usually informally) used without treatment,
resulting in serious health risks for both farmers
and those who consume the food. Social customs
and diets dictate how risky this practice is. An
example of direct wastewater reuse is the sewagefed ponds in Kolkata, India (see Box 5.3).

Mun i c i p a l

a n d

Ur b a n

Wa s tewater

5.6

Managing urban runoff

Climate change adaptation seeks to lower
the flood risks associated with extreme rain
events, but if developed in synergy with urban
development, it can also address some of the
problems associated with urban wastewater
management. Cities are increasingly concerned
with the effects of climate change, which
include higher risks of flooding and raised
temperatures, combined with increasing
demands for safe drinking water supplies
(State of Green, 2015).
Rainwater in the form of surface runoff can
contribute to cities’ water balance and be
collected to create attractive recreational areas.
A good example comes from Denmark (see
Box 5.4), which shows how it is possible to use
rainwater as a resource to create more resilient
and liveable cities.

BOX 5.4 TREATING RAINWATER
RUNOFF FROM INDUSTRIAL AREA,
KOLDING, DENMARK
The local wastewater utility in the city
of Kolding was facing the challenge of
having to clean runoff from a highly
polluted industrial area to protect the
ecosystem of a small river nearby. The
river was polluted with oil and hazardous
substances derived from the industrial
area where trucks were being loaded and
a variety of materials were stored outside
on the storage yard. To solve this problem,
they applied the HydroSeparator® which
is an automated and effective solution to
improve water quality in various recipients
while minimizing the need for retention
basins at a much lower total cost of
ownership. The maximum capacity of the
HydroSeparator® was determined by the
requirement of a maximum flow of 200
l/s discharges to the small river. It is built
of two standard HydroSeparators of 100
l/s each, which can operate concurrently
or separately. Today, the plant operates
automatically with very low operating
costs and can be monitored and controlled
from the internet as well as the connected
SRO-system from the wastewater utility
Kolding Spildevand.
Source: Extracted from State of Green (2015, p. 18).

57

CHAPTER 6
UNIDO | UNIDO Industrial Resource Efficiency Division and John Payne, John G. Payne & Associates Ltd.

Wastewater treatment canal in a power plant

INDUSTRY

This chapter describes the extent and nature of industrial wastewater production.
It also highlights the opportunities from the use and recycling of wastewater and
the recovery of energy and useful by-products when addressing natural resource
challenges in the context of sustainable industrial development.

The dawn of the industrial revolution in the
eighteenth century in the now developed
countries signalled the beginning of
society’s dilemma with the fate of industrial
wastewater. Then and now, as is so often
the case, it was discharged into natural
watercourses in the mistaken belief that
‘the solution to pollution is dilution’ and
that stormwater was Nature’s purgative.

information concerning the volume of
wastewater produced by industry are very
deficient. Moreover, a distinction needs to
be made between the overall volume of
wastewater produced and the volume that is
actually discharged, which is generally lower
due to recycling. One estimate suggests that
the volumes of industrial wastewater will
double by 2025 (UNEP FI, 2007).5

Societal and environmental pressures have,
over time, led to a continuously growing
movement that urged industry to reduce
the amount of wastewater it produces,
and to treat it before discharge. This has
evolved into a significant paradigm shift,
with wastewater now being seen as a
potential resource, and its use or recycling
after suitable treatment as a potential
way to benefit industry economically
and financially. This in turn complements
the bigger picture of green industry,
corporate social responsibility (CSR), water
stewardship and sustainable development,
including the SDGs and specifically Targets
6.3 and 6.a, which refer to wastewater (see
Chapter 2).

Some consolidated information is available
from developed countries. In the EU, for
example, limited data show that wastewater
generation has generally decreased (Eurostat,
n.d.). The data also show that manufacturing
is the greatest generator of wastewater
among the main industrial sectors (see Table
6.1). Furthermore, data from a few countries
indicate that industry is a major polluter, as only
a proportion of wastewater was treated before
being discharged (see Table 6.2).

These considerations apply mainly to large
industries, some of which have a global
reach into developing countries: many are
moving from high-income countries to
emerging markets (WWAP, n.d.). They have
the size and resources to seize opportunities
and enter the circular economy. Lacking
this momentum, small- and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) and informal industries
often discharge their wastewater into
municipal systems or directly into the
environment, either of which creates
another set of challenges and potentially
lost opportunities (see Chapter 5).

6.1 Extent of industrial
wastewater generation
As the volume of industrial wastewater is
reported on a limited and sporadic basis,
the real extent of this potential resource
is largely unknown. Globally, data and

In d u s tr y

An atypical example of quite detailed countrylevel information (see Table 6.3) is available
from Canada, which conducts biennial
industrial water surveys that include data from
manufacturing, mining and thermal-electric
generating industries (see Box 6.1).
Statistics Canada (2014) reports that the
paper industries produced almost 40% of the
volume of manufacturing discharges, with
nearly 80% having secondary or biological
treatment, and accounted for 32% of the
volume of recirculated water, with primary
metals accounting for close to 50%. Overall,
for manufacturing, the recirculation rate
(recirculated water as a percentage of intake)
was nearly 51%. For the water costs relating
to manufacturing, about 38% went to effluent
treatment and almost 10% to recirculation.
Thermal-electric power was by far the largest
user and discharger of water, of which almost
58% went untreated mainly to surface water
bodies. Its recirculation rate was low though
the volume was approximately double that
of manufacturing. Mining was somewhat

5

Presumably referring to 2007 when the report was
published.

59

Table 6.1 Generation of wastewater by type of industry, 2011 (million m³)

Industry total

Mining and
quarrying

Manufacturing
industries*

Production and
distribution
of electricity
(excluding
cooling water)**

Construction

1 487.2

n.a.

889.6

363.3

n.a.

Belgium2

530.0

42.0

239.9

7.9

0.4

Bulgaria

153.6

12.5

91.3

37.9

0.6

9.5

n.a.

9.5

n.a.

n.a.

Croatia

84.7

1.7

81.4

0.5

n.a.

Cyprus5

1.9

n.a.

1.9

0.0

n.a.

Finland

n.a.

n.a.

14.4

26.5

14.7

687.7

9.2

408.1

251.6

n.a.

1 534.6

227.6

1 180.6

75.4

0.6

154.3

17.8

129.7

3.9

0.0

45.5

5.5

20.2

6.1

1.3

40.4

0.6

33.9

2.6

0.7

Poland

n.a.

342.9

484.6

79.8

6.6

Romania

n.a.

47.3

n.a.

n.a.

3.6

Slovenia

n.a.

0.1

42.8

n.a.

0.1

Slovakia

192.2

20.5

163.0

7.9

0.1

6 335.2

47.2

602.0

n.a.

n.a.

878.0

26.0

839.0

14.0

n.a.

Serbia

76.8

10.3

36.3

30.2

n.a.

Turkey1

528.7

41.9

460.8

26.1

n.a.

Austria1

Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia2
Germany1
Hungary
Latvia

4

3

Lithuania

Spain1
Sweden

1

n.a.: Not available

¹ 2010
² 2009
³ 2007
⁴ 2006
⁵ 2005
Notes:
*Manufacturing industries include: food products; textiles; paper and paper products; refined petroleum products, chemicals and chemical
products; basic metals; motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers and other transport equipment; other manufacturing.
**Production and distribution of electricity includes the activity of providing electric power, natural gas, steam, hot water and the like through
a permanent infrastructure (network) of lines, mains and pipes.
Source: Eurostat (n.d., Table 7). © European Union, 1995–2016.

60

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 6.2 Industrial wastewater discharges after treatment (as a % of total discharges), 2007–2011
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0.0

56.0

62.5

65.4

58.5

Bulgaria

59.7

57.1

49.6

50.8

46.8

Croatia

0.0

17.0

16.8

25.7

8.5

47.7

44.3

45.7

52.4

60.2

4.4

25.9

7.2

n.a.

n.a.

Germany

46.7

n.a.

n.a.

46.5

n.a.

Lithuania

0.0

73.5

72.5

60.4

51.8

Romania

0.0

12.7

9.7

14.1

5.6

Turkey

0.0

38.1

n.a.

71.9

n.a.

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Czech Republic
The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

n.a.: Not available
Source: Eurostat (n.d., Fig. 5). © European Union, 1995–2016.

BOX 6.1 CANADIAN INDUSTRIAL WATER SURVEYS
Three sectors participate in the Canada Industrial Water
Survey: manufacturing, mineral extraction, and fossil
fuel and nuclear electric power-generating plants.
Each sector has its own questionnaire that collects
data on the volume of water brought into the facility,
including information on the source, purpose, treatment
and possible recirculation of this water, and also the
volumes and levels of treatment prior to discharge.
The questionnaires are developed in collaboration
with data users in order to meet their statistical needs.
Respondents were also consulted through individual
meetings to ensure the information being asked was
available and that the questionnaire could be filled out
within a reasonable timeframe. Data are collected directly
from survey respondents using mail-out/mail-back paper
questionnaires. Mail-out occurs in the year following
the reference year and is directed to an “environment
manager
or coordinator”. Responding to the survey
In d us t ry
is mandatory and respondents are asked to return the
completed questionnaires within 30 days of receipt. A
letter explaining the purpose of the survey, the requested
return date and the legal requirement to respond are
included in the mail-out package and fax reminders
are sent to respondents whose questionnaires are
outstanding 45 days after the mail-out.
The questionnaires and reporting guides can be
found here: www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.
pl?Function=getSurvInstrumentList&Id=253674
Source: Adapted from Statistics Canada (n.d.).

In d u s tr y

different with a recirculation rate over
100% (used mainly for processing) and
discharge volumes greater than intake due
to dewatering.
While many individual companies do
collect and indeed report their wastewater
data as required by regulations, with
some exceptions, there are glaring gaps
in all sectors collecting and collating data
on national and global scales. These
gaps will require bridging before water
management policy can attempt to make
good progress in coordinating water
use and consumption with wastewater
generation and discharges, the latter
being often overlooked.

6.2 Nature of industrial
wastewater
Data regarding the general characteristics
and quality of industrial wastewater are
more available. The toxicity, mobility
and loading of industrial pollutants have
potentially more significant impacts
on water resources, human health and
the environment than actual volumes
of water. This is reflected in Pollutant
Release and Transfer Registries (PRTRs)
(see Chapter 14), which contain

61

Table 6.3 Water intake, discharge and recirculation in Canadian industry, 2011 (million m3)
Total
Total intake

Manufacturing

Thermal-electric
power (including
nuclear)

Mining

27 600

3 677.5

23 497.2

429.2

100

13.3

85.1

1.6

26 900

3 226.8

23 082.6

587.9

100

12.0

85.8

2.2

Untreated

34.0

57.9

43.8

Primary

17.9

n.a.

47.6

Secondary

36.2

<<1

n.a.

Tertiary

12.0

n.a.

n.a.

6 000

1 870.0

3 711.2

465.1

100

30.9

61.4

7.7

50.8

15.8

108.4

% total volume
Total discharge1
% total volume
Treatment of discharge (%)

Recirculation
% total volume
Recirculation rate (as % of intake)
2

Use of recirculation (%)
Process water

49.7

Cooling, condensing, steam

50.0

Pollution control
Other

90.8
98.1

n.a.

0.1
0.3

1.7

n.a.

1

The discharge volume is higher than the intake volume due to dewatering groundwater in some mines.

2

Recirculation rate = Amount of recirculated water as a percentage of intake. The same water can leave a subsystem and re-enter it, or it is used
in another subsystem many times, resulting in a recirculation rate higher than 100%.

n.a.: Not available
Source: Statistics Canada (2014).

information from developed countries on the
amounts of selected polluting substances
(above certain thresholds) released by
industry into water, land and air (OECD,
n.d.). Such databases could be analysed to
obtain a general idea about the overall level
of potential recoverable resources among the
many undesirable contaminants.
Widely varying industrial activities produce
wastewater, which is characterized by a
broad spectrum of pollutants (see Table 6.4).
Technology is available to remove (or ‘mine’)
these pollutants and is only limited by its costeffectiveness in given industrial situations. This
creates two products: the treated water and the
materials recovered. The water may be recycled
within a plant or by another linked industry,
or it may be simply discharged, returning it to

62

the hydrological cycle for others to use. In the
USA, it has been estimated that for some major
rivers the water has been used and reused over
20 times before it reaches the sea (TSG, 2014).
Useful materials may be recovered, such as
minerals (phosphates) and metals (see Chapter
16). Cooling water may provide heat. Residual
sludge might yield biogas or may have no other
fate than disposal.

6.3 Addressing the
resource challenge
If wastewater is accepted as a positive input,
rather than an unwanted output, of industrial
activity demanding disposal, there is a logical
and preferred process from its elimination to
pro-active use and recycling.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 6.4 Content of typical wastewater in some major industries
Industry

Typical content of effluent

Pulp and paper

• Chlorinated lignosulphonic acids, chlorinated resin acids, chlorinated phenols and chlorinated
hydrocarbons – about 500 different chlorinated organic compounds identified
• Coloured compounds and absorbable organic halogens (AOX)
• Pollutants characterized by BOD, COD, suspended solids (SS), toxicity and colour

Iron and steel

• Cooling water containing ammonia and cyanide
• Gasification products – benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, cyanide, ammonia, phenols, cresols
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
• Hydraulic oils, tallow and particulate solids
• Acidic rinse water and waste acid (hydrochloric and sulphuric)

Mines and quarries

•
•
•
•
•

Slurries of rock particles
Surfactants
Oils and hydraulic oils
Undesirable minerals, i.e. arsenic
Slimes with very fine particulates

Food industry

•
•
•
•
•

High levels of BOD and SS concentrations
Variable BOD and pH depending on vegetable, fruit or meat and season
Vegetable processing – high particulates, some dissolved organics, surfactants
Meat – strong organics, antibiotics, growth hormones, pesticides and insecticides
Cooking – plant organic material, salt, flavourings, colouring material, acids, alkalis, oil and fat

Brewing

• BOD, COD, SS, nitrogen, phosphorus - variable by individual processes
• pH variable due to acid and alkaline cleaning agents
• High temperature

Dairy

• Dissolved sugars, proteins, fats and additive residues
• BOD, COD, SS, nitrogen and phosphorus

Organic chemicals

• Pesticides, pharmaceuticals, paints and dyes, petro-chemicals, detergents, plastics, etc.
• Feed-stock materials, by-products, product material in soluble or particulate form, washing and
cleaning agents, solvents and added-value products such as plasticizers

Textiles

• BOD, COD, metals, suspended solids, urea, salt, sulphide, H2O2, NaOH
• Disinfectants, biocides, insecticide residues, detergents, oils, knitting lubricants, spin finishes,
spent solvents, anti-static compounds, stabilizers, surfactants, organic processing assistants,
cationic materials, colour
• High acidity or alkalinity
• Heat, foam
• Toxic materials, cleaning waste, size

Energy

• Production of fossil fuels – contamination from oil and gas wells and fracking
• Hot cooling water

Sources: Based on IWA Publishing (n.d.); UNEP (2010); and Moussa (2008).

6.3.1 Reducing pollution and
pollution prevention
As with many environmental issues,
the first step is to prevent or minimize
pollution. The goal is to keep the volumes
and toxicity of pollution to a minimum
at the point of origin. This goes to the
core of new green industrial engineering,
where the elimination of pollution and
wastewater is part of the equation from

In d u s tr y

concept to design for operations and
maintenance. However, with established
plants, while some re-engineering is
possible, pollution reduction might be
the only option. This includes substitution
with more environmentally friendly raw
materials and biodegradable process
chemicals, as well as staff education and
training to identify pollution issues and
remedy them.

63

6.3.2 Removing contaminants
Industries discharging into municipal systems or surface
water have to comply with discharge by-laws or other
regulations to avoid fines, so in many cases end-of-pipe
treatment is required at the plant before release. In some
situations, industries find it also more economical to pay
fines than to invest in treatment to meet regulations
(WWAP, 2015).
Mixed effluents require complex treatment trains and
result in one quality of wastewater discharge to meet
local regulations. This water, because it must often meet
stringent regulations, may be of unnecessarily higher
quality than required for other fates, such as recycling
applications. As it is usually more difficult and expensive
to treat wastewater containing many pollutants than
wastewater with only one such substance, stream
separation is often desirable. Mixing more concentrated
wastewater with streams that might be suitable for direct
discharge or recycling should also be avoided (WWAP,
2006). However, in certain specific cases, appropriate
blending of wastewater streams from different sources
could potentially lead to beneficial effects in treatment.
Either way, fit-for-purpose treatment can optimize the
water quality for its next role.
There exists a myriad of possible treatment options,
including stabilization ponds, anaerobic digestion
and bioreactors to produce biogas, activated sludge,
different types of membranes, UV radiation, ozonation,
advanced oxidation and the use of wetlands of various
sorts (see Table 4.2). In 2015, the oil and gas, food
and beverage, and mining industries were expected to
account for over half of all expenditures on wastewater
treatment technologies, and further growth in
technology was anticipated for meeting strict discharge
requirements, for example in the mining sector (see Box
6.2). By 2020, the market for industrial water treatment
technologies is predicted to grow by 50% (GWI, 2015).

6.3.3 Recycling wastewater and
recovering by-products
Recycling within a plant. Overall, industry is in a good
position to use or recycle its wastewater internally. This
might involve the direct use of untreated wastewater,
provided its quality is good enough for the intended
purpose. Cooling and heating water, as well as rainwater,
may be suitable for washing, pH adjustment and fire
protection. However, process water which is sufficiently
treated to match resulting quality with intended purpose
has more potential for recycling, for example in conveying
materials, rinse water, water-cooling towers, boiler
feed, production line needs, dust suppression, and
washing (see Box 6.3). This quality is accomplished by
decentralized treatment systems. While the technology
is generally available, as noted in Box 6.2, and there is a
trend to reduce the gap between treatment and recycling

64

By 2020, the market
for industrial water
treatment technologies is
predicted to grow by 50%

BOX 6.2 ANGLO AMERICAN EMALAHLENI
WATER RECLAMATION PROJECT,
MPUMALANGA, SOUTH AFRICA
The Witbank coalfields are located around
eMalahleni, a city of half a million inhabitants in
north-eastern South Africa. The region struggles
with water scarcity that is expected to become
more severe in the future, while eMalahleni
already has difficulty in meeting the water
demands of its rapidly expanding population.
The water reclamation initiative was started to
ensure environmentally responsible management
of excess water in the mines, and a continuous
supply of treated water for mining activities,
while eliminating the need to import water
and the consequent competition with other
stakeholders for a scarce resource.
The eMalahleni Water Reclamation Plant
treats water from the three Anglo American
thermal coal operations and uses desalination
technology. Water from the mine is converted
to drinking water, process/industrial water
and water that can be safely released into the
environment. In the treatment process, gypsum
is separated from the water and used as a
construction material.
Some of this treated water is used directly
in mining operations, but the majority is for
social use and meets 12% of eMalahleni’s daily
water needs offering a reliable and potable
water supply. Anglo American is minimizing
its water footprint and environmental impact
while delivering long-term benefits of safe
and uninterrupted access to coal reserves from
operating mines, and eliminating both the need
to import water and the uncontrolled release of
water from participating mines.
Source: Adapted from WBCSD/IWA (n.d.).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 6.3 CREATIVE USE OF WASTEWATER AT CARBERY MILK PRODUCTS IN CORK, IRELAND
Fermenter:
Beer at 3%

Whey 2—3% lactose

Distillation: 96%

Bioethanol

Wastewater processing and recycling stream

Heat recovery from steam
Anaerobic digestion
Heat requirements:
Pre-heating of milk
Boiler feedwater temp increase
Pasteurisation of milk
CIP*
Biogas for boiler

Water
reuse

High quality
treated water

Heat exchanger

WWTP**

Phosphorus

* CIP: Clean-in-place
**WWTP: Wastewater treatment plant

The dairy industry in the US produces large amounts of wastewater: for every litre of milk, it uses 1.5–3 litres of
water. Typically, the wastewater has approximately 10 times the organic loading of municipal wastewater. Whey is
a by-product of cheese-making and commonly used for feeding pigs or making other products. However, there is
a large surplus which is very energy-intensive to treat as wastewater. The main ingredient of whey is lactose and
this can be fermented into ethanol in a creative process of wastewater recycling. Carbery Milk Products in Cork,
Ireland, was the first dairy producer in the world to do this.
The whey is put through microfiltration and reverse osmosis and the lactose goes to a fermenter where it is
turned into beer before going on to a distillation system to produce a 96% ethanol product for the bioethanol
fuel market. All the bioethanol in Ireland comes from this one plant and it is the only European country not using
sugarcane-based ethanol from Brazil.
The steam from the distillation process is recovered and used to pre-heat boiler water, heat water for clean-in-place
(CIP) and for pasteurization, thus saving energy.
The waste stream from the fermentation is sent to an anaerobic digester and produces biogas which is used to
produce additional heating.
The warm wastewater from the anaerobic digester is passed through a heat exchanger to pre-heat the incoming
chilled milk. Thus, the wastewater is cooled to a suitable temperature for discharge into the local river without
affecting the environment.
At the same time, the wastewater has a large concentration of phosphorus of which 99% must be removed
before discharge. The phosphorus is recycled back to agricultural land.
The company wants to expand the plant and the resulting high-quality treated effluent is potentially suitable for
recycling at the site, particularly as boiler feedwater, as the amount of water that the plant can withdraw from
the local river is limited. Moreover, recycling would reduce discharges to the river, particularly during seasonal low
flow, when the dilution capacity is lower. Polishing the already high-quality effluent using advanced oxidation is
being investigated, as it is cheaper than buying potable water. The water would go into the reverse osmosis plant,
which demineralizes the water. This has the added benefit of reducing membrane fouling and reducing crosscontamination as it has no direct contact with food products.
Source: Adapted from Blue Tech Research (n.d.).

In d u s tr y

65

BOX 6.4 KALUNDBORG SYMBIOSIS IN KALUNDBORG, DENMARK
The Kalundborg Industrial Symbiosis is an “industrial ecosystem” where the by-products of one enterprise are used
as a resource by other enterprises, in a closed cycle. It began in 1961 with the development of a new project to use
surface water from Lake Tissø for a new oil refinery with the aim of saving the limited supplies of groundwater. The
City of Kalundborg was in charge of building the pipeline while the refinery was responsible for the financing.
The Kalundborg Industrial Symbiosis has developed gradually over several decades from initiatives and individual
cooperation between companies of different sectors driven by economic advantages, with support from the
Kalundborg Municipality. Nowadays, it is a project mainly financed by the symbiosis partners.
The symbiosis involves exchange of all sorts of materials, including wastewater, as shown in the flow diagram below.
Water Cascading Initiatives: The Asnæs Power Station receives 700,000 m3 of cooling water from Statoil each year,
which it treats to use as boiler feed water. It also uses about 200,000 m3 of Statoil’s treated wastewater for cleaning
each year. The cooling water becomes steam that is provided back to Statoil, as well as to other business, such as
a local fish farm. The savings to local water resources are considerable – nearly 3 million m3 of groundwater and 1
million m3 of surface water per year (Domenech and Davis, 2011).
The power plant uses salt water from the fjord for some of its cooling needs. As a result, it reduces the withdrawals
of freshwater from Lake Tissø. The resulting by-product is hot salt water, an amount of which goes to the fish farm’s
57 ponds.
Heat Cascading Initiatives: Asnæs started supplying the city with steam for its new district heating system in 1981.
Then, Novo Nordisk and Statoil joined in as customers for steam. This system of district heating was encouraged by
the city and the Danish government and thus replaced about 3,500 oil furnaces.
Flow diagramme
of Kalundborg Symbiosis

Energy

Water

Materials

1. Steam
2. District heating
3 Power to grid
4. Warm condensate
5. District heating

6. Waste water
7. Cleaned waste water
8. Surface water
9. Technical water
10. Used cooling water
11. Deionized water
12. Seawater
13. Drain water
14. Tender water
15. Process water
16. Cleaned surface water

17. Waste
18. Gypsum
19. Fly ash
20. Sulphur
21. Slurry
22. Bioethanol
23. Sand
24. Sludge
25. C5/C6 Sugars
26. Lignin
27. NovoGro 30
28. Ethanol waste
29. Biomass

Lake Tissø

Kara/Noveren

Kalundborg Utility
6 7 8

DONG
Gyproc

17
8

18

Statoil

Novo Nordisk and Novozymes
Land Owners’ Association

14 15 2

5 16 8
23

19

1
9 10 11 12

20

1

24

8

13

13

Inbicon

8

Novo Nordisk

Water reservoir
28

1

4

5

6

1 8

Kalundborg Municipality
Algae Plant

1 4 5 16

21

Novozymes

22 1
7

6

Novozymes
wastewater and biogas

26 25
3 27

15

6 28 29 6

For further information, see www.symbiosis.dk/en.
Source of illustration: Kalundborg Symbiosis (n.d.).
Sources: Adapted from EC (2016, Box 9, p. 25) and Industrial Ecology (n.d.).

66

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 6.5 INDUSTRIAL AND ENERGY USE
OF MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
(GE Reports, 2015), obstacles may include implementation,
costs not outweighing benefits, long payback periods,
maintenance and increased energy consumption. Moreover,
the location and availability (intermittent, batch or
continuous production) of the wastewater stream must fit
with its intended use.
Using wastewater or recycling treated wastewater is a process
that can be repeated many times. It not only reduces the cost
for industry of acquiring freshwater by decreasing intake,
particularly in areas or times of scarcity, but also has the
added benefit of reducing discharges. In this way, the need to
meet regulatory standards and the risk of fines is minimized.
Furthermore, the practice benefits the environment and adds
weight to any social license to operate.
Industrial symbiosis. One notable opportunity for industrial
wastewater use and recycling is the cooperation between
plants in industrial symbiosis (SSWM, n.d.). This can involve
the exchange of process water or the recycling of treated
wastewater for purposes similar to in-plant recycling.
Examples include steam or hot wastewater, or wastewater
that contains organic material and nutrients, and
unconverted raw materials that may be economic to recover:
oil, used solvents, starch and other substances that can be
traded or recycled, perhaps by employing waste registers
between adjacent industries (WWAP, 2006). The treatment
technology options are similar to those for in-plant purposes
and may employ decentralized systems. These may involve
a dedicated centralized wastewater treatment plant that
services all the industries.
Eco-industrial parks. Industrial symbiosis is best seen in
eco-industrial parks which strategically locate industries
adjacent to one another to take convenient advantage of
wastewater management and recycling (see Box 6.4). For
SMEs, this can be a significant way to save on wastewater
treatment costs. Important factors are the sharing of
information to match needs, reasonable proximity, and
reliability of supply in terms of quantity and quality.
Combined Heat and Power Plants (CHP, or cogeneration),
which require substantially less cooling water than
conventional generation, are more efficient when they are
located near to the demand for heat and power such as
an industrial complex and as decentralized power supply
(Rodríguez et al., 2013). Interesting examples of ecoindustrial parks are found in many countries, for example the
Shanghai Chemical Industrial Park in China (WWAP, 2015).
The Kalundborg Industrial Symbiosis is an “industrial
ecosystem” where the by-products of one enterprise are
used as a resource by other enterprises, in a closed cycle. It
began in 1961 with the development of a new project to
use surface water from Lake Tissø for a new oil refinery with
the aim of saving the limited supplies of groundwater. The
City of Kalundborg was in charge of building the pipeline
while the refinery was responsible for the financing.

The Tarragona site of a water reclamation
unit in the south of Catalonia, Spain, utilizes
secondary effluent from two municipal
wastewater plants, treating it for industrial
users. The Tarragona area is highly waterstressed and water unavailability hinders
further growth in the region. Water recycling
in an industrial park (a petrochemical complex)
will free up existing raw water rights to meet
future local (municipal and tourism) demand.
The final target is to meet 90% of the water
demand of the industrial park from recycled
water (DEMOWARE, n.d.).
Terneuzen is situated in the southwest of
the Netherlands. The industrial site of Dow
Terneuzen originally planned to use desalinated
seawater as a source, but the increasing cost
of this proved to be problematic due to quality
problems, corrosion, etc. As a result, the nearby
municipal wastewater treatment plant was
re-engineered to provide reclaimed water to
the industrial complex (10,000 m3 per day). The
water is used to generate steam and feed its
manufacturing plants. After the steam is used
in the production processes, the water is again
used in cooling towers until it finally evaporates
into the atmosphere (so it is ‘recycled’ a second
time). Compared with the energy cost needed
for conventional desalination of seawater for
the same use, Dow Terneuzen has reduced
its energy use by 95% by reclaiming urban
wastewater – the equivalent of reducing its
carbon dioxide emissions by 60,000 tonnes
each year. Dow is now using this experience
gained in Europe at its site in Freeport, Texas,
USA (World Water, 2013).
The LIFE WIRE project is a LIFE12 project
being implemented in Barcelona, Spain,
that aims to boost industrial recycling of
treated wastewater by demonstrating the
feasibility of water recycling through the use
of satellite treatments able to produce fitfor-use water quality. The project studies the
feasibility of technology configurations based
on the combination of ultrafiltration, carbon
nanostructured material filtration and reverse
osmosis to use treated urban wastewater
in industries. The project technically and
economically assesses the benefits of using the
proposed treatment scheme over the current
conventional treatments in three industrial
sectors: electrocoating, chemical and liquidwaste disposal.
Sources: Extracted from EC (2016, Box 8, p. 25).

In d u s tr y

67

Industry needs to ‘produce
more with less’, which in
the case of water means
running drier

The upside of eco-industrial park wastewater
arrangements is similar to those for in-house
recycling (SSWM, n.d.). The downside include the
need for long-term commitments to justify the
initial capital expenditures, and the need for further
treatment to meet some industries’ needs and
possibly regulatory approval hurdles.
Multiple-use systems (MUS) involving cascading
reuses of water from higher to lower quality within
a river basin may have industrial components, for
example, where domestic wastewater may be
reclaimed for washing and cooling (UNEP, 2015c).
Reclaiming urban wastewater. Industry
can assist on the other side of the wastewater
equation by using reclaimed urban wastewater
from municipalities (see Box 6.5): this inter-sector
water reuse is growing quickly in many countries
(WBCSD, n.d.). It is a very pro-active measure
of sustainability as it reduces the requirements
for freshwater intake, which is particularly
important in areas of water scarcity, and reduces
overall municipal discharges. Issues of timing of
wastewater availability and its transport to the
target industrial plants also need to be worked
out. In some cases, municipalities will custom-treat
wastewater for specific industries which may not
need perfectly clean drinkable water. In California,
for example, the Central and West Basin Municipal
Water Districts offer reclaimed water of different
qualities and costs, including process water for
petroleum refining. The State Water Resources
Control Board also promotes wastewater for power
plant cooling (California Department of Water
Resources, 2013).

6.4 Wastewater and
sustainable industrial
development
Water is not only an operational challenge and a
cost item in industry, it is also an opportunity for
growth as the incentives for minimizing water use
(which includes wastewater use and recycling)
reduce costs and water dependency (WBCSD, n.d.).

68

Industry needs to ‘produce more with less’, which in
the case of water means running drier (UNIDO, 2010).
As the reduction of freshwater intake is linked to a
decrease in wastewater discharges, there is a major role
to be played by cleaner production initiatives that focus
on reducing overall water use, closing the water cycle,
eliminating wastewater discharge (zero discharge), and
reducing or eliminating solvents and toxic chemicals
(UNEP, 2010). Cleaner production through green
industry creates value by lowering operational costs
through the elimination of inefficiencies by using
the 3R strategy (reduce, recycle, reuse), which also
helps limit environmental impacts (UNIDO, 2010). For
example, the UNIDO Transfer of Environmentally Sound
Technology (TEST) programme has targeted wastewater
pollution from industry on the Danube River, with the
goal of improved water efficiency and less wastewater
discharges, by analysing the issues and problems and
introducing cleaner production solutions and new
technology (UNIDO, 2011). Resource efficiency and
enhanced environmental performance have even been
shown to generate economic benefits for certain SMEs
(see Box 14.3).
More broadly speaking, cleaner production has an
important place in industrial ecology, which also
includes pollution control, eco-efficiency, life-cycle
thinking and closed loop production. These allow the
identification of opportunities for enhanced resource
efficiency and value-adding activities. The ultimate goal
is zero discharge – the situation in which all water is
recycled within a plant or traded to another, and the
only consumption is through evaporation, which in
theory means all the wastewater is used or recycled and
there is no discharge (except for minor losses). At that
point, water withdrawal (intake) equals consumption
(WWAP, 2006). However, the Jevons Paradox6 can take
effect: as water efficiency improves, overall water use
may in fact increase, with lower cost of production and
corresponding increased industrial output.
Once an industry knows its water footprint and
pedigree, it can target its wastewater generation to
look for possibilities of water reuse and recycling.
Moreover, it can expand its efforts into water
neutrality (Hoekstra, 2008), which means that after
the industry has made efforts to use or recycle its
wastewater, the negative impacts of remaining water
pollution can be compensated for by investing in
projects that promote the sustainable management
of water (i.e. wastewater treatment) within local
environments. Thus, wastewater might also be seen
as resource for promoting investment.

6

In the nineteenth century, William Stanley Jevons argued that
gains in technological efficiency did not decrease the use of coal
and other resources, but actually increased their consumption
and production (Alcott, 2005).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 7
FAO | Sara Marjani Zadeh
IWMI | Javier Mateo-Sagasta
With contributions from: Andreas Antoniou (IGRAC); Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH); John Chilton
(IAH): Carlos Carrión-Crespo (ILO); Marlos de Souza, Olcay Unver and Vittorio Fattori (FAO);
Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP); and Kate Medlicott (WHO)

AGRICULTURE
Irrigation system in Thailand

This chapter reviews the main pollutants from agriculture, its associated
impacts, and offers some key pollution mitigation options. The chapter
also discusses how agriculture can be a beneficial user of wastewater,
and how the practice can become safe.

Agriculture is both a producer and user of
wastewater. As a result, the sector can both
cause and suffer the consequences from
pollution.
The intensification of agriculture has
increased in recent years, both in industrial
and traditional farming, contributing not only
to the increase in agricultural productivity, but
also resulting in higher waterborne pollution
loads, which affects ecosystems and human
health. At the same time, industries and cities
are expanding and contributing to higher
loads of pollution entering the water used in
agriculture, with adverse effects for the sector.

7.1 Agriculture7 as a
source of water pollution
Over the past half century, agriculture has
expanded and intensified in order to meet
the increasing food demand triggered
mainly by population growth and changes
in diet. The area equipped for irrigation has
more than doubled, from circa 1.4 million
km2 in 1961 to circa 3.2 million km2 in
2012 (AQUASTAT, 2014). Total livestock
has more than tripled from 7.3 billion units
in 1970 to 24.2 billion in 2011 (FAOSTAT,
n.d.a.). Aquaculture, especially inland fed
aquaculture and particularly in Asia, has
grown more than twentyfold since the
1980s (FAO, 2012).
Agriculture intensification has frequently
come with increased soil erosion, higher
sediment loads in water, and excessive
use (or misuse) of agricultural inputs
(e.g. pesticides and fertilizers) to increase
productivity. When the use of such
products exceeds the assimilation capacity
of agricultural systems, it results in higher
pollution loads to the environment. The
excess use of irrigation water also enhances
the agricultural wastewater flows back into
water bodies in the form of deep percolation
to aquifers and runoff to surface waters.

7

70

Agriculture in this chapter refers to plant and crop
production, aquaculture and livestock activities.

7.1.1 Agricultural pollutants:
sources and impacts
Agricultural activities release several types
of pollutants into the environment (see
Table 7.1). These pollutants impact aquatic
ecosystems as a result of export from farms,
transportation along the hydrological cycle
and concentration in water bodies. Typical
pollution pathways are: i) percolation to
groundwater; ii) surface runoff, drainage
water, and flows to streams, rivers and
estuaries; and iii) adsorption onto sediments
from natural or human-induced soil erosion
to sediment-rich streams (FAO/CGIAR WLE,
forthcoming).

NUTRIENTS
Natural nutrient sources (and nutrient
recycling) have been supplemented with
fertilizers to increase agricultural production
since the nineteenth century. The excessive
mobilization of nutrients is now claimed to
have gone beyond the planetary boundaries
(Rockström et al., 2009).
In crop production, water pollution from
nutrients occurs when fertilizers are applied
more heavily than crops can absorb them,
or when they are washed off the soil
surface before they can be incorporated
into plants. Excess nitrogen and phosphates
can leach into groundwater, or as surface
runoff into waterways. While nitrates and
ammonia are very soluble, phosphate is
not, and it tends to get adsorbed to soil
particles. It enters water bodies attached to
sediments through soil erosion.
In livestock production, feedlots are often
located on the banks of watercourses
so that (nutrient-rich) animal waste (i.e.
urine) can be released directly into the
watercourse. Solid waste (manure) is usually
collected to be used as organic fertilizer.
In many cases, however, it is not stored in
contained areas and washes off by surface
runoff into watercourses when there is
significant rainfall. In wastewater-fed
aquaculture, nutrient loads to water are
primarily a function of feed composition and
feed conversion (faecal waste). Wastage of

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 7.1 Categories of major water pollutants from agriculture and the relative contribution from
agricultural production systems
Pollutant
category

Indicators / Examples

Relative contribution from
Crop production

Livestock

Aquaculture

Nutrients

Primarily nitrogen and phosphorus
that are present in chemical and
organic fertilizer, animal excreta,
and present in water as nitrate,
ammonia or phosphate

***

***

*

Pesticides

Herbicides, insecticides, fungicides
and bactericides, including
organophosphates, carbamates,
pyrethroids, organochlorine
pesticides and others (many,
like DDT, are banned in most
countries but their illegal use
persists)

***

-

-

Salts

Including sodium (Na+), chloride
(Cl-), potassium (K+), magnesium
(Mg2+), sulphate (SO42-), calcium
(Ca2+) and bicarbonate (HCO3-)
ions, among others*

***

*

*

Sediment

Measured in water as
total suspended solids or
nephelometric turbidity units –
especially from pond drainage
during harvesting

***

***

*

Organic matter

Chemical or biochemical
substances that require dissolved
oxygen in the water for degrading
(organic materials, such as plant
matter and livestock excreta)**

*

***

**

Pathogens

Bacteria and pathogen indicators,
including E.coli, total coliforms,
faecal coliforms and Enterococci

*

***

*

Metals

Including selenium, lead, copper,
mercury, arsenic, manganese and
others

*

*

*

Emerging
pollutants

Drug residues, hormones, feed
additives, etc.

-

***

**

*Measured in the water, directly as total dissolved solids, or indirectly as electric conductivity
**Measured in the water as COD and BOD
Source: FAO/CGIAR WLE (forthcoming).

A g ri c u l tu re

71

feed (feed not taken up by the fish) in intensive fedaquaculture can significantly contribute to nutrient
loads in the water.
These nutrient loads can lead to the eutrophication of
lakes, reservoirs and ponds, causing an algae bloom
which suppresses other aquatic plants and animals
(FAO, 2002). Excessive accumulation of nutrients may
also increase adverse health impacts such as the blue
baby syndrome, which can be caused by high nitrate
levels in drinking water (WHO, 2006a).

PESTICIDES
In many countries, insecticides, herbicides and
fungicides are heavily applied in agriculture
(Schreinemachers and Tipraqsa, 2012). When
improperly selected and managed, they can pollute
water resources with carcinogens and other toxic
substances that can affect humans and many forms
of wildlife. Pesticides may also affect biodiversity
by destroying weeds and insects, which can have
negative impacts further up in the food chain. In the
developed world, even though the use of older broadspectrum pesticides is still widespread, the trend is
toward newer pesticides that are more selective and
less toxic to humans and the environment, and that
require a lower application per hectare to be effective.
Currently, millions of tonnes of active pesticide
ingredients are used in agriculture (FAOSTAT, n.d.b)
and cases of acute pesticide poisoning account
for significant morbidity and mortality worldwide,
especially in developing countries (WHO, 2008),
where poor farmers often use severely hazardous
pesticide formulations rather than safer alternatives.

SALTS
Over the last decades, the production of brackish
drainage and leaching water from agriculture has
grown proportionally to the increase in irrigation.
Salts accumulated in soils can be mobilized by
irrigation (leaching fractions), transported by
drainage water, and cause salinization of receiving
water bodies. In addition, excessive irrigation can
raise water tables from saline aquifers and this can
increase seepage of saline groundwater into water
courses and increase their salinization. Intrusion of
saline seawater into aquifers is another important
cause of salinization of water resources in coastal
areas. This intrusion is frequently the result of
excessive groundwater extractions for agriculture
(Mateo-Sagasta and Burke, 2010).
Major water salinity problems have been reported in
the USA, Australia, China, India, Argentina, Sudan
and many countries in Central Asia (FAO, 2011).
In 2009, approximately 1.1 billion people lived in

72

regions that had saline groundwater at shallow and
intermediate depths (van Weert et al., 2009).
Highly saline waters alter geochemical cycles of other
major elements, e.g. carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus,
sulphur, silica and iron (Herbert et al., 2015), with
overall impacts on ecosystems. Salinization can affect
freshwater biota at three levels: i) changes within
species; ii) changes in the community composition,
and; iii) eventually biodiversity loss and migration. In
general, when salinity concentrations rise, a decline
in biodiversity is observed (including microorganisms,
algae, plants and animals) (Lorenz, 2014).

SEDIMENTS AND OTHER POLLUTANTS
Unsustainable land use and improper tillage and
soil management in agriculture are major causes of
erosion and sediment runoff into rivers, lakes and
reservoirs. Sediment in river systems is a complex
mixture of mineral and organic matter, which can
cause reservoir siltation and affect aquatic life by
altering and suffocating habitats, and clogging fish
gills. Sediments can also be a carrier of chemical
pollutants, such as pesticides or phosphate.
Agriculture can also be a source of several other
types of pollutants, including organic matter,
pathogens, metals and emerging pollutants. Excess
of organic matter depletes oxygen from the water
bodies and increases the risk of eutrophication and
algal blooms in lakes and reservoirs. Over the last
20 years, new agricultural pollutants have emerged,
such as antibiotics, vaccines, growth promoters
and hormones that may leach from livestock
and aquaculture farms into the water, leading to
increasing risks for ecosystems and human health.
Residues of heavy metals in agricultural inputs
such as fertilizers or animal feed are also emerging
threats.

7.1.2 Responses to agricultural pollution
KNOWLEDGE AND RESEARCH
The knowledge gaps related to water pollution
from agriculture are considerable. The actual
contribution of crops, livestock and aquaculture to
water pollution is not known for most basins and
countries, particularly in the developing world. Such
knowledge is essential for national governments
to understand the extent of the problem and to
develop meaningful and cost-effective policies.
Moreover, if the pollution source is not well known,
the polluter pays principle cannot be applied. A
sustained research and modelling effort, supported
by water quality monitoring, would be needed to
better understand the pollutant pathways. Robust
assessments to understand the pathways, as well as
the health and environmental risks from emerging

W W D R

2 0 1 7

agricultural pollutants, such as animal hormones,
antimicrobial and other pharmaceuticals, are also
needed.

POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS
An adequate policy framework is needed to enable the
effective control of water pollution from agriculture.
Policies can be implemented through several types
of instruments: laws and regulations, plans and
programmes, economic instruments and information,
and awareness and education programmes (FAO,
2013b). Such instruments need to provide farmers
with the right incentives for the adoption of good
agricultural practices for pollution control.
As environmental and food production policies are
normally developed by different ministries, the sense
of shared responsibility for pollution legislation and
control is generally lacking. There are many cases
where this has led to conflict between policies aimed
at increasing food production and farm income on
the one hand, and on mitigating inland and coastal
pollution on the other. Enhanced inter-ministerial
cooperation mechanisms are required to develop
more coherent policies. Plans and programmes on
water pollution control need to be adopted at the
basin or watershed scale and cover different sources
of pollution – including industry and urban areas, in
addition to agriculture – and ideally identify those cases
in which wastewater from one sector can become a
resource for another sector, in a circular economy.

Figure 7.1 Integrated agriculture-aquaculture

Source: FAO (2013b, Fig. 7.3, p. 93).

A g ri c u l tu re

ON-FARM PRACTICES
On-farm practices play a crucial role in managing and
mitigating agricultural pollution. In crop production,
management measures to reduce the risk of water
pollution by organic and inorganic fertilizers and
pesticides include: i) the limitation and optimization
of the types, amounts and timing of application of
fertilizers and pesticides to crops; ii) the establishment
of buffer strips along surface watercourses; and iii) the
establishment of protection zones around groundwater
supply sources. Moreover, efficient irrigation schemes
can greatly reduce both water and fertilizer loss (MateoSagasta and Burke, 2010). For erosion control, good
management (i.e. contour ploughing) or restrictions on
the cultivation of steeply sloping soils are needed (US
EPA, 2003).
The problem of water quality in the livestock and
aquaculture sector arises from solid and liquid waste
(FAO, 2013b). Manure produced in livestock, for instance,
is a valuable material for improving soil fertility and can
save on fertilizer costs. However, it is highly polluting if
spread at the wrong time or in the wrong place. Without
sufficient precautions, livestock and aquaculture practices
can also contribute to the microbiological contamination
of rivers and groundwater. Therefore, measures to control
and eliminate the spreading of pathogens (i.e. bacteria
from livestock slurries) and other pollutants (i.e. nitrate)
are critical.
The risks associated with brackish or saline agricultural
drainage (return flow) also need to be managed.
Relevant water management options include the
minimization of drainage by conserving water, treatment
of drainage water (i.e. evaporation ponds
for saline drainage), or water reuse.
Brackish or saline drainage water can be
reused directly downstream, or blended
with freshwater. These approaches would
require planning at the watershed level to
adapt agriculture practices and crops to
the increasing salt content after different
cycles of reuse, which can also include the
production of prawns and fish in brackish
or saline waters.
Integrated aquaculture-agriculture (see
Figure 7.1), where crops, vegetables,
livestock, trees and fish are managed
collectively, can lead to increases in the
stability in production, resource-use
efficiency and environmental sustainability.
Integrated farming ensures that waste
from one enterprise become an input
in another farm. In this way, the use of
resources is optimized and pollution is
reduced (FAO, 2013b).

73

7.2 Agriculture as a user of
wastewater
With increasing demands for agricultural
commodities, farmers are looking into nonconventional water sources. Due to its high
nutrient content, domestic and municipal
wastewater presents an attractive option,
especially where conventional water resources
are scarce or lacking.
If wastewater is used in agriculture without the
necessary safety precautions, microbiological
and chemical pollutants can accumulate
in crops, livestock products, soil or water
resources, and lead to severe health impacts
for exposed food consumers and farm workers.
However, if adequately treated and safely
applied, wastewater is a valuable source of
both water and nutrients, contributing to food
security and the improvement of livelihoods.
Wastewater may be used directly or indirectly
in agriculture. Direct use refers to planned
and deliberate use of treated or untreated
wastewater for some beneficial purpose,
including irrigation, aquaculture and livestock.
Indirect use occurs when treated, partially
treated or untreated wastewater is discharged
into reservoirs, rivers and other water bodies,
including groundwater, that supply water for
agriculture. Indirect use poses the same health
risks as planned wastewater use projects,
but may have a greater potential for health
problems because the water user is unaware
of the wastewater being present (FAO, 1997).
Another important way in which wastewater
is used indirectly for agriculture is by means
of managed aquifer recharge (MAR) in which
treated or partially treated wastewater is

If adequately treated
and safely applied,
wastewater is a valuable
source of both water and
nutrients, contributing
to food security and the
improvement of livelihoods

74

infiltrated into aquifers through ponds, trenches,
lagoons or injection wells and subsequently reabstracted (Dillon et al., 2012). In many cases, the
soil and the unsaturated zone of the aquifer help
to remove pollutants from the wastewater so that
the re-abstracted groundwater can be used for all
types of crops.
Wastewater is typically rich in both suspended
solids (particulates) and dissolved nutrients. To
optimize water reuse, its quality, quantity and
location are important factors to be considered
(Iannelli et al., 2011).

7.2.1 Wastewater use: an opportunity
for agriculture
IRRIGATION
According to FAO’s AQUASTAT (n.d.b.), around
3,928 km³ of water per year is withdrawn
worldwide (see Figure 1, Prologue), of which 44%
(1,716 km³ per year) is consumed and 56% (2,212
km³ per year) is released as wastewater, including
agricultural drainage and wastewater.
Municipal wastewater accounts for the majority
of wastewater directly used in agriculture.
Municipal water demand corresponds to 11% of
global water withdrawal (AQUASTAT, n.d.b.). Out
of this, only 3% is consumed and the remaining
8% is discharged as wastewater, representing
330 km³ per year (Mateo-Sagasta et al., 2015),
much of which could potentially be used for
agricultural irrigation.
Agricultural drainage and wastewater, on the other
hand, account for 32% (1,257 km³ per year) of
water withdrawal. This highlights the fact that
policies, planning and implementation should
not be entirely focused on municipal wastewater
management, but also on sustainable agricultural
drainage, return flow and wastewater management.
As discussed above, water reuse for agriculture can
have significant health benefits, including increased
food security and improved nutrition.
Today, the planned use of municipal wastewater
is a common pattern in countries of the Middle
East and North Africa (MENA), Australia, and the
Mediterranean, as well as in Mexico, China and
the USA (AQUASTAT, n.d.b.). However, there is no
comprehensive inventory of the extent of treated
or untreated wastewater used in agriculture,
apart from the incipient efforts by institutions
like AQUASTAT (n.d.a.). Inadequate wastewater
treatment and the resulting large-scale water
pollution suggest that the area irrigated with
unsafe wastewater is probably ten times larger

W W D R

2 0 1 7

than the area using treated wastewater
(Drechsel and Evans, 2010).
According to FAO, globally 2.75 million km2 of
land are actually irrigated (AQUASTAT, 2014).
The approximately 330 km³ of municipal
wastewater generated every year could
potentially irrigate 40 million hectares (with
approx. 8,000 m³ per hectare) (Mateo-Sagasta
et al., 2015), or 15% of all irrigated lands.
Estimates of the total area that is being irrigated
with raw and diluted wastewater are still
fragmentary, but the numbers are likely to range
between 5 and 20 million hectares, with the
largest share probably in China (Drechsel and
Evans, 2010), which translates to between 2%
and 7% of the world’s total irrigated area.
The low percentage of wastewater that is being
used by agriculture in a planned manner – and
its unsafe application in most cases – confirms
the vast potential for improving and increasing
the application of used water (from municipal,
industrial and agricultural sources) to meet the
water demand for global food production.

AQUACULTURE AND LIVESTOCK
The objective of fertilizing an aquaculture pond
with excreta or wastewater is to produce natural
food for fish (see Box 5.4). A wide range of fish
species have been cultivated in this manner. Fish
can be grown in ponds that receive effluent or
sludge, where they can feed on algae and other
organisms that grow in the nutrient-rich water.
The fish, thereby, remove the nutrients from the
wastewater and are eventually harvested for
human consumption or as feed.
The quality and condition of the fish will
influence local acceptance. The microbial flora
of a fish reflects that of the water from which it
was taken (e.g. in the digestive tract, on the skin
or in the fluids of the body cavities). There may
be concern about contamination of the fish,
especially when they are harvested, cleaned and
prepared. If they are cooked well, they should
be safe, but it is advisable to move the fish to a
clear-water pond for several weeks before they
are harvested for human consumption.
The use of water by livestock, and the
contribution of livestock to water supply
depletion, is high and growing (FAO, 2006).
Animal products have a particularly large
water requirement per unit of nutritional
energy produced compared to food of plant
origin (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2013). Safe use
of wastewater may have a significant role in

A g ri c u l tu re

Currently, millions of tonnes of
active pesticide ingredients are
used in agriculture and cases
of acute pesticide poisoning
account for significant
morbidity and mortality
worldwide, especially in
developing countries

replacing freshwater for producing harvested
fodder (e.g. hay or silage), or for service water
replacement (e.g. cooling and cleaning facilities).
The usage of wastewater in the livestock sector,
whether from municipal/industrial production
or from the same livestock facility, is primarily
dictated by the quality of the wastewater. A
minimum of secondary treatment and disinfection
is generally recommended. In addition, reclaimed
water intended for use with cattle must have
been treated to remove helminth parasites. Such
treatment can either be based on lagooning (for
a period of 25 days or longer) or on an approved
method of filtration, such as sand or membrane
filtration (EPA Victoria, 2002).

7.2.2 Risks
The use of wastewater for irrigation has been most
successful in urban and peri-urban areas, where
wastewater is easily available and reliable, generally
free of charge, and where there is a market for
agricultural produce. Sometimes, storage of
wastewater may be necessary to provide partial
treatment or because supply trends may not match
the demand (e.g. seasonal variabilities).
Collected wastewater will go through certain
treatment procedures at the wastewater treatment
plant level prior to being applied on the field or
used for any other purposes. Although required
treatment levels vary according to the wastewater
source (type and concentration of contaminants)
and the expected use (crop type, harvesting
method, etc.), secondary treatment is often
considered sufficient for use in agriculture.
The treated wastewater and/or the reused water
will then need to go through appropriately
controlled application techniques, and potentially
additional treatment if required.

75

Water reuse for
agriculture can have
significant health
benefits, including
increased food security
and improved nutrition

Trading partially treated urban wastewater (for
irrigation) in exchange for access to freshwater
sources (for other uses in urban and peri-urban
areas) is one approach which can contribute to an
overall better management of water resources and
reduce negative health and environmental impacts
(Hanjra et al., 2012).
The mobility of contaminants and their ability to
accumulate aggravate the threat they pose to the
environment and to society.

HEALTH RISKS
Wastewater use constitutes a risk for the health of
farmers, food chain workers and consumers, due to
possible microbial and chemical contamination. The
use of low-cost labour is a common practice among
farmers using wastewater, and much of this work is
carried out by women. As a result, they face higher
health risks, including pathogen exposure, and
potential transmission to family members (Moriarty
et al., 2004).
Different approaches have been proposed for the
mitigation of health risks. Many approaches have
focused on water quality and strict regulations at the
point of use, making wastewater treatment a central
element for water reuse (Asano and Levine, 1998;
Mara and Cairncross, 1989). In the European Union,
for example, the Aquarec project proposes seven
(treatment-based) quality categories for different
types of reuse, with microbial and chemical limits for
each category (Salgot et al., 2006).
However, in low-income countries, strict water
quality standards for reuse are often perceived as
unaffordable and therefore fail in practice. WHO
Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta
and Greywater in Agriculture (WHO, 2006a)
acknowledge the potential health risks of wastewater
with no or inadequate treatment, and the necessity
to reduce such risks. The guidelines propose the use
of a number of barriers (multiple-barrier approach) to
protect public health along the sanitation and food
chains, from wastewater generation to consumption,
instead of focusing only on the quality of wastewater
at its point of use (see Box 7.1).

ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS
While using treated wastewater and optimizing
nutrient input to wastewater-irrigated soils may
have multiple environmental benefits, there are
some environmental risks associated with the use
of untreated or partially treated wastewater in
irrigation. These risks include soil contamination,
groundwater pollution and surface water
degradation.

76

Soil: Wastewater for irrigation adds nutrients,
dissolved solids, salts and heavy metals to the
soil. Over time, excessive amounts of these
elements may accumulate in the root zone with
possible harmful impacts on soil. The long-term
use of wastewater could result in soil salinity,
waterlogging, breakdown of soil structure, overall
reduction in productive capacity of soil and lower
crop yields. Impacts depend on factors such as
the source, use intensity, and composition of
wastewater, as well as soil properties and the crops’
own biophysical characteristics.
Groundwater: The use of wastewater has the
potential both to recharge groundwater aquifers
(positive externality) and to pollute groundwater
resources (negative externality). Percolation of excess
nutrients, salts and pathogens through the soil may
lead to the degradation of groundwater. However,
the actual impact will depend on a range of factors,
including the scale of wastewater use, the quality of
the groundwater, the depth to the water table, soil
drainage and soil characteristics (e.g. porous, sandy).
In irrigated areas with shallow groundwater tables,
the impact of irrigation with inadequately treated
wastewater on groundwater quality is likely to be
substantial.
Surface water: When runoff from wastewater
irrigation systems drains into surface water,
particularly small confined lakes and water bodies,
the remains of nutrients may cause eutrophication,
particularly if phosphates in the orthophosphate
form are present. Imbalances in the plant and
microbiological communities of water bodies may
in turn affect other higher forms of aquatic life
and reduce biodiversity. If these water bodies serve
local communities, the ecological impacts can be
translated into economic impacts.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

The multiple-barrier perspective goes beyond irrigation
water quality to also address post-harvest contamination
concerns by placing barriers at critical control points
along the food production chain
BOX 7.1 A MULTI-BARRIER APPROACH FOR REDUCING HEALTH RISKS FROM WASTEWATER IRRIGATION

The WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater in Agriculture (WHO, 2006a) set out
a comprehensive risk assessment and management approach to protect public health, seeking to maximize the
health benefits of safe water reuse (WHO, 2010). The sanitation safety planning manual (WHO, 2016b) provides
practical step-by-step guidance on implementing the risk assessment and management approach.
The multiple-barrier perspective goes beyond irrigation water quality to also address post-harvest contamination
concerns by placing barriers at critical control points along the food production chain (see Figure 7.1a). These
barriers aim to minimize risks and can be collectively effective even if one fails. This approach is applied in both
low-income countries, where irrigation with untreated wastewater is common and wastewater treatment is
limited, and developed countries having adopted the hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) principles
(Ilic et al., 2010).

Figure 7.1a The multi-barrier approach for reducing consumption-related risks along the food chain, as
applied in wastewater irrigation.
Wastewater
generation

Wastewater
treatment

Farmer/
Producer

Safe irrigation
practices

Traders/
Retailers

Hygienic handling
practices

Street food
kitchens

Safe food washing
and preparation

Consumer

Awareness
creation to
create demand
for safe produce

Facilitating behaviour change via education, market and
non-market incentives, and regular inspections

Source: Amoah et al. (2011, Fig. 1, p. 3).

The approach has been applied in Jordan, where the planned use of wastewater has been promoted since 1977
and where over 90% of treated wastewater is currently being used for irrigation. To deal with health concerns and
limited monitoring capacities, the Jordanian authorities introduced national guidelines for irrigation water quality in
2014. As part of the 2016–2025 National Water Strategy, the national guidelines adopted the more flexible healthbased target approach described in the WHO 2006 Guidelines (MWI, 2016a).
Contributed by WHO.

A g ri c u l tu re

77

CHAPTER 8
UNEP | Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo and Carla Friedrich
With contributions from: Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH); Javier Mateo-Sagasta and Mathew MacCartney
(IWMI); Maite M. Aldaya (Water Observatory, Botín Foundation and Public University of Navarra); and
Paul Ouedraogo (Ramsar Convention)

Combined sewer overflow treatment wetlands in Washington,
Indiana (USA) designed by Lochmueller Group

ECOSYSTEMS

This chapter examines the role of ecosystems in wastewater management and the
use of wastewater for enhancing ecosystem services.

Wastewater, when improperly managed,
can have detrimental effects on ecosystems.
However, there are numerous opportunities
to create synergies between ecosystem
services and wastewater management. These
interactions can be examined from two
perspectives. First, ecosystem services can
contribute to wastewater treatment as an
alternative or supplement to conventional
water treatment systems. The water
purification process provided by aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystems can supply clean water
suitable for drinking, industry, recreation,
and wildlife habitat. Second, the resources
embedded in wastewater – including water,
nutrients and organic carbon – can under
appropriate circumstances be used for
ecosystem rejuvenation and remediation,
enhancing ecosystems services, with major
benefits for economies and societies.

ecosystems, and if managed well, this
relationship can be mutually beneficial. ‘Green
infrastructure’ (GI) refers to natural (e.g.
riparian buffers, wetlands and mangroves)
or semi-natural ecosystems (e.g. constructed
wetlands, rain gardens, bio-retention ponds),
which can provide services such as sediment
filtration and pollution removal, comparable
to certain functions of ‘grey infrastructure’
(e.g. conventional piped drainage and water
treatment systems). The GI approach relies on
the provision of ecosystem services to deliver
primary water and wastewater management
benefits, accompanied by a wide array of
secondary co-benefits (e.g. carbon sequestration,
biodiversity protection, recreation), in a costeffective and sustainable manner (UNEP-DHI/
IUCN/TNC/WRI, 2014). Protecting and restoring
these GI systems benefits human society and
contributes to healthy ecosystems.

8.1 The role and limits of
ecosystems in wastewater
management

Riparian buffers are vegetated areas next to
water resources that act as filters and protect
water quality, provide bank stabilization, and
aquatic and wildlife habitat (see Table 8.1)
(Lowrance et al., 1995).

There is a clear link between sustainable
wastewater management and healthy

Natural ecosystems are known as the kidneys
of the environment, removing pollutants (see

Table 8.1 Effects of riparian buffers of different sizes on the reduction of sediment and nutrients from field
surface runoff
Buffer
width

Buffer
type

(m)

Sediment

Nitrogen

Phosphorus

Input

Output

Reduction

Input

Output

Reduction

Input

Output

Reduction

(mg/l)

(mg/l)

(%)

(mg/l)

(mg/l)

(%)

(mg/l)

(mg/l)

(%)

4.6

Grass

7 284

2 841

61.0

14.1

13.6

4.0

11.3

8.1

28.5

9.2

Grass

7 284

1 852

74.6

14.1

10.9

22.7

11.3

8.6

24.2

19.0

Forest

6 480

661

89.8

27.6

7.1

74.3

5.0

1.5

70.0

23.6

Grass/Forest

7 284

290

96.0

14.1

3.5

75.3

11.3

2.4

78.5

28.2

Grass/Forest

7 284

188

97.4

14.1

2.8

80.1

11.3

2.6

77.2

Source: Lowrance et al. (1995, Table 6, p. 30).

Ecosys te m s

79

BOX 8.1 NAKIVUBO WETLAND:
A RECIPIENT OF MUCH OF KAMPALA’S
(UGANDA) DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL
WASTEWATER

Wastewater, when
improperly managed, can
have detrimental effects on
ecosystems. However, there
are numerous opportunities
to create synergies between
ecosystem services and
wastewater management

Box 8.1), regulating water flow and
storing sediment. They can be very
effective and economical in terms of
providing wastewater treatment services,
provided that these ecosystems are
healthy, the pollutant load (and types of
contaminants) in the effluent is regulated,
and the pollution-carrying capacity of
the ecosystem is not exceeded. There are
natural limits to the assimilative capacity
of ecosystems, beyond which they are
threatened and can no longer perform
a purifying role. Once the concentration
of contaminants in runoff reaches critical
thresholds, there is a risk of abrupt and
irreversible environmental change (Steffen
et al., 2015).
Constructed wetlands and pond systems
are recognized as a reliable wastewater
treatment technology (see Box 8.2). In
these systems, the planted vegetation
greatly increases the surface contact
area, which helps remove contaminants
along the filter bed consisting usually of a
combination of sand and gravel.

8.2 Planned use of
wastewater for ecosystem
services
Water reclamation and reuse are no
longer a luxury but a must, particularly
in water-scarce countries, where many
cities and environmental agencies already
use partially treated wastewater to create
artificial lakes or wetlands, recharge
depleted groundwater, restore natural

80

The Nakivubo Wetland directly receives
untreated wastewater from approximately
100,000 households and several industries
in Kampala, neither of which are serviced
by the main sewage system. The 5.3 km2
wetland also receives the effluent of the
city’s main wastewater treatment plant.
Murchison Bay and Lake Victoria are
protected from the effects of sewage by
the wetland, which plays a purification role.
Since the intake for Kampala water supply
lies only 3 km from the wetland’s main
outflow canal, this protection is vital. The
economic value of water purification services
of the Nakivubo Wetland has been estimated
at between US$980,000 and US$1,808,000
per year, with additional co-benefits totalling
US$200,000 per year from crop cultivation,
papyrus harvesting, brick making and fish
farming (De Groot et al., 2006).
Contributed by Paul Ouedraogo (Ramsar Convention).

wetlands or irrigate golf courses, parks
and gardens (see Table 8.2). In addition to
landscape irrigation, reclaimed water has been
used to manage natural wetlands in Spain and
Mexico (Otoo et al., 2015) to make sure that
water levels are maintained even in periods of
drought.
The planned use of treated and partially
treated wastewater for ecosystem services
is relatively recent. It can increase resource
efficiency and provide benefits to ecosystems
through:
––

Reducing freshwater abstraction;

––

Recycling and reusing essential nutrients,
thereby reducing the fertilizer use and
GHG emissions;

––

Minimizing water pollution and
maintaining the quality of the river water
at a sufficient level for fisheries and other
aquatic ecosystems to thrive; and

––

Recharging depleted aquifers for various
beneficial uses, such as indirect potable
reuse (IPD) (see Sections 16.1.2 and
16.1.5).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 8.2 Examples of using treated wastewater for supporting ecosystem services
Name of the reuse
project

Country

Quighe and
BeiXiaoHe Water
Reclamation Plant

China

Marrakech
Wastewater
Treatment Plant

Morocco

Sulaibiya
Wastewater
Reclamation
Project

Kuwait

Jonan Three River
Project

Japan

Texcoco Lake

Mexico

Type of water
reuse

Greening of
landscapes

Restoration of
wetlands and
reservoirs

Drivers of water
reuse

Purpose of water
reuse

Technology for
wastewater
treatment

Water cost
savings;
insufficient
alternative water
resources

Landscape
irrigation;
groundwater
recharge

Micro-filtration;
reverse osmosis

Water channels
and river
restoration

Activated sludge;
sand filtration;
advanced
treatment with
nutrient removal
process

Drying up of
natural water
resources –
restoration of
water channels,
lakes and rivers

Source: Adapted from Otoo et al. (2015, Table 10.2, pp. 177–180).

BOX 8.2 CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS FOR
WASTEWATER TREATMENT, INDIANA, USA
In Washington, Indiana (USA), combined sewer
overflows (CSOs) were regularly contaminating
local waterways. The city constructed an artificial
wetland to process wastewater, which saved the
city over US$26 million compared to the estimated
cost of building a conventional treatment system,
as well as saving US$1.6 million annually in
operational costs. Water discharged from the
constructed wetland system has exceeded the
water quality standards for the city’s wastewater
treatment plant, and wildlife has returned to the
local waterways since the system’s construction.
Source: PR Newswire (2013); UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC/WRI (2014);
and City of Washington, personal communication (2016).

Although valuation of treated wastewater
use for ecosystem services reveals favourable
environmental and economic benefits (see
Box 8.3), functional markets for many of the
ecosystem services are currently embryonic or
non-existent (Qadir et al., 2015a).
Given the degradation of natural habitats for
waterbirds, constructed wetlands provide a
legitimate alternative.

Ecosys te m s

BOX 8.3 RECREATIONAL OASIS
CREATED BY TREATED WASTEWATER IN
LIMA, PERU
In a city of dust and sand, parks and gardens
can positively impact human well-being.
Huascar Park, a multi-purpose recreational
park, receives its water from one of Lima’s
15 wastewater treatment plants. Huascar
Park combines wastewater treatment and a
public park, which is a win-win situation as
it optimizes resource recovery in an urban
area and provides benefits for ecosystems.
The partially treated wastewater supplies
water and some nutrients to the park, which
are extremely valuable in Lima where soils
are low in moisture and fertility. It also saves
freshwater for other uses and improves
the availability of nutrients in the soils for
vegetation, thereby creating a recreational
‘oasis’ in the middle of the Peruvian capital.
There is an important local ecosystem service
provided, as the green area provides an
environment conducive for the relaxation
and recreation of the park visitors, thereby
supporting their mental and physical health.
Contributed by Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH).

81

Governments and
companies have
traditionally focused
on meeting emission
standards – effluent or
discharge standards –
without considering the
ambient standards from the
ecosystem standpoint
8.3 Operational and
policy aspects
Reducing pollution caused by untreated
wastewater discharges and increasing
the use of treated wastewater requires
concerted efforts, which need to be
done through integrated, full-life cycle
ecosystem management and resource
efficiency objectives. Policies and
approaches that recognize wastewater
as a resource and highlight the strong
linkage between ecosystem services and
human well-being are also required.
The implementation of ambient water
quality standards is key to the prevention
of negative environmental impacts and
the conservation of natural ecosystems.
Ambient standards refer to the capacity
of natural ecosystems to absorb or
assimilate environmental pollution.
They are measured as the maximum
allowable amount of a substance in a
water body, given as a concentration.
Since the ambient standards can be set
at differential levels for varying locations,
it is possible to use them to reduce
the total maximum load and protect
valuable ecosystems in a way that would
not be possible using emission controls
(Markandya et al., 2001) (see Box 8.4).
Although ambient water quality standards
often exist in national legislation, they do
not exist for all substances and all places
(Hoekstra et al., 2011). When they do
exist, the capacity to effectively enforce
them is often lacking, especially (but not
only) in developing countries.

82

BOX 8.4 ADDED VALUE OF THE
AMBIENT WATER QUALITY STANDARDS
IN COMPARISON WITH EMISSION
STANDARDS
Governments and companies have
traditionally focused on meeting emission
standards – effluent or discharge standards
– without considering the ambient
standards from the ecosystem standpoint.
Meeting emission standards is one thing,
but looking at how effluents influence the
assimilation capacity of water bodies is
another. Meeting effluent standards – in
terms of concentration of chemicals in the
effluent – can simply be done by using
more water to dilute the effluent before
disposal, which might be helpful to meet
effluent standards. However, it does not
reduce the total load of chemicals added to
the environment and the related impact on
the ecosystems, not to mention the related
increase in overall water use.
Source: Hoekstra et al. (2011).
Contributed by Maite M. Aldaya (Water Observatory,
Botín Foundation and Public University of Navarra).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

PART III

W O R L D

W A T E R

D E V E L O P M E N T

REGIONAL
ASPECTS

Chapter 9 | Africa
Chapter 10 | The Arab Region
Chapter 11 | Asia and
the Pacific

Chapter 12 | Europe and

North America

Chapter 13 | Latin America and

the Caribbean

R E P O R T
2017

CHAPTER 9
UNESCO Multisectoral Regional Office in Abuja | Simone Grego and Oladele Osibanjo

Optimizing water reuse and efficiency

AFRICA

This chapter examines the critical challenges of Africa’s rapidly growing urban
settlements and the opportunities provided through wastewater use.

9.1 Water and wastewater
in Sub-Saharan Africa
Africa is home to 15% of the world’s
population, but has only 9% of global
renewable water resources, unevenly distributed
across the region (Wang et al., 2014). The gap
between water availability and water demand
is growing fast, especially in cities, where
the urban population is expected to nearly
quadruple by 2037 (World Bank, 2012). The
improvement of living standards and the change
in consumption patterns are contributing to this
growth in water demand. On the other hand,
water availability is decreasing due to competing
demands from agriculture, mining and industry,
and deteriorating water quality. Large numbers
of people are dependent on groundwater as
their primary or alternate source of water,
but pollution and over-extraction threaten
groundwater resources (World Bank, 2012).
In Sub-Saharan Africa, out of over a billion
people, there are still 319 million people without
access to improved drinking water sources.
For sanitation, the picture is even gloomier, as
695 million people do not have basic sanitation
and not a single Sub-Saharan African country
has met the MDGs target regarding sanitation
(UNICEF/WHO, 2015).
Mining, oil and gas, logging, and manufacturing
represent the main industries in the region. All
of these produce wastewater, which is often
released into the environment with minimal
or no treatment. For example, in Nigeria, less
than 10% of industries reportedly treat their
effluents before discharging them into surface
waters (Taiwo et al., 2012; Ebiare and Zejiao,
2010). Moreover, where stabilization ponds
exist, pollutant concentrations observed in the
effluent were sometimes five times greater than
those observed in Europe (Li et al., 2011).
Agricultural runoff containing agro-chemicals
and plant and livestock wastes are a contributing
source of pollution to water bodies. For example,

Af ri c a

a link has been established between the
periodic eutrophication of the Oyun Reservoir
in Offa, Kwara State, Nigeria, and the runoff of
phosphate fertilizers from nearby farms and from
cow dung washing from the watershed into the
reservoir (Mustapha, 2008).
In most African cities, rain washes municipal
solid wastes and other pollutants into
rudimentary drainage systems and subsequently,
into nearby rivers (cf. Taiwo, 2011) and
groundwater. The situation is further aggravated
by the weak enforcement of, and noncompliance with, town planning principles and
regulations (Osibanjo and Majolagbe, 2012).
While agricultural and industrial wastewaters
are recognized pollution sources in the region,
the focus of this chapter is mainly on urban
wastewater, as the latter is central to the new
opportunities that could arise from improved
management, in the context of accelerated
urban growth.

9.2

Critical challenges

9.2.1 Urban settlements
One of the main challenges related to
wastewater in Africa is the overall lack of
infrastructure for collection and treatment.
Combined with high organic loads, unregulated
waste input, power outages, increasing
wastewater flow rates, high energy costs and
lack of re-investments (Nikiema et al., 2013),
this results in the pollution of already limited
surface and groundwater resources.
In urban settings, sewer collection tends to
be limited, and connections from houses
and facilities to municipal sewerage are
insufficient. Where infrastructure exists,
improper operation, poor maintenance and
lack of skilled professionals severely limit the
effectiveness of the treatment process, leading
to the high concentration of pollutants found
in the environment.

85

Figure 9.1 Urban and rural population (% annual growth), 2013

East Asia and Pacific (developing only)

Europe and Central Asia (developing only)

Latin America and Caribbean (developing only)

Middle East and North Africa (developing only)

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa (developing only)
-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Rural population growth (annual %)

4

5

6

7

Urban population growth (annual %)

Source: Based on data from the World Bank (n.d.).

In existing waterworks, the lack of stable
financial support impedes the maintenance
and upgrade of treatment facilities and the
purchase and use of adequate monitoring
instruments (Wang et al., 2014; Nikiema et al.,
2013). In Addis Ababa, for example, the Kaliti
treatment plant, initially designed to serve
50,000 people, was serving less than 13,000,
which was attributed to a lack of investment
in connecting houses to the sewerage
pipelines, resulting in a low connection rate.
It has been calculated that, in 2009, less than
3% of the wastewater produced by the town
reached wastewater treatment facilities (Abiye
et al., 2009).

a shortage of investments in human
capacity, contributes to ongoing water and
wastewater quality problems (UNEP, 2010).

Another challenge hampering the ability of
African countries to manage wastewater is the
insufficient capacity for effective monitoring
of wastewater before and after treatment. In
Nigeria, for example, a recent study (UNESCO,
2016a) indicates that only a few laboratories
in the country are able to detect emerging
pollutants.

In addition, existing laws and legislation
for the water sector at all the tiers
of government usually do not take
wastewater into consideration. In Nigeria,
for example, there is little to no mention
of wastewater in most of the federal and
state laws (Ajiboye et al., 2012; GoldfaceIrokalibe, 1999 and 2002; GoldfaceIrokabile et al., 2001). Enforcement
of regulation (i.e. for the industries
connected to the sewerage) is almost
non-existent in most countries, directly
affecting water quality downstream.

9.2.2 Governance and data needs
Poor governance, including ineffective
policies and institutions, lack of enforcement,
corruption, insufficient infrastructure and

86

A critical issue, which limits the possibility
of establishing adequate policies for water
quality, is the lack of available data about
wastewater. In Sub-Saharan Africa, little
quantitative data are available about
wastewater generation, treatment, use
and quality. Comprehensive information is
available only for Senegal, Seychelles and
South Africa, with data from Seychelles
and South Africa dating back to early
2000 (Sato et al., 2013).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Figure 9.2 Urban water management challenges versus institutional and economic capacities
Index 0—1.00
Higher-capacity cities facing lower
water-related challenges

1.00
0.90

CPT

Higher-capacity cities facing higher
water-related challenges

DUR
JHB

0.80

OUA

CAPACITIES

0.70
DLA
DAK

0.60
0.50

ADD
NBO

KMS
MPM
LOS
KIN

0.40
0.30

LUN
ACC
LUM
BZV

COO
LLW

KRT

BLZ
LAD

YAO

IBA
ABV
KAN

HRE

ABJ

CKY

DSM

KAM

MBU

0.20
Lower-capacity cities facing lower
water-related challenges

0.10
0.00

0.20

0.30

0.40

Lower-capacity cities facing higher
water-related challenges

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

CHALLENGES
Source: World Bank (2012, Fig. 1, p. 5).
* Notes: Cities abbreviations: ABJ, Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire; ABV, Abuja, Nigeria; ACC, Accra, Ghana; ADD, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; BLZ, Blantyre,
Malawi; BZV, Brazzaville, Congo; CKY, Conakry, Guinea; COO, Cotonou, Benin; CPT, Cape Town, South Africa; DAK, Dakar, Senegal;
DLA, Douala, Cameroon; DSM, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania; DUR, Durban, South Africa; HRE, Harare, Zimbabwe; IBA, Ibadan, Nigeria; JHB,
Johannesburg, South Africa; KAN, Kano, Nigeria; KIN, Kinshasa, D.R. Congo; KMS, Kumasi, Ghana; KRT, Khartoum, Sudan; LLW, Lilongwe,
Malawi; LAD, Luanda, Angola; LOS, Lagos, Nigeria; LUN, Lusaka, Zambia; MBU, Mbuji-Mayi, D.R. Congo; MPM, Maputo, Mozambique; NBO,
Nairobi, Kenya; OUA, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso; YAO, Yaounde, Cameroon.
** Note on methodology: This figure presents an index that categorizes cities in two dimensions: water-related challenges and institutional
and economic capacities. For each dimension, a number of variables were identified, for which indicators were then selected. For the waterrelated challenges dimension, indicators were selected for the following variables: urbanization challenges, solid waste management, water
supply services, sanitation services, flood hazards, and water resources availability. For the institutional and economic capacities dimension,
indicators were selected for the following variables: country policies and institutions, economic strength, water-related institutions, and water
utility governance. Indicators were normalized, thus units value vary from 0 to 1. Indicators were assigned equal weights and aggregated for
each dimension.

Af ri c a

87

9.2.3 Rapid urbanization
In 2013, the annual growth rate of the urban
population (see Figure 9.1) in the developing
countries of Sub-Saharan Africa (6%) was
three times higher than the rural one (2%). The
ratio of people living in urban areas in Africa
is projected to increase from 40% to 45%
between 2015 and 2025 (UNDESA, 2014).
These figures suggest that there will probably
be a massive increase in wastewater production
in African cities (World Bank, 2012).
African cities are growing quickly, and their
current water management systems cannot
keep up with the growing demand. It has been
estimated that half of the urban infrastructure
that will make up African cities by 2035 has yet
to be built (World Bank, 2012). This scenario
poses several challenges and, at the same time,
offers opportunities to break away from past
(inadequate) water management approaches
and to shift to innovative water management
solutions, such as integrated urban water
management (IUWM), which includes the use
of treated wastewater to help meet increasing
water demand.
Limited human, financial and institutional
capacities related to water management pose
challenges for African cities. Although the
main challenges in terms of magnitude exist
in the larger cities, these are also relatively
better-placed in terms of institutional and
economic capacity (see Figure 9.2) to address
the problems through economies of scale.
Most smaller cities lack this advantage and
clearly need to focus on capacity-building as a
necessary step towards improving their water
and wastewater management systems.

The gap between water
availability and water demand
is growing fast, especially
in cities, where the urban
population is expected to
nearly quadruple by 2037

88

BOX 9.1 WASTEWATER USE IN
KUMASI AND ACCRA, GHANA
Ghana provides a good example of
urban and peri-urban agriculture
developing through informal irrigation
with untreated wastewater from
streams and drains. In Kumasi and
Accra, where the central wastewater
treatment plants are barely functional,
wastewater is regularly used to irrigate
crops. This practice, common in urban
centres in many countries of Africa,
provides food for the population, offers
employment and alleviates poverty for
a number of Ghanaians, and also helps
to preserve freshwater resources.
In Accra, farmers irrigate more than
15 kinds of vegetables with untreated
wastewater. Urban plot sizes vary
between 22 and 3,000 m2 per farmer.
Year-round irrigated vegetable farming
can achieve average annual income
levels of US$400–800 per farmer. The
annual market value for production is
estimated at US$14 million and around
200,000 urban dwellers from all classes
benefit from this production. The
cultivated land in Kumasi is estimated to
cover 115 km2, which is twice the total
area reported under formal irrigation in
the whole country.
There are, however, public health
concerns, in particular regarding
microbial contamination of these
agricultural products. Analysis of
vegetables sold in the markets has
shown the presence of faecal coliforms
and helminth eggs (Keraita and
Drechsel, 2004).
Source: Bahri et al. (2008).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

9.3

The way forward

9.3.1 Wastewater use in urban
and peri-urban farms
The value of wastewater as an untapped
resource is widely recognized, even in the
absence of national policies regulating
water reuse in many African countries.
Several urban and peri-urban farmers
are switching from traditional freshwater
irrigation to wastewater irrigation. This is
exemplified by the untreated wastewater
irrigation business in Kumasi and Accra,
Ghana (see Box 9.1), where wastewater
is used to irrigate crops and to produce
vegetables. While this creates opportunities
for business and improved livelihoods,
it has serious health implications for
customers and farmers (Keraita and
Drechsel, 2004; Drechsel et al., 2010).
In the region, there are several examples
of sludge recovery for agricultural
use, creating opportunities for the
improvement of livelihoods for farmers
whilst helping to reduce the quantity of
sludge released into the environment.
A pilot composting plant was set up in
Kumasi, Ghana, and its operations were
monitored for 12 months (Mensah et al.,
2003). The positive results, including
farmers’ acceptance to use the composts
as fertilizer, indicate that nutrient recovery
from sludge is a viable option to reduce
the impact of wastewater on water quality
and to improve the livelihoods of farmers
in urban and peri-urban areas.

Strong advocacy is needed to
convince policy-makers and
members of the political class of
the phenomenal ‘cost of inaction’
in terms of socio-economic
development, environmental
quality and human health

9.3.2 Treated wastewater use
Namibia and South Africa provide two good
examples of using wastewater which, when
properly treated, can be a safe source of
water for drinking and industrial purposes.
Box 16.1 shows how in Windhoek, Namibia,
wastewater is treated to meet drinking water
quality standards, while Box 9.2 describes
how wastewater is being recycled in industry.

9.3.3 Creating an enabling
environment for positive change
Sub-Saharan Africa can address the strong
growth in water demand that is expected for
2030 and meet the SDG 6, provided it starts
addressing its current water challenges now
and embraces the opportunities that improved
wastewater management can provide.
This move will require a better governance
structure, effective institutions and policies,
better infrastructure for wastewater collection
and treatment, and better maintenance of
this infrastructure. Increased human and
institutional capacity-building for wastewater
treatment, monitoring and data management,
a stronger regulatory framework, and
enforcement and compliance monitoring are
also critically important.
In order to achieve success in the
implementation of the foregoing elements,
a strong political will is necessary. Therefore,
strong advocacy is needed to convince policymakers and members of the political class of
the phenomenal ‘cost of inaction’ in terms of
socio-economic development, environmental
quality and human health.

Af ri c a

89

Sub-Saharan Africa
can address the strong
growth in water demand
that is expected for 2030 and
meet the SDG 6, provided it
starts addressing its current
water challenges now and
embraces the opportunities
that improved wastewater
management can provide

Finally, the establishment of adequate
financial mechanisms is a key
element. Investors can be reluctant to
finance water infrastructure projects,
demanding high upfront payments and
long development periods. Different
options for financing wastewater
management should hence be explored
with national governments, such as
payment of water/wastewater levies,
participation by the private sector
through investment in effective lowcost best available technologies and
public–private partnership (see Chapter
15). Donor support should be sought
for pilot/demonstration projects of
innovative business/delivery models,
as well as cost-effective and proven
innovative technologies.

BOX 9.2 WASTEWATER RECYCLING
IN THERMAL POWER GENERATION,
SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa has been pioneering the
internal treatment and recycling of
wastewater in industries since 1980. This
practice has the advantage of reducing
both the demand for, and the amount of
effluent discharged.
ESKOM is the main South African electricity
public utility, and one of the largest in
Africa. Large quantities of water are used
in its inland thermal power plants, mainly
for cooling purposes, with production
of substantial amounts of “blow-down”
water (i.e. the water that is drained from
cooling equipment). This water cannot
be released untreated, due to its high
salinity and the presence of pathogens and
chemical additives.
In the early 1980s, ESKOM began
installing reverse osmosis plants to treat
blow-down water. Currently, in the
Lethabo Power Station, in Sasolburg, Free
State, a reverse osmosis plant is installed
with a total capacity of 12 million litres
per day. A part of this clean water is
returned to the concentrated cooling
water system and another part is used as
feed water for the ion exchange process
– another desalination process. The water
from the ion exchange process has very
low levels of total dissolved solids (TDS)
and is reused in the plant.
Source: Schutte (2008).

90

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 10
UNESCWA | Carol Chouchani Cherfane
With contributions from: Ali Karnib (UNESCWA) and Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH)

ARAB
REGION

Miyahuna Wastewater Treatment Plant in Amman (Jordan)

THE

This chapter addresses the production, collection and treatment of wastewater in
the Arab region, with a special focus on political frameworks promoting different
uses of treated wastewater.

10.1 Context
The Arab region is the driest in the world, with
18 out of 22 Arab countries falling below the
water poverty line of 1,000 m3 per capita in 2014
(AQUASTAT, n.d.b). The use of safely treated
wastewater has become a means for increasing
water availability in several Arab states and has
been included as a core component of water
resources management plans at the regional and
national levels.
Access to improved sanitation is largely prevalent
in the Arab region, but connections to sewerage
networks and wastewater treatment facilities
remain more limited. Network coverage is
generally provided in larger urban centres, while
septic tanks and cesspits remain common in rural
areas and in the region’s least developed countries
(UNESCWA, 2013). Off-network sanitation
systems, however, complicate the collection and
treatment of wastewater and reduce the ability to
sustainably manage wastewater as a resource in
most areas.
Regional monitoring and reporting on water,
sanitation and wastewater services is conducted
under the auspices of the Arab Ministerial Water
Council through the MDG+ Initiative.8 The
MDG+ data presented in Table 10.1 show that,
during the year 2013, 69% of the wastewater
collected in Arab States was safely treated, with
46% undergoing secondary treatment and 23%
undergoing tertiary treatment. Furthermore, 84%
of all wastewater collected in the water-scarce
Gulf Cooperation Countries (GCC) underwent
tertiary treatment, and 44% of their total safely

8

92

The MDG+ Initiative is a regional, intergovernmental initiative
that collects country-level data from National Monitoring
Teams, comprised of the national ministry responsible for
water and wastewater utilities, and statistical offices in each
Arab State. The initiative collects data on access to water
supply, sanitation and wastewater treatment services in the
Arab region. The wastewater indicators measured by the
MDG+ Initiative clarify the quantity of wastewater treated
by level, the quantity of treated wastewater used and for
what purpose, and the tariff applied on sanitation services.
Detailed descriptions and methods of calculating the MDG+
indicators can be found in UNESCWA (2013).

treated wastewater volume was subsequently
used. At the Arab regional level, 23% of the
safely treated wastewater is being used, mostly
for irrigation and groundwater recharge.

10.2 Challenges
10.2.1 Serving displaced populations
and floods
The provision of water, sanitation and
wastewater treatment for refugees in camps,
informal settlements and host communities in
Arab States has become a serious challenge.
Jordan hosts over 700,000 registered refugees
from Iraq and Syria, of which 90% are living
outside of camps (UNHCR, 2016); while in
Lebanon, the water infrastructure is struggling
to serve the 1.5 million refugees that represent
the equivalent of one third of the Lebanese
population (UNOCHA, 2016). Conflict and the
internal displacement of people in Iraq, Libya,
Palestine, Somalia and Syria have also strained
the operating capacity of wastewater facilities
and damaged sewage networks.
The absence of adequate storm drainage
systems and artificial groundwater recharge
schemes render treatment plants often
inoperable during extreme rainfall events,
which are increasing in frequency and intensity
due to climate change. Flooding has imposed
economic and environmental costs and damage
to infrastructure, property and protected areas,
as has been experienced on the Socotra Islands
in Yemen, the Arabian Gulf, as well as along
the Egyptian, Lebanese and Palestinian coasts
over the last few years.

10.2.2 Industrial wastewater
Industrial wastewater management is costly
and controversial in the region. Chemical and
biological effluents from the textile and tannery
industries in Egypt, Morocco and other Arab
countries affect surface and groundwater
supplies, but closing these small-scale
businesses threatens traditional livelihoods.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

At least 11 out of 22 Arab States have adopted legislation
permitting the use of treated wastewater
Table 10.1

Volume of collected wastewater, wastewater treatment and use (million m3 per year), 2013

Volume of
collected
wastewater

State

Primary
treatment

Secondary
treatment

Tertiary
treatment

Volume
of safely
treated
wastewater

Volume
of treated
wastewater
used

Treated
wastewater
use
(% of safely
treated
wastewater)

Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Bahrain

122.8

0

0

122.8

122.8

38.1

31

Kuwait

n.a.

0

58.0

250.3

308.3

308.3

100

Oman

26.2

0

0

26.2

26.2

20.4

78

Qatar

176.8

0

0

158.7

158.7

115.9

73

Saudi Arabia

1 317.2

0

580.2

736.9

1 317.1

237.1

18

United Arab
Emirates

615.7

0.3

11.7

593.6

605.3

397.2

65.6

3 030.4

724.3

2 054.8

57.1

2 111.9

n.a.

n.a.

Iraq*

620.4

0

415.7

0

415.7

0

0

Jordan

130.8

0

130.8

0

130.8

113.3

87

Lebanon

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Palestine*

61.0

0.3

45.3

0

45.3

0

0

1 570.4

0

275.2

0

275.2

19.3

7

Libya*

291.1

0

45.8

0

45.8

14.7

32

Morocco

144.2

38.2

0.1

6.1

6.2

n.a.

n.a.

Tunisia

235.0

0

222.0

6.6

228.6

60.0

26

Mashreq
Egypt

Maghreb
Algeria

Least developed countries (LDC)
Mauritania

0.65

0

0.65

0

0.65

0.12

18

Sudan

18.0

18.0

0

0

0

0

0

Yemen*

159.4

58.1

42.2

22.0

64.3

n.a.

n.a.

TOTAL

8 520.0

839.2

3 882.5

1 980.3

5 562.8

1 324.4

23

* Data represent the year 2012.
n.a.: Not available.
Source: Compiled from LAS/UNESCWA/ACWUA (2016).

Th e

Ara b

Re g i o n

93

BOX 10.1 NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE
WASTEWATER SECTOR IN LEBANON
On a larger scale, brine released from desalination
plants includes chemical residues that negatively affect
coastal ecosystems. Oily water brought to the surface
during oil extraction contaminates aquifer systems and
degrades land resources.

10.2.3 Insufficient integration and
investment
Despite investments in secondary treatment plants,
many facilities are overloaded and produce effluent
below the expected quality, due to changing
population pressures and the time lag between the
design and construction (UNESCWA, 2013). Investment
choices are also often made with little regard for the
hot and arid climate conditions that characterize the
region, which should be considered, particularly when
assessing aerobic and anaerobic treatment options.
The technical capacity and budgets to operate and
maintain secondary and tertiary wastewater facilities
also lag behind in some Arab countries. This constrains
investment opportunities and lengthens the time
required to render the plants operational.
Wastewater master plans can quickly become
outdated, given the regional dynamics (see Box
10.1). Institutional arrangements for wastewater
management can also be unclear. Moreover, there is
often a lack of coordination between national and
municipal actors responsible for extending sewerage
networks, and water resource managers and water
utilities responsible for operating wastewater facilities
(see Chapter 3).

10.3 Responses
In 2011, the Arab Ministerial Water Council adopted
a regional water security strategy and action plan,
which called for the expansion of desalination and the
use of treated wastewater and agricultural drainage
water as non-conventional water resources that can be
developed to offset the water deficit in the Arab region
(AMWC, 2011). In tandem, the Council launched
the MDG+ Initiative to monitor and report on water
supply, sanitation and wastewater services in Arab
states, based on a set of region-specific indicators that
examine water and wastewater within the context of
water-scarce environments (UNESCWA, 2013).

10.3.1 Policy frameworks
At least 11 out of 22 Arab States have adopted
legislation permitting the use of treated wastewater,
issued by the national institutions responsible for the
use and discharge of wastewater, whether it be the
ministries responsible for the environment in Kuwait,
Lebanon and Oman, health in Iraq, agriculture in Tunisia,
housing in Egypt, or the institutes responsible for
standards in Jordan and Yemen (WHO, 2006b).

94

In 2012, the population of Lebanon was estimated at
4.3 million. Out of about 310 million m3 of wastewater
produced annually, an estimated 250 million m3 came
from domestic sources and 60 million m3 from industry
(MEW, 2012).
It is estimated that only 8% of the wastewater
generated in Lebanon is treated. About 11% of the
population uses safely managed wastewater systems
in the governorates of North and South Lebanon,
compared to only 7% and 3% in Greater Beirut and
the Bekaa, respectively (Karnib, 2016). Most collected
wastewater is discharged into surface waters and
the Mediterranean Sea. On-site septic tanks have
contaminated groundwater resources, such as the
Jeita Springs that supply water to Greater Beirut (BGR,
n.d.). The harmful impacts of inadequate wastewater
collection, transfer and treatment increase health and
environmental risks.
The 2012 National Strategy for the Wastewater Sector
includes five strategic pillars: i) an integrated and
prioritized investment programme for wastewater
collection, treatment and use; ii) legal, regulatory and
policy measures to set and regulate standards; iii)
institutional measures to define responsibilities and
to create capacity for service delivery; iv) financial
measures for viability and affordable services; and v)
measures to optimize private sector participation in
the wastewater sector. The implementation cost was
estimated at US$3.1 billion for work planned between
2012 and 2020. Unfortunately, the implementation of
the strategy was disrupted due to a lack of funding and
the instability resulting from political uncertainty and
ongoing conflicts in the region.

Jordan and Tunisia address wastewater within the
context of their national water policies and plans.
Jordan adopted the “Water Substitution and Reuse
Policy” in February 2016, which formalizes treated
wastewater use as a national policy and includes plans
to set tariffs for the use of treated wastewater and
blended treated wastewater (MWI, 2016a). This has
been complemented by a decentralized wastewater
management policy to serve smaller communities
(MWI, 2016b) – a significant step as treated
wastewater accounts for nearly 15% of available
water resources in Jordan (UNESCWA, 2015).
Donor coordination and investment planning in
the wastewater sector is well developed in Jordan.
The Jordan Response Plan for the Syrian Crisis
2016–2018 dedicates significant resources to
expanding wastewater collection and treatment in
host communities in Jordan. The incorporation of
energy efficiency and local air pollution measures in

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 10.2 WATER REUSE IN TUNISIA
wastewater treatment plants has also been planned,
as well as efforts to ensure gender-sensitive sanitation
facilities in schools and healthcare clinics (MOPIC,
2016). Tunisia has also engaged in an active water
reuse programme (see Box 10.2).

10.3.2 Produced water use by the oil
industry
Efforts have been made to treat and use water produced
during oil extraction. Oman tested the treatment and
use of oil-containing wastewater for irrigation as an
alternative to injecting the water back into aquifers,
contaminating groundwater resources (JPEC, 1999).
The de-oiling of produced water was also researched by
Sultan Qaboos University in Oman (Pillay et al., 2010),
which found that constructed wetlands could also be
used to dispose of the treated produced water.

10.3.3 Treated wastewater use for
ecosystems and artificial groundwater
recharge
Saudi Arabia’s investment in an environmentally sensitive
wastewater treatment system around Riyadh resulted
in the construction of the Wadi Hanifa Wetlands from
redirected drainage and treated wastewater. The
initiative received the Aga Khan Award for Architecture
for the design of the new recreational spaces and the reemergence of biodiversity in the area (AKDN, n.d.).
Off-network approaches are also being applied that
draw on lessons learned from natural ecosystems. In
Lebanon, the Litani River Authority successfully tested
a constructed wetland for wastewater treatment.
Meanwhile, similar nature-based decentralized
approaches to wastewater treatment are being adopted
in several mountain communities in Lebanon that cannot
be accessed by sewage networks (Difaf, 2016).
Treated wastewater is now also being used to support
artificial groundwater recharge and water storage
in the water-scarce Arab region. In Bahrain, 7% of
treated wastewater is used for groundwater recharge
(LAS/UNESCWA/ACWUA, 2015). Meanwhile, some
Arab States are redirecting stormwater and treated
wastewater into aquifers as a way to manage extreme
rainfall events and increase water reserves, as was done
by Egypt along its Red Sea Coast.

10.3.4 Wastewater to energy
Recovered biogas from wastewater treatment through
anaerobic digestion allows for the production of energy
(see Section 16.2.2). Recovered biogas in the region is
being used for on-site generation of heat and electricity,
and could even be used for off-site energy production.
The As-Samra Wastewater Treatment Plant, the largest
in Jordan, serves 2.27 million people and achieves
80% energy self-sufficiency through a biogas-powered

Th e

Ara b

Re g i o n

Water reuse has been a priority in Tunisia since
the early 1980s, when Tunisia launched a nationwide water reuse programme to increase the
country’s usable water resources. Most municipal
wastewater receives secondary biological treatment
through activated sludge, with some limited tertiary
treatment also in place.
Restrictions on treated wastewater use to protect
public health have received considerable attention
and are in line with WHO recommendations (WHO,
2006b). Tunisian regulations allow for the use
of secondary treated effluent on all crops except
vegetables, whether eaten raw or cooked. Regional
agricultural departments supervise the use of safely
treated wastewater and collect charges from the
farmers. Tunisian farmers pay for irrigation water on
the basis of the volume of water required and the
area to be irrigated.
While there is strong government support for
treated wastewater use, farmers continue to
prefer irrigation from groundwater due to social
acceptance, regulations concerning crop choices,
and other agronomic considerations. Farmers in the
arid south have also expressed concerns about the
long-term impacts of saline wastewater on their
crop productivity and soils. In addition, farmers
consider the health restrictions as an impediment
to growing high-value crops such as vegetables. To
address these challenges, Tunisian policy-makers
have sought to improve the coordination and pursue
demand-driven approaches to improve the planning
of wastewater reclamation and irrigation projects
with safely treated effluent (Qadir et al., 2010).
Contributed by Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH).

generator supported by an anaerobic sludge digestor
(UNESCWA, 2015). The Gabal El Asfar wastewater
treatment facility on the east bank of the Nile in
Cairo has a processing capacity of more than 1.4
million m3 per day, and includes a cogeneration plant
fuelled by anaerobic sludge digestion that produces
up to 65% of the power needed to run the facility
(Badr, 2016).
Modular biogas digesters are also being considered
for generating and supplying energy to refugee
camps and informal settlements in the Mashreq.
However, awareness-raising within the local cultural
context is needed before application of such
approaches is pursued beyond the pilot phase.

95

CHAPTER 11
UNESCAP | Aida N. Karazhanova and Donovan Storey, with contributions from Jayakumar Ramasamy
(UNESCO Bangkok Office), Ram S. Tiwaree and Stefanos Fotiou

ASIA
PACIFIC
AND

Community-led meeting on sanitation in Lao PDR

THE

This chapter describes how wastewater is being increasingly recognized as a potential
resource for different sectors across the Asia and Pacific region, with co-benefits
ranging from climate resilience to by-product recovery.

11.1 Context and challenges
Asia and the Pacific region is experiencing
increased competition across key sectors
over limited freshwater resources, while
an estimated 80–90% of all wastewater
produced in the region is released untreated,
polluting ground and surface water
resources, as well as coastal ecosystems
(UNESCAP, 2010) (see Table 11.1). In order
to meet future water demands in the region
and reduce pollution, water needs to be used
more efficiently and wastewater production
and discharge improved by using innovative
management and technical solutions.
The region’s urban population more than
doubled between 1950 and 2000 (UNESCAP/
UN-Habitat, 2015), creating a huge
demand for new and improved wastewater
treatment systems. Another challenge for
wastewater management in urban areas is
related to socio-economic disparities. Slum
areas are typically underserved (see Section
5.3), whereas wealthier neighbourhoods
generally have better access to wastewater
management infrastructure and services.
As of 2009, 30% of the region’s urban
population lived in slums and over half of the
regional rural residents still lacked access to
improved sanitation, compared to 25% of
urban residents (UNESCAP, 2014).
In order to close existing gaps between water
demand and available supplies, the region
needs to upscale and implement integrated
policy frameworks (including through
public consultations) that facilitate circular
economies and green growth initiatives.
Technologies to improve water use efficiency
have been commonly adopted in China,
Japan and the Republic of Korea. In these
countries, wastewater management and
water reuse have become an integral part
of the water management cycle, including
through economic stimulus packages to
prevent wastewater discharge and pollution.

A s i a

a n d

th e

Pa c i f i c

These practices are also accompanied by
enabling financial policies that help create
markets for wastewater by-products
(including those associated with ecological
sanitation (EcoSan) case studies in India and
Nepal), which in turn can positively impact
access to sanitation services (UNESCAP,
2013). Singapore’s NEWater scheme (see
Figure 11.1) is enabled by an innovative policy
package for water management, adapted to
the country’s particular geographic, social,
political and economic conditions (see Box
16.9).
There is a growing shift from viewing
wastewater as an ‘unpleasant by-product’
of the anthropogenic water cycle towards
recognizing its potential as a resource for
different sectors. However, most wastewater
is still discharged without any treatment (see
Table 11.1). For example, the percentage
of wastewater release without treatment
have been estimated at 77% for Thailand
(2012), 82% for Pakistan (2011), 84% for
Armenia (2011) and 81% for Viet Nam (2012)
(UNESCAP, 2015a). Improving the efficiency
of wastewater management would contribute
to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in the region.

11.2 Building resilient
infrastructure
Natural disasters, 90% of which are waterrelated, are increasing in frequency and
intensity due to climate change (UNESCAP,
2015b). More attention needs to be paid
to improving the resilience of physical
wastewater infrastructure, such as drains
and pipes, and of the drainage systems
that can capture runoff during floods and
storm events. During floods, which caused
an estimated total damage of US$61 billion
in the region in 2011 (ADB, 2013), the
sewage effluent often mixes with alreadycontaminated stormwater, creating a

97

Figure 11.1 General technical scheme of NEWater in Singapore

COLLECTION OF
USED WATER

REVERSE OSMOSIS
Undesirable contaminants are
removed here. The water aer this
stage is high-grade water

NEWater

NEWater TREATMENT

TREATED
USED WATER

High-grade
recycled water
NEWater is mainly
used by the industries.
During dry periods,
NEWater is added to
our reservoirs to blend
with raw water.

ULTRAVIOLET DISINFECTION

MICROFILTRATION

The water passes through ultraviolet
light to ensure that any remaining
organism is eraccated. Chemicals are
then added to restore pH balance.
The NEWater is now ready for use.

Microscopic parcles,
including some bacteria are
filtered out in this stage

Source: Courtesy of Singapore’s National Water Agency (PUB).

Table 11.1 Countries with the lowest level of wastewater treatment in the Asia-Pacific Region
Country

Wastewater
treated
(%)

Country

Wastewater
treated
(%)

Viet Nam

19

Vanuatu

0

Bangladesh

17

Tuvalu

0

Papua New Guinea

15*

Timor-Leste

0

Tajikistan

12

Niue

0

Nepal

12

Nauru

0

Myanmar

10*

Marshall Islands

0

Bhutan

10*

Maldives

0

Cambodia

9

Kiribati

0

Lao PDR

6

Cook Islands

0

Samoa

5*

Afghanistan

0

*Estimate.
Note: The percentage of wastewater treated is very much dependant on the conditions in the countries’ largest/larger cities, where the
percentage is generally higher, and rarely a reliable indicator of conditions in the smaller urban centres of towns and rural areas, for which
data are often lacking.
Source: Adapted from ADB (2013, Appendix 4, p.100).

98

W W D R

2 0 1 7

sanitation crisis and increasing the risk of waterborne
diseases. Where urban runoff is a major source of
flooding and pollution, as is the case in most cities
across the region, there is a great need for new and
innovative city planning, including climate-resilient
water infrastructure, which can rely on appropriately
decentralized water harvesting and collection systems
(UNESCAP, 2015a) (see Section 15.5).
There is a great potential for communities to
incorporate risk-mitigating infrastructure into
new and existing construction projects in order to
address these issues. Risk-mitigating infrastructure
may include, among others: green roofs, like in
Hong Kong, China (Urbis Limited, 2007), restored
urban green areas, wetlands and waste-stabilization
ponds in Kolkata City (a partly natural partly humanengineered wetland); water-efficient buildings in
the Republic of Korea; vertical farming, which is
producing large quantities of plants and vegetables
inside multi-story buildings in Australia, China, Japan
and New Zealand (Despommier, 2011); rainwater
catchment systems, in Kiribati; and mangrove belts
in Sri Lanka, Thailand and the Pacific Island States.
According to one study, green roofs can retain
60–100% of the stormwater they receive, depending
on the substrate depth and the quantity and intensity
of the precipitation received (Thomson et al., 1998).

11.3 A systems approach to
wastewater by-product recovery
By-products from domestic wastewater, such as salt,
nitrogen and phosphorus, have potential economic
value that can be used to improve livelihoods in the
region. In the absence of centralized infrastructure,
households that oversee their own sanitation can
become energy-independent by utilizing their own
waste, thus reducing expenditures for fuel as well as
health risks and environmental impacts. Harvesting
phosphorus from urine with urine-diverting toilets,
like in Australia, China and Japan, also reduces the
nutrient load of wastewater effluent and has a great
potential for upscaling in the region (UNESCAP/
UN-Habitat/AIT, 2015). Biomass (septage) can be
used wider as a fertilizer in agriculture, as historically
practiced in countries of Central Asia, or can be
converted to fuel for cooking or heating with biogas
reactors, as seen in cases of rural Cambodia, China,
Thailand, Viet Nam, and the Pacific (UNESCAP/UNHabitat/AIT, 2015), thus reducing water pollution
(Schuster-Wallace et al., 2015). Analyses of case
studies in South-East Asia have shown that revenues
from wastewater by-products, such as fertilizer,
are significantly higher than the operational costs
of wastewater systems that harvest by-products,

A s i a

a n d

th e

Pa c i f i c

As of 2009,
30% of the region’s
urban population lived
in slums and over half
of the regional rural
residents still lacked
access to improved
sanitation, compared to
25% of urban residents

providing evidence that resource recovery from
wastewater is a viable and profit-producing business
model for sustainable practices and economic
development (UNESCAP/UN-Habitat/AIT, 2015).

11.4 Regulatory and capacity
needs
Regulations targeting point-source pollution (i.e.
industrial contaminants) in cities can help reduce
the detrimental effects of urban wastewater in the
Asia-Pacific region. Cities often rely on centralized
wastewater treatment facilities, which are expensive
to develop and maintain, and often cannot meet the
immediate needs of urban populations, particularly
the poor. In this regard, decentralized wastewater
treatment systems, or DEWATS (UNESCAP/UNHabitat/AIT, 2015), are being increasingly utilized
in both rural and urban areas, with a number of
benefits (see Section 15.4).
Managing wastewater more effectively and
efficiently in the region requires the support of
institutions, including greater support for local
authorities (GWOPA/UN-Habitat/ICLEI/WWF7/
UCLG/WWC/DGI, 2015). Municipalities and local
governments often lack the human and financial
resources necessary to enforce environmental
regulations and improve and maintain water
infrastructure and services. As a result, maintenance
problems are frequent and widespread, exacerbated
by financing and revenue collection deficiencies
(UNESCAP, 2015a). More needs to be done
across the region to support municipal and local
governments in managing urban wastewater and
capturing its resource benefits with a view towards
achieving the SDG targets, in particular SDG 6 on
water and sanitation and SDG 11 on inclusive and
sustainable cities.

99

CHAPTER 12
UNECE | Annukka Lipponen
With contributions from: The Water Team of the GREEN Action Programme Task Force;
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and European Environment Agency

Scanning 2000 year-old sewers – Cloaca Maxima in Rome (Italy)

AND

EUROPE
NORTH
AMERICA

This chapter focuses on responses to wastewater management
challenges in Europe and North America, with a particular emphasis
on regional legal instruments.

This chapter highlights some pertinent
developments in the UNECE region (covering
the EU, Balkans, Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia as well as North
America) related to wastewater, describing
the challenges but also some promising
responses. The subregions face somewhat
different challenges (see Table 12.1).

12.1 Context
Overall, the level of access to sanitation
across the region is relatively high, including
in the Caucasus and Central Asia, which
both met the MDG target for improved
sanitation, with access to improved
sanitation reaching 95% (UNICEF/WHO,
2015). Development of sanitation services
and wastewater treatment across the region
is nevertheless uneven, as demonstrated by
the Danube Basin (Michaud et al., 2015).
Wastewater treatment in the region has
improved during the last 15–20 years. The
percentage of the population connected
to wastewater collection and treatment in
selected subregions of Europe is shown in
Figure 12.1. Tertiary treatment has increased
gradually but, in South-Eastern Europe and
the rest of Eastern pan-Europe, significant
volumes of wastewater are still collected
and discharged without treatment.

12.2 Challenges
Large parts of the UNECE region are covered
by water supply and sanitation systems,
but demographic and economic changes
have rendered the effectiveness of some of
the larger centralized systems suboptimal,
as exemplified by several oversized and
maladapted systems in parts of the former
Soviet Union. The low efficiency of water
systems, characterized by high resource use
and lack of incentives for efficient water
use, is a major issue in Eastern Europe, the

Euro p e

a n d

No r th

Am e r i c a

Caucasus and Central Asia (UNECE/OECD,
2014), where large volumes of supplied
water translate into wastewater, and where
all too often only a primary treatment is
in place. The water supply and sanitation
tariffs are generally too low to cover the
costs of operation and maintenance of the
services (OECD, 2011a). This poses significant
challenges to meeting the infrastructure
investment needs and lowers incentives
for reasonable usage levels, while raising
sustainability concerns (see Box 12.1).
Due to the demographic and economic
changes, the wider policy aspirations of
resource efficiency (EEA, 2016) and the
new knowledge about risks and equity
considerations (e.g. urban vs. rural areas,
minorities, etc.) (UNECE/WHO, 2013),
it has become clear that sanitation and
wastewater infrastructure need to be
revisited in the region, in order to ensure
the adequacy of service as well as the
appropriate level and means of treatment.
The need to reuse water is becoming more
pronounced, especially in areas prone to
water scarcity. Investments in treatment and
control technologies are increasing in both
the USA and the EU (see Box 12.2).
As indirect use of treated wastewater
frequently occurs downstream from
discharge locations, the performance
and adequacy of traditional wastewater
treatment systems has come under scrutiny
in the UNECE region. New risks related to
emerging pollutants (see Box 4.1), including
micropollutants, have been acknowledged
since the early 2000s (Bolong et al., 2009).
Most notable among these are chemical
endocrine disruptors, which can exert
negative effects on humans, animals and
ecosystems. National studies have called
for more systematic analyses of their
occurrence, transport and effects, in order
to develop scientifically well-grounded risk
assessments and response actions (Trachsel,
2008; MIE/PWA, 2016).

101

Table 12.1 Selected challenges and management responses in subregions in the UNECE region
(non-comprehensive)
North America

Challenge(s)

Response(s)

European Union

South-Eastern Europe
and Eastern Europe

Water scarcity

Ensure effective removal
of emerging pollutants

Compliance with
regional standards of
wastewater treatment

Wastewater reuse

Best available
techniques/technologies;
use of green solutions

Progress with regional
legal instruments

Caucasus and Central
Asia
Addressing pollution
from wastewater
discharges; extending
the coverage of
wastewater treatment
Extending and upgrading
the infrastructure to
more advanced levels of
treatment

Figure 12.1 Changes in wastewater treatment in regions of Europe between 1980 and 2012

Percentage of total population of the area for each period

100

Northern

Central

Southern

Eastern

South-Eastern

West Balkan

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

19
8
19 0 (3
9 )
19 0 (3
9 )
20 5 (4
)
20 2 00 (
05 00 4)
-2 2 (
00 4)
20 6 (3
10 )
(3
)
19
90
20 1 (6
0 99 )
20 3-2 5 (8
0 00 )
20 5-2 4 (
07 00 6)
-2 6 (
00 6)
20 9 (6
10 )
19
(7
94
)
19 -1
97 99
20 -2 5
0 0 (3
20 3-2 00 )
0 0 (4
20 5-2 04 )
0 0 (4
20 8-2 07 )
10 00 (6)
-2 9 (
01 4)
1
(3
)
20 1
00 99
5
20 -2 (3
04 00 )
-2 1 (5
00 )
20 5 (8
0 )
20 7 (8
0 )
20 9 (7
11 )
(6
)
19
95
19 (2
9 )
20 8 (2
)
20 2 04 (
07 00 3)
6
20 -2 (3
10 00 )
-2 8 (
01 3)
1
(3
)
20
03
20 (3
0 )
20 2 5 (
09 00 3)
20 -2 7
11 01 (3)
-2 0 (
01 4)
2
(3
)

0

Tertiary

Secondary

Primary

Collected without treatment

( ) number of countries

*UWWTPs = Urban wastewater treatment plants.
Note:
This figure illustrates the percentage population per European region connected to wastewater collection and treatment
systems (UWWTPs) over the period 1980 to 2012. In addition, a breakdown by treatment type is portrayed. Numbers in
brackets indicate number of countries in the aggregations.
Source: EEA (2013, based on data from Eurostat).

102

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 12.1 MANAGING MUNICIPAL
WASTEWATER – INFRASTRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT AND RESTORATION: RECENT
TRENDS IN EASTERN EUROPE, CAUCASUS AND
CENTRAL ASIA (EECCA) COUNTRIES
In the EECCA countries, a relatively large share of the
population is served by centralized urban wastewater
collection systems. The coverage in rural areas is
much lower, but some countries in the region made
significant progress during the 1980s. For example,
Moldova built some 650 wastewater treatment
plants in rural settlements in this period.
In the 1990s, many sanitation systems in the region
degraded due to the decentralization of social
infrastructure services to local governments with
low fiscal capacity. In Armenia, for example, the
total budget of all local governments amounted to
just 2% of the national budget, while a village in
Moldova had an annual budget equivalent to EUR
10,000 to fund all infrastructure services from school
and roads to water supply and sanitation (WSS)
(OECD, 2011a; 2013a).
At the same time, the WSS services in the region
have also suffered from poor efficiency (oversized
systems with high unit costs); inadequate tariff policy
and economic regulation; and lack of sustainable
business models for operating, maintaining and
financing WSS systems, especially in small towns
and rural areas. These challenges faced by WSS
operators were compounded by the drastic reduction
of household income and by growing income
disparities, resulting in affordability problems for
many households. Such challenges were particularly
pronounced in small remote villages (i.e. populations
less than 500) where household incomes were lower
while unit costs for WSS services were 2–3 times
higher than in larger settlements.
However, since 2000, the trend has improved
significantly in most EECCA countries, at least in the
urban areas (OECD, 2011a), often with support from
development partners. Presently, EECCA countries are
paying more attention to improving rural sanitation.
Progress in these countries has been linked to the
revision of outdated technical standards to adjust the
capacity of new WSS systems to actual and projected
demand for services (OECD, 2012) and to the
introduction of sustainable business models for WSS
operators, including the ‘regionalization’ of municipal
water utilities, community-based organizations and
private operators (OECD, 2013a; 2016).

It has become clear
that sanitation
and wastewater
infrastructure need
to be revisited in the
region, in order to
ensure the adequacy of
service as well as the
appropriate level and
means of treatment

12.3 Responses
Regional legal instruments have contributed
to the general improvement in access
to sanitation and reduced impact of
wastewater discharges, notably the EU
Urban Wastewater Treatment Directive
(UWWTD) (see Box 12.3), as well as the
UNECE/WHO Protocol on Water and
Health (UNECE/WHO, 2016) (see Box
12.4). Some legal instruments in the
region provide for technical progress.
The notion of ‘best available techniques’
(BAT), as defined in the EU environmental
legislation relating to industrial pollution,
also addresses management methods and
the environmental impacts. In the chemicals
sector, BAT is used as part of an integrated
wastewater management strategy, applying
a combination of techniques prioritizing
those aiming to prevent or reduce the
generation of water pollutants and to
recover pollutants at the source. In this
context, BAT differs from the ‘best available
technologies’ based on which the Parties
to the Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes (Water Convention;
see Section 3.2.1) (UNECE, 1992, entry
into force in 1996) are obliged to set
limits for wastewater discharges, the
latter constituting a set of requirements
considering technical aspects (as well as
availability), but also financial affordability
(UNECE, 2013).

Contributed by the Water Team of the GREEN Action Programme
Task Force, OECD.

Euro p e

a n d

No r th

Am e r i c a

103

BOX 12.2 OPTIMIZING REUSE POTENTIAL: QUALITY CONTROL OF TREATED
WASTEWATER AND EXPLORING ECOLOGICAL SANITATION IN EUROPE AND
NORTH AMERICA
Treated wastewater holds significant potential to augment water supplies, even for
drinking, and the USA reuses water in major volumes. By allowing detection of chemical
and biological contaminants, modern analytical technology and multiple barriers provide
the necessary control elements to ensure safe water reuse (Water Science and Technology
Board, 2012). A pioneering case of direct potable reuse (DPR) in the USA is the facility
of Big Spring, Texas which uses microfiltration, reverse osmosis and UV disinfection. The
treated wastewater is mixed with raw water, serving some 250,000 people (Water Online,
2014; Woodall, 2015).
Water scarcity has been an important driver of water reuse, and the matching of water
quality to the end use determines the need for treatment. West Basin Water Utility
produces five types of “designer” waters for specific uses: irrigation, cooling towers,
seawater barrier and groundwater replenishment, as well as two types of boiler feed
waters (West Basin Municipal Water District, n.d.). Some water uses are susceptible to be
fulfilled with reclaimed water having undergone limited treatment, notably green space
maintenance (WssTP, 2013). A lack of risk-based treatment guidelines for greywater and
stormwater has been noted to constrain broader use in the USA (National Academies of
Science, Engineering and Medicine, 2015). To increase the reuse potential of industrial
wastewaters, research and technology development are needed, but also demonstration
of the available technologies, as well as combinations of new and existing biological and
chemo-physical treatment technologies (WssTP, 2013).
In principle, separation of urine at the source and the recovery of faeces for fertilizer
could provide opportunities for both rural households and entrepreneurs, and reduced
wastewater treatment could have, for example, energy saving benefits. Interpretations on
the use of human faeces and urine vary greatly, even within the EU, from following the
same guidelines as for animal manure to prohibiting the practice altogether.
While use of compost from dry toilets and source-separated urine in private gardens may
be permitted, use on commercial crops is commonly prohibited (O’Neill, 2015). Driven by
aspirations to set up ecological closed-loop processes, ecological sanitation using composting
toilets and constructed wetland systems for greywater treatment have been used in ecological
settlements (i.e. Allermöhe-East Hamburg, Germany), resulting in the reduction of residents’
water and energy use (Von Muench, 2009). The effective realization of sanitation products’
reuse, and the safe use of the fertilizers it contains require that legislation and policies provide
a supportive framework, the related health risks are controlled, related logistical issues are
solved (i.e. collection of urine, which will subsequently be turned into a solid form), and that
cultural acceptance is achieved (O’Neill, 2015).9

9

104

The author wishes to acknowledge inputs received from: Sharon Megdal and Susanna Eden (Water Resources
Research Center, University of Arizona) on use of wastewater; and Sari Huuhtanen (Global Dry Toilet Association,
Finland) on ecological sanitation.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 12.3 EUROPEAN UNION’S URBAN WASTEWATER TREATMENT DIRECTIVE
The UWWTD (EU, 1991), complemented by the EU’s other pollution control and
environmental protection instruments, is a major legal tool that has contributed to the
progress visualized in Figure 12.1.
The UWWTD, adopted in 1991, addresses the collection, discharge and treatment
of urban wastewater. Its main objective is the protection of surface waters from the
adverse effects of wastewater discharges. This is achieved through the requirement
for collection and treatment of wastewater in all settlements (agglomerations) with
a population equivalent, or p.e.,10 larger than 2,000. The UWWTD provides for
the biological treatment of wastewater (secondary treatment) in agglomerations
larger than 10,000 p.e. or even smaller. In catchments with particularly sensitive
waters (covering nearly 75% of the territory of the EU), such as those suffering from
eutrophication, tertiary wastewater treatment can be required. The UWWTD laid out a
gradual implementation schedule which requires systems in the largest agglomerations
(and with potentially the largest impact) to be made compliant first.
Based on datasets submitted by 28 EU Member States, covering more than 19,000
agglomerations above 2,000 p.e. and generating a pollution corresponding to 495
million p.e., the European Commission assessed the overall compliance rate at 88%. An
additional EUR 22 billion investment is forecasted, which will allow EU Member States
to fully implement the UWWTD. In addition to investment, one of the main challenges
to implementation is long-term planning (EC, 2016b). Where implementation of the
UWWTD is well-advanced and combined sewerage systems are used, stormwater
overflow can become more significant as a source of diffuse pollution. Therefore,
reducing such overflow appears essential for improving compliance rates (Milieu, 2016).
While compliance is a challenge, especially for the recently acceded countries, it is also an
opportunity for improvement (Michaud et al., 2015).
Contributed by EEA.

10

Population equivalent, or p.e., is the unit used to quantify the pollution load under UWWTD. One p.e.
corresponds to the organic load which has a five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of 60 g of oxygen
per day (Umweltbundesamt GmbH, 2015).

BOX 12.4 NATIONAL TARGET-SETTING UNDER UNECE-WHO/EUROPE
PROTOCOL ON WATER AND HEALTH: ADDRESSING WASTEWATER CHALLENGES
The Protocol on Water and Health to the UNECE Water Convention is a legally binding
instrument that requires Parties to set national and local targets covering the entire
water cycle, including sanitation. The aim is to protect human health and well-being
through improved water management, including the protection of water ecosystems,
and by preventing, controlling and reducing water-related diseases. The Protocol’s
forthcoming programme of work for 2017–2019 sets an objective to strengthen
countries’ capacities and scaling up risk-based management approaches in water
supply and sanitation. The Protocol’s cross-sectoral planning and accountability
approach offers a practical framework to translate into specific national targets in order
to achieve the ambitions of SDG 6, including notably target 6.3 to halve the proportion
of untreated wastewater and to substantially increase water recycling and safe reuse.
Sources: UNECE/WHO (2016).
Contributed by Nataliya Nikiforova (UNECE) and Oliver Schmoll (WHO Regional Office for Europe)

Euro p e

a n d

No r th

Am e r i c a

105

CHAPTER 13
UNECLAC | Andrei Jouravlev
With contributions from: Caridad Canales (UNESCAP); Eduardo Antonio Ríos-Villamizar, Emilio Lentini,
Gustavo Ferro, Ivanildo Hespanhol, Jaime Llosa, Julio Sueros and Miguel Doria (UNESCO Montevideo
Office); and Miguel Solanes and Shreya Kumra (UNECLAC)

Indigenous leader inspects a contaminated river in the Amazon rainforest

LATIN
AMERICA AND
THE
CARIBBEAN

This chapter describes the challenges related to the recent expansion of
wastewater management in the rapidly growing cities of the Latin America
and the Caribbean region, highlighting the benefits of urban wastewater
treatment and lessons learned in the process

Latin America and the Caribbean is largely
a humid region with abundant water
resources, although it contains some
very arid areas. Agriculture is the largest
user of water, accounting for over 70%
of withdrawals, while domestic supplies
and industry represent 17% and 13%,
respectively (AQUASTAT, 2016). The region
is highly dependent on hydropower,
which provides over 60% of the electricity
in the region, and it still has significant
(74%) undeveloped technical potential
(IEA, 2014). With 80% of the population
living in urban areas, it is one of the most
urbanized regions in the world, and is
expected to urbanize even further, with
86% of its population residing in cities by
2050 (UNDESA, 2014). At present, there
are four megacities in the region, with
more than 10 million inhabitants each, and
two more are expected to be added to this
list by 2030.

13.1 The urban
wastewater challenge
In the region, urban wastewater discharges
are increasing due to: i) population growth
(urban population has risen from 314 million
in 1990 to nearly 496 million today, and
is projected to reach 674 million in 2050)
(UNDESA, 2014); and ii) expansion of water
supply and sanitation services. In 2015,
88% of the urban population had access
to improved sanitation facilities (UNICEF/
WHO, 2015), of which probably less than
60% were connected to sewerage systems
(UNICEF/WHO, 2000). Given that there
was no parallel expansion of wastewater
treatment in most of the region, urban
sewage is a key concern for governments.
The population not connected to sewerage
systems relies mostly on on-site disposal
systems such as latrines and septic tanks.
In these systems, wastewater is removed
by direct runoff or percolation into the

L at i n

Am e r i c a

a n d

th e

Ca r i b b e a n

nearby watercourses and aquifers, often
resulting in water pollution. On the whole,
urban sewerage systems represent a
larger challenge, because piped collection
and interception concentrate the
sewage in a limited number of disposal
points (Idelovitch and Ringskog, 1997).
Groundwater pollution is a common
concern in the case of on-site disposal
systems, which are still common even in
large cities.
For many decades, the coverage of sewage
treatment had remained very low (PAHO,
1990). The main reasons for this situation
were the need to prioritize the expansion
of water supply and sanitation services, as
well as the restrictions posed by the high
cost of wastewater treatment. This was
especially challenging within the context
of limited government budgets, water
tariffs that did not cover the cost of service
provision, lax enforcement of existing
regulations, high levels of poverty and
inequality, and the need to address other
urgent social needs.
As a result, nearly all urban wastewater,
including all but the most toxic industrial
wastes, was discharged into the nearest
water bodies without any treatment. Many
rivers, lakes and coastal waters, particularly
those located downstream of large cities,
were, and still are, heavily contaminated.
This has serious consequences not only for
the environment, but also for the health and
well-being of the population and the overall
socio-economic development of the region,
especially in the case of the agriculture and
tourism industries (see Box 13.1).
A critical and widespread problem is the
use of contaminated water – mostly river
water with unacceptable levels of pollution,
but also raw sewage, and in a few cases,
treated wastewater – for irrigation near
large cities (i.e. peri-urban agriculture),
particularly in arid and semi-arid areas. This

107

BOX 13.1 CONSEQUENCES OF THE DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED URBAN WASTEWATER:
THE 1991 CHOLERA EPIDEMIC
The cholera epidemic of 1991 was one of the most severe ever in Peru, with a total of almost
323,000 cases and 2,900 deaths recorded that year. Besides Peru, many other countries were also
affected, with a total of 391,000 cases and 4,000 deaths in the region.
The loss of income from tourism and the restrictions imposed on food products resulted in substantial
economic losses for the affected countries. In Peru alone, the losses in fish product exports exceeded
US$700 million. The epidemic also brought about a process of restructuring in view of the more
stringent sanitary requirements of importing countries and the increase in exporters’ costs.
This incident caused many countries to give high priority to the water supply and sanitation sector.
Particularly, the need to protect access to external markets was one of the factors that motivated the
Government of Chile to initiate an ambitious investment programme, which culminated in universal
urban wastewater treatment.
Source: Jouravlev (2004).

is mostly practiced by small-scale farmers,
who cultivate fruits and vegetables for local
markets. The main motivation for wastewater
irrigation is the intense competition for water
in river basins where large cities are located.
The fact that urban wastewater constitutes
a reliable, low-cost and nutrient-rich source
of water provided an additional impetus. The
downside, however, is that sanitary norms are
seldom respected, partly because monitoring
and control systems are weak, and in some
cases, inexistent. Nevertheless, there are
instances of successful reuse of treated urban
wastewater for irrigation, for example in
Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Mexico and Peru.

13.2 Recent expansion
of urban wastewater
treatment
The situation has begun to change over the
last two decades, with increasing attention
being paid not only to water supply and
sanitation services, but also to developing
wastewater treatment facilities. The reasons
for this change are: i) the high levels of
water and sanitation coverage achieved as
part of the MDGs process (UNICEF/WHO,
2015); ii) the improved financial situation of
many service providers, particularly in larger
cities, which in recent years have made
important advances towards cost recovery
(Ferro and Lentini, 2013); and iii) the strong
socioeconomic growth in the region in the

108

first decade of this century, which lifted an
important number of people out of poverty
and led to the emergence of a middle
class. A further contributing factor was the
integration of regional economies into global
markets. Expansion of wastewater treatment
is very important in this respect, since public
health and environmental problems related
to water pollution can result in the loss of
many years of efforts to develop export
markets (see Box 1) (Jouravlev, 2004).
In some cases, important wastewater
management programmes were also initiated
as a result of public protests and court
decisions. The most emblematic example
is the case of the Matanza-Riachuelo River
Basin in Argentina, where the authorities –
through a public interest litigation process
– were sentenced to clean the river, after
which they initiated a comprehensive plan
for the environmental recovery of the river
basin (Rossi, 2009).
The coverage of urban wastewater treatment
has almost doubled since the late 1990s and
is now estimated to have reached between
20% (Sato et al., 2013) and 30% (Ballestero
et al., 2015) of the wastewater collected
in urban sewerage systems. The principal
technologies used (approximately 80%
both in terms of the number of facilities
and of treated flow) are stabilization ponds,
activated sludge and up-flow anaerobic
sludge blanket reactors (Noyola et al., 2012).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

13.3 Ongoing concerns and
expanding opportunities
On the whole, the region has seen mostly
isolated wastewater treatment projects that are
a response to local social and environmental
problems, instead of nation-wide sustained
integrated programmes. Moreover, many
wastewater treatments plants, particularly in
smaller communities, are plagued by poor
operation and maintenance, and are sometimes
eventually abandoned because of a lack of
technical and financial capacity among local
governments and service providers. Most
of these facilities are small and cannot take
advantage of economies of scale, resulting in
high costs and high probability of incompliance
with discharge standards (Noyola et al., 2012).
Urban wastewater is still largely regarded as
waste and as leading to additional costs, rather
than a potential source of water supply and
nutrients which can substantially reduce the
pressures on the environment.
Of all countries in the region, Chile has
advanced the most in this respect, enjoying
universal urban wastewater treatment
(SISS, 2015). A few other countries in the
region have made substantial progress in
the expansion of wastewater treatment.
Countries that treat more than a half of their
urban sewage include Brazil, Mexico and
Uruguay (Lentini, 2015). There are ambitious
plans for the expansion of wastewater
treatment in many large cities, such as
Buenos Aires, Bogotá, Lima, Mexico City and
São Paulo (Ballestero et al., 2015), but most
of these plans have been delayed for years
due to financial and institutional limitations.
Treated wastewater could be an important
source of water supply in some of these
cities, particularly those located in arid areas
(Lima, for example) or where long-distance
transfers are required to meet growing
demands (as is the case in São Paulo).
The expansion of urban wastewater treatment
requires significant investments, which until
recently, most countries could not afford.
Latin America and the Caribbean would need
to invest more than US$33 billion to increase
the coverage of wastewater treatment to
64% by 2030 (Mejía et al., 2012). According
to another estimate, about US$30 billion is
needed to halve the percentage of wastewater
that currently does not receive treatment
(Lentini, 2015). In addition, approximately

L at i n

Am e r i c a

a n d

th e

Ca r i b b e a n

There are four
megacities in the region,
with more than 10
million inhabitants
each, and two more are
expected to be added to
this list by 2030

US$34 billion is required for the expansion
of stormwater drainage systems (Mejía
et al., 2012), which would reduce
pollution resulting from uncontrolled
urban runoff. This is an important aspect
of urban wastewater management that
also has significant social and economic
implications: since much of the region
lies in tropical and subtropical zones
characterized by heavy rainfall, and
most cities lack adequate stormwater
drainage infrastructure, urban flooding is
a common and costly phenomenon which
affects a large part of the population.

13.4 Benefits of urban
wastewater treatment
Investments in urban wastewater
treatment are justified not only in terms
of health and environmental benefits,
but also due to their positive impacts
on socio-economic development. For
example, in Chile, the expansion of
wastewater treatment led to the following
benefits: i) clean water for thousands of
hectares of irrigated land and production
of high-value crops; ii) promotion of
the tourism industry and water-based
recreation; iii) reduced risk of agricultural
exports being lowered due to possible
complaints about wastewater irrigation;
iv) increased competitiveness of highquality pollution-free domestic products in
external markets; v) increased employment
associated with exports and tourism
industries; and vi) better quality of water
bodies used as sources for water supply
(SISS, 2003). Furthermore, the expansion
of urban wastewater treatment has also
made it possible to: vii) capture methane

109

Latin America and
the Caribbean would
need to invest more
than US$33 billion to
increase the coverage of
wastewater treatment
to 64% by 2030

and utilize it for power generation and
domestic gas supply, thus reducing GHG
emissions; and viii) use wastewater not
only for irrigation, but also for industrial
and other uses.

13.6 Lessons learned
The main lessons from the regional
experience in wastewater management are
the following:
––

the design of any wastewater
management programme should
take the structural limitations of
national economies into account,
critically consider all available options
(technologies, sources of financing,
property structure, incentives, etc.), and
be structured and sequenced in such a
way that it does not become a burden
on the economy and on citizens;

––

government priorities, as seen
in budgetary allocations and the
establishment of effective institutions,
and political non-interference in
technical decision-making are critical,
and so is the pursuit of efficiency
(careful consideration of the costs and
benefits, effective implementation,
enforcement and control, reduction of
transaction costs, control of capture
and corruption, good information,
taking advantage of economies of scale
and scope, etc.); and

––

to reap all the benefits of wastewater
management and to avoid excessive
costs, it is essential to give preference
to integrated plans at the river basin
level that incorporate both wastewater
treatment and reuse, rather than
project-by-project approaches limited
to a single sector.

13.5 Other sources of
wastewater
As urban wastewater treatment has
expanded, other environmental issues
have begun to emerge, including sewage
sludge treatment (Rojas Ortuste, 2014),
and agricultural non-point source
pollution – the leading source of water
quality degradation in many river basins
and aquifers. As regional exports of
agricultural commodities have increased,
so has the contamination caused by
seepage and runoff of agricultural
wastewater containing fertilizers,
pesticides and other agrochemicals,
which are frequently used with little or
no control. Significant water pollution
caused by irrigation has been reported,
for example, in the Dominican Republic,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and
Venezuela (Zarate et al., 2014). This
contamination is of particular concern
in the case of groundwater, which is
an important source of supply both for
domestic water services and irrigation.

110

W W D R

2 0 1 7

PART IV

W O R L D

W A T E R

D E V E L O P M E N T

RESPONSE
OPTIONS

Chapter 14 | Preventing and

reducing wastewater generation and
pollution loads at the source

Chapter 15 | Enhancing wastewater
collection and treatment

Chapter 16 | Water reuse and
resource recovery

Chapter 17 | Knowledge, innovation,
research and capacity building on
wastewater

Chapter 18 | Creating an enabling
environment

R E P O R T
2017

CHAPTER 14
UNEP | Birguy M. Lamizana-Diallo, Andrea Salinas, Elisa Tonda, Liazzat Rabbiosi and
Llorenç Milà i Canals; and Donna Spencer (UNEP-CEP)
With contributions from: Sasha Koo-Oshima (US EPA); Jack Moss (AquaFed);
Jenny Grönwall (SIWI); and Claudia Wendland (WECF)

Turbidity and excess nutrient – Algae in lakes in Carver County (Minnesota)

PREVENTING AND
REDUCING WASTEWATER
GENERATION AND
POLLUTION LOADS
AT THE
SOURCE

This chapter describes various institutional, technical and financial
mechanisms for controlling and preventing the discharge of pollutants
into wastewater streams and reducing wastewater volumes.

The Kashmiri proverb stating that “it is
easy to throw anything into the river, but
difficult to take it out again” summarizes the
importance of pollution prevention measures.
Indeed, remedial actions to clean up polluted
sites and water bodies are generally much
more expensive than measures to prevent
pollution from occurring.
Thus, approaches to water pollution control
which focus on wastewater prevention and
minimization – through the reduction of
water consumption, in-plant refinement of
raw materials and production processes, and
recycling of waste products, for example –
should be given priority over traditional endof-pipe treatment whenever possible. More
broadly, sustainable water management
looks towards decoupling water consumption
and pollution from economic development
(UNEP, 2015c). In order to avoid merely
shifting problems between life cycle stages
or environmental compartments, it is also
important to consider how water is used
and polluted across entire production and
consumption systems, rather than focusing
only on a specific stage such as wastewater
treatment and ending up, for example,
removing pollution from wastewater while
increasing air pollution (UNEP, 2012a).
In order for this to happen, an enabling
environment needs to be in place with
supportive policies that are actively
implemented, including the enforcement of
regulations and penalties, clean and efficient
technologies, and innovative financial
mechanisms (see Box 14.1).

14.1 Mechanisms for
controlling and monitoring
pollution
Trade and market conditions can have
significant and far-reaching implications for
wastewater generation and pollution from
productive activities. For instance, 19% of

the global water footprint is not for domestic
consumption but for export (Mekonnen and
Hoekstra, 2011). Quantitative, science-based
approaches such as Life Cycle Assessments
(LCA) are relevant in this sense, in order to
avoid policies that favour the ‘exportation’ of
the most polluting industries in an attempt
to reduce wastewater-related problems
domestically (UNEP, 2012b).
Of special interest are the certification
requirements for organic products, as less
pesticide application leads to a reduction
in the chemical pollution of wastewater.
Other labelling systems, such as ISO 14024
type 1 ecolabels11 (e.g. European Ecolabel,
Nordic Swan or Blue Angel of Germany),
often include wastewater criteria for relevant
products, as they tend to cover key impacts
along the product life cycle. Being of voluntary
nature, these product information systems
constitute an incentive for companies to
increase their competitiveness, given the
current market trends to support chemicalfree production, recycled packages and other
environmentally sound practices. However,
most of the traded products are not certified
and thus the impacts of these voluntary
approaches are limited.
Monitoring and reporting of both pollutant
discharges to the environment and ambient
water quality are also of critical importance
for achieving progress. If something is not
measured, the problem cannot be defined
and the effectiveness of policies cannot be
assessed. With the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (see
Chapter 2) and the initiation of the Global
Enhanced Monitoring Initiative (GEMI) under
the UN-Water framework, periodic monitoring
of ambient water quality and wastewater
treatment are expected to guide national
reporting mechanisms and eventually allow for
global comparisons.

11

Global Ecolabelling Network, an association of national
labelling schemes from around 25 countries (GEN, n.d.).

Preventing and reducing wastewater generation and pollution loads at the source

113

BOX 14.1 GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR PREVENTING AND
REDUCING WASTEWATER GENERATION
The creation of Pollutant Release and
Transfer Registries (PRTR) provides some
helpful experience that could potentially
be applied to monitoring wastewater.
Originally established as part of the EU’s
Directives, the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the OECD
rules, national PRTRs are now being used
by 33 countries around the world to
record chemical emissions into air, water
and soil from industrial facilities (EEA,
n.d.). Although PRTRs do not include
information on wastewater treatment,
they clearly identify sources of pollution,
which supports investment decisions
on the upgrade and construction of
treatment facilities. Other monitoring
efforts include environmental impact
assessments, cost-benefit analyses of
wastewater production and reuse,
and sanitary controls. However, their
application is generally limited to project
and company levels.
A series of options can be considered by
decision-makers in the public and private
sector to address wastewater prevention,
generation, monitoring and reuse. The
industrial sector applies several different
methods of water recycling to reduce
its production and withdrawal costs,
comply with effluent and environmental
regulations, and potentially even
generate revenue. Some industries have
gone a step further by adopting the zero
liquid discharge (ZLD), as in the case of
the textile industries in Tirupur, India
(see Box 14.2). Additionally, industry-led
sustainability initiatives tend to address
wastewater/pollution issues with more
comprehensive approaches, by devising
standards and guidelines to assess
environmental and social sustainability
from a life cycle system point of view
(see Section 6.4).
The new SDGs, particularly SDG 6 Target
6.3 on water quality and wastewater,
and SDG 12 on responsible consumption
and production, will foster policy
formulation and action to implement
the measures needed. As a result,
national-level pollution prevention
and wastewater management should
benefit from international cooperation
and technology transfer mechanisms,
capacity-building schemes and other
means of implementation.

114

1.

Prevent pollution rather than treating symptoms of pollution.
Prioritizing water pollution control and addressing the causes of
water pollution by identifying hazardous substances that need to
be prohibited or strictly regulated (e.g. creating ‘Red Lists’) and
providing instruction and guidance to users.

2.

Use the precautionary principle. Actions to avoid potential
environmental damage by hazardous substances should not be
postponed on the grounds that there is no conclusive scientific
evidence.

3.

Apply the polluter pays principle, where the costs of pollution
prevention, control and reduction measures are borne by the
polluter. Such an economic instrument aims to encourage and
induce behaviour that puts less strain on the environment.

4.

Apply realistic standards and regulations. Unrealistic standards
and non-enforceable regulations may do more harm than
having no standards and regulations at all, because they create
an attitude of indifference towards rules and regulations, both
among polluters and administrators.

5.

Balance economic and regulatory instruments. The regulatory
approach to water pollution offers control to authorities over
what environmental goals can be achieved and when they can
be achieved (Bartone et al., 1994). Its major disadvantage is its
economic inefficiency. Economic instruments provide incentives to
polluters to modify their behaviour in support of pollution control
whilst providing revenue to finance pollution control activities.

6.

Apply water pollution control at the lowest appropriate level. The
appropriate level may be defined as the level at which the most
significant impacts are experienced.

7.

Establish mechanisms for cross-sectoral integration. In order
to ensure the coordination of water pollution control efforts
within water-related sectors, formal mechanisms and means of
cooperation and information exchange need to be established.

8.

Encourage a participatory approach involving all relevant
stakeholders. The participatory approach involves raising
awareness of the importance of water pollution control among
policy-makers and the general public.

9.

Provide open access to information on water pollution. A
precondition for participation is free access to information held by
public authorities.

10. Promote international cooperation on water pollution control.
Transboundary water pollution, typically encountered in large
rivers, requires international cooperation and coordination of
efforts in order to be effective.
Further, the application of integrated water resources management
(IWRM) principles and best practices in subsector projects and
programmes, while promoting bottom-up multiple stakeholder
management, will go a long way towards pollution control while
improving water and wastewater management.
Source: Adapted from Helmer and Hespanhol (1997, pp. 17-20).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

14.2 Technical responses
14.2.1 Resource-efficient and cleaner
production
The resource-efficient and cleaner production (RECP)
methodology presents a comprehensive approach in
terms of coverage of issues and a continuous application
of preventive environmental strategies to products,
processes, and services. It aims to promote production
efficiency through better use of materials, energy and
water, through sound environmental management,
and by minimizing waste and emissions, thus creating
a safer environment with fewer risks to people and
communities. It is based on life cycle thinking, applied
along product value chains (for both goods and
services) to identify key issues (including wastewater),
and proposes a number of practical solutions through
resource recovery and recycling, adoption of closedcycle manufacturing and extension of the lifespan
of manufactured goods, among others (UNEP, n.d.;
RECPnet, n.d.a.).
One particular tool to mention is the promotion
of resource efficiency in small- and medium-sized
enterprises (PRE-SME).12 It is designed for SMEs as
they dominate sectors like textile, dry cleaning, metal
finishing, printing, food and beverage, and some
subsectors of electronics, all of which have high wateruse rates and associated environmental and social
impacts. SMEs also face greater challenges increasing
their resource efficiency and cleaning their production
approaches in operations, due to a lack of awareness
and technical and financial capacities (see Chapter 6).
Box 14.3 provides practical examples of RECP
application with SMEs in Tanzania.

14.2.2 Environmentally-sound technology
for domestic wastewater separation and
treatment
Chapter 34 of Agenda 21 defined environmentally
sound technologies (ESTs) as technologies that are
better than those for which they are substitutes
in terms of protecting the environment, reducing
pollution, sustainably using resources, promoting
the recycling of wastes and products, and most
importantly safely handling residual wastes (UNCED,
1992, item 34.1). In this regard, on-site wastewater
treatment systems, focusing on ZLD and separation
of waste streams at the source, can be qualified as
ESTs. However, the conduction of an LCA study to
compare the environmental (and social and economic)

In order to decrease water
consumption and control the
release of contaminants and
by-products, participatory
approaches, better
communication, awareness
raising and education are
indispensable

BOX 14.2 ZERO LIQUID DISCHARGE IN TEXTILE
INDUSTRIES IN TIRUPUR, INDIA
The dyeing and bleaching industry in the South Indian
knitwear hub Tirupur is known as the first to opt for
zero liquid discharge (ZLD) in a systematic manner,
eliminating the release of pollutants. The components
of ZLD, including reverse osmosis, enable extensive
reuse and recovery of water and salts, and the process
minimizes the freshwater requirements.
The dyers in Tirupur were trucking in freshwater from
elsewhere to safeguard production quality, until a
public-private water supply scheme was set up, partly
based on a loan from the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). As the water is
relatively costly, reuse makes sound commercial sense,
but this has to be weighed against the high energy and
operational costs of the ZLD enabling machinery.
In the mid-1980s, there was no enforcement of
effluent standards. The transformation was prompted
by many actors. The region’s farmers stood behind the
initial push, along with the Pollution Control Board
and the court system. However, the pressure to change
behaviour at a large scale came from the High Court in
incremental steps: after it ordered closure of all dyeing
factories in 2011, the government offered an INR 2
billion (roughly US$30 million) interest-free loan to
ensure more functional treatment.
Whereas full compliance may not be achieved in the
short to medium term, a new ZLD production regime
has been instituted in Tirupur.
Source: Grönwall and Jonsson (forthcoming).
Contributed by Jenny Grönwall (SIWI).

12

For further information, see www.unep.org/resourceefficiency/
Business/CleanerSaferProduction/ResourceEfficientCleanerProduction/
Activities/PromotingResourceEfficiencyinSMEsPRE-SME/Resources/
ResourceKit/tabid/105557/Default.aspx.

Preventing and reducing wastewater generation and pollution loads at the source

115

Figure 14.1 Waste segregation and possible utilization options

Substances

Urine

Faeces

Greywater
(shower, washing,
etc.)

Rainwater

Organic waste

Filtration, biological
treatment

Compositing, anaerobic
digestion

Water supply,
groundwater
recharge

Soil
improvement,
biogas

Treatment

Hygienisation by
storage or drying

Anaerobic digestion,
drying, composting

Constructed
wetlands,
gardening, wastewater
ponds, biological
treatment, membranetechnology

Utilisation

Liquid or dry
fertilizer

Biogas, soil
improvement

Irrigation,
groundwater
recharge or direct
reuse

Source: UNESCO-IHP/GTZ (2006, Fig. 4, p. 15).

BOX 14.3 EXAMPLES OF RESOURCE-EFFICIENT AND CLEANER
PRODUCTION FROM TANZANIA
The examples of two SMEs in Tanzania demonstrate the benefit of
preventive approaches such as RECP, both from the environmental impact
point of view, including wastewater, and considering the associated
economic benefits to the companies.
Musoma Textile Mills Tanzania Limited (MUTEX) received training on
RECP to improve its resource efficiency and environmental performance.
Some notable benefits achieved include resource recovery (caustic soda);
enhanced energy and water efficiency; reduction of emissions, solid waste
and wastewater; and improved occupational health and safety conditions.
The entire RECP programme saved more than US$293,322 per year.
Tanzania Breweries Limited Mwanza plant started RECP implementation
with the objective of reducing water and energy usage, waste generation
and operational costs, while improving global sustainability compliance
as well as its business image. The execution of RECP at the breweries led
to annual savings of US$37,500 in water bills and US$56,250 in energy
consumption, reduction of CO2 emissions by 50%, reduction of solid waste
generation by 39% and of wastewater generation by 42%.
Source: RECPnet (n.d.b.) and CPCT (n.d.).

116

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 14.4 THE CARIBBEAN REGIONAL FUND
FOR WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT (CReW)
Within the Wider Caribbean Region, it is often
a tremendous challenge to secure funding for
sectors such as education, health, drinking water
supply and wastewater management, with the
latter consistently receiving the least investment.
However, without adequate levels of investment,
the consequence will be a continuing discharge of
untreated wastewater, which threatens the Region’s
economic development and the quality of life of
its people. The CReW, funded by the GEF and
implemented by the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB) and UNEP, offers one way of addressing
the issue of insufficient funding for wastewater
infrastructure in the region.
CReW has tested two types of funding mechanisms:
revolving funds (in Belize, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Guyana) and a credit enhancement facility (CEF) in
Jamaica. The CEF was established with a reserve
guarantee of US$3 million provided by CReW, as
leverage financing for a further US$9 million to
fund wastewater projects. The K-factor wastewater
utility surcharge, established in 2008, is used to
repay funds to the CEF. This innovative model creates
an incentive for allocating the resources garnered
from the monthly collection of the K-factor funds (a
portion of the water tariff) for debt servicing for larger
commercial bank loans, rather than using the funds
directly for capital investments in the sector. Belize,
Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago use CReW resources
(US$5 million, US$3 million, and US$2 million
respectively) to create revolving funds which provide
loans to the respective water utilities to finance
selected wastewater projects. Replenishment of
these revolving funds depends on income generated
primarily by the interest from the loans and through
the tariff regime. The case of Guyana is special, as the
allocation targets primarily the private sector.
Among the lessons learned are the notion that the
sustainability of financing for the wastewater sector
depends predominantly on the commitment of
governments; the adequacy of national policies, laws
and regulations; the level of enforcement of existing
laws and regulations; and the presence of sufficient,
ongoing funding for upgrading, operating and
maintenance. The project helped increase awareness
of: i) the issue of poor wastewater management
amongst decision-makers; ii) the importance of
integrated water and wastewater management;
iii) innovative ways of approaching financing
for wastewater management; and iv) a better
understanding of the requirements for sustainable
funding in the sector.
Source: CReW (n.d.) and Daniels (2015).

Separating wastes
at the source can be
easier and more costeffective than trying
to segregate them once
all have been mixed up

performance of specific technologies
in different geographical conditions is
recommended in order to determine the best
ESTs in different settings.
Large efforts have been invested in research
and development on source separation over
the last 20 years, covering low- and hightech solutions in rural and urban contexts
at different scales (Andersson et al., 2016).
Separating wastes at the source can be
easier and more cost-effective than trying to
segregate them once all have been mixed up.
For instance, decentralized wastewater
treatment systems (DEWATS) and ecological
sanitation (EcoSan) are highlighted as
promising options to balance socio-economic
development and the provision of basic
services for less privileged communities.
These treatment systems dispense with the
need for sophisticated technical control and
maintenance, and high inputs of energy
and water. They also enable the recovery of
nutrients for agriculture, thus preserving soil
fertility, assuring food security, minimizing
water pollution and the use of synthetic
fertilizers, and sometimes recovering bio-energy
(see Section 15.4).
EcoSan considers human excreta, organic
wastes and wastewater as resources, with
high potential for water reuse and component
recycling. They are mainly ‘dry sanitation’.
The main advantage of urine-diverting dry
toilets, an example of EcoSan, in contrast to
conventional pit latrines, is the separation of
urine and faeces and the conversion of faeces
into a safe, dry and odourless material (see
Figure 14.1). The risk of ground and surface
water pollution is minimized through the safe
containment of faeces and urine.

Preventing and reducing wastewater generation and pollution loads at the source

117

14.3 Financial approaches
and behavioural change
Referring to Box 14.1 on the guiding
principles, it is worth remembering that
many multilateral environmental agreements
(MEA) bear economic incentives for
preventing and reducing wastewater
generation, which can include the
precautionary principle, the polluter pays
principle, public-private partnerships and
innovative tariff policies. Success stories of
the use of innovative financial mechanisms
from the Caribbean and the USA are
illustrated in Boxes 14.4 and 14.5.
A paradigm shift in behavioural change is
of paramount importance to reverse the
current trend of wastewater generation. In
order to decrease water consumption and
control the release of contaminants and byproducts, participatory approaches, better
communication, awareness raising and
education are indispensable.

Trade and market
conditions can have
significant and farreaching implications for
wastewater generation
and pollution from
productive activities

BOX 14.5 STATE REVOLVING FUND (SRF) FOR WASTEWATER INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCING
In the USA, the State Revolving Fund is one of the sustainable financing programmes that provide financial savings
for water projects that benefit the environment, including protection of public health and conservation of local
watersheds. National and state contributions fund loans for a wide variety of water quality projects, including all
types of runoff, watershed protection or restoration and estuary management projects, as well as more traditional
municipal wastewater treatment projects, including water reuse and conservation projects.
It allows states to provide funding
for their highest-priority water
quality projects using a scoring
approach to project evaluation.
Funds to establish or capitalize the
Clean Water State Revolving Fund
(CWSRF) programmes are provided
through national government
grants via the US EPA and state
matching funds that are equal
to 20% of national government
grants. CWSRF monies are
loaned to communities below
market interest rates, and loan
repayments are recycled back into
the programme in order to fund
additional water quality protection
projects. The revolving nature of
these programmes provides for an
ongoing funding source that will
last far into the future.
Source: US EPA (n.d.c.)

The wastewater treatment plant in Escambia County, Florida (USA), destroyed
by Hurricane Ivan, and replaced and relocated away from the coastal plain and
built to be more resilient. The plant now reuses 100% of its water.

Contributed by Sasha Koo-Oshima (US EPA).

118

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 15
UN-Habitat | Graham Alabaster, Andre Dzikus and Pireh Otieno
With contributions from: Xavier Leflaive (OECD Environment Directorate)

Sludge digestion installation in a wastewater plant,
which produces methane and supplies energy

ENHANCING
WASTEWATER
COLLECTION
AND TREATMENT

This chapter examines a number of options and responses for enhancing
wastewater collection and treatment, with a special emphasis on the
advantages of low-cost decentralized systems.

15.1 Sewers and waterborne
sanitation
The importance of sewerage as a means of
transporting waste materials away from human
sources and other economic activities is welldocumented, as are its impacts. Despite more
ecologically acceptable alternatives, waterborne
waste disposal remains the prevalent method
for sanitation and for evacuating wastewater
from domestic, commercial and industrial
sources. Other sanitation options, such as onsite systems, are perfectly suited to rural areas
and low population density settings, but are
expensive and nearly impossible to manage
in dense urban environments, aside from the
most developed economies. In many cases,
significant challenges still exist in the collection
and transport of faecal sludge from on-site
facilities. According to a recent study in the city
of Kampala (IWMI, 2012), more than 80% of
the users of such facilities had no experience
with emptying personal latrines and over 60%
of the collected septage came from institutional
and commercial sources (see Figure 4.4).
The number of households connected to
sewer systems correlates (to a greater or lesser
extent) with the connections to a water supply,
although always in much lower proportions.
Recent reports (UNICEF/WHO, 2015) clearly
show that, globally, the proportion of people
connected to a sewer system (60%) is higher
than had been previously assumed. Even in
rural areas where the number of connections
is typically low, there is a significant share of
people with a connection to a sewer system
(16%). This contradicts previously published
estimates which quoted 10% or less (Corcoran
et al., 2010) (see Figure 5.1).
Many large cities in developed and transitioning
economies have extensive sewerage systems,
some of which are still functioning effectively
some 100 years after construction. London
still relies on trunk sewers constructed in the
Victorian era as part of the reticulation used
today. Complications arise with increasing
urbanization and excessive connections to

120

sewer systems that surpass their original design
capacity. Ageing wastewater collection systems
generate a number of problems, including
corroded concrete, cracked tile, collapse and
clogging. Addressing these problems can be
expensive. US EPA (2016) has estimated that
combined sewer overflows (CSOs) correction,
the rehabilitation and replacement of existing
conveyance systems, and the installation of new
sewer collection systems account for 52% of the
US$271 billion in investments needed to meet
the country’s wastewater infrastructure needs.

15.2 Low-cost sewerage
Driven by the high costs of conventional
sewerage, methods of low-cost sewerage
were conceived in response to the challenges
faced by most developing countries: low tariffs
combined with insufficient governmental
budgets, high poverty and expensive
infrastructure. These low-cost systems come
in many different types, but they normally
use piped networks with a smaller diameter,
laid at shallower gradients and at shallower
depths underground. The design principles
differ from those used in conventional sewer
design and also focus on the concept that solidfree sewage is conveyed in the system, with
interceptor boxes (similar to small septic tanks)
collecting raw wastewater from a household
or group of households. These systems lend
themselves to community management and
are also very well-suited to extend and expand
existing systems. One drawback is that they are
not suitable for stormwater drainage.
The concept was first pioneered in Brazil
by Carlos Melo (2005). Low-cost sewerage
systems have become a method of choice
for neighbourhoods of all income levels, as
they have all the characteristics required to
be the de facto standard for all sewerage.
However, conservatism amongst public health
authorities and sanitary engineers has resulted
in only sporadic uptake worldwide. Australia
has adopted a low-cost approach in some
parts of the country (Palmer et al., 1999) and

W W D R

2 0 1 7

low-cost systems are likely to gain in popularity.
The systems can also be used to connect satellite
communities to centralized systems, and have been
used in refugee settings (Van de Helm et al., 2015)
(see Section 10.2.1). Mara and Alabaster (2008) make
a case for networked systems at the neighbourhood
level as a cost-effective way to provide services
to smaller secondary urban centres. At this point,
there are not yet many examples of the technology
being evaluated, but the cost data, particularly from
countries like Brazil, clearly show that it can be
financially sustainable. In Brazil, the cost of simplified
sewerage (a type of low-cost sewerage) per person
has been shown to be twice lower than the cost
of conventional sewerage (i.e. US$170 vs US$390)
(Mara, 1996).

15.3 Combined sewerage
One important issue in relation to wastewater
collection is its source. In old systems, like the one
used in Paris, the original sewers (from 1852) were
designed only for rainwater and grey water; a later
decree from 1894 imposed the house owners to
put all kinds of wastewater, including blackwater,
in the combined sewers (Bernhardt and MassardGuilbaud, 2002; Tréhu, 1905). Although a variety
of users connect to sewer networks, most systems
were designed as so-called ‘combined systems’, in
which stormwater and other types of urban runoff are
discharged to the sewers. This was done, presumably,
in order to limit the costs of purchasing large
diameter drains, but it resulted in dilute sewage in
periods of high rainfall. Although this may have been
acceptable when population densities were low and
the assimilative capacity of the receiving waters was
adequate, recent development and city expansions
have led to a complex and often hazardous
combination of different chemical and biological
substances. Combined sewerage should therefore
generally not be considered an effective solution.
In an effort to move away from combined systems,
much work has been undertaken on sustainable urban
drainage systems (SUDS) (Armitage et al., 2013).
Sewer systems are suitable for so-called ‘point
sources’ of pollution, but the real challenge is how
to collect diffuse or non-point pollution sources. Two
major sources are the runoff from agricultural land
that has received fertilizers, and the runoff from areas
where intensive livestock is kept, as this often leads to
drugs used for veterinary purposes being present in
the water (see Chapter 7). Although many intensive
agricultural facilities install collection and treatment
systems (see Box 15.1), this is still not general practice
due to the high costs associated and/or the lack of
regulation or enforcement (FAO, 2005).

En h a n c i n g

wa s tewate r

co l l e c ti on

a n d

15.4 Decentralized treatment
(DEWATS)
In addition to centralized wastewater treatment plants,
decentralized systems have also shown an increasing
trend. Many of the approaches to decentralized
wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS), pioneered by
organizations such as the Bremen Overseas Research
and Development Association (BORDA) and the
Consortium for DEWATS Dissemination Society, have
found their rightful place as a part of sanitation systems
for rapidly expanding urban areas and also for certain
isolated communities where conventional sewerage is
precluded on economic grounds. DEWATS and low-cost
sewerage (see Section 15.2) are naturally complimentary.
DEWATS can also serve as a medium-term solution
pending the large-scale design of centralized systems,
and there is significant flexibility on their use.
Indeed, large-scale centralized wastewater treatment
systems may no longer be the most viable option for
urban water management in many countries, due to
high maintenance costs and resource needs. Moreover,
they often require large areas of land and are too
inflexible to meet the needs of rapidly expanding urban
areas. This holds true for water supply and wastewater
infrastructure, rainwater collection and drainage.
DEWATS serve individual or small groups of properties.
They allow for the recovery of nutrients and energy,
save freshwater and help secure access to water in
times of scarcity (OECD, 2015b). They may require
less up-front investment than larger, centrally piped
infrastructures, and are more effective in coping with
the need to scale up (or down) services to needs.
However, they do require individuals with a minimal
amount of training to take care of their operation and
maintenance. Through decentralized technologies,
sustainable neighbourhoods in cities could partly
replace traditional public systems (OECD, 2013b). A
challenge of DEWATS may be that local communities
need to accept that they live close to the treatment
facilities, so efforts must be made to make the plants
aesthetically acceptable. For this reason, systems based
on reed beds are often favoured.

15.5 Decentralized stormwater
management
Decentralized stormwater drainage has a good
potential for ‘source control’ technologies that handle
stormwater near the point of generation. For instance,
green roofs or pervious surfaces capture rainwater
before it runs onto polluted pavements and streets.
These solutions can alleviate peak flows, minimize the
risks of urban floods and pollution, and reduce the
need for investments in additional hard infrastructure

treatment

121

BOX 15.1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND
RECYCLING FROM GREENHOUSES IN ETHIOPIA
and treatment facilities. They can attract private
investments, encouraging property and land
developers to invest in new buildings equipped with
localized drainage systems. This may require changes
in local by-laws, as local regulations will, to a great
extent, dictate the final choice.
On the other hand, decentralized stormwater
drainage only offers a solution for temporary
retention, as the water will ultimately need to be
transported to sewer systems. In some cases, the
maintenance costs will be higher, but decentralized
systems help to attain benefits like improved human
well-being, absorption of air pollution and moisture
retention, thus lowering ambient temperature and
attenuating the urban heat island affect, ultimately
contributing to the greening of cities. Decentralized
systems can also be used for the treatment of runoff
from highways.
Experience accumulates with the implementation
and exploitation of decentralized sanitation and
urban drainage. Nonetheless, some barriers have
to be overcome, such as social perceptions and
difficulties associated with retrofitting. However, the
experience of Suwon City (see Box 15.2) suggests
that this is feasible. Lack of policy coherence can pose
additional barriers, for instance when water prices
fail to reflect the opportunity cost of the use of the
resource, or when land use and urban development
do not take the risk of urban flooding into account.
An additional challenge is the need to manage
wastewater at different scales (from buildings to the
municipal level, to even larger levels). These barriers
can be overcome by a combination of information
campaigns, a whole-of-government approach to
urban water management (including policies, laws
and regulation), business models for water utilities
and land development that factor in externalities
related to wastewater management, and a long-term
vision of the challenges in the water sector and the
opportunities for urban development.

15.6 Evolution of treatment
technologies
Significant advances have been made in treatment
technologies, since the original development of
aerated systems (e.g. activated sludge and trickling
filters) during the 1920s. The selection of treatment
systems has been driven by the prevailing economic
situation or by other factors like global warming,
water scarcity, environmental quality issues and/or
land use planning. In the rapidly urbanizing centres
worldwide, the prevention of the discharging of
carbonaceous material was the priority in order to
protect receiving waters being starved of oxygen.

122

Sher Ethiopia produces roses for export and employs
around 10,000 local people. The flower production
takes place in large greenhouses located next to Lake
Ziway in the Ethiopian municipality of Ziway, which
relies on the lake for drinking water and food (fishery).
Water from the lake is also used for agricultural
irrigation, including 500 hectares of roses.
Before the project was initiated, the various forms
of wastewater from the greenhouses (stormwater
runoff, water used for cleaning tanks, spray carts,
hoses and toilet soakaway pits) were discharged
directly into the lake. Since 2008, Sher Ethiopia has
been working towards zero wastewater discharge,
with all wastewater collected and treated in
constructed wetlands. The effluent is then stored
in reservoirs and eventually added to the irrigation
water of the greenhouses. The Dutch government
financed the research and implementation needed
for the pilot project.
The Sher company initially had little confidence that
this natural system would have such a positive effect,
but during the pilot study they decided to implement
it in all their greenhouses. At the end of 2016, 31
constructed wetlands were operational, treating
500 m3 of water per day, which is reused within
the facilities, drastically reducing the environmental
impact (water footprint) of the company.
Source: Van Dien and Boone (2015).
Contributed by Frank van Dien (ECOFYT) and Angela Renata
Cordeiro Ortigara (WWAP).

BOX 15.2 DECENTRALIZED RAINWATER
HARVESTING IN SUWON CITY, REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Suwon City is a good illustration of how decentralized
rainwater harvesting can be deployed, including in
dense, built environments, where a central piped
infrastructure is already in place (see OECD, 2015b)
for more details and developments). This city of 1.1
million inhabitants has to procure most of its water
from elsewhere. Suwon embarked on the “Rain City”
project, in order to reduce its dependence on distant
water sources. The project uses rainwater in preparation
for future water shortages. The first phase of the project
(2009–11) combined planning (including guidelines on
the installation and operation of rainwater harvesting
systems), education, and strong public finance support.
The second phase (2015–2018) includes the installation
of rainwater recycling facilities with a 10,000 m3 capacity
and 150 small rainwater tanks, with a city budget of
KRW 10 billion (roughly US$9 million) (OECD, 2015b).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 15.3 SEWER MINING IN SYDNEY,
AUSTRALIA
The oxygen demand was ‘satisfied’ by using large
amounts of energy to encourage the growth of
microbial biomass (sludge), which was separated
from the system and used in agriculture or
dumped at sea. Later developments saw extended
aeration systems to reduce the final amount of
biomass for disposal, as this was responsible for a
large proportion of the treatment costs.

The sewer pipe running through the golf course
carries wastewater from about one thousand homes
to the coastal town of Manly, where it receives
primary (very basic) treatment and then gets dumped
into the sea. The project was mining wastewater
that not only would go unused, but would also add
pollutants to the ocean. And as long as the golf club
siphoned off flow during peak hours of toilet flushing
and showering – the morning and evening – it would
not interfere with the pressure and flow rate needed
to get the remaining sewage to Manly.

During the oil crisis in the 1970s, anaerobic
digestion became the preferred method to
treat wastewater and sludge, on account of the
reduced amount of energy available. The 1980s
and 1990s saw an increased interest in nutrient
removal, mainly in the developed world, as
nutrient discharge had led to the eutrophication
of water bodies in many regions of the world.
During the same period, significant advances
were made in the use of more natural treatment
systems, such as waste stabilization ponds and
reed bed systems. These types of systems offer
efficient reduction in pathogens with low capital
and operational costs. Indeed, even in developed
economies, they find a use in small-community
treatment systems. The most recent trends have
seen treatment systems that address the reduction
of GHG emissions. In parallel, much research was
undertaken, particularly in the developing regions
of the world, on systems that focused on reducing
the bacteriological hazards.

The sewer-mining scheme has cut Pennant Hills’
potable water use by 92%, which earned the club an
award from Sydney Water. Due to the club’s use of
treated wastewater on-site, Sydney Water no longer
needs to supply it with some 70,000 m3 per year of
drinking water.
In addition, the nitrogen in the sewage has virtually
eliminated the need to fertilize the golf course: small
amounts of nitrogen get added every time the greens
are irrigated. The fertilizer savings are somewhat offset,
though, by the need to add gypsum to the soil to
counteract the extra sodium in the reclaimed water.
Overall, the system has proven to be a cost-effective
way to drought-proof the links and reduce stresses
on Sydney’s water supply. And the golfers, apparently,
are pleased.
Source: Extracted from Postel (2012).

Additional details concerning various types of
treatment technologies are provided in Table 4.2.

inorganics materials into fish biomass. The fish are
harvested and processed to become a source of feed or
food. The remaining water can be used for irrigation or
discharged. Indeed, the organics and inorganics present
in the incoming used water are removed to a large extent
in the form of the harvested fish (Crab et al., 2012).

15.7 Sewer mining and
component separation
Active direct use of wastewater and the nutrients
it contains has often been driven by necessity,
but its use for recreation or other purposes has
been documented in many developed regions
(see Box 15.3).

The key features of both of these concepts for treating
wastewater is that they do not follow the route of
destroying the nutritive value which is present in
the used water. On the contrary, they add a form of
renewable energy to allow aerobic microbes to upgrade
the nutrients to microbial cells growing in flocs, and they
harvest the latter by fish grazing on them. In the latter
case, biomass is then processed to become of further
use as feed or food.

New technologies are emerging that allow for
the upgrading of wastewater treatment plants
to ‘factories’ in which the incoming materials are
deconstructed to units such as ammonia, carbon
dioxide and clean minerals. This is followed by a
highly intensive and efficient microbial re-synthesis
process where the used nitrogen is harvested as
microbial protein (at efficiencies close to 100%),
which can be used for animal feed and food
purposes (Matassa et al., 2015).

Concerning the isolation and separation of useful
wastewater components, it is likely that urine collection
and use will become an increasingly important
component of ecological wastewater management,
as it contains 88% of the nitrogen and 66% of the
phosphorus found in human waste (Maksimović and
Tejada-Guibert, 2001; Vinnerås, 2001).

Another new approach has been proposed in
which the used water is subjected to a procedure
that allows the uptake of its organics and

En h a n c i n g

wa s tewate r

co l l e c ti on

a n d

treatment

123

CHAPTER 16
UNESCO-IHP | Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa and Blanca Jiménez-Cisneros
With contributions from: Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH); Pay Drechsel (IWMI); Xavier Leflaive
(OECD Environment Directorate); Takahiro Konami (UNESCO-IHP); Richard Connor (WWAP); and
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan

Sign warning of reclaimed water being in use

WATER REUSE AND
RESOURCE RECOVERY

This chapter outlines a broad set of opportunities for the safe and beneficial use
of treated and untreated wastewater and the recovery of useful by-products,
including energy and nutrients. Business models and economic approaches are
also presented, along with potential responses related to risk management,
regulatory considerations, and social acceptance.

Water reuse is gaining momentum as a
reliable alternative source of freshwater in the
face of growing water demand, shifting the
paradigm of wastewater management from
‘disposal’ to ‘reuse and resource recovery’.
Effective management practices, technological
innovation and appropriate regulatory policies
will offer further opportunities. Wastewater
is also a potentially important source of
recoverable energy, nutrients and other
valuable materials.
Water reuse and resource recovery from
wastewater has become a field where science
and technological innovation are rapidly
developing, with promising applications not
only in safe reuse, but also in other nonconventional areas, such as by-products
recovery, and for promoting environmental
and economic benefits.
Figure 16.1 shows global water reuse after
advanced (tertiary) treatment. However, it is
important to note that, of all the wastewater
produced worldwide, only a very small
fraction actually undergoes tertiary treatment
(see Prologue).

16.1 Beneficial reuse
of water
Water reuse is economically feasible and
attractive when there is a potential for
cost recovery by treating wastewater to a
water quality standard acceptable to users.
Cost recovery from the sale of treated
wastewater for irrigation is limited due to
significant subsidies for irrigation, especially
in developing countries. In industries, treated
wastewater can be priced higher, mainly to
achieve greater cost recovery rather than for
profit (see Section 16.3).

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

16.1.1 Water reuse in agriculture
Wastewater irrigation. Irrigation accounts
for the majority of the treated, untreated and
partially treated wastewater used worldwide
(see Chapter 7). In Israel, for example, treated
wastewater already accounted for 40% of all
water used for irrigation in 2011 (OECD, 2011b).
The use of untreated or diluted wastewater
for irrigation has taken place for centuries.
The main challenge in using wastewater for
irrigation is to shift from informal, unplanned
uses of untreated or partially treated wastewater
to planned safe uses. This requires locationspecific drivers and ‘business models’ (Otoo
and Drechsel, 2015; Saldias Zambrana, 2016;
Scott et al., 2010), and safety measures like
those outlined in the WHO’s Sanitation Safety
Planning guidelines (WHO, 2016b).
Wastewater use in aquaculture. The
intentional use of wastewater in aquaculture
(see Section 7.2.1 and Box 5.3) is declining
worldwide due to safety concerns and loss of
land areas close to urban markets, although
it has been practiced for centuries in almost
all regions of the world, notably in Asia. It
has positive impacts on food production, as
the nutritional benefits from wastewaterfed aquaculture are substantial (WHO,
2006a). Wastewater use in fishponds remains
widespread in China, India, Indonesia and Viet
Nam. Unintentional waste-fed aquaculture
occurs in Bangladesh through fish farming in
water bodies containing faecally contaminated
water. Human excreta are still used in
aquaculture in China, particularly in more remote
rural areas, but this practice is declining. The
intentional use of wastewater in aquaculture
is not a traditional practice in Africa, but fish
for human consumption are raised in faecally
polluted lakes. Using wastewater to produce fish
feed, like duckweed, offers a safer alternative.
In Lima (Peru), the culture of fish tilapia for
food in tertiary treated effluent was shown to
create employment while improving water use
efficiency in a desert environment (UNEP, 2002).

125

Figure 16.1 Global water reuse after advanced (tertiary) treatment: Market share by application
Industrial
19.3%

Agricultural irrigaon
32.0%

Environmental enhancements
8.0%

Water reuse
by applicaon

Others
1.5%

Indirect potable reuse
2.3%
Landscape irrigaon
20.0%

Non-potable urban uses
8.3%
Recreaonal
6.4%

Groundwater recharge
2.1%

Source: Lautze et al. (2014, Figure 2, p. 5, based on Global Water Intelligence data).

BOX 16.1 THE UNIQUE EXPERIENCE OF
DIRECT POTABLE REUSE (DPR) IN WINDHOEK,
NAMIBIA
The use of reclaimed water was the only affordable
option for the city of Windhoek to cope with the
water shortage caused by population growth,
increased demand and declining rainfall following the
water crisis of 1957. This has led to the first full-scale
application of DPR in the Wastewater Reclamation
Plant in Windhoek, Namibia – the world’s longest
experience since 1969. During the more than
40 years of operation, the safety was verified by
epidemiological studies and no health problems
were reported. The advanced multi-barrier treatment
process produces purified water of a quality that
consistently meets all the required drinking water
standards. The new plant, built in 2002, incorporates
a substantial technological upgrade.
The plant’s continued success is attributable to
several factors, including: the vision and great
dedication of the potable reclamation pioneers;
the excellent information policy and education
campaigns supporting buy-in; the absence of waterrelated health problems; a multiple-barrier approach;
reliable operation and online processes and water
quality control; and the near absence of practicable
alternatives (Lahnsteiner et al., 2013).

126

BOX 16.2 THE BIGGEST
UNPLANNED WATER
REUSE CASE FOR HUMAN
CONSUMPTION, MEXICO
The Tula Valley in Mexico is a
clear case of unplanned water
reuse. For more than 110 years,
up to 52 m3/s of untreated
wastewater from Mexico City
has been used for irrigation of
the Tula Valley. This has resulted
in the incidental recharge of
an aquifer, which is used as
water supply for consumption
and other activities for around
500,000 people. Thanks to
natural processes, the water
quality is compatible as a supply
source of water. The recharging
of the aquifer also had a positive
impact on local environmental,
social, and economic conditions,
and contributed to the
development of a poor region
(Jiménez-Cisneros, 2008).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 16.3 DECENTRALIZED WATER MANAGEMENT AND WASTEWATER USE: THE EXPERIENCE
OF SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA
The San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) in the USA is embracing decentralized water
treatment systems to provide supplemental water and wastewater services. In the absence of federal
regulation, the SFPUC launched a local programme for regulating on-site water use called the Nonpotable Water Program, which creates a streamlined process for new developments to collect, treat and
reuse alternative water sources, including grey water and blackwater, from large-scale commercial and
residential buildings in order to meet their non-potable needs. It establishes guidelines for developers
interested in installing non-potable water systems in buildings. Subsequently, the SFPUC realigned
governmental policies and created a new regulatory framework by collaborating with the San Francisco
departments in charge of Building Inspection and Public Health.
SFPUC allowed for micro-markets to emerge when two or more buildings share, buy or sell water without
a public agency providing the service. The programme shifts the burden of operation, maintenance and
water quality compliance to the private sector while the public sector maintains oversight to ensure the
protection of public health and the public water system (OECD, 2015b).
Contributed by Xavier Leflaive (Water Team Leader, OECD Environment Directorate).

16.1.2 Urban water reuse
Reclaimed water (after ‘fit-for-purpose’
treatment) offers opportunities for a sustainable
and reliable urban water supply (see Chapter
5), as a growing number of cities are relying on
more distant and/or alternative sources of water
to meet the increasing demand.
Indirect potable reuse (IPR) is based on
infiltration of treated wastewater into surface
waters and groundwater, where natural
processes (filtration, adsorption, UV exposure,
sedimentation, dilution, natural die-off)
further clean the water (see Box 5.2). After
re-abstraction, the water is treated like any
other source of drinking water. IPR thus offers
a feasible option to augment other drinking
water sources, provided strict monitoring is
in place to achieve compliance with drinking
water standards and guidelines. Singapore’s
NEWater (see Box 16.9) is an example of
indirect potable reuse, but due to public
acceptance concerns, only a small portion of
the reclaimed water is injected into Singapore’s
freshwater reservoirs for indirect reuse.
Direct potable reuse (DPR) is gaining
interest with recent developments in the
availability and affordability of appropriate
water treatment technologies (see Section
5.5.1). Direct potable water reuse requires
the most rigorous water quality monitoring
to eliminate any risks to the public health and
to meet strict water quality requirements. In
Windhoek, Namibia, which lacks affordable

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

water alternatives, up to 35% of the
city’s wastewater is treated and blended
with other potable sources to increase
the drinking water supply (see Box 16.1)
(Lazarova et al., 2013).
Unplanned potable water reuse for urban
supplies still occurs through the discharge
of untreated or insufficiently treated
wastewater into surface and groundwater
sources (see Box 16.2) and remains a
challenge, especially in densely populated
river basins all over the world.
Non-potable reuse. The main factor for
the rapid expansion of non-potable urban
reuse (see section 5.5.2) is that the water
does not necessarily need to comply with
strict water quality standards (i.e. ‘fit-forpurpose’ treatment). However, risks related
to direct contact with reclaimed water
and cross-connection contamination are
a concern to be dealt with through strict
control measures. The high costs of building
and maintaining adequate infrastructure
to keep the reclaimed water separate from
potable water (i.e. dual distribution systems)
can impose a financial constraint. However,
such systems, which can easily be integrated
in new urban developments, are currently
expanding in Europe, Japan and the USA (see
Box 16.3) (Asano et al., 1996; Grigg et al.,
2013; OECD, 2015b).

127

BOX 16.4 PHOSPHORUS (P) RECOVERY
GAINING MOMENTUM

16.1.3 Industrial water reuse
Industrial water reuse (see Chapter 6) involves
recycling industrial wastewater for industrial uses
(process water) and non-industrial uses (irrigation,
landscape irrigation, non-potable urban uses,
etc.). Industries can also use treated municipal
wastewater. Recycled industrial water has been
used as process water in power stations, textile
manufacturing, paper industry, oil refineries,
heating and cooling, and steelworks for a long
time. New applications of industrial water reuse
are also emerging, such as the use of treated
wastewater as cooling water in big data centres
(for example, the Google data centres in Belgium
and Georgia, USA). More efficient water recycling
and process technologies can ultimately lead to
the closing of the water loop in industries (see Box
14.2), while reducing water use by more than 90%
(Rosenwinkel et al., 2013).

16.1.4 The ‘fit-for-purpose’ concept
‘Fit-for-purpose’ water reuse means that the
required treatment level is defined by water quality
requirements of the intended use. Most nonpotable reuse options require a quality lower than
that of drinking water, so that secondary treatment
is often adequate (see Section 5.5). However,
barriers to wider applications of this approach
remain, including the lack of appropriate and
flexible regulatory and institutional frameworks.
Potential health and environmental risks can also
be reduced through appropriate safety control
measures, such as the multiple-barrier approach
(WHO, 2006a) (see Section 16.4).
The ‘fit-for-purpose’ water reuse concept has been
successfully applied in the West Basin Municipal
Water District in El Segundo, California, USA (see
Box 12.2), which treats water to five distinct levels
of quality suited for different specific uses (Walters
et al., 2013).

16.1.5 Wastewater use for
environmental benefits – Replenishing
water resources
Common uses of wastewater for environmental
benefits include the replenishment of water
resources through groundwater recharge, river
flow restoration, water augmentation in lakes and
ponds, and restoration of wetlands and biodiversity
(see Chapter 8).
Aquifer recharge. Artificial aquifer recharge
through the intentional injection of treated
wastewater for subsequent recovery or to
enhance ecosystems is a common practice.
The main limitations are related to the aquifers’

128

The most common form of phosphorus recovery
from wastewater takes place as struvite
precipitation. The most attractive financial options
are those where the recovery takes place early and
allows the operator to save on the costly removal
of unwanted struvite within the treatment system.
However, in view of the sale of the recovered P,
there are no financially attractive options yet that
can compete directly with phosphate-ore-based
fertilizers in the market (Schoumans et al., 2015).
Short-term price volatility, long-term price hikes, and
increasing concern for P insecurity on the political
agenda (relating to concerns of food insecurity and
environmental degradation) may provide additional
incentives for recycled P over unsustainable mining.
Marketing strategies for recovered phosphorus
The Ostara Company in Canada, specialized in
private–public partnerships with wastewater
treatment plants, has successfully applied P-recovery
as crystalline struvite pellets branded ‘Crystal Green’,
which can be used as a commercial fertilizer, by
transforming the unwanted struvite formation in the
pipes. Revenue from the fertilizer sale is shared with
the city to offset the costs of the facilities.
The Austrian-based company ASH DEC Umwelt
AG developed a technology for sludge incineration
that completely destroys pathogens and organic
pollutants, followed by a chemical and thermal
treatment to produce an ash-based multi-nutrient
fertilizer, sold under the PhosKraft® brand.
Considering reduced disposal costs, the production
price is comparable to commercial fertilizers. The
payback period for investments in a full-scale plant
was estimated at 3–4 years (Drechsel et al., 2015a).
Contributed by Pay Drechsel (IWMI); Angela Renata Cordeiro
Ortigara (WWAP); and Dirk-Jan Kok and Saket Pande (TU Delft).

storage capacity and recharge rate. Aquifer recharge
offers several benefits, including water supply
augmentation and storage, maintenance of wetlands,
and saline intrusion prevention.
The Torreele Facility in Belgium produces highquality infiltration water for indirect potable use via
groundwater recharge in the dune aquifers of St.
André, while offering environmental benefits such
as saline water intrusion prevention, sustainable
groundwater management and the enhancement of
natural values (Van Houtte and Verbauwhede, 2013).
Unintentional aquifer recharge with untreated or
insufficiently treated wastewater still occurs in many
areas. This needs special attention, as it can lead to
human and environmental health risks.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

BOX 16.5 RECOVERY OF ENERGY
AND BIOFUELS FROM BIOSOLIDS: THE
COMPREHENSIVE (LEGISLATIVE AND
FINANCIAL) APPROACH OF JAPAN
In Japan, although more than half of biosolids
are recovered, only 15% of their potential
biomass energy is being utilized. The Japanese
Government has set a target to increase this
percentage to 30% by 2020 by means of
legislative approaches, financial aid, promotion of
innovation, tax reductions and standardizations of
biosolid by-products.
The new Sewerage Act of Japan of 2015
requires sewage operators to utilize biosolids
as a carbon-neutral form of energy. The full
potential of the country’s 2.3 million tonnes of
biosolids produced each year by 2,200 operating
wastewater treatment plants can generate 160
GWh electricity per year. In 2016, 91 plants
recovered biogas for electricity and 13 produced
solid fuels. A leading example is the city of Osaka,
which produces 6,500 tonnes of biosolid fuel per
year from 43,000 tonnes of wet sewage sludge
for electricity generation and cement production.
As a financial aid to support sewage operators
investing in the energy reuse from biosolids, a
feed-in tariff is paid for the electricity generated
from biosolids at a fixed price per kWh.
The Government of Japan promotes innovation by
subsidizing breakthrough technologies in biosolids
reuse. Private financing is also promoted through
a special depreciation measure to reduce the tax
burden on private firms investing in energy reuse
equipment of wastewater treatment plants. Byproducts like biosolid fuel are being standardized in
order to create a market for them.
Source: Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of
Japan*
Contributed by Takahiro Konami (UNESCO-IHP).

16.2 Resource recovery from
wastewater and biosolids
16.2.1 Nutrient recovery
Recovering nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) from
sewage or sewage sludge requires advanced
technologies, which are still in the stage of
development, yet have made significant progress
in recent years (see Section 15.7). There are an
increasing number of cases (e.g. Bangladesh,
Ghana, India, South Africa, Sri Lanka, etc.) where
municipalities engage in septage sludge dewatering,
safe co-composting and pelletization (Nikiema et al.,
2014). P-recovery from on-site treatment facilities
such as septic tanks and latrines can be technically
and financially feasible by transforming septage into
organic or organic-mineral fertilizer. Moreover, faecal
sludge presents a relatively lower risk of chemical
contamination compared to sewerage biosolids.
Extractable P mineral resources are predicted to
become scarce or exhausted in the next 50 to
100 years (Steen, 1998; Van Vuuren et al., 2010).
Thus, P-recovery from wastewater is becoming an
increasingly viable alternative (see Box 16.4). An
estimated 22% of global P demand could be satisfied
by recycling human urine and faeces worldwide
(Mihelcic et al., 2011).
Despite significant technological advances in nutrient
recovery from wastewater and sludge, business
opportunities remain limited, mainly due to lacking
markets. The low nutrient content in biosolids, in
particular N, does not allow for profitable sales on
the market. Only 5–15% of the available N in the
wastewater can be recovered, while it is possible to
capture 45–90% of the P in wastewater (Drechsel
et al., 2015a). Hence, the process will probably be
driven by various technological options to recover P
from struvite precipitation, sludge and incineration
with different levels of costs and efficiencies.

*For further information, see www.mlit.go.jp/en/index.html

BOX 16.6 EXAMPLES OF BUILDINGS HEATED AND COOLED WITH WASTEWATER
The 2010 Winter Olympic Village, Vancouver, Canada. The former 2010 Winter Olympic Village, later
converted to apartment buildings, is heated with effluents from the wastewater treatment plant of a nearby
village (Godfrey et al., 2009).
Wintower high-rise building at Winterthur, Switzerland. Wastewater is used to heat the 28-storey
Wintower in cold winter months and to cool the building in summer. About 600 kW heating energy is
extracted from wastewater taken from the sewer. Wastewater is also used for cooling in summer, absorbing
energy from the building. This system is a demonstration of wastewater use as a carbon-neutral energy source
for the year-round heating and cooling of buildings (HUBER, n.d.).

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

129

Energy recovery has
significant business
potential in terms of
reducing energy use,
operational costs and its
carbon footprint

16.2.2 Energy recovery
Wastewater plays a significant role in the
water-energy nexus. Although wastewater
collection and treatment require
significant amounts of energy, wastewater
itself can be a source of energy and its
vast potential is underexploited (WWAP,
2014). The chemical, thermal and
hydraulic energy contained in wastewater
can be recovered in the form of biogas,
heating/cooling and electricity generation
through on-site and off-site processes
(Meda et al., 2012). Technologies exist for
on-site energy recovery through sludge/
biosolids treatment processes integrated
in wastewater treatment plants. The
off-site energy recovery involves sludge
incineration in centralized plants through
thermal treatment processes. Emerging
technologies include microbial fuel cells
to generate bioelectricity from sludge
using bacteria, aerobic granular sludge
technology, anaerobic ammonium
oxidation (Anammox), and biomass
manipulation. There are also opportunities
for combined energy and nutrient recovery.
Although the technologies are available,
their widespread application is hindered
by limited market opportunities and other
barriers related to economies of scale.
Energy recovery has significant business
potential in terms of reducing energy use,
operational costs and its carbon footprint.
Reducing the carbon footprint of
wastewater treatment plants can increase
revenue streams through carbon credits
and carbon trading programmes (Drechsel
et al., 2015a).

130

BOX 16.7 TOTAL ENERGY
RECOVERY POTENTIAL OF
SEWAGE SLUDGE ENCOMPASSING
ANAEROBIC DIGESTION AND
THERMAL CONVERSION IN ZÜRICH,
SWITZERLAND
The latest Outotec plant, using sewage
sludge from Zürich, is an example of total
energy recovery with efficient energy
conversion and nutrient recovery, setting
new global standards for energy conversion
efficiency. Efficient energy conversion
is possible with anaerobic digestion,
producing biogas and/or electricity, and
with combustion, producing steam and
heat. Each of the two processes yields
about 50% of the energy potential of
sewage sludge, adding up to a total yield
of 6 MWh per tonne of dry sludge. There
are different options for use, like upgrading
the biogas to pipeline grade quality and
feeding it to the gas grid, or converting
the steam into electricity and heat for use
within the wastewater treatment plant. The
city of Zürich adopted this model in 2015.
Phosphorus recovery is a legal obligation in
Switzerland since January 2016. The Zürich
Water Board will implement P-recovery
once the most appropriate technology will
be selected.
Source: Outotec GmbH & Co (n.d.).
Contributed by Ludwig Hermann (Outotec GmbH & Co).

Biogas production. Biogas production
from chemical energy contained in organic
substances in wastewater through the
anaerobic digestion of biosolids for subsequent
electricity and heat generation is the most
common application of on-site energy recovery.
A substantial portion of the energy and heat
demand of wastewater treatment plants can
be met through energy recovery from biosolids
(see Box 16.5).
Heat recovery. Thermal energy contained in
wastewater can be extracted for space heating
and cooling. There are several applications
of wastewater use for heating/cooling in
residential and commercial buildings, public
spaces and industrial plants (see Box 16.6).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Hydraulic energy. Placing turbines in
wastewater streams can generate electricity,
but this process is restricted due to the
low-elevation locations of most wastewater
treatment plants. The As-Samra Wastewater
Treatment Plant in Jordan (see Section 10.3.4)
is well-known for using elevation differences
between the city and the plant, as well as
between the plant inlet and outlet, using two
turbines upstream and downstream of the
plant. About 80–95% of the plant’s energy
requirement is met by these turbines (1.7
and 2.5 MW, respectively) and the biogas
generated from sludge (9.5 MW) (Otoo and
Drechsel, 2015).
Transitioning to energy neutrality and net
energy producers. With the optimization of
energy use in wastewater treatment processes
and the recovery of energy from wastewater
and biosolids, there are opportunities for
wastewater treatment facilities to transition
from major energy consumers to energy
neutrality, or even to net energy producers
(see Box 16.7).

BOX 16.8 WASTEWATER AS A SOURCE OF
HIGH-VALUE HYDROCARBONS THROUGH
MICROALGAE
•

Wastewater to liquid transportation fuel. The
concept of producing biofuel for transportation
is based on the conversion of nutrients in
wastewater into microalgae biomass (i.e.
wastewater-fed microalgae), which in turn are
converted into biofuel. This approach provides
multiple benefits, and can be used for cleaning
wastewater, capturing carbon dioxide and
producing alternative sustainable energy without
competing with agriculture for water, fertilizer
and land. In the USA, NASA’s Offshore Membrane
Enclosures for Growing Algae (OMEGA) project
is exploring the feasibility of producing aviation
fuels by farming microalgae in floating offshore
pods that are ‘fed’ by wastewater from cities
(Trent, 2012).

•

Bio-oil from wastewater algae. New Zealand’s
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric
Research (NIWA) has demonstrated the
commercial feasibility of producing bio-oil from
wastewater-grown microalgae at the Christchurch
Wastewater Treatment Facility (Craggs et al.,
2013). Carbon dioxide is added into ‘high-rate
algal ponds’ to facilitate the energy-efficient
conversion of algal biomass to bio-oil.*

•

Production of biodegradable bioplastics.
Biodegradable bioplastics produced from
wastewater microalgae have the potential to
replace traditional petroleum-based plastics
at lower costs. Once it becomes economically
feasible, this process could revolutionize the
polymer space, offering business opportunities for
the production of bio-based sustainable products
while bringing additional benefits such as carbon
sequestration, smaller ecological footprints,
reduced petroleum dependence, and improved
end-of-life options.**

•

Production of cosmetic ingredients from
wastewater by using microalgae. Since
July 2015, the Algae Biomass Energy System
Development Research Center at the University
of Tsukuba in Japan is conducting research on
algae biomass and industrial applications for
synthesizing algae-derived oils, thus creating
a new ‘algae industry’, combining biofuel
production, wastewater treatment, and algaederived oils for cosmetics and medical products.

16.2.3 Recovery of high-value byproducts
Metals and other inorganic compounds in
wastewater – mainly in industrial effluents –
present opportunities not only for recovery of
high-value by-products, but also for reducing
health concerns and environmental pollution
caused by their disposal. Effluents from mining
and electrical industries can contain certain
traces of heavy metals (e.g. gold, silver, nickel,
palladium, platinum, cadmium, copper, zinc,
molybdenum, boron, iron and magnesium).
Their recovery has been explored through
various electrochemical extraction processes,
which are often energy- and chemical-intensive.
These applications are limited to specific largescale industries. The recent development of bioelectrochemical technology may provide a new
approach for efficient metal recovery (Wang
and Ren, 2014).
The use of environmental friendly microalgae
is being explored to produce high-value
products such as transportation biofuels, bioplastics, bio-chemicals, nutrition supplements
for humans and animals, antioxidants, and
cosmetic ingredients from resources dissolved
in wastewater (see Box 16.8).

*For further information, see www.niwa.co.nz/freshwater-andestuaries/research-projects/bio-oil-from-wastewater-algae
** For further information, see http://algix.com/sustainability/oursolution/

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

131

16.3 Business models and
economic approaches
Wastewater use offers a double value
proposition if, in addition to the environmental
and health benefits of wastewater treatment,
financial returns are also possible. The size of
the revenue streams depends on the types
of resources that can be recovered from
wastewater. Wastewater use itself becomes
all the more competitive when freshwater
prices reflect also the opportunity cost of using
freshwater whereas pollution charges reflect the
cost of removing pollutants from wastewater
flows, not to mention the potential economic
damage of inaction.
Wastewater treatment has primarily followed a
‘social business model’, with its main economic
justification centred on safeguarding public
health and the environment. Yet, there is a
range of options to move from a ‘revenue
model’ to a ‘business model’ (Drechsel et al.,
2015a), with cost and value recovery offering
a significant advantage from a financial
perspective, not only for private sector
engagement, but also to the public sector.
Intersectoral water transfers (or ‘water
swaps’) aim to provide treated water to farmers
for irrigation, for example, in exchange for
freshwater for domestic and industrial purposes
(Winpenny et al., 2010). This business model
can also be applied to water swaps with other
water-intensive users, such as golf courses.
Water swaps do not increase the overall water
availability, but can allow for the allocation of
more freshwater to high-value uses.
Replenishing natural capital is based on
benefit sharing, where the agency responsible
for drinking water pays an amount to the
entity responsible for partial treatment and
medium-term storage, generally through
groundwater recharge. This business model
benefits the drinking water agency when the
potential benefits compare favourably with the
development of alternative freshwater supplies.
Operational cost recovery will depend upon the
prevalent price for fresh/potable water. Private
stakeholders neighbouring the groundwater
recharge zone can benefit as well by gaining
access to higher groundwater levels (and they
can potentially sell the water through private
tankers) (Rao et al., 2015).

132

On-site value creation is based on wastewater
aquaculture. When fish production takes place
within a pond-based treatment process, the
reuse value proposition can be integrated
through the absorption of nutrients from the
wastewater into biomass (e.g. duckweed) that
can in turn feed the fish. The business model
combines a low-cost treatment solution with
potentially high revenue generation, thus
allowing for a move beyond cost recovery (Rao
et al., 2015).
Marketing reclaimed water is arguably
the simplest business model, where partially
treated (‘fit-for-purpose’) wastewater is made
available to the user at a lower cost than
treated water. Although low freshwater prices
make it often difficult to charge appropriately
for reclaimed water, and thus to achieve full
cost recovery, several successful examples have
been documented (Lazarova et al., 2013).
Hedging future water markets is based on
the premise that the demand for reclaimed
wastewater by industries and agriculture will
increase in the future. The concept is to match
future water ‘buyers’ with suppliers of treated
wastewater by trading water entitlements,
thus securing parts of the investment capital
beforehand for wastewater treatment projects
(Rao et al., 2015).
Examples of water reuse cases with business
potential are presented in Table 16.1.
The potential for cost recovery from
wastewater use increases with greater
treatment levels, which translates to
improvements in water quality and/or the
ability to recover additional resources and
materials. Recovering several products from
wastewater enables new opportunities,
enhances revenue, and moves the business up
on the economic value proposition ladder (see
Figure 16.2).
At present, the possibilities for nutrient and
energy recovery are among the most advanced
in terms of technical and financial feasibility,
as described in the various examples provided
in the previous section (16.2). However, there
is increasing potential for enhancing these
processes (see Chapter 17) and, collectively,
such advances are expected to provide further
opportunities for cost recovery in wastewater
management and reuse.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Table 16.1 Examples of water reuse cases with business potential
Business model

Water swap

Replenishing
natural capital

On-site value
creation based
on aquaculture

Marketing
reclaimed water

Hedging for
future water
markets

Business case
location

Business concept, products/
services and beneficiary

Mashhad City, Iran

Agreement between
regional water company
and association of farmers
for water exchange.
Transfer of farmers' water
rights from dams and
groundwater in exchange
for treated wastewater

Secondary
treatment

Water scarcity and the
need to reduce stress on
freshwater

Hoskote Lake,
Bangalore, India

Department of minor
irrigation diverting
untreated sewage from
one part of the city to
another. The recharging of
a dry lake and groundwater
wells benefits small
farmers and households
around the recharge zone

No treatment
except natural
processes

Need for lake restoration
and replenishing
depleting groundwater
table and drying wells

Mirzapur,
Bangladesh

Partnership of Hospital
Trust and NGO to treat
wastewater to produce
duckweed as fish feed and
cultivate crops for local
market

Tertiary treatment,
including nutrient
removal through
duckweed

Partnership between
hospital complex and
the technology promoter
and high demand for fish
in the region

Gaborone City,
Botswana

Treatment of wastewater
from Gaborone and reuse
for irrigation of Glen
Valley farms and river flow
augmentation

Secondary
treatment

Frequent droughts and
chronic water scarcity

Prana Sustainable
Water, Switzerland

Wastewater treatment
pre-financed by future
water sales via contractual
agreements to secure
water shares and finances

Secondary or
tertiary treatment

Knowledge management
on water markets, water
trading and commodity
pricing along with strong
partnerships

Treatment type

Drivers and opportunities

Source: Adapted from Drechsel et al. (2015a, Table 11.2, pp. 202–203).

16.4 Minimizing risks to
human health and the
environment
Due to potential risks to human health,
water reuse for human consumption (i.e.
drinking water) requires the most rigorous
approach, including strict regulations
and robust monitoring, assessment and
compliance programmes.

vulnerable groups include farmers, field
workers and nearby communities through
direct contact with wastewater, and
consumers through the consumption of
wastewater-grown crops. Limited awareness
of health risks associated with wastewater
use, due to poverty and low education,
further contributes to these risks, in particular
in developing countries. Women are especially
vulnerable (Moriarty et al., 2004).

Exposure of vulnerable groups to partially
treated, or untreated, wastewater, especially
in agricultural irrigation, requires particular
attention (see Section 7.2.2). The most

Appropriate wastewater treatment, in
combination with the application of water
quality standards in wastewater-irrigated
agriculture should be sufficient to protect

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

133

Figure 16.2 Ladder of increasing value propositions for reuse with increasing investments in water quality
or the value chain

Safe disposal for
environmental and
human health

Water recovery for
irrigation

Nutrients and
organic matter
recovery

Yield increase
Yield increase

Surface water
quality
Environmental
flows

Avoided
freshwater use

Internal production
of feed, fish or
biofuel
Feedstock,
protein and
ethanol
production

Energy recovery
and carbon credits
Decreased
internal/external
energy demand
Carbon
emissions
offset

Water recovery for
industry

Potable water
recovery

Fresh/drinking
water

Industrial
production
Avoided
freshwater use

Avoided
eutrophication
Soil
amelioration

Water reliability
Public health
Groundwater
recharge

Treatment
value
proposition

Recovery value proposition from wastewater and biosolids

Source: Drechsel et al. (2015a, Fig. 1.2, p. 8).

Water reuse is
economically feasible and
attractive when there is a
potential for cost recovery
by treating wastewater to
a water quality standard
acceptable to users

public health. However, in the majority of lowincome countries, where most of the wastewater
produced undergoes little or no treatment,
alternative approaches are necessary to prevent
pathogens from entering food production
chains. The WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of
Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater in Agriculture
(WHO, 2006a) recommend a multiple-barrier
approach to protect public health where nontreatment options are implemented (see Box 7.1).
Potential long-term effects of emerging pollutants
on human health and ecosystems (see Section
4.1) as a result of wastewater use are not known
yet (UNESCO, 2016b). There is a need for further
research regarding the risks to human health and
the environment caused by chemicals and emerging
pollutants in wastewater (see Section 17.2).
The environmental health risk is an important aspect
of wastewater use (see Section 6.2.2). Yet, the issue
is often neglected. Comprehensive environmental
monitoring programmes are needed, not only
to evaluate and assess risks, but also to develop
appropriate environmental protection policies.

134

W W D R

2 0 1 7

16.5 Regulations for water
reuse
Earlier regulations for wastewater use were
based on wastewater treatment measures,
whereas more recent ones focus on specific
water quality standards and criteria for
different types of use, in order to protect
human and environmental health. However,
the cost of advanced wastewater treatment
to conform to high water quality standards
remains unaffordable for many developing
countries. The multiple-barrier approach (see
Box 7.1) responds to this challenge, as it is
based on risk assessment and management.

BOX 16.9 SINGAPORE NEWATER:
COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL AND
AWARENESS CAMPAIGN
The Singapore Public Utilities Board
(PUB)* used a comprehensive approach,
including the ABC Waters Programme
for public awareness; the 3Ps (People,
Public, Private) education programme;
and the NEWater Visitor Centre. The 3Ps
programme included community leaders,
journalists, business groups, government
agencies and the media. The NEWater
Visitor Centre was built to offer public
education programmes and information
dissemination. It attracted over 800,000
domestic and foreign visitors. In order
to reduce negative public perception
and psychological fear and stigma, PUB
translated technical information and
terms into simple language; for example,
the term ‘wastewater and sewage’ was
changed into ‘used water’, and ‘sewerage
treatment plant’ into ‘water reclamation
plant’. Information was also provided in
simple diagrams and graphs, as well as
through entertaining tools for community
outreach such as the mobile game ‘Save
My Water’. Social acceptance regarding
wastewater increased as a result of these
educational efforts for awareness-raising
and outreach.
*For further information, see www.pub.gov.sg/
Source: PUB.

Wate r

re u s e

a n d

re cove r y

At present,
the possibilities for nutrient
and energy recovery are
among the most advanced
in terms of technical and
financial feasibility

Wastewater use guidelines need to be feasible
to implement in terms of both technological
and economic possibilities; enforceable
through appropriate policies and programmes;
and realistic for specific local conditions,
taking account of economic, sociocultural and
environmental factors. The human health and
environmental protection measures need to
be tailored to suit the local balance between
affordability and risk.
Various guidelines for wastewater use
for irrigation have been developed at the
international and national levels. The most
important criteria include health risk-based
parameters, including microbiological standards
for wastewater use such as the absence of
faecal indicator bacteria, and physio-chemical
parameters for treated wastewater, measuring
the presence of total suspended solids (TSS),
nutrients and heavy metals. Guidelines can
also include restrictions based on irrigation
practices according to the origin and end use of
wastewater, such as crop restriction, irrigation
techniques and human exposure control.
Developed countries set technical standards
for microorganisms and chemicals. Such strict
limit values require considerable monitoring
and enforcement efforts. On the other hand,
regulations in developing countries focus on
use restrictions such as restricting wastewater
irrigation for vegetables for direct human
consumption and/or requiring a minimum time
interval between irrigation and crop harvest.
Such use restrictions cannot be monitored
without functioning oversight agencies.
Consequently, some countries, such as Mexico
and Tunisia, have adopted guidelines based on
use restrictions combined with easy-to-measure
limit values.

135

Various guidelines
for wastewater use
for irrigation have been
developed at the
international and
national levels

One of the internationally applied guidelines
for wastewater use is the WHO Guidelines
for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and
Greywater in Agriculture (WHO, 2006a). The
wastewater quality guidelines for agricultural
use developed by FAO (1985; 1992) focus
on evaluating the suitability of water for
irrigation and identifying possible restrictions
in use. Effective policies and regulations for
wastewater use and resource recovery are
mostly lacking at the national level, being
only implemented in a small number of
countries, including Israel, Jordan, Mexico,
Tunisia and Turkey, where wastewater
irrigation is a well-established practice.

16.6 Social acceptance of
wastewater use
The use of wastewater can encounter
strong public resistance due to a lack of
awareness and trust with regard to the
human health risks. Other factors include
different cultural and religious perceptions
about water in general and/or using treated
wastewater. Whereas public health and
safety concerns have traditionally been
the main reason for public resistance to
wastewater use, cultural aspects (see Box
16.10) and consumer behaviour seem to be
the overriding factors in most cases today,
even when the reclaimed water resulting
from advanced treatment processes is
entirely safe. Aesthetic aspects of reclaimed
water, such as colour, odour and taste, also
play an important role in public acceptance.

136

Awareness raising and education are the main
tools to overcome social, cultural and consumer
barriers and to significantly contribute to
building trust among consumers and changing
public perception about wastewater use. Such
awareness campaigns need to be tailored to
consumers with different cultural and religious
backgrounds. Awareness and education
programmes also need to target all age groups
to be effective. Furthermore, they need to
be tailored to local circumstances and needs.
Branding and information dissemination is
another important aspect, contributing to
a positive public perception of reclaimed
water, as well as recovered resources such as
fertilizers. For example, in Singapore, reclaimed
water is branded as ‘NEWater’ at a limited
scale (see Box 16.9). Robust regulatory and
monitoring frameworks ensuring human health
safety are key to building consumer trust and
changing public perception.

BOX 16.10 CULTURAL IMPLICATIONS OF
WASTEWATER REUSE IN FISH FARMING IN
THE MIDDLE EAST
The reuse of wastewater in fish farming is
widely practiced to varying degrees in different
regions of the world. A full-scale demonstration
study in Egypt was conducted to use treated
wastewater in fish farming and for irrigation of
crops and trees. The treated wastewater was
carefully monitored for microbial pathogens,
parasites, and toxic chemicals in the water
and the fish. In spite of the fact that the
produced fish were quite suitable for human
consumption, consumers in Egypt did not
accept them.
Source: Mancy et al. (2000).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 17
UNESCO-IHP | Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa
UNESCO-IHE | Damir Brdjanovic
With contributions from: Manzoor Qadir (UNU-INWEH); Pay Drechsel (IWMI); Xavier Leflaive (OECD
Environment Directorate); Takahiro Konami (UNESCO-IHP); and Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport
and Tourism of Japan

Testing water quality in Beaver Lake in Minnesota

KNOWLEDGE,
INNOVATION, RESEARCH AND
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

This chapter offers a review of trends in knowledge, research, innovation, capacity
building and wastewater management, with a focus on current gaps and barriers.
Responses to these challenges are presented in terms of capacity development, public
awareness and improved collaboration, highlighting the potential for improving cost
recovery and applying technological responses at appropriate scales.

17.1 Trends in research and
innovation
With innovation and technological
development evolving rapidly, there is a
growing impetus for a paradigm shift towards
wastewater management as part of a circular
economy. Rather than thinking of reusing
water as a costly add-on to wastewater
treatment plants, the concept of converting
them into ‘resource recovery factories’ that will
use wastewater and sludge as a raw material
and recover valuable products for marketing to
end users is gaining increasing attention.
The evolution of wastewater management,
especially in developed countries, has
been tied to fighting epidemics and major
technological breakthroughs. The nineteenth
century’s basic activated sludge technologies
(treating wastewater using micro-organisms
to remove organic matter from sewage)
allowed the transition from “the sanitary dark
ages” to “the age of sanitary enlightenment
and industrial revolution” (Cooper, 2001).
Technological developments in the late
twentieth century focused on nutrient
removal — nitrogen and phosphorus —
to deal with the widespread problem of
eutrophication and reduce environmental
impacts of wastewater. Around the turn of
the twenty-first century, with ever-increasing
wastewater treatment requirements and
institutional management capacities, the
research and technological focus shifted
to advanced processes in order to comply
with more stringent regulations and effluent
standards. Future research and innovation
trends in the field of wastewater will probably
focus on resource recovery to reinvent the
economics of the treatment and disposal of
wastewater and sludge. Competing demands
for water and other natural resources are
also driving research and innovations in
wastewater technology and management.

138

The latest major technological innovations
in wastewater treatment (see Box 17.1)
are mainly aimed at improving treatment
efficiencies (Brdjanovic, 2015; Qu et al., 2013;
Van Loosdrecht and Brdjanovic, 2014).
While in some parts of the developed world
new treatment plants are constructed based
on cutting-edge technologies, there is an
increasing call for appropriate technologies
matching the institutional and resource
constraints of low-income countries, such as
technologies which can operate with limited
external energy needs and lower installation,
operation and maintenance costs than
activated sludge systems, while achieving
the same performance targets (Libhaber and
Orozco-Jaramillo, 2012) (see Chapter 15).

17.2 Knowledge, research,
technology and capacitybuilding gaps
The use of existing technologies requires
financing, technical capacity and
infrastructure, which developing countries
often lack. It also requires knowledge transfer,
information sharing and capacity-building
through education and training to support
the sustainability of technology applications.
These knowledge, technology and capacity
gaps should be assessed through a gap
and capacity analysis that will facilitate the
required technology transfer, education and
capacity-building efforts where needed.
The extremely low level of secondary and
advanced wastewater treatment in developing
countries indicates an urgent need for
technological upgrades in wastewater
treatment and safe use options to support
the achievement of SDG Target 6.3 (see
Chapter 2). Appropriate and affordable
technologies need to be transferred from
developed to developing countries, supported

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Future research and innovation trends
in the field of wastewater will probably
focus on resource recovery

BOX 17.1 INNOVATIONS IN WASTEWATER TECHNOLOGY AND RESEARCH
Membrane filtration. Advances in membrane technology have not only reduced human and
environmental health risks associated with treated wastewater, but also opened new opportunities
for wastewater use, such as potable reuse. The use of membrane technologies (reverse osmosis,
microfiltration, ultrafiltration, etc.) is becoming increasingly common for tertiary or advanced treatment,
especially in developed countries, as membranes continue to improve and operational costs decrease.
Membrane bioreactors (MBRs) are an emerging technology, resulting from innovations to intensify
the membrane separation by incorporating it with the activated sludge process. Recently, the number of
plants with MBR technology is on the rise (Van Loosdrecht and Brdjanovic, 2014). MBRs offer advantages
such as compactness, flexibility and ability to operate reliably under remote control.
Microbial fuel cells, a technological innovation based on bio-electrochemical processes of bacteria, have
started to find applications in wastewater treatment over the past decade, in order to harvest energy
(electrical current) by utilizing anaerobic digestion that mimics bacterial interactions found in nature.
This technology can significantly reduce treatment process costs and the amount of leftover sludge.
However, given the challenges in scaling up for practical application, further research and technological
improvements are needed to overcome the high energy requirements.
New developments in biological treatment processes have found successful application due to the
high efficiencies and low investment and operational costs. Examples include innovative processes for
improved nitrogen removal such as SHARON® (single reactor system for high-activity ammonium removal
over nitrite), ANAMMOX® (anaerobic ammonium oxidation) and BABE® (bio augmentation batch
enhanced), as well as mineral crystallization processes for phosphorus recovery and reuse. Granular sludge
treatment processes are also emerging by using engineered microbial structures. The first granular sludge
process is commercialized under the name of NEREDA®.
Nanotechnology is an emerging and growing field with potentially promising applications in water
purification and wastewater treatment, as well as in water quality and wastewater monitoring (Qu et al.,
2013). Presently, nanotechnology applications in water and wastewater treatment focus on technology
maturation and full-scale demonstration.
Innovative wastewater monitoring and control systems are finding application as technologies
improve. The most promising technological advances include: innovative monitoring techniques based
on new sensors, computerized telemetry devices, and innovative data analysis tools. Research on sensor
and system control is advancing rapidly. New methods to control wastewater treatment are continually
introduced, including the use of mobile applications to operate the SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition) system for remote monitoring and control of wastewater systems.
Natural treatment systems (constructed wetland systems) are becoming more attractive as innovative
natural solutions to complement existing technological limitations, with research increasingly focusing on
natural processes.
Modelling has become an important aspect of new research developments in the field of wastewater,
as fundamental knowledge on microbiology and bio-chemistry advances and the computational capacity
improves. Modelling not only allows the transfer of scientific knowledge to practical applications, but also
facilitates the communication between scientists and engineers at a global level (Brdjanovic, 2015).

K n ow l e d ge ,

i n n ovati o n ,

re s e a rc h

a n d

c a pa c ity

development

139

by knowledge transfer and capacity-building. In
addition to North–South cooperation, South–
South cooperation can further support developing
countries in improving their scientific, technological
and innovative capacity. The transfer of new
technologies, where their application is feasible and
affordable, should be equally promoted.
Emerging pollutants (see Box 4.1) represent an
evident knowledge and research gap. Research
is needed to improve the understanding of the
dynamics of these pollutants in water resources
and the environment, and the methods to remove
these pollutants from wastewater (UNESCO,
2015). Improved techniques for the assessment,
monitoring and removal of emerging pollutants
are required, as is further research on the potential
for multi-resistant pathogen development. There
are also huge gaps in the existing regulatory
and monitoring frameworks, as well as in data
availability regarding the occurrence level of
emerging pollutants in wastewater and receiving
water bodies (UNESCO, 2015).
Another necessary element for research and
capacity building is a new health risk assessment
related to pathogens present in wastewater
and the mitigation measures required in
developing countries. The most common health
risk assessments are based on models that
were largely studied and verified in developed
countries. Similar models and studies are required
for developing countries as well. While health risk
mitigation measures generally target pathogenrelated threats, health risks related to chemical
pollutants also require attention, especially due to
the ineffective industrial wastewater management
in developing and emerging countries.
It is also essential to understand how external
factors like climate change will impact wastewater
management. Research on the impacts of climate
change on wastewater systems and treatment
processes has only recently begun to appear
(GWP, 2014) and many questions remain to be
studied. Furthermore, more research efforts and
innovative data collection and sharing tools are
needed to address the enormous data gaps with
regard to wastewater.

17.2.1 Barriers to research, innovation
and technology applications
Lack of financing is a major barrier for the
application of existing technologies in developing
countries, but also for the promotion of research
and the transitioning of new technologies for
large-scale applications in developed countries.
The high costs of high-end technologies hamper

140

BOX 17.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF CUTTINGEDGE TECHNOLOGIES IN WASTEWATER IN
JAPAN
The Government of Japan is supporting innovation
in the field of wastewater treatment and resource
recovery through the B-DASH (Breakthrough by
Dynamic Approach in Sewage High Technology)
project, with the aim of implementing cuttingedge technologies by subsidizing innovations and
standardizing their application. Under B-DASH, private
companies in partnership with local governments can
apply for subsidies for field-testing and implementing
new technologies, including the construction of a
facility. Results of this field-testing are used for the
development of standardization guidelines, issued
by the National Institute for Land and Infrastructure
Management of Japan. In total, 31 new technologies
have been adopted and brought into practice through
the B-DASH project since its commencement in 2011,
some of which have the potential to be applied
globally in the near future.
For example, in 2012, two Japanese firms
collaborated with the City Government of Osaka to
test a new pipeline-based system for wastewater
heat utilization at the Ebie Wastewater Treatment
Plant. This new system can reduce CO2 emissions
from air-conditioning or hot-water supply by
15–25% compared to conventional technologies.
In 2014, a new guideline for introducing a pipelinebased wastewater heat recovery system was issued,
based on field-tested results. Moreover, in order to
promote private sector investment in wastewater,
the Sewage Act of Japan was amended in 2015 so
that private companies can install wastewater heat
exchangers inside sewers.
Contributed by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism
of Japan and Takahiro Konami (UNESCO-IHP).

their widespread application, especially in developing
countries. Furthermore, a limited market niche for new
technology applications halters innovation (Daigger,
2011). The limited knowledge about the market for
products recovered from wastewater adds to this
challenge. Scarce data and information on wastewater
form another major impediment to research and
innovation, as is the (often-missing) link between the
academia, industry and local government.
Translating innovation into practical application
requires research into financing opportunities and into
ways to create a market niche for new technologies,
building human and technical capacities, and engaging
stakeholders, including the private sector. This can be
enabled through strong political will and government
support (see Box 17.2).

W W D R

2 0 1 7

17.3 Future trends in wastewater
management
Whereas past innovation in the field of wastewater
focused mainly on advanced treatment technologies,
new and innovative solutions are emerging, combining
both technological and management aspects.
Future trends in wastewater management increasingly
focus on water reuse and resource recovery, which
provide the additional benefits of safeguarding public
health and reducing environmental pollution. For
example, water reuse, the creation of commercial
(phosphorus) fertilizers, and in particular energy
recovery, can significantly lower operation and
maintenance costs (Wichelns et al., 2015).
Innovative wastewater management solutions
that incorporate interdisciplinary and integrated
approaches are also becoming more common and an
area of growing research interest. Decentralization
at an appropriate level, combining centralized and
decentralized solutions, is also appearing as a potential
alternative, transitioning from oversized, centralized
water and wastewater facilities, to infrastructure at a
more adequate management scale (see Chapter 15).

17.3.1 Shifting from wastewater treatment
to water reuse and resource recovery
The technological advances in wastewater treatment
over the past decades have presented an opportunity
to shift the primary objective of wastewater
management from ‘treat and dispose’ to ‘reuse,
recycle, and recover resources’. Various technological
options for resource recovery from wastewater and
sludge exist at different stages of development and
application, and are developing rapidly (see Chapter
16). Technological opportunities for resource recovery
from wastewater are also creating a new niche with
profitable business models, which facilitates the
sustainability of the applied solutions (Strande et
al., 2014; Otoo and Drechsel, 2015), although more
research in resource recovery markets and economically
sustainable revenue models is needed.
Trends in resource recovery move towards innovative
management approaches, most notably integrated
resource recovery, which in turn requires supportive
regulations, market demand, investment, social
acceptance and a willingness of different stakeholders
to work together. It also requires a holistic view in
order to ensure collective thinking among future
practitioners, decision-makers and marketers
(Holmgren et al., 2015).
Future wastewater treatment plants will be expected
to deliver recovered resources and high-quality water
for reuse in different sectors, while being cost-effective
and self-sufficient in terms of energy.

K n ow l e d ge ,

i n n ovati o n ,

re s e a rc h

a n d

17.3.2 Combining centralized and
decentralized solutions at an appropriate scale
On the trajectory from on-site to off-site sanitation
systems, recent innovations have shown that a mixed
portfolio of solutions, including the combination of
centralized and decentralized wastewater management
facilities, can also be suitable to large service areas,
while offering benefits of decentralization such as
reduced investment, low operation and maintenance
costs, and customizability to local conditions (CairnsSmith et al., 2014).

BOX 17.3 DISTRIBUTED WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
AN ALTERNATIVE TO CENTRALIZED SYSTEMS
Distributed systems represent a flexible, localized
and highly networked approach, where the central
infrastructure plays an arterial role, while smaller,
tailored systems operate and interact with users at a
more localized level (Biggs et al., 2009). Distributed
water systems are not merely technical innovations,
but also require innovative governance and are not
appropriate in every context. Even in those specific
contexts where they are the most appropriate solution,
distributed systems face several barriers that limit their
diffusion (OECD, 2015b):
Firstly, distributed systems can weaken existing central
systems (e.g. to collect and treat wastewater), when
the best-off consumers disengage from the central
network, depriving the managing utility from revenues.
This is an issue, as distributed systems work best in
combination with centrally piped infrastructures.
Utilities and city administrations may be reluctant to
explore options that negatively affect the revenue base
of the existing networks, unless alternative sources of
revenues are identified.
Secondly, distributed systems raise the issue of
responsibility: who is responsible and accountable for
the service provided at the building or district level?
Accountability is an issue, as distributed systems require
the capacity to monitor and control the quality of
multiple water flows at several levels, which will also
lead to additional costs.
Thirdly, the complexity of economies of scale in urban
water management needs attention. Considering
physical economies of scale, a large treatment plant is
usually cheaper to operate than several smaller ones.
However, system economies can counterbalance physical
economies of scale, for example, by saving investment
costs on centralized infrastructure expansion compared
to on-site wastewater treatment and reuse technologies.
Source: OECD (2015b).
Contributed by Xavier Leflaive (Water Team Leader, OECD Environment
Directorate).

c a pa c ity

development

141

A concept of ‘distributed wastewater systems’,
which refers to a highly networked and localized
approach to production, distribution and
consumption, can be seen as an alternative
based on the optimum combination of different
centralized and decentralized systems for
managing wastewater across networked cluster
systems. This option is more efficient in terms of
time, energy and costs, and generates positive
externalities for end users and the environment.
However, significant challenges can exist in terms
of implementation (see Box 17.3).
Additional research is needed to better
understand how to best combine systems in a
portfolio of solutions (sewered and unsewered)
across a variety of scales, in countries where
wastewater infrastructure is only emerging
(Cairns-Smith et al., 2014). Key research
issues in this area include: cost-effectiveness,
consumer behaviour, acceptance and incentives,
business models and institutional arrangements.
Furthermore, issues around the system
ownership, household acceptance and financing
of these systems, especially in developing
countries, need to be considered.

17.4 Capacity building, public
awareness and collaboration
among stakeholders
Access to scientific knowledge, research,
new technologies, appropriate education and
training on sustainable solutions for wastewater
management is not readily available in less
developed countries.
Education and capacity building is vital and
can be offered through training programmes
focusing on different aspects of wastewater
management in developing countries, both
targeting water professionals and as part
of formal educational curricula at different
levels. This can directly influence issues of
social perception and acceptance, especially in
wastewater use and resource recovery.
The social dimension should not be
underestimated. Safe water reuse, for example,
requires active stakeholder participation,
based on an understanding of benefits and
risks. Public education campaigns can raise
awareness among the general public about
the ways in which water can and is being
safely reused, even for drinking purposes, with
provocative examples – like water reuse by
astronauts on the International Space Station.

142

Enabling stakeholder involvement and capacity
development as early as possible is critical for
the success of planned reuse projects. Where
reuse is based on a multi-barrier approach,
behavioural change and the acceptance of best
practices are keys to success. As stakeholders
might lack the appropriate risk awareness and/
or do not directly benefit from adopting safety
measures, a better understanding of genderspecific incentives (both positive or negative)
is needed to promote recommended practices,
with the highest potential for local adoption
(Karg and Drechsel, 2011).
Institutional capacity building is essential. If the
entity in charge of operation and maintenance
of wastewater facilities lacks the appropriate
institutional capacity, the risk of failure will
remain, regardless of whether the utility is
managing smaller, decentralized or larger
centralized plants (Murray and Drechsel, 2011).
In this regard, a new generation of scientists,
engineers and professionals, addressing different
aspects of wastewater management, needs to
be trained to face the problems that arise from
increasingly complex and interconnected issues
at different scales. Future wastewater managers
will require a mix of technical and managerial
skills in order to develop and implement a
compendium of solutions across the various
wastewater flows, from pollution abatement
at the source through collection and treatment
to water reuse and the recovery of useful byproducts.
Concrete efforts are required to train female
researchers in the field of wastewater, in
order to promote a greater number of women
scientists in the higher echelons of scientific
institutions and decision-making in developed
and developing countries alike (WWAP, 2016).
There is an urgent need, both in developed and
developing countries, for education at all levels –
from informal education for children and adults
to higher education curriculum development
– on the values of wastewater, while the risks
of wastewater mismanagement for human and
environmental health need urgent attention.
The development and implementation of
innovative, transdisciplinary and holistic
educational and training approaches, including
actualized, distance, student-catered, problembased learning and training materials, are
essential to ensure that the issues and challenges
can be embraced with deeper insight, advanced
knowledge and greater confidence.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

CHAPTER 18
WWAP | Richard Connor, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara, Engin Koncagül and Stefan Uhlenbrook
With contributions from: Marianne Kjellén (UNDP); Sarah Hendry (Centre for Water Law Policy and Science
(under the auspices of UNESCO), University of Dundee); and Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP)

Ellerntors Bridge in Hamburg (Germany)

CREATING
AN
ENABLING
ENVIRONMENT

In conclusion, this chapter presents a roadmap of potential responses, solution options and means
of implementation that can be adopted to foster progress in improving wastewater management.
Such options go well beyond the merely technical to include legal and institutional frameworks,
financing opportunities, building knowledge and capacity, mitigating human and environmental
health risk, and fostering social acceptance. As the challenges vary from place to place around the
world, it is incumbent upon stakeholders and decision-makers in each region, country, basin and
community to identify the most appropriate mix of options for their particular situation.

Addressing the world’s wastewater-related
challenges is crucial to advancing human
health and livelihoods, promoting the growth
of local and national economies, improving the
quality of water, air and land, and protecting
and enhancing ecosystems and the services
they provide. Indeed, improved wastewater
management represents a critical factor in
achieving sustainable development for all.
Nonetheless, as described throughout this
report, wastewater is not merely a problem in
search of solutions, but a valuable resource that,
if properly managed, can provide tremendous
opportunities and benefits.
The demand for – and use of – water is
increasing in most parts of the world as a
result of population growth, urbanization and
improving socio-economic conditions. At the
same time, water availability is increasingly
compromised by climate change, unsustainable
groundwater abstraction and pollution. In several
areas, from the western USA and southern
Europe through Northern Africa and the Middle
East to parts of China and India, freshwater
resources are already severely stressed and
service providers are struggling to meet the everincreasing demand for freshwater. Reusing water
enhances freshwater availability for meeting
human and environmental needs and is indeed
already happening in several places. Depending
on its level of treatment, wastewater can be
– and is being – used for multiple purposes,
ranging from irrigation and landscaping to
industrial uses, and even as a source of potable
drinking water.
More water use also means more wastewater.
And, with so much of the world’s wastewater
being released untreated, the impacts on
human health and the environment have been
increasing proportionately.
Appropriately treating wastewater prior to
its release reduces the pollution loads to the
environment and lowers health risks to humans.
Some of the more advanced treatment processes
may appear financially cost-prohibitive, especially
for the poorest communities. However, when
compared with the cost of building a new dam,

144

desalination or importing water from another
basin, and when health and environmental benefits
are taken into consideration, improved wastewater
management makes sound economic sense,
particularly under conditions of water scarcity.
Improved wastewater management can also lead
to the creation of direct and indirect jobs in waterdependent sectors and beyond (WWAP, 2016).
There are basically two approaches to addressing
the challenges related to pollution from
wastewater. The first involves preventing excessive
use (quantity) and contamination of water at
the point of initial use, thus reducing the overall
volume of wastewater produced and the pollution
loads it contains. The second involves the
collection of wastewater and applying appropriate
levels of treatment (i.e. ‘end-of-pipe’ solutions) for
other uses or discharge into the environment. This
approach includes setting quality standards and
regulations for incoming wastewater streams and
outgoing treated wastewater. Where prevention
and appropriate treatment are impracticable, costeffective solutions are available to reduce risks
from exposure to untreated wastewater (see for
example WHO, 2006a).
Planning for water reuse has been gaining
momentum in the context of sustainable
water resources management, the greening of
economies, and urban planning (cf. Lazarova
et al., 2013). However, water is not the only
resource that can be recovered from wastewater.
Nutrients, organic matter, energy and other
useful by-products can also be extracted from
certain types of wastewater. For example, the
cost-efficiency of energy (biogas) recovery from
sewage sludge is well-documented (cf. WWAP,
2014; UN-Water, 2015a). Recovering water
and useful by-products is critical to balancing
economic development with environmental and
resource protection in a circular economy.
The wastewater management cycle encompasses
four essential steps:
1.

reducing and preventing pollution at the
source;

2.

removing contaminants from wastewater
streams (i.e. treatment);

W W D R

2 0 1 7

3.

using treated wastewater for various applications;
and

the right place, in a way that optimizes the most suitable
mix of both grey and green infrastructure.

4.

recovering useful by-products.

For developing countries, appropriate, effective and
low-cost wastewater treatment technologies are
available (see Chapter 15). Preliminary, primary and
secondary treatment can be simple processes that
produce effluent of the quality required for a variety
of uses, with low investment costs and, in particular,
low operational and maintenance costs (JiménezCisneros, 2011; Libhaber and Orozco-Jaramillo, 2012),
particularly when combined with well-managed green
infrastructure (see Chapter 8). As biological processes
perform better at higher temperatures, many of these
processes are particularly well-suited to countries
with warm climates, which includes most developing
countries (Qadir et al., 2015b). Their objective will
be to incrementally increase the levels of wastewater
treatment from preliminary, primary and secondary
treatment towards tertiary treatment processes, thus
generating effluent of increasing quality.

Each of these can been seen as a different but
interconnected step in a logical process, or ladder
approach, within the broader IWMI framework. As
such, a number of technical, regulatory and financial
considerations need to be taken into account in order
to improve wastewater management and maximize its
opportunities and benefits.
Water scarcity has been moving up on the global
political agenda, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The SDGs included in
the Agenda also promote improved water quality
through enhanced wastewater management (UNGA,
2015a). Indeed, the integrity and biological diversity
of ecosystems have been increasingly impacted by
wastewater, which has compromised ecosystem
services upon which sustainable development – in all
its economic, social and environmental dimensions –
depends.
Given wastewater’s potential role in addressing water
scarcity, pollution and resource recovery, it is not
surprising that wastewater management is attracting
increasing attention. Moreover, with so little wastewater
being treated and even less being used, the potential
opportunities from exploiting appropriately treated
wastewater as a resource are enormous. The following
sections describe a number of responses that collectively
would create an enabling environment for enhancing
water reuse and the recovery of useful by-products.

18.1 Technical options
Despite the increasing number of cases of water
reuse for agricultural, industrial, environmental and
recreational purposes as well as for drinking water, the
potential for using ‘fit-for-purpose’ treated wastewater
is yet to be fully exploited, particularly in developing
countries and emerging economies. Whereas highincome countries treat about 70% of the wastewater
they produce, lower middle-income and low-income
countries, respectively, only treat an estimated 28%
and 8% of their wastewater (Sato et al., 2013).
The choice of technologies is highly site-specific.
Wastewater is managed in a large diversity of climatic
systems, with varying degrees of water resources
availability, levels of economic development, types of
economic activity and settlement patterns, all of which
result in different challenges for wastewater and water
quality management (UNEP, 2015a). In spite of existing
knowledge gaps, a wide range of technical solutions
have been developed, and it is most often a question of
choosing and implementing the right technologies at

Cre ati n g

a n d

e n a b l i n g

th e

e nv iron ment

Choosing the most appropriate type of wastewater
treatment system is also important. While there is
no one common solution, low-cost DEWATS are
gaining in acceptance and are increasingly being
used in developed and developing countries alike (see
Chapter 15). For developing countries in particular,
it has been suggested that centralized, cuttingedge treatment plants are a risky investment due
to insufficient institutional capacity and financing.
Appropriate technologies relying on simple processes
with lower capital and operational and maintenance
costs are generally more sustainable, while potentially
offering effluent of adequate quality levels for several
potential uses, including agriculture (Libhaber and
Orozco-Jaramillo, 2012). It has been estimated that
the investment costs for such simple or ‘appropriate’
treatment facilities represent only 20–50% of
conventional treatment plants, with even lower
operation and maintenance costs (in the range of
5–25% of conventional activated sludge treatment
plants) (Wichelns et al., 2015).
Although developed countries generally have advanced
wastewater management systems in place, they
too face a number of challenges, including ageing
infrastructure that is often inappropriately suited for
dealing with current wastewater loads (see Chapter
12), staff attrition (WWAP, 2016) and growing concern
over emerging pollutants (see Chapters 4 and 17).
The concept of ‘fit-for-purpose’ is another critical
consideration. As it is unlikely that the capacity
for advanced wastewater treatment in developing
countries will increase substantially in the near
future, it will be important to develop and adopt
tailored technologies that treat wastewater to levels
appropriate for selected end uses. Irrigated agriculture

145

has historically been the most common use for partially
treated wastewater, and its use for this purpose has
been reported in around 50 countries, on 10% of
all irrigated land (FAO, 2010). Other opportunities
for using treated wastewater also exist – from urban
landscaping to potable water, each requiring different
levels of treatment. Integrating these potential uses
into the wastewater management systems (via ‘fit-forpurpose’ treatment) is required to unleash the sizeable
potential of water reuse (see Chapter 16).
Finally, technologies for the recovery of useful byproducts from wastewater, such as energy (heat and
biogas) and nutrients, have been evolving rapidly
and are increasingly cost-effective, especially when
considered within the overall wastewater management
cycle (see Chapter 16). For example, thermal, chemical
and hydraulic energy contained in wastewater can be
recovered in the form of biogas, heating/cooling or
electricity through either on-site or off-site processes
(Meda et al., 2012), and various technologies exist
for on-site energy recovery through sludge/biosolids
treatment processes integrated into wastewater
treatment plants. New methods are also available
for recovering phosphorus from wastewater and
for transforming septage into fertilizer at low cost.
Technological innovations in these fields will play a
critical role in advancing resource recovery and reuse,
especially in developing countries and emerging
markets (Hanjra et al., 2015a).

18.2 Legal and institutional
frameworks
One of the main reasons why wastewater has been
largely neglected is that it often lacks an institutional
home, and many reformed water utilities have
not realized the value in investing in wastewater
infrastructure (UN-Water, 2015a). Improving wastewater
governance therefore requires the alignment of varying
interests in ways that allow people and organizations
to collaborate towards meeting basic common needs
while maximizing benefits across the various stages of
wastewater management (see Chapter 3).
Regulatory frameworks need to be appropriate to
time and place, recognizing the diversity of economies
and cultures and the very different needs of different
parts of society (UNEP, 2015b). Although there is
a need to raise standards for water quality nearly
everywhere, achieving progress will require a flexible
and incremental approach. Adequate regulation is
time-consuming and expensive, but if the wholelife costs and benefits of managing wastewater are
factored in, the savings for society, the environment
and the economy can be substantial (UNEP, 2015a).
An effective regulatory framework requires that the
implementing authority has the necessary technical and

146

managerial capacity and performs in an independent
fashion, with sufficient powers to enforce rules and
guidelines. Transparency and access to information
motivates compliance by promoting trust among users
with respect to the implementation and enforcement
processes (UN-Water, 2015b).
Wastewater management is of international concern,
as pollution problems have no borders. The importance
of international collaboration is illustrated by the
case of the Danube and the Black Sea (see Box 3.1).
Adequate national and international coordination can
help ensure that limited financial resources are spent in
the most effective way.
However, actions to address water pollution – by
cleaner production and consumption processes
and more efficient and comprehensive treatment –
are nearly always undertaken locally. Hence, local
regulation, stakeholder consultation and motivation for
compliance remain critical elements of any sustainable
wastewater management strategy.
Policies and regulatory instruments are also
implemented locally and need to be adapted to
varied circumstances. For example, where economic
inequalities are stark, one centralized service provision
strategy is unlikely to serve all users. It is therefore
important that the political, institutional and financial
support be distributed equally, as ‘bottom-up’
initiatives and small-scale local (i.e. decentralized)
provision of wastewater management services also
need the support and enabling environments to thrive.
Likewise, the ways of treating and using wastewater
need to be chosen according to local circumstances,
taking into account ecosystem needs, competing
uses of water and culturally acceptable practices.
Within such constraints, water can – and needs to –
be reused as intensively as possible as a response to
water scarcity and the increasing demand for food
and energy. Where high-quality effluent is required,
the adoption of (or changes in) water reuse legislation
has been shown to be the main ‘push factor’ that
influenced treatment plants in changing their current
technology by essentially forcing them to implement
advanced treatment schemes (DEMOWARE, 2016).
In many countries, new legislation and institutional
arrangements will be required to accommodate
and regulate the use of wastewater for a variety of
uses, ranging from irrigation and industrial water
recycling to aquifer recharge and the enhancement of
ecosystem services. As an additional source of water,
treated wastewater can be integrated into national
water supply schemes (Hanjra et al., 2015b).
New regulations regarding the recovery of wastewater
by-products are also required. Although the technical
expertise is available (see Chapter 16), there is often

W W D R

2 0 1 7

little or no legislation on quality standards for these
products, creating market uncertainties that can
discourage investment. Markets for these products
could be stimulated by financial or legal incentives (e.g.
compulsory blending of recovered phosphates in artificial
fertilizer). Applying quality criteria to the end product,
rather than to the input material, could also help
promote market acceptance of high-quality materials
from municipal wastewater and further stimulate
the recycling of nutrients and other by-products of
wastewater as a critical part of the circular economy.
The management of wastewater and the consequent
protection of water resources is an area where societies’
ability to act for the benefit of those without a political
voice of their own – the vulnerable, the coming
generations and ecosystems – is continually challenged.
Where the enforcement of standards and permits is
required, the impartiality of public authorities is crucial.
Transparency and public participation in policy-making
may be ways to assure sensible, acceptable and
sustainable solutions. A common vision and generalized
agreement on the goals of wastewater management
is the best guarantor of their successful implementation.

18.3 Financing opportunities
Wastewater management and sanitation are generally
considered to be expensive and capital-intensive
(see Section 3.3). This is especially the case of large
centralized systems, which require a large degree of
up-front capital expenditure. Once completed, these
systems also rarely generate significant revenue and
are therefore unable to cover their own operation and
maintenance costs over the medium and long term,
which leads to their rapid deterioration. Therefore, it is
unsurprising that investing in wastewater management
and water quality has not been considered a political
priority in many developed and developing economies.
The problem is further exacerbated by chronically
lacking investment in the development of institutions
and human capacity (see Chapter 17). It is essential
to coordinate investments and financing in order
to improve the overall performance of wastewater
management systems (WHO, 2015). A results-based
approach to financing can also help promote the
optimal design and efficient implementation and
operation of these systems (WWC/OECD, 2015).
Decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS)
can be used to offset some financial problems
generated by centralized systems (see Section 15.4).
Their use is most common in smaller communities,
treating lower volumes of wastewater and often
applying low-cost technologies (e.g. stabilizing ponds,
anaerobic filters and constructed wetlands). When
properly designed and implemented, such lowcost technologies can provide satisfactory results in
terms of effluent quality. However, even though the

Cre ati n g

a n d

e n a b l i n g

th e

e nv iron ment

initial investments for these technologies are low,
they still require an appropriate level of operation
and maintenance in order to avoid system failure.
Therefore, financial resources and investments in
human capacity need to be considered early in the
design phase to ensure the proper functioning of
decentralized systems over the long term.
In order to maximize the net benefits of wastewater
treatment systems, it is also important to examine
their social, environmental and financial costs and
benefits locally and downstream, and to compare these
results to the next-best alternative, including the costs
of no action over the longer term. Indeed, the vast
majority of available evidence suggests that the costs
of inadequate investment in wastewater management
are far greater than in terms of actual money spent,
particularly when the direct and indirect damages
to health, socio-economic development and the
environment are taken into consideration (see Section
13.5) (UN-Water, 2015a).
Wastewater use can add a new revenue stream to
wastewater treatment, particularly under conditions
of recurring or chronic water scarcity. Several different
business models have been implemented where cost
and value recovery offer a significant advantage from
a financial perspective (see Section 16.3). However,
revenues from the sale of treated wastewater are
not generally adequate to cover the operational and
maintenance costs of the water treatment facility itself.
When different entities are responsible for different
parts of the sanitation service chain, clearly agreed
cost-, risk- and benefit-sharing mechanisms need to
be in place (e.g. public–private partnerships or other
participatory approaches) if the value created through
reuse is to help maintain the sanitation service chain
(Wichelns et al., 2015). Within the broader context of
water resources management, multi-purpose water
infrastructure may offer additional advantages for
enhanced wastewater treatment, but this is often more
difficult to finance than single-purpose projects (WWC/
OECD, 2015).
Even when delivered to the tap, potable water
remains generally undervalued and underpriced when
compared to the actual cost of the service. Treated
wastewater must itself be priced lower than potable
water in order to gain public acceptance. In such cases,
encouraging water reuse takes precedence over cost
recovery. Yet, even where revenues from wastewater
use fail to cover their extra costs, investments in water
reuse generally compare well to the costs of dams,
desalination, inter-basin transfers and other options to
increase water supplies (Wichelns et al., 2015).
The recovery of nutrients (mainly phosphorus and
nitrogen) and energy can add significant new value
streams to improve the proposition of cost recovery.
In recent years, several technological innovations have

147

emerged that allow for increased efficiency in the
recovery of nutrients and energy (see Section 16.2).
Studies on multiple-resource recovery show that greater
financial benefits become possible when the resource
reuse trajectory extends not only to energy, but also
targets carbon credits (Hanjra et al., 2015b). Recovered
biogas has successfully been used as an energy source
for the treatment plant itself, in combined heat and
power generation (CHP), or cogeneration, and even
as transportation fuel (WWAP, 2014). Reintroducing
recovered phosphorus and nitrogen as fertilizer would
drop the price of these products and contribute to
lowering the overall cost of food (Sengupta et al.,
2015). Methods are now available for recovering
phosphorus from wastewater and for transforming
septage into pelletized fertilizer at low cost (Hanjra et
al., 2015a). Furthermore, the controlled recovery of
phosphorus – a non-renewable resource indispensable
as a fertilizer in modernized agriculture – can be more
financially advantageous than the chemical treatment
needed to remove unwanted phosphorus precipitation
at the treatment plant. Phosphorus recovery will
likely become even more cost-competitive with the
rising cost of mining finite rock-phosphate (Wichelns
et al., 2015). Apart from tangible economic benefits,
improved nitrogen recovery would also reduce the
nitrogen loading to the atmosphere (Sengupta et al.,
2015). Although still in early stages of development,
innovative technologies for recovering other valuable
materials are also emerging, such as metal recovery via
bioelectrochemical processes (Wang and Ren, 2014).
In summary, the financing of wastewater treatment
and use becomes increasingly favourable when
treatment costs are low and the value proposition
goes beyond recovering water from wastewater to
include the recovery of nutrients, energy and other
useful by-products. In view of these potential synergies
across the wastewater management cycle, it has
been demonstrated that public–private partnerships,
based on cost recovery across the entire wastewater
management cycle, can help incentivize and even
co-finance the sanitation/wastewater sector, while at
the same time promoting small- and medium-scale
entrepreneurs (Murray et al., 2011). The availability
of end users who can absorb the supply of product
and are willing and able to pay for it (i.e. the market)
represents the most critical condition for implementing
any given water reuse and by-product recovery and use
scheme (Rao et al., 2015).

18.4 Enhancing knowledge and
building capacity
Data and information on wastewater generation,
treatment and use is essential for policy-makers,
researchers, practitioners and public institutions in order
to develop national and local action plans aimed at

148

environmental protection and the safe and productive
use of wastewater. However, there is a pervasive lack
of data relating to virtually all aspects of water quality
and wastewater management, particularly in developing
countries (UN-Water, 2015a). When available, countrylevel data on wastewater generation, treatment and use
are often incomplete or outdated (Sato et al., 2013),
so that direct comparisons between countries can be
difficult or impossible (see Section 4.4). The monitoring
required for measuring progress towards SDG Target 6.3
can be expected to generate some progress in nationallevel monitoring and reporting (see Chapter 2).
Knowledge concerning the volumes and, perhaps even
more importantly, the constituents of wastewater are
necessary tools for protecting human and environmental
health and safety. Here too, there is much room for
improvement at the basin and local level in order to
monitor the effectiveness of regulatory systems and
support the enforcement of environmental laws.
In order to enhance wastewater management, it
is equally essential to ensure that the appropriate
levels of human capacity are in place (see Chapter
17). Therefore, continuous professional development
throughout all levels is needed to keep up with the
ever-evolving technology and societal needs.
There is always a need for appropriately trained staff,
irrespective of whether it is concerning large-scale
centralized wastewater management systems or
smaller, on-site systems. For example, the operation
and maintenance of many on-site systems has
often been left to homeowners or local authorities,
leading to system failure due to lack of, or improper,
maintenance (UN-Water, 2015a). According to the
International Water Association, “many developing
economies are lacking significant numbers of water
professionals, and the necessary knowledge, experience
and specialist skills to meet the rising demand for water
and sanitation services” (IWA, 2014, p. 3). Investing in
adequate training also makes the difference between
good regulatory policies and actually controlling water
quality- and harvesting-related benefits (UN-Water,
2015b). As stated in the 2016 United Nations World
Water Development Report, “critical relationships and
essential linkages exist between the management
of water [in its broadest sense] and employment
opportunities in countries at all levels of development.
[…] Water plays a key role in generating and sustaining
direct employment opportunities across a large array
of sectors and in unlocking the potential for indirect
employment creation through its multiplier effect”
(WWAP, 2016, pp. 7 and 126).
Organizational and institutional capacities in the
wastewater management sector are also inadequate,
particularly in developing countries. Given that
wastewater management often lacks an ‘institutional
home’, the challenges involved in aligning varying

W W D R

2 0 1 7

interests and increasing collaboration towards meeting
basic common objectives call for strong efficient and
transparent institutions, capable of both designing
guidelines and enforcing regulations.
Finally, research and development are needed to
adapt innovative technologies to local contexts, both
in terms of improved low-cost wastewater treatment
systems (including the separation of waste streams to
tailor treatment and the next intended use), as well as
increased efficiencies in the use of treated wastewater
and recovered by-products (see Chapter 17). It is
also increasingly important to improve the processes
for the recovery of metals and emerging pollutants,
which usually require high-capital and high-capacity
technologies. More research is needed on the impacts
and potential removal of emerging pollutants such as
microbeads (see Box 4.2) and potentially hazardous
pharmaceutical chemicals such as endocrine disruptors
and antimicrobial resistance-enhancing compounds.

18.5 Mitigating human and
environmental health risks
The discharge of untreated wastewater can have severe
impacts on human and environmental health, including
outbreaks of food-, water- and vector-borne diseases,
as well as pollution and the loss of biological diversity
and ecosystem services. Unfortunately, in spite of the
growing efforts to increase treatment and coverage
levels, much of the wastewater generated in cities
and rural areas will remain untreated or only partially
treated for many years to come. As a result, the largely
unintentional and informal use of untreated or partially
treated wastewater for irrigation and other uses is likely
to continue. Risk management is therefore essential for
enhancing the safety of wastewater use.
The most appropriate option for managing risks from
wastewater use in a given context will vary according
to the intended end use, sociocultural acceptance, and
economic, institutional, biophysical and technological
factors (Balkema et al., 2002). Whenever human
exposure is considered likely (e.g. via food or direct
contact), more rigorous risk management measures will
be required. For example, less stringent management
measures would be applied where wastewater is used
for the irrigation of non-food crops, in comparison to
landscape irrigation at a public park or school, where
direct contact with exposed contaminants is more
likely. Even more stringent measures are required
when wastewater is used to augment potable supplies
(Keraita et al., 2015).
The WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater,
Greywater and Excreta in Agriculture (see Section
7.2.2) proposes a multi-barrier approach in which
wastewater treatment is just one of several options to
protect public health (WHO, 2006a). When untreated

Cre ati n g

a n d

e n a b l i n g

th e

e nv iron ment

wastewater is used for the irrigation of comestible
crops, for barriers at wastewater sources, on farms,
at markets and at the consumer level, thus providing
protection at different points along the production
chain.

18.6 Fostering social acceptance
Even if wastewater use projects are technically welldesigned, appear financially realizable and have
incorporated appropriate health protection measures,
water reuse schemes can still fail, if planners do
not adequately account for the dynamics of social
acceptance (see Sections 3.4 and 16.6). Overall
acceptance of (safe) wastewater use varies with the
development stage of a society and can be a dynamic
process, which makes social feasibility studies, close
participation of user groups, and trust building critical
components of a successful wastewater use programme
(Drechsel et al., 2015b). While water scarcity can
promote a positive perception of wastewater use, other
factors will impact its public acceptance, including
the availability of alternative water sources, levels of
education, perceptions of health risks, religious concerns
and the means and messages used in knowledge
sharing and communication. Overcoming negative
public perceptions is particularly critical in the case of
drinking water (i.e. potable water reuse). Although these
systems often present higher water quality standards
than other water sources, extensive information
campaigns and participation by the public are required
to build trust in the system and overcome the so-called
‘yuck’ factor.
The health risks associated with water reuse need
to be assessed, managed, monitored and reported
on a regular basis in order to gain public acceptance
and to maximize the benefits of using wastewater
while minimizing the negative impacts (UN-Water,
2015a). In low- to middle-income countries with
limited treatment capacity, where untreated or partially
treated wastewater is released into water bodies and
then abstracted and used for informal irrigation, the
cultural and social challenge is not the introduction
of water reuse but the prevention of unintentional/
unsafe use of untreated wastewater. In those cases,
support is needed for a transition towards safe reuse of
wastewater (Drechsel et al., 2015b).

18.7 Coda
In a world where demands for freshwater are
continuously growing, and where limited water
resources are increasingly stressed by over-abstraction,
pollution and climate change, neglecting the
opportunities arising from improved wastewater
management is nothing less than unthinkable.

149

REFERENCES
Aagaard-Hansen, J. and Chaignat, C. L. 2010. Neglected tropical diseases: Equity and social
determinants. E. Blas and A. S. Kurup (eds). Equity, Social Determinants and Public Health
Programmes. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO).
Abiye, T. A., Sulieman, H. and Ayalew, M. 2009. Use of treated wastewater for managed aquifer
recharge in highly populated urban centers: A case study in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Environmental
Geology, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 55–59. Doi: 10.1007/s00254-008-1490-y
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2013. Asian Water Development Outlook 2013: Measuring Water
Security in Asia and the Pacific. Mandaluyong, Philippines, ADB. www.adb.org/publications/asianwater-development-outlook-2013
Ajiboye, A. J., Olaniyi, A. O. and Adegbite, B. A. 2012. A review of the challenges of sustainable water
resources management in Nigeria. International Journal of Life Sciences Biotechnology and Pharma
Research, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1–9.
Akcil, A. and Koldas, S. 2006. Acid Mine Drainage (AMD): Causes, treatment and case studies.
Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 14, No. 12–13, pp. 1139-1145. dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2004.09.006
AKDN (Aga Khan Development Network). n.d. Aga Khan Award for Architecture, Wadi Hanifa
Wetlands. AKDN website. www.akdn.org/architecture/project.asp?id=2258
Alcott, B. 2005. Jevon’s Paradox. Ecological Economics, Volume 54, No. 1, pp. 9–21.
Ammerman, A. J. 1990. On the origins of the Forum Romanum. American Journal of Archaeology, Vol.
94, No. 4, pp. 627–645.
Amoah, P., Keraita, B., Akple, M., Drechsel, P., Abaidoo, R. C. and Konradsen, F. 2011. Low-cost
Options for Reducing Consumer Health Risks from Farm to Fork where Crops are Irrigated with
Polluted Water in West Africa. IWMI Research Report No. 141. Colombo, International Water
Management Institute (IWMI). www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/IWMI_Research_Reports/PDF/
PUB141/RR141.pdf
AMWC (Arab Ministerial Water Council). 2011. Arab Strategy for Water Security in the Arab Region to
Meet the Challenges and Future Needs for Sustainable Development 2010-2030. Cairo, AMWC.
www.accwam.org/Files/Arab_Strategy_for_Water_Security_in_the_Arab_Region_to_meet_the_
Challenges_and_Future_Needs_for_Sustainable_Development_-_2010-2030.pdf
Andersson, K., Rosemarin, A., Lamizana, B., Kvarnström, E., McConville, J., Seidu, R., Dickin, S. and
Trimmer, C. 2016. Sanitation, Wastewater Management and Sustainability: From Waste Disposal
to Resource Recovery. Nairobi/Stockholm, United Nations Environment Programme/Stockholm
Environment Institute (UNEP/SEI). www.sei-international.org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/
NEW/SEI-UNEP-2016-SanWWM&Sustainability.pdf
AQUASTAT. 2014. Area Equipped for Irrigation. Infographic. Rome, Food and Agricultural Organization
of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/infographics/Irrigation_eng.pdf
_____. 2016. Water Withdrawal by Sector, around 2010. Rome, Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/tables/WorldData-Withdrawal_eng.pdf
_____. n.d.a. Municipal Wastewater. AQUASTAT database. Rome, Food and Agricultural Organization
of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/wastewater/index.stm
_____. n.d.b. AQUASTAT database. Rome, Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations
(FAO). www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm
Armitage, N., Vice, M., Fisher-Jeffes, L., Winter, K., Spiegel, A. and Dunstan, J. 2013. Alternative
Technology for Stormwater Management: The South African Guidelines for Sustainable Drainage
Systems. WRC Report no. TT 558/13. Pretoria/Cape Town, Water Research Commission (WRC)/
University of Cape Town. www.wrc.org.za/Knowledge%20Hub%20Documents/Research%20
Reports/TT%20558-13.pdf
Asano, T. and Levine, A. D. 1998. Wastewater Reclamation, Recycling, and Reuse: An Introduction. T.
Asano (ed.), Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse. CRC Press.
Asano, T., Maeda, M., and Takaki, M. 1996. Wastewater reclamation and reuse in Japan: Overview and
implementation examples. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 34, No. 11, pp. 219–226.

150

W W D R

2 0 1 7

REFERENCES

ATSE (Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering). 2013. Drinking Water through
Recycling: The Benefits and Costs of Supplying Direct to the Distribution System. Melbourne,
Australia, ATSE. www.atse.org.au/Documents/reports/drinking-water-through-recycling-full-report.pdf
Badr, F. 2016. Assessment of Wastewater Services and Sludge in Egypt. Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). www.cairoclimatetalks.net/sites/default/files/assessment%20
of%20wastewater%20services%20in%20Egypt1%20(1).pdf
Bahri, A., Drechsel, P. and Brissaud, F. 2008. Water Reuse in Africa: Challenges and Opportunities.
Paper presented at the First African Water Week: Accelerating Water Security for Socio-Economic
Development of Africa, Tunis, 26–28 March 2008. publications.iwmi.org/pdf/H041872.pdf
Balkema, J. A., Preisig, H. A., Otterpohl, R. and Lambert, F. J. D. 2002. Indicators for the sustainability
assessment of wastewater treatment systems. Urban Water, Vol. 4, pp. 153–161.
Ballestero, M., Arroyo, V. and Mejía, A. 2015. Documento Temático: Agua Potable y Saneamiento para
Todos [Technical Document: Drinking Water and Sanitation for All]. VII World Water Forum Regional
Process. (In Spanish.)
Bartone, C. R., Bernstein, J., Leitmann, J. and Eigen, J. 1994. Toward Environmental Strategies for
Cities: Policy Considerations for Urban Environmental Management in Developing Countries.
Urban Management Programme Policy Paper No. 18. Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/826481468739496129/pdf/multi-page.pdf
Bauer, H. 1993. Cloaca Maxima. E. M. Steinby (ed.), Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae. Rome,
Quasar, pp. 288–290.
Bernhardt, B. and Massard-Guibaud, G. (eds). 2002. Le démon moderne. La pollution dans les sociétés
urbaines et industrielles d’Europe [The Modern Demon. Pollution in Urban and Industrial European
Societies]. Clermont-Ferrand, France, Presses universitaires Blaise Pascal. Support Livre broché. (In
French.)
BGR (Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe). n.d. TC Lebanon: Protection of Jeita Spring.
BGR website. www.bgr.bund.de/EN/Themen/Wasser/Projekte/abgeschlossen/TZ/Libanon/jeita_fb_
en.html
Bianchi, E. 2014. La Cloaca Maxima e i Sistemi Fognari di Roma dall’Antichità ad Oggi [The Cloaca
Maxima and Rome’s Sewerage Systems from Antiquity to Today]. Rome, Palombi Editore. (In Italian.)
Biggs, C., Ryan, C., Wiseman, J. and Larsen, K. 2009. Distributed Water Systems: A Networked and
Localized Approach for Sustainable Water Services – Business Intelligence and Policy Instruments.
Melbourne, Australia, Victorian Eco-innovation Lab (VEIL), University of Melbourne. www.
ecoinnovationlab.com/wp-content/attachments/234_Distributed-Water-Systems.VEIL_.pdf
Blue Tech Research. n.d. Turning Whey from Dairy Wastewater into Alcohol and Revenue. Cork, Ireland,
Blue Tech Research. www.bluetechresearch.com/news/turning-whey-from-dairy-wastewater-intoalcohol-and-revenue/.
Bolong, N., Ismail, A. F., Salim, M. R. and Matsuura, T. 2009. A review of the effects of emerging
contaminants in wastewater and options for their removal. Desalination, Vol. 239, No. 1–3,
pp. 229–246.
Boufaroua, M., Albalawneh, A. and Oweis, T. 2013. Assessing the efficiency of grey-water reuse at
household level and its suitability for sustainable rural and human development. British Journal of
Applied Science and Technology, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 962–972.
Brdjanovic, D. (ed.). 2015. Innovations for Water and Development. Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCOIHE. www.unesco-ihe.org/sites/default/files/unesco-ihe_innovations_e_vs050315.pdf
Cairns-Smith, S., Hill, H. and Nazarenko, E. 2014. Urban Sanitation: Why a Portfolio of Solutions is
Needed. Working Paper. The Boston Consulting Group. www.bcg.com/documents/file178928.pdf
Cakir, F. Y. and Stenstrom, M. K. 2005. Greenhouse gas production: A comparison between aerobic
and anaerobic wastewater treatment technology. Water Research, Vol. 39, No. 17, pp. 4197–4203.
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2005.07.042
California Department of Water Resources. 2013. Resource Management Strategies, Vol. III of
California Water Plan Update 2013. Sacramento, Calif., California Department of Water Resources.
demoware.eu/en/demo-sites/tarragona
Cho, R. 2011. From Wastewater to Drinking Water. State of the Planet, News of the Earth Institute.
New York, Earth Institute, Columbia University. blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2011/04/04/from-wastewaterto-drinking-water/

Refe re n ce s

151

Cooper, P. F. 2001. Historical aspects of wastewater treatment. P. Lens, G. Zeeman and G. Lettinga
(eds), Decentralised Sanitation and Reuse: Concepts, Systems and Implementation. Integrated
Environmental Technology Series. London, IWA Publishing.
Copeland C. 2015. Microbeads: An Emerging Water Quality Issue. CSR Insights. www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
misc/IN10319.pdf
Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D. and Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water?
The Central Role of Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development. United Nations
Environment Programme/United Nations Human Settlements Programme/GRID-Arendal (UNEP/UNHabitat). www.unep.org/pdf/SickWater_screen.pdf
CPCT (Cleaner Production Centre of Tanzania). n.d. Nyanza Bottling Company Limited. Resource
Efficient and Cleaner Production (RECP) – Case Studies. Mwanza, Tanzania, CPCT. cpct.or.tz/
selected%20photo/Beverage%20Industries.pdf
Crab, R., Defoirdt, T., Bossier, P. and Verstraete, W. 2012. Biofloc technology in aquaculture: Beneficial
effects and future challenges. Aquaculture, Vol. 356–357, pp. 351–356.
Craggs, R. J., Lundquist, T. J. and Benemann, J. R. 2013. Wastewater treatment and algal biofuel
production. M. A. Borowitzka and N. R. Moheimani (eds), Algae for Biofuels and Energy, Vol. V
of Developments in Applied Phicology, pp. 153–163. Springer Netherlands. Doi: 10.1007/978-94007-5479-9
CReW (Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management). n.d. CReW website. www.gefcrew.org/
Culp, G. L. and Culp, R. L. 1971. Advanced Wastewater Treatment. New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold
Environmental Engineering Series.
Daigger, G. T. 2011. Changing paradigms: From wastewater treatment to resource recovery.
Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation, Energy and Water 2011, Vol. 16, pp. 942-957.
Daniels, M. 2015. Innovative Wastewater Financing Mechanism – Why CReW is not only about
Constructing Wastewater Treatment Plants (Important Considerations for Replication).
Georgetown, Guyana Wastewater Revolving Fund. www.aidis.org.br/PDF/cwwa2015/CWWA%20
2015%20Paper%20Submission%20-%20Marlon%20Daniels%20-%20Innovative%20
Financing%20Mechanisms%20-%20Why%20CReW%20is%20not%20only%20about%20Wastewater%20Treatment%20Plants.pdf
DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs). 2016. Microbead Ban Announced to
Protect Sealife. Government of the United Kingdom. www.gov.uk/government/news/microbeadban-announced-to-protect-sealife
De Groot, R. S., Stuip, M. A. M., Finlayson, C. M. and Davidson, N. 2006. Valuing Wetlands: Guidance
for Valuing the Benefits Derived from Wetland Ecosystem Services. Ramsar Technical Report No. 3/
CBD Technical Series No. 27. Gland, Switzerland, Ramsar Convention Secretariat and Montreal, PQ,
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. www.cbd.int/doc/publications/cbd-ts-27.pdf
DEMOWARE (Innovation Demonstration for a Competitive and Innovative European Water Reuse
Sector). 2016. Market Analysis of Key Water Reuse Technologies. Report D4.1. demoware.eu/en/
results/deliverables/deliverable-d4-1-market-analysis-of-key-water-reuse-technologies.pdf
_____. n.d. Tarragona. DEMOWARE website. demoware.eu/en/demo-sites/tarragona
Despommier, D. 2011. The Vertical Farm: Feeding the World in the 21st Century. London, McMillan.
Difaf, H. H. 2016. Cost-effective Treatment of Wastewater in Remote Areas for Potential Reuse to Cope
with Climate Change Impacts and Water Scarcity. Presentation held during the UNESCWA and
ACWUA Workshop on Developing the Capacities of the Human Settlements Sector for Climate
Change Adaptation Using Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Tools, Amman, 21–23
May 2016. www.unescwa.org/sites/www.unescwa.org/files/events/files/07-difaf_lenanon.pdf
Dillon, P. J., Escalante, F. E. and Tuinhof, A. 2012. Management of Aquifer Recharge and Discharge
Processes and Aquifer Storage Equilibrium. GEF–FAO Groundwater Governance Thematic Paper 4.
Canberra, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
Domenech, T. and Davies, M. 2011. Structure and morphology of industrial symbiosis networks: The
case of Kalundborg. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 10, pp. 79–89.
Doorn, M. R. J., Strait, R., Barnard, W. and Eklund, B. 1997. Estimate of Global Greenhouse Gas
Emissions from Industrial and Domestic Wastewater Treatment. Washington, DC, United
States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_Report.
cfm?dirEntryID=115121

152

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Drechsel, P. and Evans, A. E. V. 2010. Wastewater use in irrigated agriculture. Irrigated and Drainage
Systems, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 1–3. Doi: 10.1007/s10795-010-9095-5
Drechsel, P., Hope, L. and Cofie, O. 2013. Gender mainstreaming: Who wins? Gender and irrigated
urban vegetable production in West Africa. Journal of Gender and Water (wH2O), Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 15–17.
Drechsel, P. and Karg, H. 2013. Motivating behaviour change for safe wastewater irrigation in urban
and peri-urban Ghana. Sustainable Sanitation Practice, Vol. 16, pp. 10–20. www.ecosan.at/ssp/
issue-16-behaviour-change/SSP-16_Jul2013_10-20.pdf/view
Drechsel, P., Mahjoub, O. and Keraita, B. 2015b. Social and cultural dimensions in wastewater use. P.
Dreschel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World.
Springer Netherlands.
Drechsel, P., Qadir, M. and Wichelns, D. (eds). 2015a. Wastewater: Economic Asset in an Urbanizing
World. Springer Netherlands.
Drechsel, P., Scott, C. A., Raschid-Sally, L., Redwood, M. and Bahri, A. (eds). 2010. Wastewater,
Irrigation and Health: Assessing and Mitigating Risk in Low-Income Countries. Colombo,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI), London, Earthscan and Ottawa, International
Development Research Centre (IDRC). cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/36471
Ebiare, E. and Zejiao, L. 2010. Water quality monitoring in Nigeria: Case study of Nigeria’s industrial
cities. Journal of American Science, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 22–28.
EC (European Commission). 2016a. CSI Guidance on Integrating Water Reuse in Water Planning
Management. Meeting of the Strategic Co-ordination Group, 2–3 May 2016. Brussels, EC.
_____. 2016b. Eighth Report on the Implementation Status and the Programmes for Implementation
of Council Directive 91/271/EEC concerning Urban Waste Water Treatment. Brussels, EC. eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52016DC0105
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2013. Urban Waste Water Treatment. EEA website. www.eea.
europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/urban-waste-water-treatment/urban-waste-water-treatmentassessment-3
_____. 2016. SOER 2015 – The European Environment – State and Outlook 2015. Copenhagen, EEA.
www.eea.europa.eu/soer
_____. n.d. European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register. prtr.ec.europa.eu/#/home
Ekane, N., Kjellén, M., Noel, S. and Fogde, M. 2012. Sanitation and Hygiene Policy: Stated Beliefs
and Actual Practice – A Case Study in the Burera District, Rwanda. Working paper 2012-07.
Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).
Ekane, N., Nykvist, B., Kjellén, M., Noel, S. and Weitz, N. 2014. Multi-level Sanitation Governance:
Understanding and Overcoming Challenges in the Sanitation Sector in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Working paper 2014-04. Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI). Doi: 10.3362/20461887.2014.024
Environment Agency. 2009. Discharges of Consented Red List Substances National Dataset User
Guide. Version 2.0.0. 1st January, 2009. Bristol, United Kingdom, Environment Agency. www.
findmaps.co.uk/assets/pdf/Discharges_of_Consented_Redlist_Substances_User_Guide_v2.0.0.pdf
EPA Victoria (Environment Protection Authority Victoria). 2002. Guidelines for Environmental
Management: Disinfection of Treated Wastewater. Victoria, Australia, EPA Victoria. www.epa.vic.
gov.au/our-work/publications/publication/2002/september/730
EU (European Union). 1991. Council Directive Concerning Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive,
91/271/EEC. Official Journal of the European Communities, L 135/40.
_____. 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October
2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. Official Journal
of the European Communities, L 327/1.
_____. 2008. Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November
2008 on waste and repealing certain Directives. Official Journal of the European Communities, L
312/3.

Refe re n ce s

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

Doorn, M. R. J., Towprayoon, S., Manso Vieira, S. M., Irving, W., Palmer, C., Pipatti, R. and Wang,
C. 2006. Wastewater Treatment and Discharge. IPCC. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
Gas Inventory. Hayama, Japan, Global Environmental Strategies (IGES). www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/
public/2006gl/pdf/5_Volume5/V5_6_Ch6_Wastewater.pdf

153

Eurostat. 2014. Data Collection Manual for the OECD/Eurostat Joint Questionnaire
on Inland Waters: Concepts, Definitions, Current Practices, Evaluations and
Recommendations. Version 3.0. Luxembourg, Eurostat. ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
documents/1798247/6664269/Data+Collection+Manual+for+the+OECD_
Eurostat+Joint+Questionnaire+on+Inland+Waters+%28version+3.0%2C+2014%29.pdf/f5f60d49-e88c4e3c-bc23-c1ec26a01b2a
_____. n.d. Water use in Industry. Eurostat Statistics Explained. Luxembourg, Eurostat. ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Water_use_in_industry
Falconer, I. R. 2006. Are endocrine disrupting compounds a health risk in drinking water? International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 180–4.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 1985. Water Quality for Agriculture. FAO
Irrigation and Drainage Paper 29 Rev. 1. Rome, FAO.
_____. 1992. Wastewater Treatment and Use in Agriculture. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 47. Rome,
FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/t0551e/t0551e00.htm
_____. 1997. Quality Control of Wastewater for Irrigated Crop Production. Eater Reports No. 10. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/docrep/w5367e/w5367e00.htm
_____. 2002. World Agriculture: Towards 2015/2030. Summary Report. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/
docrep/004/Y3557E/Y3557E00.HTM
_____. 2005. Pollution from Industrialized Livestock Production. Livestock Policy Brief No. 2. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/a-a0261e.pdf
_____. 2006. Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options. Rome, FAO.
_____. 2010. The Wealth of Waste: The Economics of Wastewater Use in Agriculture. FAO Water Report No.
35. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/012/i1629e/i1629e.pdf
_____. 2011. The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture (SOLAW):
Managing Systems at Risk. Rome, FAO.
_____. 2012. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. Rome, FAO.
_____. 2013a. Food Wastage Footprints. Sustainable Pathways. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/fileadmin/
templates/nr/sustainability_pathways/docs/Factsheet_FOOD-WASTAGE.pdf
_____. 2013b. Guidelines to Control Water Pollution from Agriculture in China: Decoupling Water Pollution
from Agricultural Production. FAO Water Report No. 40. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/documents/card/
en/c/86c39a7c-b362-567e-b214-ae0df99ca72d/
_____. 2015. Global Initiative on Food Loss and Waste Reduction. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i4068e.pdf
FAOSTAT. n.d.a. FAOSTAT website. faostat.fao.org/
_____. n.d.b. Pesticides Use. FAOSTAT website. faostat3.fao.org/browse/R/RP/E
FAO/CGIAR WLE (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research Programme on Water, Land and Ecosystems). Forthcoming. Water
Pollution from Agriculture: A Global Review.
Fernández, D., Jouravlev, A., Lentini, E. and Yurquina, A. 2009. Contabilidad Regulatoria, Sustentabilidad
Financiera y Gestión Mancomunada: Temas Relevantes en Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento [Regulatory
Accountability, Financial Sustainability and Joint Management: Relevant Topics in Water and Sanitation
Services]. Santiago, Natural Resources and Infrastructure Division, Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). (In Spanish.). www.cepal.org/es/publicaciones/6346-contabilidadregulatoria-sustentabilidad-financiera-gestion-mancomunada-temas
Ferro, G. and Lentini, L. 2013. Políticas Tarifarias para el Logro de los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio
(ODM): Situación Actual y Tendencias Regionales Recientes [Pricing Policies to Achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs): Current Situation and Recent Trends in the Region]. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). (In Spanish.).
repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/4045/S2013024_es.pdf
Finger, M. and Allouche, J. 2002. Water Privatisation: Trans-national Corporations and the Re-regulation of
the Water Industry. London/New York, Spon Press.
Förster, J. 2014. Eurostat Statistics Explained. Water Use in Industry. Luxembourg, Eurostat. ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Water_use_in_industry
GEN (Global Ecolabelling Network). n.d. GEN website. www.globalecolabelling.net/

154

W W D R

2 0 1 7

REFERENCES

Gerbens-Leenes, P. W., Mekonnen, M. M. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2013. The water footprint of poultry, pork and
beef: A comparative study in different countries and production systems. Water Resources and Industry, Vol.
1–2, pp. 25–36.
GE Reports. 2015. Ralph Exton: Closing the Gap between Treating Wastewater and Reusing it. GE Reports
website. www.gereports.com/post/120556373453/closing-the-gap-between-treating-wastewater-and-reusing/
Gerlach, E. and Franceys, R. 2010. Regulating water services for all in developing economies. World
Development, Vol. 38, No. 9, pp. 1229–1240.
Godfrey, N., Hart, J., Vaughan, W. T. and Wong, W. 2009. Using wastewater energy to heat an Olympic village
for the 2010 Winter Olympics and beyond. Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation, WEFTEC
2009, pp. 6572–6580(9). Alexandria, Va., Water Environment Federation (WEF).
Goldface-Irokalibe, I. J. 1999. The application of water resources: Decree to the development and management
of river basin development authorities. Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence, Vol. 5, No. 57.
_____. 2002. Towards an Effective Legal and Institutional Framework for Integrated Water Resources
Management in Nigeria. A.B.U. Zaria.
Goldface-Irokalibe, I. J. et al. 2001. WRMS, Legal and regulatory Framework (GAC).
González, O., Bayarri, B., Acena, J., Pérez, S. and Barceló, D. 2016. Treatment technologies for wastewater
reuse: Fate of contaminants of emerging concern. Vol. 45 of D. Fatta-Kassinos, D. D. Dionysiou and K.
Kümmerer (eds), Advanced Treatment Technologies for Urban Wastewater Reuse: The Handbook of
Environmental Chemistry, pp. 5–37. Doi: 10.1007/698_2015_363
Government of British Columbia. 1992. Urban runoff quality control guidelines for the province of British
Columbia. Vancouver, BC, Waste Management Group, Environmental Protection Division. www.env.gov.
bc.ca/wat/wq/nps/NPS_Pollution/Stormwater_Runoff/urban_runoff_guidelines.pdf
Government of Canada. 2016. Order Adding a Toxic Substance to Schedule 1 to the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999. Canada Gazette, Vol. 150, No. 13. Government of Canada. www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/
p2/2016/2016-06-29/html/sor-dors150-eng.php#archived
_____. n.d. Groundwater Contamination. Website of the Government of Canada. www.ec.gc.ca/eau-water/
default.asp?lang=En&n=6A7FB7B2-1
Grigg, N. S., Rogers, P. D. and Edmiston, S. 2013. Dual Water Systems: Characterization and Performance for
Distribution of Reclaimed Water. Denver, Colo., Water Research Foundation.
Grönwall, J. and Jonsson, A. C. Forthcoming. The impact of ‘zero’ coming into fashion: ZLD uptake and sociotechnical transitions in Tirupur. Water Alternatives.
Groom, E., Halpern, J. and Erhardt, D. 2006. Explanatory Notes on Key Topics in the Regulation of Water and
Sanitation Services. Water Supply And Sanitation Sector Board Discussion Paper Series No.6. Washington,
DC, World Bank. hdl.handle.net/10986/17236.
Guest, J. S., Skerlos, S. J., Barnard, J. L., Beck, M. B., Daigger, G. T., Hilger, H., Jackson, S. J., Karvazy, K., Kelly,
L., Macpherson, L., Mihelcic, J. R., Pramanik, A., Raskin, L., Van Loosrecht, M. C. M., Yeh, D. and Love, N.
G. 2009. A new planning and design paradigm to achieve sustainable resource recovery from wastewater.
Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 43, No. 16, pp. 126–130. Doi: 10.1021/es9010515
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2015. Industrial Water Technology Markets 2015: Meeting Industrial Needs
in Process Water Treatment and Wastewater Reuse. Oxford, United Kingdom, GWI. www.globalwaterintel.
com/market-intelligence-reports/industrial-water-technology-markets-2015-meeting-industrial-needsprocess-water-treatment-and-wastewater-reuse
GWOPA/UN-Habitat/ICLEI/WWF7/UCLG/WWC/DGI (Global Water Operators’ Partnership Alliance/United
Nations Human Settlements Programme/Local Governments for Sustainability/7th World Water Forum/
The Global Network of Cities, Local and Regional Governments/World Water Council/Daegu Gyeongbuk
Development Institute). 2015. The Daegu-Gyeongbuk Water Action for Sustainable Cities and Regions.
Draft Discussion Paper. www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/lras_dg_water_action_for_sustainable_cities_and_
regions_april2015.pdf
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2013. Integrated Urban Water Management (IUWM): Toward Diversification
and Sustainability. Policy Brief. Stockholm, GWP. www.gwp.org/Global/GWP-C%20Files/TOPIC%205%20
-%20Impacts%20of%20Climate%20on%20Wastewater%20Management.pdf
_____. 2014. Impacts of Climate on Wastewater Management. Discussion Brief No. 5. Global Water
Partnership. Stockholm, GWP. www.gwp.org/Global/GWP-C%20Files/TOPIC%205%20-%20Impacts%20
of%20Climate%20on%20Wastewater%20Management.pdf

Refe re n ce s

155

Hanjra, M. A., Blackwell, J., Carr, G., Zhang, F. and Jackson, T. M. 2012. Wastewater irrigation and
environmental health: Implications for water governance and public policy. International Journal of
Hygiene and Environmental Health, Vol. 215, No.3, pp. 255–269. Doi: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2011.10.003
Hanjra, M. A., Drechsel, P., Wichelns, D. and Qadir, M. 2015a. Transforming urban wastewater into an
economic asset: Opportunities and challenges. P. Dreschel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater
– Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.
Hanjra, M. A., Drechsel, P., Mateo-Sagasta, J., Otoo, M. and Hernández-Sancho, F. 2015b. Assessing the
finance and economics of resource recovery and reuse solutions across scales. P. Dreschel, M. Qadir and
D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.
Harris, S., Morris, C., Morris, D., Cormican, M. and Cummins, E. 2013. The effect of hospital effluent on
antimicrobial resistant E. coli within a municipal wastewater system. Environment Science: Process
Impacts, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 617–622.
Hasan, A. 1988. Orangi Pilot Project: A low-cost sewer system by low-income Pakistanis. B. Turner (ed.),
Building Community: A Third World Case Book. London, Building Community Books.
Helmer, R. and Hespanhol, I. (eds). 1997. Water Pollution Control – A Guide to the Use of Water Quality
Management Principles. London, F & F Spon, on behalf of the United Nations Environment Programme/
Water Supply & Sanitation Collaborative Council/World Health Organization (UNEP/WSSCC/ WHO).
Herbert, E. R., Boon, P., Burgin, A. J., Neubauer, S. C., Franklin, R. B., Ardón, M., Hopfensperger, K.
N., Lamers, L. P. M. and Gell, P. 2015. A global perspective on wetland salinization: Ecological
consequences of a growing threat to freshwater wetlands. Ecosphere, Vol. 6, No. 10, pp. 1–43.
Heymann, E., Lizio, D. and Siehlow, M. 2010. World Water Markets: High Investment Requirements Mixed
with Institutional Risks. Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Deutsche Bank Research. www.dbresearch.de/
PROD/DBR_INTERNET_EN-PROD/PROD0000000000258353.PDF
Hirabayashi, Y., Mahendran, R., Koirala, S., Konoshima, L., Yamazaki, D., Watanabe, S., Kim, H. and Kanae,
S. 2013. Global flood risk under climate change. Nature Climate Change, Vol. 3, pp. 816–821. Doi:
10.1038/nclimate1911
Hoekstra, A. Y. 2008. Water Neutral: Reducing and Offsetting the Impacts of Water Footprints. Value of
Water Research Report Series No. 28. Delft, the Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. waterfootprint.org/en/
resources/publications/value-water-research-report-series-unesco-ihe/
Hoekstra, A. Y., Chapagain, A. K., Aldaya, M. M. and Mekonnen, M. M. 2011. The Water Footprint
Assessment Manual: Setting the Global Standard. London/Washington, DC, Earthscan. waterfootprint.
org/media/downloads/TheWaterFootprintAssessmentManual_2.pdf
Holmgren, K. E., Li, H., Verstraete, W. and Cornel, P. 2015. State of the Art Compendium Report on
Resource Recovery from Water. IWA Resource Recovery Cluster. London, International Water
Association (IWA). www.iwa-network.org/downloads/1440858039-web%20State%20of%20the%20
Art%20Compendium%20Report%20on%20Resource%20Recovery%20from%20Water%20
2105%20.pdf
Hophmayer-Tokich, S. 2006. Wastewater Management Strategy: Centralized v. Decentralized Technologies
for Small Communities. Enschede, The Netherlands, The Center for Clean Technology and
Environmental Policy, University of Twente. purl.utwente.nl/publications/95384
HUBER. n.d. Three HUBER projects for wastewater heat recovery in Switzerland. HUBER website. Berching,
Germany. www.huber.de/huber-report/ablage-berichte/energy-from-wastewater/three-huber-projectsfor-wastewater-heat-recovery-in-switzerland.html
Hudson, A. (ed.). 2012. Catalysing Ocean Finance: Volume II Methodologies and Case Studies. New York,
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/
environment-energy/water_governance/ocean_and_coastalareagovernance/catalysing-ocean-finance.html
Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of Water and Sanitation Improvements
at the Global Level. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO). www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health/wsh0404.pdf
Hutton, G. and Varughese, M. 2016. The Cost of Meeting the 2030 Sustainable Development Goal Targets
on Drinking Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene. Technical paper. Washington, DC, World Bank/Water and
Sanitation Programme (WSP). elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/K8543
Iannelli, R., Bianchi, V., Salvato, M. and Borin, M. 2011. Modelling assessment of carbon supply by
different macrophytes for nitrogen removal in pilot vegetated mesocosms. International Journal of
Environmental and Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 91, No. 7–8, pp. 708–726.

156

W W D R

2 0 1 7

REFERENCES

Idelovitch, E. and Ringskog, K. 1997. Wastewater Treatment in Latin America: Old and New
Options. Washington, DC, World Bank. www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/
WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2011/08/11/000356161_20110811002849/Rendered/
PDF/170370REPLACEM00as0previous0record0.pdf
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2014. World Energy Outlook 2014. Paris, IEA. dx.doi.org/10.1787/
weo-2014-en
Ilic, S., Drechsel, P., Amoah, P. and Lejeune, J. T. 2010. Applying the multiple-barrier approach for
microbial risk reduction in the post-harvest sector of wastewater irrigated vegetables. P. Drechsel,
C. A. Scott, L. Raschid-Sally, M. Redwood and A. Bahri (eds), Wastewater Irrigation and Health:
Assessing and Mitigation Risks in Low-income Countries. London/Sterling, Va., Earthscan, pp. 239–
259. www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/Books/PDF/Wastewater_Irrigation_and_Health_book.pdf
Industrial Ecology. n.d. Kalundborg. http://www.tudelft.nl/en/study/master-of-science/masterprogrammes/industrial-ecology/
Industrial Symbiosis Institute. 2008. New Technologies and Innovation through Industrial Symbiosis.
Kalundborg, Denmark, Industrial Symbiosis Institute. www.ewp.rpi.edu/hartford/~stephc/ET/Other/
Miscellaneous/Kalundborg-Industrial%20Symbiosis%20Institue.pdf
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press. Doi: 10.1017/
CBO9781107415324
IWA (The International Water Association). 2014. An Avoidable Crisis: WASH Human Resources
Capacity Gaps in 15 Developing Economies. London. IWA Publishing. www.iwa-network.org/
downloads/1422745887-an-avoidable-crisis-wash-gaps.pdf
IWA (International Water Association) Publishing. n.d. Industrial Wastewater Treatment. IWA Publishing
website. www.iwapublishing.com/news/industrial-wastewater-treatment
IWMI (International Water Management Institute). 2012. Resource Recovery and Reuse (RRR) Project:
Baseline Survey Report – Kampala. Colombo, IWMI. ifadrrr.iwmi.org/Data/Sites/34/media/pdf/rrrbaseline-survey-report---kampala.pdf
Jackson, H. B. 1996. Global needs and developments in urban sanitation. D. Mara (ed.), Low-cost
Sewerage. Chichester, UK, John Wiley & Sons.
Jiménez-Cisneros, B. 2008. Unplanned reuse of wastewater for human consumption: The Tula Valley,
Mexico. B. Jiménez-Cisneros and T. Asano (eds), Water Reuse: An International Survey of Current
Practice, Issues and Needs. Scientific and Technical Report No. 20. London, IWA Publishing.
_____, B. 2011. Safe sanitation in low economic development areas. P. Wilderer (ed.), Treatise on Water
Science, Vol. 4, pp. 147–201. Amsterdam, Elsevier Science.
JPEC (Japan Petroleum Energy Center). 1999. Treatment and Utilization of Oil-containing
Produced-water in Oman. Tokyo, JPEC. www.pecj.or.jp/japanese/report/reserch/report-pdf/
H11_1999/99surv9-e.pdf
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century.
Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC).
repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/6454/S047591_en.pdf
Kalundborg Symbiosis. n.d. Kalundborg Symbiosis Diagram. www.symbiosis.dk/diagram
Karg H. and Drechsel, P. 2011. Motivating behaviour change to reduce pathogenic risk where unsafe
water is used for irrigation. Water International, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 476–490. dx.doi.org/10.1080/0
2508060.2011.594684
Karnib, A. 2016. Assessing population coverage of safely managed wastewater systems: A case study
of Lebanon. Research Paper No. 313. Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development,
Vol. 6, No. 2. Doi: 10.2166/washdev.2016.009
Kelley, C. P., Mohtadi, S., Cane, M., Seager, R. and Kushnir, Y. 2015. Climate change in the Fertile
Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences (PNAS), Vol. 112, No. 11, pp. 3241–3246. Doi: 10.1073/pnas.1421533112
Keraita, B. and Drechsel, P. 2004. Agricultural use of untreated urban wastewater in Ghana. C.A.
Scott, N.I. Faruqui, and L. Raschid-Sally (eds), Wastewater Use in Irrigated Agriculture: Confronting
the Livelihood and Environmental Realities. Wallingford, UK, CABI Publishing; Colombo/Ottawa,
International Water Management Institute/International Development Research Centre (IWMI/IDRC).

Refe re n ce s

157

EFERENCE

Keraita, B., Drechsel, P., Mateo-Sagasta, J. and Medlicott, K. 2015. Health risks and cost-effective health
risk management in wastewater use systems. P. Dreschel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater –
Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.
Kjellén, M. 2006. From Public Pipes to Private Hands: Water Access and Distribution in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. Stockholm, Department of Human Geography, Stockholm University.

Kjellén, M., Pensulo, C., Nordqvist, P. and Fogde, M. 2012. Global Review of Sanitation System Trends
and Interactions with Menstrual Management Practices. Report for the Menstrual Management and
Sanitation Systems Project. Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI). www.sei-international.org/
mediamanager/documents/Publications/SEI-ProjectReport-Kjellen-GlobalReviewOfSanitationSystemTrends
AndInteractionsWithMenstrualManagementPractices.pdf
Knudsen, L. G., Phuc, P. D., Hiep, N. T., Samuelsen, H., Jensen, P. K., Dalsgaard, A., Raschid-Sally, L.
and Konradsen, F. 2008. The fear of awful smell: Risk perceptions among farmers in Vietnam using
wastewater and human excreta in agriculture. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public
Health, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 341–352.

Kvarnström, E., Emilsson, K., Richert Stintzing, A., Johanssons, M., Jönsson, H., Af Petersens, E., Schönning,
C., Christensen, J., Hellström, D., Qvarnström, L., Ridderstolpe, P. and Drangert, J.-A. 2014. Urine
Diversion: One Step Towards Sustainable Sanitation. Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).
www.gwp.org/Global/GWP-CACENA_Files/en/pdf/esr3.pdf
Lahnsteiner, J., Du Pisani, P., Menge, J. and Esterhuizen, J. 2013. More than 40 years of direct potable reuse
experience in Windhoek. V. Lazarova, T. Asano, A. Bahri and J. Anderson (eds). Milestones in Water
Reuse: The Best Success Stories. London, IWA Publishing.
Lanciani, R. 1890. La Cloaca Maxima [The Cloaca Maxima]. Bullettino della Commissione Archeologica
Comunale di Rome [Bulletin of the Municipal Archeological Commission of Rome], Vol. 18, No. 3, pp.
95–102. (In Italian.)

LAS/UNESCWA/ACWUA (League of Arab States/United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia/Arab Countries Water Utilities Association). 2015. Supporting the Move from the MDGs
to the SDGs in the Arab Region. Regional Initiative for Establishing a Regional Mechanism for Improved
Monitoring and Reporting on Access to Water Supply and Sanitation Services in the Arab Region (MDG+
Initiative). Beirut, UNESCWA. www.unescwa.org/files/page_attachments/brochure-mdgs_to_sdgsnov2015.pdf
_____. 2016. MDG+ Initiative Report 2016.

Lautze, J., Stander, E., Drechsel, P., Da Silva, A. K. and Keraita, B. 2014. Global Experiences in Water Reuse.
Resource Recovery and Reuse Series 4. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI)/
CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems. www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/wle/rrr/
resource_recovery_and_reuse-series_4.pdf

Lazarova, V., Asano, T., Bahri, A. and Anderson, J. 2013. Milestones in Water Reuse: The Best Success Stories.
London, IWA Publishing.
Lentini, E. 2015. El Futuro de los Servicios de Agua y Saneamiento en América Latina: Desafíos de los
Operadores de Áreas Urbanas de más de 300.000 Habitantes [The Future of Water and Sanitation
Services in Latin America: The Challenges of Providers of Urban Areas with over 300,000 Inhabitants].
Washington, DC, Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). (In Spanish.) publications.iadb.org/bitstream/
handle/11319/7176/El_futuro_de_los_servicios_de_agua_y_saneamiento_en_America_Latina.pdf
Li, F. T., Wang, H. T. and Mafuta, C. 2011. Current status and technology demands for water resources
and water environment in Africa. L. F. Ting (ed.), Research on Water Resources of African Typical Areas.
Beijing, Science Press.

Libhaber, M. and Orozco-Jaramillo, Á. 2012. Sustainable Treatment and Reuse of Municipal Wastewater. For
Decision Makers and Practicing Engineers. London, IWA Publishing.
Lipinski, B., Hanson, C., Lomax, J., Kitinoja, L., Waite, R. and Searchinger, T. 2013. Reducing Food Loss and
Waste: Installment 2 of Creating a Sustainable Food Future. Working paper. Washington, DC, World
Resources Institute (WRI). www.wri.org/sites/default/files/reducing_food_loss_and_waste.pdf

Liu, Z., Kanjo, Y. and Mizutani, S. 2009. Removal mechanisms for endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs)
in wastewater treatment – Physical means, biodegradation, and chemical advanced oxidation: A review.
Science of The Total Environment, Vol. 407, No. 2, pp. 731–748. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.08.039
Lorenz, J. J. 2014. A review of the effects of altered hydrology and salinity on vertebrate fauna and their
habitats in northeastern Florida Bay. Wetlands, Vol. 34, Supplement 1, pp. 189–200.

158

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

Lowrance, R., Altier, L. S., Newbold, J. D., Schnabel, R. R., Groffman, P. M., Denver, J. M., Correll, D.
L., Gilliam, J. W., Robinson, J. L., Brinsfield, R. B., Staver, K. W., Lucas, W. and Todd, A. H. 1995.
Water Quality Functions of Riparian Forest Buffer Systems in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed.
Washington, DC, United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
Mahjoub, O. 2013. Ateliers de sensibilisation au profit des agriculteurs et des femmes rurales aux
risques liés à la réutilisation des eaux usées en agriculture: Application à la région de Oued
Souhil, Nabeul, Tunisie [Awareness-raising workshops for farmers and rural women about the
risks related to the use of wastewater in agriculture: Applied to the area of Oued Souhil, Nabeul,
Tunisia]. UN-Water. Proceedings of the Safe Use of Wastewater in Agriculture. International wrapup event, 26–28 June 2013, Tehran. (In French.) www.ais.unwater.org/ais/pluginfile.php/550/
mod_page/content/84/Tunisia_Ateliers%20de%20sensibilisation%20au%20profit%20des%20
agriculteurs%20et%20des%20femmes%20rurales_Mahjoub.pdf
Major, D. C., Omojola, A., Dettinger, M., Hanson, R. T. and Sanchez-Rodriguez, R. 2011. Climate
change, water, and wastewater in cities. C. Rosenzweig, W. D. Solecki, S. A. Hammer and
S. Mehrotra (eds), Climate Change and Cities: First Assessment Report of the Urban Climate
Change Research Network. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, pp. 113–143. uccrn.org/
files/2014/02/ARC3-Chapter-5.pdf
Maksimović, C. and Tejada-Guibert, J. (eds). 2001. Frontiers in Urban Water Management: Deadlock
or Hope. London, IWA Publishing.
Mancy, K. H., Fattal, B. and Kelada, S. 2000. Cultural implications of wastewater reuse in fish farming
in the Middle East. Water Science & Technology, Vol. 42, No. 1–2, pp. 235–239.
Mara, D. (ed.). 1996. Low-cost Sewerage. New York, John Wiley.
Mara, D. and Alabaster, G. 2008. A new paradigm for low-cost urban water supplies and sanitation
in developing countries. Water Policy, Vol. 10, pp. 119–129.
Mara, D. and Carincross, S. 1989. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater and Excreta in
Agriculture and Aquaculture: Measures for Public Health Protection. Geneva, Switzerland, World
Health Organization (WHO).
Markandya, A., Perelet, R., Mason, P. and Taylor, T. 2001. Dictionary of Environmental Economics.
London, Earthscan.
Massoud, M. A., Tarhini, A. and Nasr, J. A. 2009. Decentralized approaches to wastewater treatment
and management: Applicability in developing countries. Journal of Environmental Management,
Vol. 90, No. 1, pp. 652–659. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.07.001
Matassa, S., Batstone, D. J., Hülsen, T., Schnoor, J. and Verstraete, W. 2015. Can direct conversion
of used nitrogen to new feed and protein help feed the world? Environmental Science and
Technology, Vol. 49, No. 9, pp. 5247–5254. Doi: 10.1021/es505432w
Mateo-Sagasta, J. and Burke, J. 2010. Agriculture and Water Quality Interactions: A Global Overview.
SOLAW Background Thematic Report-TR08. Rome, Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations (FAO).
Mateo-Sagasta, J., Raschid-Sally, L. and Thebo, A. 2015. Global wastewater and sludge production,
treatment and use. P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns, Wastewater: Economic Asset in
Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.
Meda, A., Lensch, D., Schaum, C. and Cornel, P. 2012. Energy and water: Relations and recovery
potential. V. Lazarova, K. Choo and P. Cornel (eds), Water–Energy Interactions in Water Reuse.
London, IWA Publishing.
Mejía, A., Requena, B., Rivera D., Pardón, M. and Rais, J. 2012. Agua Potable y Saneamiento
en América Latina y el Caribe: Metas Realistas y Soluciones Sostenibles [Drinking Water and
Sanitation in Latin America and the Caribbean: Realistic Goals and Sustainable Solutions].
Caracas, Development Bank of Latin America (CAF). (In Spanish.) publicaciones.caf.com/
media/17238/libro_agua_esp.pdf
Mekonnen, M. M., Hoekstra, A. Y. 2011. National Water Footprint Accounts: The Green,
Blue and Grey Water Footprint of Production and Consumption. Delft, The Netherlands,
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education. waterfootprint.org/media/downloads/Report50NationalWaterFootprints-Vol1.pdf
_____. 2016. Four billion people facing severe water scarcity. Science Advanced, Vol. 2, No. 2. Doi:
10.1126/sciadv.1500323

Refe re n ce s

159

EFERENCE

Melo, J. C. 2005. The Experience of Condominial Water and Sewerage Systems in Brazil: Case Studies
from Brasilia, Salvador and Parauapebas. Water and Sanitation Program (WSP). Washington, DC,
World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/505601468226737476/The-experience-ofcondominial-water-and-sewerage-systems-in-Brazil-case-studies-from-Brasilia-Salvador-and-Parauebas
Mensah, A., Cofie, O. and Montangero, A. 2003. Lessons from a Pilot Co-composting Plant in Kumasi,
Ghana. 29th WEDC International Conference, Towards the Millennium Development Goals, Abuja.
wedc.lboro.ac.uk/resources/conference/29/Mensah.pdf
MEW (Ministry of Energy and Water, Government of Lebanon). 2012. National Strategy for the
Wastewater Sector. Resolution No. 35 of the 17th October 2012. Beirut, Government of Lebanon.

Michaud, D., Gabric, S., Hommann, K. and Shegay, A. 2015. Water and Wastewater Services in the
Danube Region: A State of the Sector. Vienna, World Bank Group. documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/327761467999140967/Water-and-wastewater-services-in-the-Danube-region-a-state-ofthe-sector
MIE/PWA (Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment of the Netherlands/Public Waste Agency of
Flanders, Belgium). 2016. Inventory of Awareness, Approaches and Policy: Insight in Emerging
Contaminants in Europe. Deventer, The Netherlands, Witteveen+Bos and TTE Consultants.

Mihelcic, J. R., Fry, L. M. and Shaw, R. 2011. Global potential of phosphorus recovery from human urine
and feces. Chemosphere, Vol. 84, No. 6, pp. 832–839. doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.02.046
Milieu. 2016. Assessment of Impact of Storm Water Overflows from Combined Waste Water Collecting
Systems on Water Bodies (including the Marine Environment) in the 28 EU Member States, Final
Report. Brussels, Milieu Ltd. Law and Policy Consulting.
Molinos-Senante, M., Hernández-Sancho, F. and Sala-Garrido, R. 2011. Cost–benefit analysis of waterreuse projects for environmental purposes: A case study for Spanish wastewater treatment plants.
Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 92, No. 12, pp. 3091–3097.

MOPIC (Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan) 2016.
Jordan Response Plan for the Syrian Crisis 2016–2018 Annexes. Amman, MOPIC. www.jrpsc.org/
Moriarty, P., Butterworth, J. A. and Van Koppen, B., 2004. Beyond Domestic: Case Studies on Poverty
and Productive Uses of Water at the Household Level. Technical Paper Series No. 41. Delft, The
Netherlands, IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre.

Moussa, M. S. 2008. Process Analysis of Textile Manufacturing: Environmental Impacts of Textile
Industries. E-textile toolbox. yeumoitruong.vn/attachments/u2s3-4-environmental-impact-of-textileindustries-pdf.355/
MRC (Mekong River Commission). 1995. Agreement on the Cooperation for the Sustainable
Development of the Mekong River Basin. Phnom Penh, Mekong River Commission. www.
mrcmekong.org/assets/Publications/policies/agreement-Apr95.pdf

Muñoz, I., Gómez-Ramos, M. J., Agüera, A., Fernández-Alba, A. R., García-Reyes, J. F. and Molina-Díaz,
A. 2009. Chemical evaluation of contaminants in wastewater effluents and the environmental risk
of reusing effluents in agriculture. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 28, No. 6, pp. 676–694.
doi:10.1016/j.trac.2009.03.007
Murray, A., Cofie, O. and Drechsel, P. 2011. Efficiency indicators for waste-based business models:
Fostering private-sector participation in wastewater and faecal-sludge management. Water
International, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 505-521. dx.doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2011.594983

Murray, A. and Drechsel, P. 2011. Why do some wastewater treatment facilities work when the majority
fail? Case study from the sanitation sector in Ghana. Waterlines, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 135–149. dx.doi.
org/10.3362/1756-3488.2011.015
Mustapha, M. K. 2008. Assessment of the water quality of Oyun Reservoir, Offa, Nigeria, using selected
physico-chemical parameters. Turkish Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp.
309–319. www.trjfas.org/abstract.php?lang=en&id=626

MWI (Ministry of Water and Irrigation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan). 2016a. Water Substitution
and Reuse Policy. Amman, MWI. www.mwi.gov.jo/sites/en-us/Hot%20Issues/Strategic%20
Documents%20of%20%20The%20Water%20Sector/Water%20Substitution%20and%20
Reuse%20Policy%2025.2.2016.pdf
_____. 2016b. Decentralized Wastewater Management Policy. www.mwi.gov.jo/sites/en-us/Hot%20
Issues/Strategic%20Documents%20of%20%20The%20Water%20Sector/Decentralized%20
Wastewater%20Management%20Policy%2025.2.2016.pdf

160

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

Nandeesha, M. C. 2002. Sewage Fed Aquaculture System of Kolkata – A Century-old Innovation of
Farmers. Aquaculture Asia, Vol. 7, pp. 28–32. library.enaca.org/AquacultureAsia/Articles/AprilJune-2002/SewerageFedAquacultureSystemsOfKolkata.pdf
Narayan, D., Patel, R., Schafft, K., Rademacher, A. and Koch-Schulte, S. 2000. Can Anyone Hear us?
Voices from 47 Countries. Vol. I of Voices of the Poor. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Narducci, P. 1889. Sulla fognatura della città di Roma [On the sewerage of the city of Rome]. Technical
description. Rome, Forzani e C. (In Italian.)
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine. 2015. Using Graywater and Stormwater
to enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs and Benefits. Washington, DC,
National Academies Press.
Nikiema, J. Cofie, O. and Impraim, R. 2014. Technological options for safe resource recovery from fecal
sludge. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI) CGIAR Research Program on
Water, Land and Ecosystems (WLE). www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/wle/rrr/resource_recovery_
and_reuse-series_2.pdf
Nikiema, J., Figoli, A., Weissenbacher, N., Langergraber, G., Marrot, B., Moulin, P. 2013. Wastewater
treatment practices in Africa - Experiences from seven countries. Sustainable Sanitation Practice,
Vol. 14, pp. 26–34. cgspace.cgiar.org/handle/10568/40210
NLÉ. 2012. Makoko Floating School: Adapting African Coastal Cities to the Impacts of Climate Change.
Research Report. Amsterdam, NLÉ. www.nleworks.com/publication/makoko-prototype-book/
Noyola, A., Padilla-Rivera, A., Morgan-Sagastume, J. M., Güereca, L. P. and Hernández-Padilla, F. 2012.
Typology of municipal wastewater treatment technologies in Latin America. Clean – Soil, Air, Water,
Vol. 40, No. 9, pp. 926–932. onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/clen.201100707/full
NRMMC/EPHC/NHMRC (Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council/Environment Protection
and Heritage Council/National Health and Medical Research Council). 2009. National Water
Quality Management Strategy - Australian Guidelines for Water Recycling: Managing Health and
Environmental Risks (Phase 2) - Stormwater Harvesting and Reuse. Document No. 23. Canberra,
NRMMC/EPHC/NHMRC. www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/4c13655f-eb04-4c24ac6e-bd01fd4af74a/files/water-recycling-guidelines-stormwater-23.pdf
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2010. Pricing Water Resources and
Water and Sanitation Services. Paris, OECD Publishing.
_____. 2011a. Ten Years of Water Sector Reform in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia. Paris,
OECD Publishing. dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264118430-en
_____. 2011b. Environmental Performance Review: Israel. Paris, OECD Publishing.
_____. 2012. Meeting the Challenge of Financing Water and Sanitation: Tools and Approaches. Paris,
OECD Publishing. dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264120525-en
_____. 2013a. Business Models for Rural Sanitation in Moldova. Paris, OECD.
_____. 2013b. New Modes of Water Supply and Sanitation Management and Emerging Business
Models. Paris, OECD. www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=ENV/
EPOC/WPBWE/RD(2013)7&docLanguage=En
_____. 2015a. The Economic Consequences of Climate Change. Paris, OECD Publishing.
_____. 2015b. Water and Cities. Ensuring Sustainable Futures. Paris, OECD Publishing. www.oecd.org/
fr/regional/water-and-cities-9789264230149-en.htm
_____. 2016. Sustainable Business Models for Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Towns and Rural
Settlements in Kazakhstan. Paris, OECD Publishing. dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264249400-en
_____. n.d. Pollutant Release and Transfer Register. OECD website. www.oecd.org/chemicalsafety/
pollutant-release-transfer-register/
Olmstead, S. M. 2010. The Economics of Water Quality. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 44–62.
O’Neill, M. 2015. Ecological Sanitation – A Logical Choice? The Development of the Sanitation
Institution in a World Society. Tampere, Finland, Tampere University of Technology.
Osibanjo, O. and Majolagbe, A. O. 2012. Physicochemical quality assessment of groundwater based on
land use in Lagos city, Southwest, Nigeria. Chemistry Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 79–86.

Refe re n ce s

161

Otoo, M., Mateo-Sagasta, J. and Madurangi, G. 2015. Economics of water reuse for industrial,
environmental, recreational and potable purposes. P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds),
Wastewater: Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.

EFERENCE

Otoo, M. and P. Drechsel. 2015. Resource Recovery from Waste: Business Models for Energy, Nutrient
and Water Reuse. London, Earthscan.

Outotec GmbH & Co. n.d. Outotec Sewage Sludge Incineration Plants. Outotec website. www.outotec.
com/en/Products--services/Energy/Sewage-Sludge-Incineration-Plants/

PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). 1990. The Situation of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
in the American Region at the End of the Decade 1981–1990, and Prospects for the Future. Volume
1. Washington, DC, PAHO. www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/827-AAL90-8870-0.pdf
Palmer, N., Lightbody, P., Fallowfield, H. and Harvey, B. 1999. Australia’s Most Successful Alternative
to Sewerage: South Australia’s Septic Tank Effluent Disposal Schemes. www.efm.leeds.ac.uk/CIVE/
Sewerage/articles/australia.pdf
Peal, A., Blackett, I., Hawkins, P. M. and Heymans, C. 2014. Fecal sludge management: A comparative
analysis of 12 cities. Journal of Water Sanitation and Hygiene for Development, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp.
563–575. doi:10.2166/washdev.2014.026
Pillay, A. E., Salih, F. M. and Maleek, M. I. 2010. Radioactivity in oily sludge and produced waste water
from oil: Environmental concerns and potential remedial measures. Sustainability, Vol. 2, pp.
890–901. www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/2/4/890/pdf
Poongothai, S., Ravikrishnan, R. and Murthy, P. 2007. Endocrine disruption and perspective human
health implications: A review. The Internet Journal of Toxicology, Vol. 4, No. 2. ispub.com/
IJTO/4/2/3638

Postel, S. 2012. “Sewer Mining” – Efficient Water Recycling Coming to a Community near You. National
Geographic website. voices.nationalgeographic.com/2012/01/16/sewer-mining-coming-to-acommunity-near-you/
PR Newswire. 2013. Constructed Wetland System Wins National Honor, Saves $26 Million. www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/constructed-wetland-system-wins-national-honor-saves-26million-203799381.html

Prüss-Üstün, A., Bartram, J., Clasen, T., Colford Jr, J. M., Cumming, O., Curtis, V., Bonjour, S., Dangour,
A. D., De France, J., Fewtrell, L., Freeman, M. C., Gordon, B., Hunter, P. R., Johston, B. R., Mathers,
C., Mäusezahl, D., Medlicott, K., Neira, M., Stocks, M., Wolf, J. and Cairncross, S. 2014. Burden
of disease from inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene in low- and middle-income settings: A
retrospective analysis of data from 145 countries. Tropical Medicine and International Health, Vol.
19, No. 8, pp. 894–905. Doi: 10.1111/tmi.12329
Qadir, M., Bahri, A., Sato, T. and Al-Karadsheh, E. 2010. Wastewater production, treatment, and
irrigation in Middle East and North Africa. Irrigation and Drainage Systems, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp.
37–51. Doi: 0.1007/s10795-009-9081-y

Qadir, M., Boelee, E., Amerasinghe, P. and Danso, G. 2015a. Costs and benefits of using wastewater for
aquifer recharge. P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic asset in an
urbanizing world. Springer Netherlands.
Qadir, M., Mateo-Sagasta, J., Jiménez, B., Siebe, C., Siemens J. and Hanjra, M. A. 2015b. Environmental
risks and cost-effective risk management in wastewater use systems. P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D.
Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic asset in an urbanizing world. Springer Netherlands.
Qu, X., Alvarez, P. J. J. and Li, Q. 2013. Applications of nanotechnology in water and wastewater
treatment. Water Research, Vol. 47, No. 12, pp. 3931–3946. dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2012.09.058
Raghav, M., Eden, S., Mitchell, K. and Witte, B. 2013. Contaminants of emerging concern in water.
Arroyo 2013. Tucson, Ariz., Water Resources Research Center, College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences, University of Arizona.

Rao, K., Hanjra, M. A., Drechsel, P. and Danso, G. 2015. Business models and economic approaches
supporting water reuse. P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic Asset
in an Urbanizing World. Springer Netherlands.

Raschid-Sally, L. and Jayakody, P. 2008. Drivers and Characteristics of Wastewater Agriculture in
Developing Countries: Results from a Global Assessment. IWMI Research Report No. 127. Colombo,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI).

162

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

RECPnet (Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production). n.d.a. Capturing and Promoting Knowledge
on Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production. Factsheet. United Nations Industrial Development
Organization/United Nations Environment Programme (UNIDO/UNEP). recpnet.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/05/KMS_Capturing-and-Promoting-Knowledge-on-RECP.pdf
_____. n.d.b. RECP Experiences at Musoma Texitle Mills Tanzania Limited (MUTEX) –
Tanzania. RECP Experiences. United Nations Industrial Development Organization/
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP/UNIDO). africa.recpnet.org/uploads/
resource/3dd4f3974e38a68ecb59b16ff6cc158d.pdf
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, A., Chapin III, F. S., Lambin, E., Lenton, T. M., Scheffer,
M., Folke, C., Schellnhuber, H. J., Nykvist, B., De Wit, C. A., Hughes, T., Van der Leeuw, S., Rodhe,
H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, P .K., Costanza, R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M., Karlberg, L., Corell, R. W.,
Fabry, F. J., Hansen, J., Walker, B., Liverman, D., Richardson, K., Crutzen, P. and Foley, J. 2009.
Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity. Ecology and Society, Vol. 14,
No. 2, art. 32. www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss2/art32/
Rodríguez, D. J., Delgado, A., DeLaquil, P. and Sohns, A. 2013. Thirsty Energy. Water Papers. Washington,
DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/01/17932041/thirsty-energy
Rojas Ortuste, F. 2014. Políticas e Institucionalidad en Materia de Agua Potable y Saneamiento en
América Latina y el Caribe [Policies and Institutions involved in Drinking Water and Sanitation in Latin
America and the Caribbean]. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). (In Spanish.) repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/36776/
S2014277_es.pdf
Rosenwinkel, K. H., Borchmann, A., Engelhart, M., Eppers, R., Jung, H., Marzinkowki, J. and Kipp, S.
2013. Closing loops – Industrial water management in Germany. V. Lazarova, T. Asano, A. Bahri, and
J. Anderson (eds), Milestones in Water Reuse: The Best Success Stories. London, IWA Publishing.
Rossi, A. 2009. Matanza Riachuelo River Basin Authority. Circular of the Network for Cooperation in
Integrated Water Resource Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, No. 29. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (UNECLAC). repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/39403/Carta29_en.pdf
Rothstein, B., and Tannenberg, M. 2015. Making Development Work: The Quality of Government
Approach. Stockholm, Expertgruppen för Biståndsanalys (EBA). eba.se/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/
Making_development_work_07.pdf
SADC (Southern African Development Community). 2000. Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses
in the Southern African Development Community. Gaborone, Southern African Development
Community. www.sadc.int/documents-publications/show/1975
Saldias Zambrana, C. 2016. Analyzing the Institutional Challenges for the Agricultural (Re)use of
Wastewater in Developing Countries. PhD Dissertation. Ghent, Belgium, University of Ghent.
Salgot, M., Huertas, E., Weber, S., Dott, W. and Hollender, J. 2006. Wastewater reuse and risk:
Definition of key objectives. Desalination, Vol. 187, No. 1–3, pp. 29–40.
Sato, T., Qadir, M., Yamamoto, S., Endo, T. and Zahoor, A. 2013. Global, regional, and country level
need for data on wastewater generation, treatment, and use. Agricultural Water Management, Vol.
130, pp. 1–13. dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2013.08.007
Schoumans, O. F., Bouraoui, F., Kabbe, C., Oenema, O. and Van Dijk, K. C. 2015. Phosphorus
management in Europe in a changing world. Ambio, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 180–192. doi.org/10.1007/
s13280-014-0613-9.
Schreinemachers, P. and Tipraqsa, P. 2012. Agricultural pesticides and land use intensification in high,
middle and low income countries. Food Policy, Vol. 37, No. 6, pp. 616–626.
Schuster-Wallace, C. J., Wild, C. and Metcalfe, C. 2015. Valuing Human Waste as an Energy Resource:
A Research Brief Assessing the Global Wealth in Waste. Hamilton, Ont., United Nations University
Institute for Water, Environment and Health (UNU-INWEH). inweh.unu.edu/vast-energy-valuehuman-waste
Schutte, F. 2008. Water reuse in central and southern regions of Africa. B. Jiménez and T. Asano (eds),
Water Reuse: An International Survey of Current Practice, Issues and Needs. London, IWA Publishing.
Scott, C., Drechsel, P., Raschid-Sally, L., Bahri, A., Mara, D., Redwood, M. and Jiménez, B. 2010.
Wastewater irrigation and health: Challenges and outlook for mitigating risks in low-income
countries. P. Drechsel, C. A. Scott, L. Raschid-Sally, M. Redwood and A. Bahri (eds), Wastewater
Irrigation and Health: Assessing and Mitigating Risks in Low-income Countries. London/Sterling, Va.,
Earthscan. www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/Books/PDF/Wastewater_Irrigation_and_Health_book.pdf

Refe re n ce s

163

EFERENCE

SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute). Piloting Enclosed Long-term Composting in an Indian village.
Stockholm, SEI. www.sei-international.org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/sei-fs-2014biharecosan-mohaddipur.pdf

Sengupta, S., Nawaz, T. and Beaudry, J. 2015. Nitrogen and phosphorus recovery from wastewater.
Current Pollution Reports, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 155–166. link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40726-0150013-1
Sheikh, S. 2008. Public Toilets in Delhi: An Emphasis on the Facilities for Women in Slum/Resettlement
Areas. CCS Working Paper No. 192. Summer Research Internship Programme 2008, Centre for Civil
Society. ccs.in/internship_papers/2008/Public-toilets-in-Delh-192.pdf
Shiklomanov, I. A. 1999. World water resources and their use a joint SHI/UNESCO product. Database.
http://webworld.unesco.org/water/ihp/db/shiklomanov/

SISS (Superintendencia de Servicios Sanitarios). 2003. El tratamiento de aguas servidas en Chile
[Wastewater treatment in Chile]. Aguas Claras [Clear Waters], No. 2. Santiago. SISS, Government of
Chile. (In Spanish.) www.siss.gob.cl/577/articles-4482_recurso_1.pdf

_____. 2015. Informe de Gestión del Sector Sanitario 2014 [Management Report of the Sanitation Sector
2014]. Santiago, SISS, Government of Chile. (In Spanish.)

SSWM (Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management). n.d. Reuse Water between Businesses. SSWM
website. www.sswm.info/category/implementation-tools/water-use/hardware/optimisation-water-useindustry/reuse-water-between
State of Green. 2015. Sustainable Urban Drainage System: Using Rainwater as a Resource to Create
Resilient and Liveable Cities. Think Denmark: White paper for a green transition. Copenhague, State
of Green. stateofgreen.com/files/download/8247
Statistics Canada. 2014. Industrial Water Use 2011. Ottawa, Statistics Canada. publications.gc.ca/
collections/collection_2014/statcan/16-401-x/16-401-x2014001-eng.pdf

_____. n.d. Industrial Water Survey (IWS). Statistics Canada website. www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p2SV.
pl?Function=getSurvey&Id=253674
Steen, I. 1998. Management of a non-renewable resource. Phosphorus and Potassium, Vo. 217, pp.
25–31.

Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter,
S. R., De Vries, W., De Wit, C. A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson, L. M.,
Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B. and Sorlin, S. 2015. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development
on a changing planet. Science, Vol. 347, No. 6223. Doi: 10.1126/science.1259855

Sterner T. 2003. Policy Instruments for Environmental and Natural Resource Management. Washington,
DC, Resource for the Future.

Strande, L., Ronteltap, M. and Brdjanovic, D. (eds). 2014. Faecal Sludge Management: Systems Approach
for Implementation and Operation. London, IWA Publishing.

Taiwo, A. M. 2011. Composting as a sustainable waste management technique in developing countries.
Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 4, pp. 93–102. Doi: 10.3923/jest.2011.93.102
Taiwo, A. M., Olujimi, O. O., Bamgbose, O. and Arowolo, T. A. 2012. Surface water quality monitoring
in Nigeria: Situational analysis and future management strategy. K. Voudoris (eds), Water Quality
Monitoring and Assessment. InTech. www.intechopen.com/books/water-quality-monitoring-andassessment/surface-water-quality-monitoring-in-nigeria-situational-analysis-and-future-managementstrategy
Tchobanoglous, G., Burton, F. L. and David Stensel, H. 2003. Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and
Reuse. 4th edition. New York, Metcalf & Eddy Inc.

Thomson et al. 1998. Report on the Environmental Benefits and Costs of Green Roof Technology for the
City of Toronto. Toronto, Ont., Department of Architectural Science, Ryerson University.
Trachsel, M. 2008. Consensus Platform “Endocrine Disruptors in Waste Water and in the Aquatic
Environment”: Final Document. Bern, Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF).

Transparency International. 2008. Global Corruption Report 2008: Corruption in the Water Sector.
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press. www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/global_
corruption_report_2008_corruption_in_the_water_sector

164

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

Tréhu, É. 1905. Des pouvoirs de la municipalité parisienne en matière d’assainissement, l’application de la
loi du 10 juillet 1894 sur l’assainissement de Paris et de la Seine [The Powers of the Parisian Municipality
with regard to Sanitation, applying the Law of 10 July 1894 to the Sanitation of Paris and the River
Seine]. PhD disseration. Faculty of Law, Paris University. (In French.)
Trent, J. 2012. Offshore Membrane Enclosures for Growing Algae (OMEGA) – A Feasibility Study for
Wastewater to Biofuels. NASA Ames Research Center project report for the California Energy
Commission. www.energy.ca.gov/2013publications/CEC-500-2013-143/CEC-500-2013-143.pdf
TSG (TechKNOWLEDGEy Strategic Group). 2014. 2014 Water Market Review. Boulder, Colo., TSG. www.
tech-strategy.com/index.htm
Umweltbundesamt GmbH. 2015. Technical Assessment of the Implementation of Council Directive concerning
Urban Waste Water Treatment (91/271/EEC). Brussels, Umweltbundesamt GmbH. ec.europa.eu/
environment/water/water-urbanwaste/implementation/pdf/Technical%20assessment%20UWWTD.pdf
UN (United Nations). 1997. Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International
Watercourses. New York, United Nations. legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/
conventions/8_3_1997.pdf
_____. n.d.a. Sustainable Development Goals. www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainabledevelopment-goals/
_____. n.d.b. Wastewater Treatment. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform, United Nations. www.
un.org/esa/sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/methodology_sheets/freshwater/waste_water_treatment.pdf
UNCED (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development). 1992. Agenda 21. New York,
United Nations. sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/Agenda21.pdf
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2004. Catalyzing Change: A
Handbook for Developing Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and Water Efficiency
Strategies. Thirteenth Session of the Commission on Sustainable Development. Background Paper No.
5. Submitted by the Global Water Partnership (GWP) Technical Committee. DESA/DSD/2005/5.
_____. 2014. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. New York, United Nations. www.un.org/en/
development/desa/publications/2014-revision-world-urbanization-prospects.html
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006: Beyond
Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New York, UNDP. www.undp.org/content/undp/en/
home/librarypage/hdr/human-development-report-2006.html
_____. 2010. Human Development Report 2010: The Real Wealth of Nations. Pathways to Human
Development. New York, UNDP. hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/reports/270/hdr_2010_en_complete_
reprint.pdf
UNDP WGF at SIWI/Cap-Net/Water-Net/WIN. 2009. Training Manual on Water Integrity. Stockholm,
Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI).
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 1992. Convention on the Protection and Use
of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes. Helsinki, 17 March 1992. www.unece.org/
fileadmin/DAM/env/water/pdf/watercon.pdf
_____. 2013. Guide to Implementing the Water Convention. New York/Geneva, United Nations. www.
unece.org/env/water/publications/ece_mp.wat_39.html.
UNECE/OECD (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe/Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development). 2014. Integrated Water Resources Management in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus
and Central Asia. European Union Water Initiative National Policy Dialogues Progress Report 2013. New
York/Geneva, United Nations. www.unece.org/index.php?id=35306
UNECE/WHO (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe/World Health Organization). 1999.
Protocol on Water and Health to the 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes. Geneva, UNECE/WHO. www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/
documents/2000/wat/mp.wat.2000.1.e.pdf
_____. 2013. The Equitable Access Score-card: Supporting Policy Processes to Achieve the Human Right to
Water and Sanitation. Geneva, UNECE/WHO.
_____. 2016. A Healthy Link: The Protocol on Water and Health and the Sustainable Development Goal.
www.unece.org/index.php?id=44282&L=0

Refe re n ce s

165

_____. 2010. Clearing the Waters: A Focus on Water Quality Solutions. Nairobi, UNEP. www.unep.org/
publications/contents/pub_details_search.asp?ID=4123

EFERENCE

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2002. International Source Book on Environmentally
Sound Technologies for Wastewater and Stormwater Management. London, IWA Publishing on
behalf of UNEP. www.unep.or.jp/ietc/Publications/TechPublications/TechPub-15/main_index.asp

_____. 2012a. Greening the Economy through Life Cycle Thinking – Ten Years of the UNEP/SETAC Life
Cycle Initiative. Nairobi, UNEP. www.unep.fr/shared/publications/pdf/DTIx1536xPA-GreeningEconomy
throughLifeCycleThinking.pdf
_____. 2012b. Measuring Water Use in a Green Economy. A Report of the Working Group on Water
Efficiency to the International Resource Panel. Nairobi, UNEP. www.unep.org/resourcepanel-old/
Portals/24102/Measuring_Water.pdf

_____. 2015a. Good Practices for Regulating Wastewater Treatment: Legislation, Policies and Standards.
Nairobi, UNEP. unep.org/gpa/documents/publications/GoodPracticesforRegulatingWastewater.pdf
_____. 2015b. Economic Valuation of Wastewater - The Cost of Action and the Cost of No Action.
Nairobi, UNEP. unep.org/gpa/Documents/GWI/Wastewater%20Evaluation%20Report%20Mail.pdf

_____. 2015c. Options for Decoupling Economic Growth from Water Use and Water Pollution. Report of
the International Resource Panel Working Group on Sustainable Water Management. Nairobi, UNEP.
www.unep.org/resourcepanel/KnowledgeResources/AssessmentAreasReports/Water/tabid/133332/
Default.aspx
_____. 2016. A Snapshot of the World’s Water Quality: Towards a Global Assessment. Nairobi, UNEP.
en.unesco.org/emergingpollutants
_____. n.d. Cleaner & Safer Production. UNEP website. www.unep.org/resourceefficiency/Business/
CleanerSaferProduction/tabid/55543/Default.aspx

UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC/WRI (United Nations Environment Programme-DHI Partnership/International
Union for the Conservation of Nature/The Nature Conservancy/World Resources Institute). 2014.
Green Infrastructure Guide for Water Management: Ecosystem-based Management Approaches for
Water-related Infrastructure Projects. Nairobi, UNEP. www.unepdhi.org/-/media/microsite_unepdhi/
publications/documents/unep/web-unep-dhigroup-green-infrastructure-guide-en-20140814.pdf
UNEP FI (United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative). 2007. Half Full or Half Empty? A
Set of Indicative Guidelines for Water-Related Risks and an Overview of Emerging Opportunities for
Financial Institutions. Geneva, Switzerland, UNEP FI. www.unepfi.org/publications/water/
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2010. Statistical
Yearbook 2009. Bangkok, UNESCAP.

_____. 2013. Development Financing for Tangible Results: A Paradigm Shift to Impact Investing and
Outcome Models – The Case of Sanitation in Asia. Discussion Paper. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.
unescap.org/resources/development-financing-tangible-results-paradigm-shift-impact-investing-andoutcome-models
_____. 2014. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific 2014. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.unescap.org/
resources/statistical-yearbook-asia-and-pacific-2014
_____. 2015a. Eco-Efficient Infrastructure Development towards Green and Resilient Urban Future.
Brochure. www.unescap.org/resources/brochure-eco-efficient-infrastructure-development-towardsgreen-and-resilient-urban-future

_____. 2015b. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific 2015. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.unescap.org/
resources/statistical-yearbook-asia-and-pacific-2015
UNESCAP/UN-Habitat (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific/United
Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2015. The State of Asian and Pacific Cities 2015: Urban
Transformations, Shifting from Quantity to Quality. UNESCAP/UN-Habitat.

UNESCAP/UN-Habitat/AIT (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific/
United Nations Human Settlements Programme/Asian Institute of Technology). 2015. Policy Guidance
Manual on Wastewater Management with a Special Emphasis on Decentralised Wastewater
Treatment Systems (DEWATS). United Nations/AIT. www.unescap.org/resources/policy-guidancemanual-wastewater-management
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2011. A World of
Science. Natural Sciences Quarterly Newsletter, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 1–24. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0021/002122/212222e.pdf

166

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

_____. 2015. UNESCO Project on Emerging Pollutants in Wastewater Reuse in Developing Countries.
Brochure. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002352/235241E.pdf
_____. 2016a. Harnessing Scientific Research Based Outcomes for Effective Monitoring and
Regulation of Emerging Pollutants: A Case Study of Emerging Pollutants in Water and
Wastewater in Nigeria. Series of Technical and Policy Case Studies. UNESCO-IHP International
Initiative on Water Quality (IIWQ). en.unesco.org/emergingpollutants/strengthening-scientificresearch-and-policy/case-studies
_____. 2016b. Emerging Pollutants in Water and Wastewater: Technical and Policy Case Studies.
UNESCO Project on Emerging Pollutants in Wastewater Reuse in Developing Countries.
en.unesco.org/emergingpollutants
UNESCO-IHP/GTZ (International Hydrological Programme of the United Nations/Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit). 2006. Capacity Building for Ecological Sanitation
– Concepts for Ecologically Sustainable Sanitation in Formal and Continuing Education. Paris/
Eschborn, Germany, UNESCO-IHP/GTZ. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001463/146337e.pdf
UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia). 2013. ESCWA
Water Development Report 5: Issues in Sustainable Water Resources Management and Water
Services in the Arab Region. New York, United Nations. www.unescwa.org/publications/escwawater-development-report-5-issues-sustainable-water-resources-management-and
_____. 2015. ESCWA Water Development Report 6: The Water, Energy, Food Security Nexus in the
Arab Region. Beirut, United Nations. www.unescwa.org/publications/escwa-water-developmentreport-6-water-energy-and-food-security-nexus-arab-region
UNGA (United Nations General Assembly). 2010. Resolution 64/292. The Human Right to Water and
Sanitation. New York, UNGA.
_____. 2014. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and
Sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque. Twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council.
UNGA A/HRC/27/55. documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N13/418/25/PDF/N1341825.
pdf?OpenElement
_____. 2015a. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution
adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. A/70/L.1. New York, UNGA. www.
un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
_____. 2015b. Promotion and Protection of Human Rights: Human Rights Questions, including
Alternative Approaches for Improving the Effective Enjoyment of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedom. Seventieth session of the Third Committee. A/C.3/70/L.55/Rev.1 2015. UNGA.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2012. State of the World’s Cities
Report 2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities. World Urban Forum Edition. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/745habitat.pdf
_____. 2016. World Cities Report 2016 - Urbanization and Development: Emerging Futures. Nairobi,
UN-Habitat. wcr.unhabitat.org/main-report/
_____. n.d. Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation (LVWATSAN). Initiative Reports. mirror.
unhabitat.org/content.asp?cid=2289&catid=462&typeid=24&subMenuId=0
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2016. Jordan: UNHCR Operational
Update - August 2016. reliefweb.int/report/jordan/jordan-unhcr-operational-update-august-2016
UNICEF/WHO (United Nations Children’s Fund/World Health Organization). 2000. Global Water
Supply and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/WHO. www.who.
int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmp2000.pdf
_____. 2009. Diarrhoea: Why Children are still Dying and What can be Done. New York/Geneva,
UNICEF/WHO. www.unicef.org/media/files/Final_Diarrhoea_Report_October_2009_final.pdf
_____. 2011. Drinking Water: Equity, Safety and Sustainability. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/WHO
WHO Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. www.wssinfo.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/resources/report_wash_low.pdf
_____. 2012. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation, 2012 Update. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/
WHO Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
_____. 2014. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation, 2014 Update. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/
WHO Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.

Refe re n ce s

167

EFERENCE

_____. 2015. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment. New York/
Geneva, UNICEF/WHO Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. www.wssinfo.
org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP-Update-report-2015_English.pdf
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2010. A Greener Footprint for Industry:
Opportunities and Challenges of Sustainable Industrial Development. Vienna, UNIDO. www.unido.
org/what-we-do/environment/resource-efficient-and-low-carbon-industrial-production/greenindustry/
green-industry-platform.html

_____. 2011. UNIDO Green Industry Policies for Supporting Green Industry. Vienna, UNIDO. www.unido.
org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/Green_Industry/web_policies_green_industry.pdf
UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs). 2016. Humanitarian
Bulletin Lebanon, Issue 22, 1–31 August 2016. reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/OCHAHumanitarianBulletin-Issue22-August2016.pdf
UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2012. SEEA-Water: System of Environmental–Economic
Accounting for Water. New York, UNSD. unstats.un.org/unsd/envaccounting/seeaw/
seeawaterwebversion.pdf
_____. n.d. Questionnaire 2013 on Environment Statistics. UNSD website. UNSD/UNEP. unstats.un.org/
unsd/environment/questionnaire2013.htm

UN-Water. 2015a. Wastewater Management: A UN-Water Analytical Brief. UN-Water. www.unwater.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/unwater_new/docs/UN-Water_Analytical_Brief_Wastewater_Management.pdf
_____. 2015b. Compendium of Water Quality Regulatory Frameworks: Which Water for Which Use? UNWater.

_____. 2016a. Metadata on Suggested Indicators for Global Monitoring of the Sustainable Development
Goal 6 on Water and Sanitation. UN-Water. www.unwater.org/fileadmin/user_upload/unwater_new/
docs/Goal%206_Metadata%20Compilation%20for%20Suggested%20Indicators_UN-Water_v201604-01_2.pdf
_____. 2016b. Water and Sanitation Interlinkages across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Urbis Limited. 2007. A Study on Green Roof Application in Hong Kong. Hong Kong, Urbis Limited. www.
archsd.gov.hk/media/11630/green_roof_study_final_report.pdf
US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2003. National Management Measures to
Control Nonpoint Source Pollution from Agriculture. Washington, DC, US EPA. www.epa.gov/nps/
national-management-measures-control-nonpoint-source-pollution-agriculture
_____. 2004. Guidelines for Water Reuse. Washington, DC, US EPA. nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.
cgi/30006MKD.PDF?Dockey=30006MKD.PDF
_____. 2012. 2012 Guidelines for Water Reuse. Washington, DC, US EPA. nepis.epa.gov/Adobe/PDF/
P100FS7K.pdf
_____. 2015. Steam Electric Power Generating Effluent Guidelines – 2015 Final Rule. US EPA website.
www.epa.gov/eg/steam-electric-power-generating-effluent-guidelines-2015-final-rule

_____. 2016. Clean Watershed Needs Survey 2012 – Report to Congress. Washington, DC, US EPA. www.
epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-12/documents/cwns_2012_report_to_congress-508-opt.pdf
_____. n.d.a. Glossary of Climate Change Terms. US EPA website. www3.epa.gov/climatechange/glossary.
html#W
_____. n.d.b. Terminology Service (TS): Vocabulary Catalogue. US EPA website. ofmpub.epa.
gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/searchandretrieve/glossariesandkeywordlists/search.
do?details=&glossaryName=Septic%20Systems%20Glossary

_____. n.d.c. Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF). US EPA website. www.epa.gov/sites/production/
files/2016-03/documents/cwsrfinfographic-030116.pdf www.epa.gov/cwsrf
USGS (United States Geological Survey). n.d. Contaminants of Emerging Concern in the Environment.
USGS website. toxics.usgs.gov/investigations/cec/index.php

Van de Helm, A. W. C., Bhai, A., Coloni F., Koning, W. J. G. and De Bakker, P. T. 2015. Developing Water
and Sanitation Services in Refugee Settings from Emergency to Sustainability – The Case of Zaatari
Camp in Jordan. Proceeding of the IWA Water Development Congress and Exhibition 2015, Jordan,
18–22 October 2015. London, International Water Association (IWA). repository.tudelft.nl/islandora/
object/uuid:7953d49d-194a-4ecb-81d8-63afcb3f6f60?collection=research

168

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

Van Dien, F. and Boone, P. 2015. Constructed Wetlands Pilot at Sher Ethiopia PLC. Evaluation Report.
ECOFYT. www.hoarec.org/images/Evaluation%20Report%20Constructed%20Wetland%20
Pilot%20at%20Sher%20Ethiopia%20PLC.pdf
Van Houtte, E. and Verbauwhede, J. 2013. Long-time membrane experience at Torreele’s water re-use
facility in Belgium. Desalination and Water Treatment, Vol. 51, No. 22–24, pp. 4253–4262. www.
tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/19443994.2013.769487
Van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. and Brdjanovic, D. 2014. Anticipating the next century of wastewater
treatment. Science, Vol. 344, No. 6191, pp. 1452–1453. Doi: 10.1126/science.1255183
Van Vuuren, D. P., Bouwman, A. F., Beusen, A. H. W. 2010. Phosphorus demand for the 1970–2100
period: A scenario analysis of resource depletion. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 20, No. 3,
pp. 428–439. doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.04.004
Van Weert, F., Van der Gun, J., Reckman, J. 2009. Global Overview of Saline Groundwater
Occurrence and Genesis. Utrecht, The Netherlands, International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre (IGRAC).
Veolia/IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2015. The Murky Future of Global Water
Quality: New Global Study Projects Rapid Deterioration in Water Quality. White Paper. Veolia /
IFPRI. www.ifpri.org/publication/murky-future-global-water-quality-new-global-study-projectsrapid-deterioration-water
Vinnerås, B. 2001. Faecal Separation and Urine Diversion for Nutrient Management of Household
Biodegradable Waste and Wastewater. Uppsala, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences. pub.
epsilon.slu.se/3817/1/vinneras_b_091216.pdf
Visvanathan C., Ben Aim, R. and Parameshwaran, K. 2000. Membrane separation bioreactors for
wastewater treatment. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 30, No. 1,
pp. 1–48. Doi: 10.1080/10643380091184165
Von Muench, E. 2009. Compilation of 24 SuSanA case studies: Pre-Print for the 10th SuSanA
meeting. Eschborn, Germany, Sustainable Sanitation Alliance. www.susana.org/en/resources/
library/details/1937
Von Sperling, M. 2007. Wastewater Characteristic, Treatment and Disposal. Vol. I of Biological
Wastewater Treatment Series. London, IWA Publishing. www.sswm.info/sites/default/files/
reference_attachments/SPERLING%202007%20Wastewater%20Characteristics,%20
Treatment%20and%20Disposal.pdf
Walters, J., Oelker, G. and Lazarova, V. 2013. Producing designer recycled water tailored to customer
needs. V. Lazarova, T. Asano, A. Bahri and J. Anderson (eds). Milestones in Water Reuse: The Best
Success Stories. London, IWA: Publishing.
Wang, H. and Ren, Z. J. 2014. Bioelectrochemical metal recovery from wastewater: A review. Water
Research, Vol. 66, pp. 219–232.
Wang, H., Wang, T., Zhang, B., Li, F., Toure, B., Omosa, I. B., Chiramba, T., Abdel-Monem, M. and
Pradhan, M. 2014. Water and wastewater treatment in Africa – Current practices and challenges.
Clean – Soil, Air, Water, Vol. 42, No. 8, pp. 1029–1035. onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/
clen.201470073/pdf
Water Online. 2014. Texas Leads the Way with First Direct Potable Reuse Facilities in U.S. Water
Online, 16 September 2014. www.wateronline.com/doc/texas-leads-the-way-with-first-directpotable-reuse-facilities-in-u-s-0001
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). n.d. Scaling up Industrial Water
Reuse. WBCSD website. www.wbcsd.org/work-program/sector-projects/water/waterreuse.aspx
WBCSD/IWA (World Business Council for Sustainable Development/International Water Association).
n.d. Anglo American plc eMalahleni Water Reclamation Project. Case Study. WBCSD/IWA.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2016. The Global Risks Report 2016. Geneva, Switzerland, WEF. wef.
ch/risks2016
West Basin Municipal Water District. n.d. Recycled Water. West Basin Municipal Water District
website. www.westbasin.org/water-reliability-2020/recycled-water/about-recycled-water.html
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006a. Guidelines of the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and
Grey Water – Vol. 2: Wastewater Use in Agriculture. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/wastewater/wwuvol2intro.pdf

Refe re n ce s

169

_____. 2008. Acute pesticide poisoning: a proposed classification tool. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, Vol. 86, pp. 205–209. who.int/bulletin/volumes/86/3/07-041814/en/
_____. 2010. Third Edition of the WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and
Greywater in Agriculture and Aquaculture: Guidance Note for National Programme Managers
– Health-Based Targets. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
wastewater/FLASH_OMS_WSHH_Guidance_note3_20100901_17092010.pdf?ua=1
_____. 2014a. Investing in Water and Sanitation: Increasing Access, Reducing Inequalities. UN-Water
Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking Water GLAAS 2014 Report. Geneva,
Switzerland, WHO. apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/139735/1/9789241508087_eng.pdf?ua=1
_____. 2014b. Preventing Diarrhoea through Better Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Exposures and
Impacts in Low- and Middle-income Countries. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/150112/1/9789241564823_eng.pdf
_____. 2015. UN-Water GLAAS TrackFin Initiative: Tracking Financing to Sanitation, Hygiene and
Drinking-water at the National Level. Guidance document summary for decision-makers. Geneva,
Switzerland, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/investments/trackfinsummary.pdf
_____. 2016a. Preventing disease through healthy environments: A global assessment of the burden
of disease from environmental risks. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. www.who.int/quantifying_
ehimpacts/publications/preventing-disease/en/
_____. 2016b. Sanitation Safety Planning: Manual for Safe Use and Disposal of Wastewater,
Greywater and Excreta. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
publications/ssp-manual/en/
Wichelns, D., Drechsel, P. and Qadir, M. 2015. Wastewater: Economic asset in an urbanizing world. P.
Dreschel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds), Wastewater – Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World.
Springer Netherlands.
WIN (Water Integrity Network). 2016. Water Integrity Global Outlook 2016. Berlin, WIN.
Winblad, U. and Simpson-Hébert, M. (eds). 2004. Ecological Sanitation: Revised and Enlarged Edition.
Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).

EFERENCE

_____. 2006b. A Compendium of Standards for Wastewater Reuse in the Eastern Mediterranean
Region. Cairo, WHO. apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/116515

Winpenny, J., Heinz, I., Koo-Oshima, S., Salgot, M., Collado, J., Hernandez, F. and Torricelli, R. 2010.
The Wealth of Waste: The Economics of Wastewater Use in Agriculture. FAO Water Report No. 35.
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/docrep/012/
i1629e/i1629e00.htm

Winsemius, H. C., Aerts, J. C. J. H., Van Beek, L. P. H., Bierkens, M. F. P., Bouwman, A., Jongman, B.,
Kwadijk, J. C. J., Ligtvoet, W., Lucas, P. L., Van Vuuren, D. P. and Ward, P. J. 2016. Global drivers of
future river flood risk. Nature Climate Change, Vol. 6, pp. 381–385. Doi: 10.1038/nclimate2893
Winsemius, H. C. and Ward, P. J. 2015. Projections of future urban damages from floods. Personal
communication to OECD.
Woodall, A. 2015. Innovative Water Use in Texas. Presentation held during the Groundwater
Protection Council 2015 Annual Forum, 27–30 September 2015, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. www.
gwpc.org/sites/default/files/event-sessions/Woodall_Allison.pdf
World Bank. 2012. The Future of Water in African Cities: Why Waste Water? Washington, DC, World
Bank.
_____. n.d. World Development Indicators. World Bank website. data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/
world-development-indicators
World Water. 2013. Fresh Thinking to Improve Business and Sustainability. msdssearch.dow.com/
PublishedLiteratureDOWCOM/dh_08d9/0901b803808d92c4.pdf?filepath=liquidseps/pdfs/
noreg/609-50111.pdf&fromPage=GetDoc
WssTP (Water Supply and Sanitation Technology Platform). 2013. Water Reuse Report: Water Supply
and Sanitation Technology Platform, Brussels. An Executive Summary. wsstp.eu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/102/2013/11/ExS-Water-Reuse.pdf

170

W W D R

2 0 1 7

EFERENCE

WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006. The United Nations World Water
Development Report 2: Water: A Shared Responsibility. Paris, United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
_____. 2012. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2012: Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO).
_____. 2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014: Water and Energy. Paris,
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
_____. 2015. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2015: Water for a Sustainable
World. Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002318/231823E.pdf.
_____. 2016. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016: Water and Jobs. Paris,
Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
_____. n.d. Facts and Figures. Fact 36: Industrial wastewater. UNESCO website. www.unesco.org/
new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/facts-and-figures/all-facts-wwdr3/fact-36industrial-wastewater/
WWC/OECD (World Water Council/Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development).
2015. Water: Fit to Finance? Catalyzing national growth through investment in water security.
Report of the High-Level Panel on Financing Infrastructure for a Water-Secure World. Marseille/
Paris, France, WWC/OECD.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2015. Das Grosse Wegschmeissen: Vom Acker bis zum
Verbraucher: Ausmaß und Umwelteffekte der Lebensmittelverschwendung in Deutschland [The
great wastage: From field to end user: Magnitude and environmental impact of food waste in
Germany]. WWF Germany. (In German.) www.wwf.de/fileadmin/fm-wwf/Publikationen-PDF/
WWF_Studie_Das_grosse_Wegschmeissen.pdf
Zarate, E., Aldaya, M., Chico, D., Pahlow, M., Flachsbarth, I., Franco, G., Zhang, G., Garrido,
A., Kuroiwa, J., Cesar, J., Palhares, P. and Arévalo Uribe, D. 2014. Water and agriculture. B.
Willaarts, A. Garrido and R. Llamas (eds), Water for Food Security and Well-being in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Social and Environmental Implications for a Globalized Economy.
Oxon, UK/New York, Routledge. www.fundacionbotin.org/paginas-interiores-de-unapublicacion-de-la-fundacion-botin/water-for-food-security-and-well-being-in-latin-america-andthe-caribbean.html

Refe re n ce s

171

ANNEX 1 LEXICON

There can be different, even inconsistent definitions
available for terms relating to wastewater. The
following definitions have been adapted from a
number of published works in order to provide a
common understanding and to ensure consistency
across the terminology used in the WWDR 2017.

Decentralized wastewater treatment system:
System used to collect, treat, and disperse or reclaim
wastewater from a small community or service area.

Agricultural runoff: Water from agricultural fields
that does not infiltrate into the soil and runs off as
overland flow.

Emerging pollutants: Any synthetic or naturally
occurring chemical or any microorganism that is not
commonly monitored in the environment but has the
potential to enter the environment and cause known
or suspected adverse ecological and/or human
health effects.

Biosolids: Sewage sludge adequately treated,
processed and applied as fertilizer to improve and
maintain productive soils and stimulate plant growth.
Blackwater: Wastewater generated from the toilet,
collected separately from a sewage flow. It contains
urine, faeces, flushwater and/or toilet paper.
Centralized wastewater treatment system: Managed
system consisting of collection sewers and a single
treatment plant used to collect and treat wastewater
from a specific service area.
Circular economy: An economy which balances
economic development with environmental and
resource protection. It places emphasis on the
most efficient use and recycling of resources, and
environmental protection. A circular economy features
low consumption of energy and other resources, low
emission of pollutants, minimum waste production
and high efficiency. It involves applying cleaner
production in companies, as well as eco-industrial
park development and integrated resource-based
planning for development in industry, agriculture and
urban areas.
Contaminant: Biological, physical, chemical, or
radiological substance which has an adverse effect
on water, soil or air. The presence of contaminants
does not necessarily mean that the water poses
health risks.
Combined sewer system: Sewer systems designed to
collect both municipal wastewater (from domestic,
industrial and other sources) and urban runoff, and
transport it to the wastewater treatment plant (or
alternative means of disposal).

172

Domestic wastewater: Composed of blackwater,
greywater and potentially other types of wastewater
deriving from household activities in residential
settlements.

Endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs): Natural or
synthetic compounds that interfere with the synthesis,
secretion, transport, binding, action, or elimination
of natural hormones of living organisms that are
responsible for the maintenance of homeostasis,
reproduction, development and/or behaviour.
Endocrine system: The collection of human
glands that produce hormones that regulate
metabolism, growth and development, tissue
function, reproduction, mood, sleep, and/or other
physiological functions.
Eutrophication: Process by which a body of water
becomes enriched in dissolved nutrients (e.g. nitrogen
and phosphorus) that stimulate the growth of
aquatic plant life, usually resulting in the depletion of
dissolved oxygen.
Greywater: Wastewater generated from a washing
machine, bathtub, shower or bathroom sink, collected
separately from a sewage flow. It does not include
wastewater from a toilet.
Heat pollution: The warmer-than-ambient water
released from industrial systems (i.e. cooling in
thermal power plants), altering the temperature of
the receiving water body in such a way that it impacts
the local environment.
Heavy metal pollution: Pollution by metals with a
high atomic mass deriving from a number of sources,
such as industrial effluents.

W W D R

2 0 1 7

Industrial wastewater: Water discharged after
being used in, or produced by, industrial or energy
production processes.

Reclaimed water: Treated (‘fit-for-purpose’) wastewater
that can be used under controlled conditions for
beneficial purposes, such as irrigation.

Micropollutants: Pollutants that are present in low
concentrations in water (i.e. micrograms/litre or even
less), such as pharmaceuticals, ingredients of household
chemicals, chemicals used in small businesses or
industries, environmental persistent pharmaceutical
pollutants (EPPP), pesticides or hormones.

Sediment pollution: Minerals, sand, and silt eroded
from the land and washed into the water, potentially
creating problems for aquatic organisms.

Municipal wastewater: Wastewater originating from
domestic, industrial, commercial and institutional
sources within a given human settlement or community.
The composition of municipal wastewater can vary
considerably, reflecting the range of contaminants
released by the different combination of sources.
Nonpoint source pollution or diffuse pollution:
Pollution resulting from land runoff, precipitation,
atmospheric deposition or land drainage.
On-site wastewater treatment system: System relying
on natural processes and/or mechanical components
to collect, treat and disperse or reclaim wastewater
from a specific location.
Pathogens or pathogenic microorganisms (e.g.
bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi): Microorganisms
that can cause disease in humans.
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs): Toxic chemicals
that adversely affect human health and the
environment, including PCBs, DDT, and dioxins. POPs
remain intact in the environment for exceptionally long
periods of time and potentially bio-accumulate in the
fatty tissues of living organisms.
Point source pollution: Point source pollution: any
discernible and confined conveyance, including
but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, fissure, container, intensive livestock
operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from
which pollutants are discharged. This term does not
include diffuse urban stormwater discharges and
return flows from agriculture.

Septage: The nutrient-rich by-product of domestic
wastewater after pre-treatment that accumulates in a
septic tank or (less commonly) a pit latrine.
Sewage: Wastewater and excrement (blackwater)
conveyed in sewers.
Sewerage: Pipes, pumps and other appurtenances
or infrastructure for collecting and transporting the
sewage from its points of generation to desired
endpoints (i.e. treatment plant).
Sludge: The nutrient-rich organic materials resulting
from the treatment of domestic sewage in a
wastewater treatment facility.
Urban runoff: Surface runoff of rainwater and other
forms of precipitation (i.e. snowmelt) in urban
areas, where much of the land surface is covered
by pavements, buildings and compacted landscapes
that do not allow water to infiltrate in the soil, thus
increasing the runoff volume. This runoff is a major
source of urban flooding and water pollution in urban
communities.
Urban wastewater: Includes both municipal
wastewater and urban runoff, thus potentially
containing a wide range of contaminants.
Wastewater or effluent: A combination of one or
more of: domestic effluent consisting of blackwater
and greywater; water from commercial establishments
and institutions, including hospitals; industrial effluent,
stormwater and other urban runoff; and agricultural,
horticultural and aquaculture runoff.13
Wastewater by-products: Materials (e.g. nutrients,
metals) and energy that can be recovered from
wastewater and used.

Pollution: The result of substances/contaminants
entering water bodies and thereby degrading the
quality of water. Water pollution can have natural
causes due to environmental causes (i.e. arsenic) or by
anthropogenic activities.
Recycled water: Treated (‘fit-for-purpose’)
wastewater that can be used under controlled
conditions for beneficial purposes within the same
establishment or industry.

An n ex

I

13

Even though urban and agricultural runoff may not be considered
wastewater under certain definitions (e.g., when wastewater is
understood as “water after it has gone through any use”), it is
being considered as a form of wastewater for the purposes of this
report, in part because of its direct relationship to the achievement
of SDG 6.3 which states “improve water quality by reducing
pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous
chemicals and materials (…)”.

173

ibliograph

Wastewater management: Includes the
prevention or reduction of pollution at the source
(in terms of the pollution load and the volume of
wastewater produced), the collection and removal
of contaminant from wastewater streams (i.e.
treatment), and the beneficial use and/or disposal
of treated wastewater and its by-products.14
Wastewater nutrients: This expression
mainly refers to the presence of nitrogen and
phosphorus in domestic wastewater, agricultural
runoff (including from livestock and food
processing) and in some industrial effluents.
Nutrients can cause an excessive growth of algae
(i.e. eutrophication) in water bodies, but they
are also a recoverable wastewater by-product for
agriculture and aquaculture.

Wastewater treatment: A process, or sequence
of processes, that removes contaminants from
wastewater so that it can be either safely used
again (fit-for-purpose treatment) or returned to the
water cycle with minimal environmental impacts.
There are several levels of water treatment,
the choice of which is dependent on the type
of contaminants, the pollution load, and the
anticipated end use of the effluent.
Preliminary treatment: Removal of wastewater
constituents such as rags, sticks, floatables,
grit, and grease that may cause maintenance
or operational problems during the treatment
operations and processes.
Primary treatment: Removal of a portion of
the suspended solids and organic matter from
the wastewater, which can or cannot include a
chemical step or filtration.

Secondary treatment: Removal of biodegradable
organic matter (in solution or suspension),
suspended solids, and nutrients (nitrogen,
phosphorus, or both).
Tertiary treatment: Removal of residual
suspended solids (after secondary treatment),
further nutrient removal and disinfection.

Quaternary treatment: Techniques for the
elimination of micropollutants that may not have
been removed by conventional treatment processes
(primary, secondary and tertiary treatment).

Bibliography (Lexicon):
Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D. and
Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role of
Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development. A
Rapid Response Assessment. United Nations Environment
Programme/United Nations Human Settlements
Programme/GRID-Arendal (UNEP/UN-Habitat).
EPA Victoria (Environment Protection Authority Victoria).
n.d. Reusing and Recycling Water. EPA Victoria website.
Victoria, Australia, EPA. www.epa.vic.gov.au/yourenvironment/water/reusing-and-recycling-water
Raschid-Sally, L. and Jayakody, P. 2008. Drivers and
Characteristics of Wastewater Agriculture in Developing
Countries: Results from a Global Assessment. IWMI
Research Report No. 127. Colombo, International Water
Management Institute (IWMI).
Tchobanoglous, G., Burton, F.L. and David Stensel, H. 2003.
Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse. Fourth
edition. New York, Metcalf & Eddy Inc.
UN (United Nations). n.d. Wastewater Treatment. Sustainable
Development Knowledge Platform, United Nations. www.
un.org/esa/sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/methodology_
sheets/freshwater/waste_water_treatment.pdf
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2006.
Circular Economy: An Alternative Model for Economic
Development. Paris, UNEP.
US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency).
n.d. Terminology service: Vocabulary Catalogue. US EPA
website. ofmpub.epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/
searchandretrieve/glossariesandkeywordlists/search.
do?details=&glossaryName=Septic%20Systems%20
Glossary
_____. n.d. International Cooperation, Persistent Organic
Pollutants: A Global Issue, A Global Response. US EPA
website. www.epa.gov/international-cooperation/
persistent-organic-pollutants-global-issue-global-response
_____. n.d. Polluted Runoff: Nonpoint Source Pollution. US
EPA website. Available at: www.epa.gov/polluted-runoffnonpoint-source-pollution/what-nonpoint-source
WateReuse Research Foundation/American Water Works
Association/Water Environment Federation/National Water
Research Institute. 2015. Framework for Direct Potable
Reuse. Alexandria, Va.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2016. Guidelines for
the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater in
Agriculture and Aquaculture. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO.

Water reuse/wastewater use: Use of untreated,
partially treated or treated wastewater.

14

Grammatically speaking, water is ‘reused’ and wastewater is
‘used’, but wastewater is not ‘reused’.

174

W W D R

2 0 1 7

ABBREVIATIONS and ACRONYMS
BAT		

Best available technologies

B-DASH

Breakthrough by dynamic approach in sewage high technology

BOD		

Biochemical oxygen demand

CBD		

Central business district

CEF		

Credit enhancement facility

CHP		

Combined heat and power

CIP		

Clean-in-place

COD		

Chemical oxygen demand

CReW		

Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management

CSOs		

Combined sewer overflows

CWSRF		

Clean Water State Revolving Fund

DEWATS

Decentralized wastewater treatment system

DPR		

Direct potable reuse

EcoSan		

Ecological sanitation

EDCs		

Endocrine-disrupting compounds

EECCA		

Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia

ESTs		

Environmentally sound technologies

EU		

European Union

FC		

Faecal coliform bacteria

FAO		

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FSM		

Faecal sludge management

GCC		

Gulf Cooperation Countries

GEF		

Global Environment Facility

GHG		

Greenhouse gas

GI		

Green infrastructure

IPR		

Indirect potable reuse

IWRM		

Integrated water resources management

LCA		

Life cycle assessments

MBR		

Membrane bioreactor

MDG		

Millennium Development Goals

MENA		

Middle East and Northern Africa

MW		

Megawatt

NGO		

Non-governmental organization

175

176

OECD		

Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development

p.e.		

Population equivalent

PCBs		

Polychlorinated biphenyls

POPs		

Persistent organic pollutants

PRTRs		

Pollutant Release and Transfer Registries

PUB		

Singapore Public Utilities Board

RECP		

Resource-efficient and cleaner production

SADC		

Southern African Development Community

SDG		

Sustainable Development Goal

SEEA-Water

System of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water

SFPUC		

San Francisco Public Utilities Commission

SMEs		

Small- and medium-sized enterprises

SS		

Suspended Solids

SUDS		

Sustainable urban drainage systems

TN		

Total Nitrogen

TP		

Total Phosphorus

TrackFin

Tracking financing to sanitation, hygiene and drinking water

TSS		

Total suspended solids

UNECE		

United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

UNEP		

United Nations Environment Programme

UNGA		

United Nations General Assembly

UN-Habitat

United Nations Human Settlement Programme

UNICEF		

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNIDO		

United Nations Industrial Development Organization

UNSD		

United Nations Statistical Division

US EPA		

United States Environment Protection Agency

UWWTD

EU Urban Wastewater Treatment Directive

WEF		

World Economic Forum

WHO		

World Health Organization

WSS		

Water supply and sanitation

ZLD		

Zero liquid discharge

W W D R

2 0 1 7

boxes

cronym

BOXES, FIGURES and TABLES
BOXES
Box 1.1

Archaeological wastewater systems: The case of Ancient Rome				

18

Box 2.1

Poverty, wastewater management and sustainable development – multiple connections

27

Box 2.2

Gender roles and the introduction of safe wastewater use				

27

Box 2.3

Water ‘loss’ from food wastage							 28

Box 3.1

International institutional framework for jointly protecting water quality in the Danube 		
and the Black Sea									 34

Box 4.1

Emerging pollutants									 38

Box 4.2

Banning wastewater contaminants: the example of microbeads				

39

Box 4.3

Risk assessment in the management of wastewater systems				

45

Box 5.1

Sewage and waste disposal in Lagos, Nigeria						

50

Box 5.2

Indirect potable reuse in practice in San Diego, California				

55

Box 5.3

Sewage-fed aquaculture systems of Kolkata: A century-old innovation of farmers		

56

Box 5.4

Treating rainwater runoff from industrial area in Kolding, Denmark			

57

Box 6.1

Canadian Industrial Water Surveys							 61

Box 6.2

Anglo American eMalahleni Water Reclamation project, Mpumalanga, South Africa

64

Box 6.3

Creative use of wastewater at Carbery Milk Products, in Cork, Ireland			

65

Box 6.4

Kalundborg Symbiosis in Kalundborg, Denmark					

66

Box 6.5

Industrial and energy use of municipal wastewater					

67

Box 7.1

A multi-barrier approach for reducing health risks from wastewater irrigation		

77

Box 8.1

Nakivubo Wetland: A recipient of much of Kampala’s (Uganda) domestic			
and industrial wastewater								 80

Box 8.2

Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment in Indiana, USA				

81

Box 8.3

Recreational oasis created by treated wastewater in Lima, Peru				

81

Box 8.4

Added value of the ambient water quality standards in comparison			
with emission standards								 82

Box 9.1

Wastewater use in Kumasi and Accra, Ghana						

88

Box 9.2

Wastewater recycling in thermal power generation in South Africa			

90

Box 10.1

National strategy for the wastewater sector in Lebanon					

94

Box 10.2

Water reuse in Tunisia								 95

Box 12.1

Managing municipal wastewater – Infrastructure development and restoration:
Recent trends in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia (EECCA) countries		

103

Box 12.2

Optimizing reuse potential: Quality control of treated wastewater and exploring		
ecological sanitation in Europe and North America					

104

Box 12.3

European Union’s Urban Wastewater Treatment Directive				

105

Box 12.4

National target setting under UNECE-WHO/Europe Protocol on Water and Health: 			
Addressing wastewater challenges							105

Box 13.1

Consequences of the discharge of untreated urban wastewater:
The 1991 cholera epidemic								108

Box 14.1

Guiding principles for preventing and reducing wastewater generation			

114

177

Box 14.2

Zero liquid discharge in textile industries in Tirupur, India				

115

Box 14.3

Examples of resource-efficient and cleaner production from Tanzania			

116

Box 14.4

The Caribbean Regional Fund for Wastewater Management (CReW)			

117

Box 14.5

State Revolving Fund (SRF) for Wastewater Infrastructure Financing			

118

Box 15.1

Wastewater collection and recycling from greenhouses in Ethiopia			

122

Box 15.2

Decentralized rainwater harvesting in Suwon city, Korea					

122

Box 15.3

Sewer mining in Sydney, Australia							123

Box 16.1

The unique experience of direct potable reuse (DPR) in Windhoek, South Africa		

126

Box 16.2

The biggest unplanned water reuse case for human consumption			

126

Box 16.3

Decentralized water management and wastewater use: The experience of
San Francisco, California								127

Box 16.4

Phosphorus (P) recovery gaining momentum						128

Box 16.5

Recovery of energy and biofuels from biosolids: The comprehensive (legislative
and financial) approach of Japan							129

Box 16.6

Examples of buildings heated and cooled with wastewater				

129

Box 16.7

Total energy recovery potential of sewage sludge encompassing anaerobic digestion
and thermal conversion in Zürich, Switzerland						

130

Box 16.8

Wastewater as a source of high-value hydrocarbons through microalgae			

131

Box 16.9

Singapore NEWater: Comprehensive educational and awareness campaign		

135

Box 16.10

Cultural implications of wastewater reuse in fish farming in the Middle East		

136

Box 17.1

Innovations in wastewater technology and research					

139

Box 17.2

Implementation of cutting-edge technologies in wastewater in Japan			

140

Box 17.3

Distributed wastewater systems: an alternative to centralized systems			

141

FIGURES

178

Figure 1

Fate of freshwater withdrawals: Global consumption and wastewater production by 		
major water use sector (circa 2010)							
1

Figure 2

Number of months per year in which the volume of surface water and groundwater that
is withdrawn and not returned exceeds 1.0 at 30 x 30 arc min resolution (1996–2005)*

10

Figure 3

Projected changes in flood frequency							

11

Figure 4

Estimated in-stream concentrations of faecal coliform bacteria (FC) for Africa, Asia
and Latin America (February 2008–2010)						

12

Figure 5

Estimated in-stream concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) for Africa,
Asia and Latin America (February 2008–2010)						

13

Figure 6

Trend in biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentrations in rivers between
1990–1992 and 2008–2010							

14

Figure 1.1

Wastewater in the water cycle							 19

Figure 1.2

Wastewater flows									 20

Figure 1.3

Framing wastewater management from a resource perspective				

Figure 2.1

The Sustainable Development Goals							 24

Figure 2.2

Percentage of untreated wastewater in 2015 in countries with different income levels
and aspirations for 2030 (50% reduction over 2015 baseline)				

26

Figure 3.1

Institutional levels of policy-making and implementation					

31

Figure 3.2

Financial flow model for faecal sludge management					

36

Figure 4.1

Wastewater components and their effects						

40

W W D R

2 0 1 7

22

igure

Figure 4.2

Faecal waste framework for estimating proportion of safety managed sanitation
and wastewater									

40

Figure 4.3

Sanitation transitions and associated reductions in diarrhoeal disease			

41

Figure 4.4

Water management system in Kampala (Uganda)					

43

Figure 4.5

Water management system in Dhaka (Bangladesh)					

43

Figure 5.1

Percentage of population served by different types of sanitation systems			

49

Figure 5.2

Proportion of urban population living in slums, 2000–2012				

51

Figure 7.1

Integrated agriculture-aquaculture							

73

Figure 7.1a The multi-barrier approach for reducing consumption-related risks along the food chain, 		
as applied in wastewater irrigation							 77
Figure 9.1

Urban and rural population (% annual growth), 2013					

86

Figure 9.2

Urban water management challenges versus institutional and economic capacities		

87

Figure 11.1 General technical scheme of NEWater in Singapore					

98

Figure 12.1 Changes in wastewater treatment in regions of Europe between 1990 and 2012		

102

Figure 14.1 Waste segregation and possible utilization options					

116

Figure 16.1 Global water reuse after advanced (tertiary) treatment: market share by application

126

Figure 16.2 Ladder of increasing value propositions for reuse with increasing investments in water 		
quality or the value chain								 134

TABLES
Table 1.1

Examples of negative impacts of untreated wastewater on human health, the 			
environment and productive activities							 19

Table 2.1

SDG 6 targets and indicators								

25

Table 3.1

Actors, roles and functions to govern wastewater					

32

Table 4.1

Sources of wastewater generated and typical components				

39

Table 4.2

Selected types of wastewater treatment systems, their advantages and inconveniences

46

Table 5.1

Urban typologies and wastewater, and sustainable urban drainage issues

Table 5.2

Composition of raw wastewater for selected countries					

53

Table 5.3

Main wastewater pollutants, their source and effects					

53

Table 5.4

Red List Substances									

52

Table 5.5

Examples of industrial wastewater data						

54

Table 6.1

Generation of wastewater by type of industry, 2011 (million m³)				

60

Table 6.2

Industrial wastewater discharges after treatment (as a percentage of total discharges),
2007–2011										

61

Table 6.3

Water intake, discharge and recirculation in Canadian industry, 2011			

62

Table 6.4

Content of typical wastewater in selected major industries				

63

Table 7.1

Categories of major water pollutants from agriculture and the relative contribution from 		
agricultural production systems							 71

Table 8.1

Effects of riparian buffers of different sizes on the reduction of sediment and nutrients 		
from field surface runoff								 79

Table 8.2

Examples of using treated wastewater for supporting ecosystem services			

Table 10.1

Volume of collected wastewater, wastewater treatment and use (million m3 per year), 		
2013										 93

Table 11.1

Countries with the lowest level of wastewater treatment in the Asia-Pacific Region		

Table 12.1

Selected challenges and management responses in subregions in the UNECE region
(non-comprehensive)								 102

Table 16.1

Examples of water reuse cases with business potential					

81

98

133

179

redits

PHOTO CREDITS
Executive summary
p. 1
© Toa55/Shutterstock.com
Prologue
p. 8
© Punghi/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 1
p. 16 © gameanna/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 2
p. 23 © RossHelen/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 3
p. 29 © FAO/Matthias Mugisha flickr.com CC BY-NC 2.0
Chapter 4
p. 37 © Kletr/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 5
p. 48 © AfriramPOE/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 6
p. 58 © John Kasawa/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 7
p. 69 © Kosin Sukhum/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 8
p. 78 © Lochmueller Group
Chapter 9
p. 84 © Nestlé flickr.com CC BY-NC-ND 2.0
Chapter 10
p. 91 © ACWUA
Chapter 11
p. 96 © Viengsompasong Inthavong/World Bank flickr.com CC BY-NC-ND 2.0
Chapter 12
p. 100 © Riccardo Auci/Indissoluble.com flickr.com CC BY-SA 2.0
Chapter 13
p. 106 © Caroline Bennett/Rainforest Action Network flickr.com CC BY-NC 2.0
Chapter 14
p. 112 © Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) flickr.com CC BY-NC 2.0
Chapter 15
p. 119 © Hans Engbers/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 16
p. 124 © CTR Photos/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 17
p. 137 © Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) flickr.com CC BY-NC 2.0
Chapter 18
p. 143 © Boris Stroujko/Shutterstock.com

180

W W D R

2 0 1 7

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT

Report

Report

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

ThePRIMARY
United Nations
World Water Development Report 2017
PALETTE

C

THE UNTAPPED RESOURCE
Color Codes
CMYK : C009 M020 Y010
K000
RGB : R235 G196 B028

Y

CM

MY

CY

C

M

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2017

M

AVENIR NEXT COND

WASTEWATER

WASTEWATER
THE UNTAPPED RESOURCE

WATER
AND JOBS

Color Codes
CMYK : C024 M012 Y009
K000

Y

GRADIENTS COLOR

SECONDARY COLOR SYSTEM
CM
Color Codes
CMYK : C002 M074 Y065
K000

MY

Color Codes
CMYK : C060 M000 Y048
K000

CY

Color Codes
CMYK : C032 M093 Y049
K015

CMY

CMY

K

K

UNECE, UNECLAC,
UNESCAP, UNESCWA

UNDESA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP,
UNESCWA

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

ISBN 978-92-3-100146-8
© UNESCO 2016
166 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

ISBN 978-92-3-100201-4
© UNESCO 2017
200 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

WWDR 2016 Full colour, with boxes, figures, maps, tables, notes,
photographs, references, and list of abbreviations and acronyms,
as well as Forewords by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Kimoon, UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova and UN-Water Chair
and ILO Director-General Guy Ryder

WWDR 2017 Full colour, with Lexicon, boxes, figures, maps,
tables, notes, photographs, references and list of abbreviations and
acronyms, as well as Forewords by UNESCO Director-General Irina
Bokova and UN-Water Chair and ILO Director-General Guy Ryder

To purchase a printed copy of the book, please visit: publishing.unesco.org
To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications, please write to: wwap@unesco.org
To download the PDF format of the report and associated publications, WWDR previous editions and media material, please visit:
www.unesco.org/water/wwap
USB key content: WWDR 2017, Executive Summary in 10 languages, Facts and Figures in five languages and WWDR previous editions

ASSOCIATED PUBLICATIONS

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2016

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2016

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2017

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2017

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German, Italian,
Korean, Portuguese, Russian
and Spanish

Available in English, French,
Spanish and Italian

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German, Italian,
Hindi, Portuguese, Russian and
Spanish

Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

To download these documents, please visit: www.unesco.org/water/wwap

WWDR 2017
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

E

World Water
Assessment
xProgramme
e c u ti

ve

Su m m a r y

181

UN-WATER REPORTS

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater-related issues, including
sanitation. It was formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UNWater is comprised of UN entities with a focus on, or interest in, water-related issues as Members and other nonUN international organizations as Partners.
The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating
synergies and joint efforts, so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. By doing so, UNWater seeks to increase the effectiveness of the support provided to Member States in their efforts towards
achieving international agreements on water.

PERIODIC REPORTS

World Water Development Report (WWDR)
is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater
resource. The Report is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water
Members and Partners and it represents the coherent and integrated response of
the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging challenges. The report
production coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme and the theme
is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day (22 March). From 2003 to 2012,
the WWDR was released every three years. Since 2014, the Report is published
annually to provide the most up-to-date and factual information of how waterrelated challenges are addressed around the world.
UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
(GLAAS)
is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) on behalf of UN-Water. It
provides a global update on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements,
human resource base, and international and national finance streams in support of
sanitation and drinking water. It is a substantive input into the activities of Sanitation
and Water for All (SWA).
The progress report of the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)
is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring of
progress towards access to safe drinking water, and adequate sanitation and hygiene.
Monitoring draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually
supported by national statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria and
increasingly draws on national administrative and regulatory datasets.

P Strategic outlook
P State, uses and
management of water
resources
P Global
P Regional assessments
P Triennial (2003-2012)
P Annual (since 2014)
P Links to the theme of World
Water Day (22 March)
P Strategic outlook
P Water supply and sanitation
P Global
P Regional assessments
P Biennial (since 2008)

P Status and trends
P Water supply and sanitation
P Global
P Regional and national
assessments
P Biennial (1990-2012)
P Annual updates (since
2013)

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2018
• Update of UN-Water Policy Brief on Water and Climate Change
• UN-Water Policy Brief on the Water Conventions
• UN-Water Analytical Brief on Water Efficiency
• SDG 6 Synthesis Report 2018 on Water and Sanitation

W W D R 2 0 1 7
182 information on UN-Water Reports at: http://www.unwater.org/publications
More

