United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

LEAVING
NO ONE BEHIND

UNECE, UNECLAC,
UNESCAP, UNESCWA

water and
sanitation

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

water and
sanitation

Sustainable
Development
Goals

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Sustainable
Development
Goals

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

LEAVING
NO ONE BEHIND

Published in 2019 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2019
This report is published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water. The list of UN-Water
Members and Partners can be found on the following website: www.unwater.org.
ISBN 978-92-3-100309-7

This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO
(CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using
the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the
UNESCO Open Access Repository (www.unesco.org/open-access/termsuse-ccbysa-en).
The present licence applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use
of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be
requested from the copyright owner.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are
not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. The contents
were contributed by the UN-Water Members and Partners listed on the title pages of
the chapters therein. UNESCO and the UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content provided or for discrepancies
in data and content between contributed chapters. WWAP provided the opportunity
for individuals to be listed as authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in this
publication. WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.
Chapters 2 and 10: The views expressed in these chapters are those of the author(s).
Their inclusion does not imply endorsement by the United Nations University.
Chapter 9: by Chantal Demilecamps (as co-author); contributors of Chapter 4:
Alistair Rieu-Clarke, Sonja Koeppel and Nataliya Nikiforova © United Nations 2019
Suggested citation:
WWAP (UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme). 2019. The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2019: Leaving No One Behind. Paris, UNESCO.
Original cover design by Phoenix Design Aid
Printed by UNESCO, Paris.
This publication is printed in vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources paper, supporting
responsible use of forest reserves, 100% recycled, acid-free and chlorine-free.

Contents
Foreword by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO 						

viii

Foreword by Gilbert F. Houngbo, Chair of UN-Water and President of IFAD				

ix

Preface												

x

WWDR 2019 Team											

xii

Acknowledgements											

xiii

Executive summary											

1

Prologue												

10

Introduction												

11

Section 1 – The state of the world’s water resources							

13

Section 2 – Water supply, sanitation and hygiene							

18

Section 3 – Socio-economic development indicators							

21

Chapter 1

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

34

1.1 Introduction											

35

1.2 The human rights to water and sanitation								

36

1.3 Groups and individuals ‘left behind’ in terms of access to water and sanitation			

38

1.4 Human rights-based approach to integrated water resources management (IWRM)			

41

1.5 Links between the human rights to water and sanitation and other human rights			

43

Chapter 2

Physical and environmental dimensions								

44

2.1 Water-provisioning systems									

45

2.2 Sanitation											

53

2.3 Disaster risk reduction										

56

2.4 Conclusions											

57

Chapter 3

Social dimensions											

58

3.1 Introduction											

59

3.2 Impediments to implementing the rights to water and sanitation					

60

3.3 Inequalities related to finance, infrastructure and beyond						

65

3.4 Supporting the implementation of the human rights to water and sanitation			

67

v

Chapter 4

Political, legal and institutional dimensions								72
4.1 Introduction											73
4.2 Policy, politics and processes									74
4.3 Walking the talk: Implementing plans and policies						78
Chapter 5

Economic dimensions of WASH services								84
5.1 Introduction											85
5.2 Providing WASH to vulnerable and disadvantaged groups: A cost–benefit analysis			86
5.3 Affordability											87
5.4 Increasing efficiency and reducing unit costs							89
5.5 Designing subsidies and tariffs									90
5.6 Funding and financing: Mobilizing commercial sources of investment				92
5.7 Conclusions											95
Chapter 6

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements							96
6.1 Defining who are left behind in urban settings							97
6.2 Challenges of monitoring inequalities in service							98
6.3 Mapping and data collection in informal settlements						99
6.4 Integrated urban planning and community engagement						100
6.5 Costs of service provision in high-density low-income urban settlements				101
6.6 Attracting sustainable investment at the local level						102
6.7 Financing WASH in urban settings								103
6.8 Centralized vs. decentralized urban water supply and sanitation systems				103
6.9 Conclusions and policy recommendations							104
Chapter 7

Rural poverty												106
7.1 Introduction: Three paradoxes to better understand rural poverty and water			107
7.2 Emerging challenges										109
7.3 Promoting pro-poor multisectoral policies							115

vi

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Chapter 8

Refugees and forced displacement crises								115
8.1 Refugees and forced displacement: A global challenge						117
8.2 Marginalization of the displaced: Main drivers							119
8.3 Providing displaced people with access to water and sanitation				

121

8.4 Fragile states and states in fragile situations							126
Chapter 9

Regional perspectives											128
9.1 The Arab region											129
9.2 Asia and the Pacific										132
9.3 Europe and North America									135
9.4 Latin American and the Caribbean								138
9.5 Sub-Saharan Africa										142
Chapter 10

Strategies and response options for inclusive development						146
10.1 Introduction											147
10.2 Enhancing water supply and improving accessibility						147
10.3 Addressing the investment gap									148
10.4 Knowledge and capacity development								150
10.5 Governance 											151
10.6 Roles and responsibilities in realizing the human rights to water and sanitation			153
Chapter 11

The way forward											156
Coda												159

References												160
Abbreviations and acronyms										180
Boxes, figures and tables										182
Photo credits												186

vii

Foreword
by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO

Access to water is a human right: it is vital for the dignity of each and every individual.
The 2019 edition of the World Water Development Report focuses on the theme of “Leaving No One Behind”.
It argues that fulfilling the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation for all can also significantly
contribute to the achievement of the broad set of goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development:
from food and energy security, to economic development and environmental sustainability. Based on the
latest data, this report’s findings clearly illustrate the need to make substantial progress towards delivering
on the 2030 Agenda promise of reaching the most vulnerable.
The stakes are high: nearly a third of the global population do not use safely managed drinking water
services and only two fifths have access to safely managed sanitation services. The intensification of
environmental degradation, climate change, population growth and rapid urbanisation — among other
factors — also pose considerable challenges to water security. Furthermore, in an increasingly globalised
world, the impact of water-related decisions cross borders and affect everyone.
At the current pace of progress, billions of people will remain unable to enjoy their right to access to water
and sanitation and the multiple benefits that such access can provide. Yet, this report concludes these
objectives are entirely achievable, so long as there is a collective will to do so, entailing new efforts to include
those ‘left behind’ in decision-making processes.
This latest Report, coordinated by UNESCO, is the result of a collaborative effort of the UN-Water Family and
was made possible thanks to the long-standing support of the Government of Italy and the Umbria Region,
to whom we are extremely grateful.
I am convinced that the 2019 edition will spur action and help support Member States in making informed
decisions to build more resilient, more peaceful communities, leaving no one behind.

Audrey Azoulay

viii

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Foreword
by Gilbert F. Houngbo, Chair of UN-Water and President of the International Fund for Agriculture Development

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development calls on us to transform our world and leave no one behind.
The 2019 edition of the United Nations World Water Development Report demonstrates how improving the
management of water resources, providing access to safe and affordable drinking water and sanitation for
all contribute to the goals that underpin the 2030 Agenda. Water for all is essential for eradicating poverty,
building peaceful and prosperous societies and reducing inequality.
The numbers speak for themselves. As the Report shows, if the degradation of the natural environment
and the unsustainable pressure on global water resources continue at current rates, 45% of global Gross
Domestic Product and 40% of global grain production will be at risk by 2050. Poor and marginalized
populations will be disproportionately affected, further exacerbating already rising inequalities.
The 2019 edition looks at different dimensions of inequality linked to food and nutrition, disasters and
migration, drawing on data and information from the UN family and others. For example: if women had
the same access as men to productive resources – including land and water, they could increase yields on
their farms by 20 to 30%, raising total agricultural output in these countries by 2.5 to 4%. This could reduce
the number of hungry people in the world by around 12 to 17%. Further, the overall risk of being displaced
by disasters has doubled since the 1970s. The depletion of water and other natural resources is increasingly
recognized as a driver of displacement that triggers internal and international migration.
The 2019 Report provides evidence of the need to adapt approaches, in both policy and practice, to address
the causes of exclusion and inequality. This is key to ensuring the availability and sustainable management
of water and sanitation for all.
To build knowledge and inspire people to take action, UN-Water commissions UN-Water publications
such as the UN World Water Development Report drawing on the experience and expertise of UN-Water
Members and Partners. Thanks are due to all my colleagues, and especially to UNESCO for coordinating
the production of this Report that will contribute to greater sustainability and resilience, and to creating a
world where no one is left behind.

Gilbert F. Houngbo

ix

Preface
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, UNESCO WWAP Coordinator
and Richard Connor, Editor in Chief

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development sets a series of ambitious challenges for the global
community. These Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) include targets for access to safe drinking
water and sanitation and better water management, as well as goals for addressing inequality and
discrimination, including the overarching aims of ‘leaving no one behind’ and ‘reaching the furthest
behind first’. These are challenges that, to date, have proven difficult to meet, partly because they are
complex, but also due to political inertia. The global context for this agenda may be characterized as
‘crisis is the new normal’, with political insecurity, social, economic and environmental challenges
on a daunting scale. This calls for redoubled efforts and carefully selected approaches towards
achieving transformative change.
The issues underlying both water-related goals and leaving no one behind intersect in several ways.
Both water supply and sanitation, and issues of equality for all people and for specific disadvantaged
groups in particular, are recognized through international human rights instruments and
agreements. However, these have not been enough to bring about the necessary changes. To some
extent, the issues share both root causes and similar challenges. The same people who are being left
behind are those who could benefit most from improved access to water and sanitation. Improved
access to water and sanitation, water management and governance, and the multiple benefits they
bring, can contribute significantly to positive transformation for marginalized people. Benefits
include better health, savings in time and money, dignity, improved access to food and energy, and
greater opportunities in terms of education, employment and livelihoods.
These benefits, directly and indirectly, separately and in combination, contribute to improving the
lives of all, but can be particularly transformative for people in vulnerable situations. At the same
time, engaging with marginalized groups can enhance the achievement and sustainability of waterrelated goals. This process of engagement can also be transformative in giving a voice to those rarely
heard, in turn creating space for vital water-related knowledge and experience that might otherwise
be lost.
As the sixth in a series of annual, thematic reports, the 2019 edition of the United Nations World
Water Development Report (WWDR) examines how improved water resource management and
access to water supply and sanitation services can help address the causes and alleviate the impacts
of poverty and social inequity. It provides insights and guidance in helping identify ‘who’ is being
left behind, and describes how existing frameworks and mandates, such as the 2030 Agenda and
the SDGs and human rights-based approaches, can help ‘reach the furthest first’, through improved
water management.
The report assesses the issues and offers potential responses from technical, social, institutional
and financial perspectives, while taking account of the many different challenges faced in rural
and urban settings. With the world witnessing the highest levels of human displacement on record,
an entire chapter has been dedicated to the exceptional challenges faced by refugees and forcibly
displaced people with respect to water and sanitation.

x

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

We have endeavoured to produce a balanced, fact-based and neutral account of the current state
of knowledge, covering the most recent developments, and highlighting the challenges and
opportunities provided by improved water management in the context of human development.
Although primarily targeted at national-level decision-makers and water resources managers, as well
as academics and the broader development community, we hope this report will also be well received
by those interested in poverty alleviation, humanitarian crises, human rights and the 2030 Agenda.
This latest edition of the WWDR is the result of a concerted effort between the Chapter Lead
Agencies, FAO, OHCHR, UNDP, UNESCO-IHP, UN-Habitat, UNHCR, UNU-INWEH, UNU-FLORES,
WWAP and the World Bank, with regional perspectives provided by UNECE, UNECLAC, UNESCAP
and UNESCWA. The Report also benefited to a great extent from the inputs and contributions of
several other UN-Water members and partners, as well as of dozens of scientists, professionals and
NGOs, who provided a wide range of relevant material.
On behalf of the WWAP Secretariat, we would like to extend our deepest appreciation to the aforementioned agencies, members and partners of UN-Water, and to the writers and other contributors
for collectively producing this unique and authoritative report that will, hopefully, have multiple
impacts worldwide. Léo Heller, Special Rapporteur on the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation, deserves specific recognition for having generously shared his knowledge and wisdom in
the early critical phases of the report’s production process.
We are profoundly grateful to the Italian Government for funding the Programme and to the Regione
Umbria for generously hosting the WWAP Secretariat in Villa La Colombella in Perugia. Their
contributions have been instrumental to the production of the WWDR.
Our special thanks go to Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO, for her vital support to WWAP
and the production of the WWDR. The guidance of Gilbert F. Houngbo, President of IFAD, as Chair of
UN-Water has made this publication possible.
Last but not least, we extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues at the WWAP Secretariat
for their professionalism and dedication, without whom the report would not have been completed.

Stefan Uhlenbrook

Richard Connor

xi

WWDR 2019 Team
Director of the Publication
Stefan Uhlenbrook
Editor in Chief
Richard Connor
Process Coordinator
Engin Koncagül
Publications Assistant
Valentina Abete
Graphic Designer
Marco Tonsini
Copy Editor
Simon Lobach

UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) Secretariat (2018–2019)
Coordinator: Stefan Uhlenbrook

Deputy Coordinator: Michela Miletto
Programmes: Richard Connor, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara, Engin Koncagül, Lucilla Minelli
and Natalia Uribe Pando
Publications: Valentina Abete and Marco Tonsini
Communications: Simona Gallese and Laurens Thuy
Administration and support: Barbara Bracaglia, Lucia Chiodini, Arturo Frascani and Lisa Gastaldin
IT and Security: Fabio Bianchi, Michele Brensacchi, Tommaso Brugnami and Francesco Gioffredi
Interns: Daria Boldrin, Francesca Maria Burchi, Tais Policanti, Théo Lecarpentier, Sonia Marcantonio,
Charlotte Moutafian, Giulia Scatolini, Andres Valerio Oviedo, Bianca Maria Rizzo, Saunak Sinha Ray
and Yani Wang

xii

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Acknowledgements
The UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) recognizes the valuable
contributions of FAO, OHCHR, UNDP, UNESCO-IHP, UN-Habitat, UNHCR, UNU and
the World Bank whose inputs as chapter lead agencies made the content preparation of
this report possible. Sincere appreciation goes to the Regional Economic Commissions,
UNECE, UNECLAC, UNESCAP and UNESCWA for co-leading Chapter 9 on regional
perspectives. We also would like to thank those UN-Water members and partners and all
other organizations and individuals who provided useful contributions and comments
throughout the production process.
WWAP is grateful for the generous financial contribution from the Italian Government,
which allows for the functioning of the WWAP Secretariat and the production of the
WWDR series, and for the facilities provided by Regione Umbria.
The Spanish version of the Report is available thanks to the National Association of Water
and Sanitation Utilities of Mexico (ANEAS) and its members, and the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB).
We would like to acknowledge the UNESCO Field Offices in Almaty and New Delhi for the
translation of the Executive Summary of the WWDR 2019 into Russian and Hindi. Chinese,
Arabic and Portuguese editions of the Executive Summary are made possible thanks to
the valuable collaboration between China Water and Power Press and UNESCO Office
in Beijing, Qatar National Commission for UNESCO and UNESCO Office in Doha and
the National Water Agency, the Brazilian Cooperation Agency and the UNESCO Office in
Brazil, respectively.

xiii

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Woman in camp for people displaced by floods in Pakistan

Executive
summary
Improvements in water resources management and access to water supply
and sanitation services are essential to addressing various social and
economic inequities, such that ‘no one is left behind’ when it comes to
enjoying the multiple benefits and opportunities that water provides.

The world’s water: An increasingly stressed resource

Water use has been increasing worldwide by about 1% per year since the
1980s, driven by a combination of population growth, socio-economic
development and changing consumption patterns. Global water demand is
expected to continue increasing at a similar rate until 2050, accounting for
an increase of 20 to 30% above the current level of water use, mainly due to
rising demand in the industrial and domestic sectors. Over 2 billion people
live in countries experiencing high water stress, and about 4 billion people
experience severe water scarcity during at least one month of the year.
Stress levels will continue to increase as demand for water grows and the
effects of climate change intensify.

Access to water supply and sanitation

Three out of ten people do not have access to safe drinking water. Almost
half of people drinking water from unprotected sources live in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Six out of ten people do not have access to safely managed sanitation
services, and one out of nine practice open defecation. However, these
global figures mask significant inequities between and within regions,
countries, communities and even neighbourhoods.
Global cost–benefit studies have demonstrated that water, sanitation and
hygiene (WASH) services provide good social and economic returns when
compared with their costs, with a global average benefit–cost ratio of 5.5 for
improved sanitation and 2.0 for improved drinking water. It is likely that the
benefits of improved WASH services for vulnerable groups would change
the balance of any cost–benefit analysis that accounts for changes in these
groups’ self-perceived social status and dignity.

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development
Safe drinking water and sanitation are recognized as basic human rights, as
they are indispensable to sustaining healthy livelihoods and fundamental in
maintaining the dignity of all human beings.
International human rights law obliges states to work towards achieving
universal access to water and sanitation for all, without discrimination,
while prioritizing those most in need. Fulfilment of the human rights to

1

water and sanitation requires that the services be available, physically accessible,
equitably affordable, safe and culturally acceptable.
‘Leaving no one behind’ is at the heart of the commitment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which aims to allow all people in all countries to benefit
from socio-economic development and to achieve the full realization of human rights.

International human
rights law obliges
states to work towards
achieving universal
access to water and
sanitation for all,
without discrimination,
while prioritizing those
most in need

Caution must be taken in order to clearly differentiate between ‘water rights’ and the
human rights to water and sanitation. Water rights, which are normally regulated
under national laws, are conferred to an individual or organization through property
rights or land rights, or through a negotiated agreement between the state and
landowner(s). Such rights are often temporary and can potentially be withdrawn.
The human rights to water and sanitation are neither temporary nor subject to state
approval, and they cannot be withdrawn.

Who are being left behind?

There are multiple prohibitive grounds of discrimination, but poverty usually figures
quite prominently.
Women and girls regularly experience discrimination and inequalities in the
enjoyment of their human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation in many
parts of the world. Ethnic and other minorities, including indigenous peoples,
migrants and refugees, and people of certain ancestries (e.g. castes), often experience
discrimination, as can religious and linguistic minorities. Disability, age and health
status can also be a factor, as persons with physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairments are disproportionately represented among those who lack access to
safe drinking water and sanitation. Differences in property, tenure, residence, and
economic and social status can lead to discrimination as well.
These do not necessarily constitute an exhaustive list of such specific disadvantaged
groups or individuals in vulnerable situations, and it is important to note that some
people may suffer from multiple forms of discrimination (intersectionality).

Delivering water and sanitation services

Water availability depends upon the amount of water physically available, and how
it is stored, managed and allocated to various users. It includes aspects related to the
management of surface water, groundwater, as well as water recycling and reuse.
Water accessibility refers to how water is physically delivered or obtained. Piped
water is the least costly method to transport water in densely populated areas. Where
piped networks are unavailable, people mostly rely on wells or community water
supply systems (e.g. water delivery through kiosks and vendors, or water trucks). In
the latter case, they often pay prices several times higher for water of lesser quality,
further exacerbating inequities between the rich and disadvantaged.
Water treatment relates to the processes used to purify, disinfect and protect water
against recontamination. The most common methods of water treatment depend
upon energy (usually electricity) being available around the clock, which is rarely the
case in most developing countries. Low-tech and nature-based solutions also exist but
are usually not applied at scale and usually do not guarantee a quality of water that is
safe for drinking.

Sanitation generally comprises on- or off-site facilities for the collection, transport,
treatment and disposal of wastewater under hygienic conditions. Collection
systems usually refer to a toilet system. Transportation in the context of typical
grey infrastructure refers to a piped underground sewage system, although in some
instances waste is transported by trucks, and treatment — when available — usually
involves centralized sewage treatment plants or localized systems (e.g. septic

2

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

tanks). Disposal of end products is usually split into liquid and solid waste that can
be disposed of safely into the environment or, if not, collected in hazardous waste
facilities to be destroyed in an incinerator.
Water-related natural hazards, such as floods and droughts, can damage water supply
and sanitation infrastructure, preventing service to millions of people.

Social dimensions

The social and cultural factors driving exclusion and discrimination need to be taken
into account when endeavouring to fulfil the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation, as well as to implement Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6.
Discrimination may happen in various ways and for different reasons. Direct
discrimination occurs when individuals are discriminated against in laws, policies or
practices that intentionally exclude them from service provision or equal treatment.
Indirect discrimination occurs when laws, regulations, policies or practices seem
neutral at face value, but in practice have the effect of exclusion from the provision of
basic services.
The basic provision of safe drinking water and sanitation facilities at home and in the
workplace enhances workforce health and productivity. Providing similar facilities in
schools enhances education outcomes by reducing absenteeism, particularly among
adolescent girls.
Comparatively lower levels of access to water and sanitation services can be observed
among ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples. Valuing traditional knowledge
through the recognition of indigenous peoples’ stewardship of land and water
supports inclusion and the fulfilment of human rights.

Good governance

Having inclusive institutional structures in place for multi-stakeholder dialogue and
cooperation is essential to ensuring equitable access to sustainable water supply and
sanitation services.

Having inclusive
institutional structures
in place for multistakeholder dialogue and
cooperation is essential
to ensuring equitable
access to sustainable
water supply and
sanitation services

Government alone cannot always take on the full responsibility for ‘providing’ water
supply and sanitation services to all citizens, especially in low-income settings. When
governments’ role is geared towards policy setting and regulation, the actual provision
of services is carried out by non-state actors or independent departments. Wellfunctioning accountability mechanisms help institutions with sufficient capacity fulfil
their mandates to monitor and enforce the obligations of service providers.
Creating coherence between the various institutional levels is essential to ensure that
policies deliver on their objectives. In the current context of multi-level governance,
the role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in expressing the opinions of
civil society and promoting the public’s active participation has become increasingly
influential in policy formulation. Large corporations can also have a great deal of
influence over policy-making as well as policy outcomes.
‘Pro-poor’ measures are far more common in policy proclamations than in
mechanisms for tracking or monitoring service provision. The fulfillment of pro-poor
policies can also be hampered by the non-application of financial measures aimed at
reducing disparities in water services. Overambitious policies with unrealistic targets
can lead to a mismatch between the responsibilities and the resources available
to responsible entities. Corruption, excessive regulation and/or rigid conformity
to formal rules, which tend to coincide with bureaucratic inertia, can increase
transaction costs, discourage investments, and potentially derail or hinder water
management reforms.

3

The human rights-based approach (HRBA) advocates for the fundamental standards,
principles and criteria of human rights frameworks. These include non-discrimination
and participation that is active, free and meaningful, as well as representation by
and for people in disadvantaged or vulnerable situations. Good governance relates
to systems that have qualities of accountability, transparency, legitimacy, public
participation, justice and efficiency and therefore overlaps with the principles of the
HRBA. Good water governance involves measures and mechanisms that promote
effective policy implementation along with sanctions against poor performance,
illegal acts and abuses of power. Holding decision-makers accountable requires
ability, willingness and preparedness among rights-holders (or their representatives)
to scrutinize actions and non-actions. This in turn builds on transparency, integrity
and access to information.

Economic dimensions

The vulnerable and disadvantaged, who are typically not connected to piped systems,
suffer disproportionately from inadequate access to safe drinking water and sanitation
services and often pay more for their water supply services than their connected
counterparts.
The human rights to water and sanitation place obligations on states and utilities to
regulate payments for services and to ensure that all members of the population can
afford access to basic services. Ensuring that water is affordable to all requires policy
recommendations tailored to specific target groups.
Expenditure on drinking water and sanitation typically includes infrequent, large
capital investments, including the cost of infrastructure and connections as well
as recurrent spending on operation and maintenance. One way of increasing
affordability is to lower the costs of providing the service. Technological innovation
and dissemination, the enhancement of management through good governance
and increased transparency practices, and the implementation of cost-effective
interventions can improve production efficiency and thus lower service costs.

Ensuring that water
is affordable to all
requires policy
recommendations
tailored to specific
target groups

Even with improved efficiency, it is likely that subsidies will continue to be important
for achieving universal coverage. Because subsidies are most often linked to capital
expenditures and those are most often focused on relatively well-off communities, the
non-poor have often been the beneficiaries of subsidy interventions intended to reach
the poor. Sanitation services may be more natural candidates for subsidies than water
supply services, since willingness to pay for such services is often lower and the wider
social benefits are higher. Subsidies that promote greater community participation
empower vulnerable groups to allocate resources toward their own priorities.
Setting tariffs — ideally the major funding source of service provision — requires
striking a balance between several key objectives: cost recovery, economic efficiency,
equity and affordability. Designing tariff structures is challenging precisely because
these four objectives conflict, and trade-offs are inevitable. WASH services differ from
many other services in that they are considered a basic right and should be provided
to people regardless of cost or ability to pay. If, to meet affordability and equity
objectives, subsidies are to be delivered through water tariffs, then vouchers or cash
distribution might be better than an increasing block tariff (IBT).
Large WASH service providers can use commercial financing and indirectly support
vulnerable groups through cross-subsidization. Where this is the case, pricing
mechanisms might allow for cross-subsidization between population groups, using a
uniform volumetric tariff with a rebate. Ideally, the tariff level paid by the customers
who do not receive the rebate should be high enough to repay the principal and
interest at commercial terms. In some cases, other funding sources such as domestic
tax revenues, grants and private finance may supplement the tariff receipts. Blended
finance approaches will require potentially complex combinations of development
finance, private finance and government subsidies to ensure that all target groups are
being reached.

4

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Urban settings

Substantial inequality exists between slum and non-slum households in access to water
and sanitation facilities. The wealthier often enjoy high levels of service at low cost,
whereas the poor pay a much higher price for a service of similar or lesser quality.
Peri-urban areas are often not included in service schemes when residents don’t pay
taxes or when their housing rental arrangements are part of the informal economy.
As a result, many of the world’s poorest and most disadvantaged individuals are not
recognized or counted as part of the formal system, and most importantly find difficulty
in gaining access to basic services, because they have no physical address and thus
remain ‘hidden’ or ‘lost’ in aggregated statistics.

The wealthier often enjoy
high levels of service at
low cost, whereas the
poor pay a much higher
price for a service of
similar or lesser quality

Traditional approaches to sanitation and wastewater management in urban areas tend
to favour large-scale, centralized collection and treatment that allow for economies of
scale. The population density in peri-urban areas may be too low to justify the cost of
household connections, and not high enough to permit conventionally designed systems.
Supplying groups of households (rather than individual households) in peri-urban lowincome areas and large villages could reduce investment costs while still allowing a good
service level for the poorest.
The provision of urban sanitation infrastructure lags far behind infrastructure for
water provision in most urban settings, and the poorest residents of slum areas are the
most affected. Moreover, significant improvement in water needs to be matched with a
commensurate investment in sanitation. Although water supply systems are sometimes
better served with smaller, easily managed networks, the challenges of wastewater and
sludge management are often more complex. A main reason is the unwillingness to pay
for sanitation services.
There have been numerous attempts to use resource recovery (water, nutrients, metals,
biofuel) to offset some of the costs of service provision. Despite the additional recovery
efforts, as with all ‘waste’, when it needs to be transported, the costs thereof often negate
the benefits gained. Decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS) provide an
alternative with substantially lower investment and operational costs and can offer more
efficient solutions for given circumstances, including in certain peri-urban areas.

Rural poverty

More than 80% of all farms in the world are family farms smaller than 2 hectares.
Smallholder family farmers constitute the backbone of national food supplies,
contributing more than half of the agricultural production in many countries. Yet, it is in
the rural areas that poverty, hunger and food insecurity are most prevalent.
Water infrastructure remains extremely sparse in rural areas, so that millions of
women, men and children are not covered by water and sanitation services. Moreover,
the institutional capacity, including domestic resource mobilization and budget
allocations — both at national and subnational levels — has been insufficient to cater for
maintenance needs of the installed water infrastructure.
Water management for smallholder family farmers needs to consider both rainfed
and irrigated agriculture. Approximately 80% of the global cropland is rainfed, and
60% of the world’s food is produced on rainfed land. Supplemental irrigation in rainfed
agricultural systems may not only ensure crop survival, but also double or even triple
rainfed yields per hectare for crops such as wheat, sorghum and maize.
Ensuring secure and equal access to water in rural areas, while providing opportunities
for future water investments, requires greater recognition of the water-related needs of
small-scale irrigators in the context of their contribution to national food security. Water
allocations to large-scale users, whether for irrigation or other purposes, must not take
place at the expense of small-scale farmers’ legitimate needs, irrespective of their ability
to demonstrate formally sanctioned water rights.

5

Refugees and forcibly displaced people

The world has been witnessing the highest levels of human displacement on record.
Armed conflict, persecution and climate change, in tandem with poverty, inequality,
urban population growth, poor land use management and weak governance, are
increasing the risk of displacement and its impacts.
Away from home, refugees and internally displaced people (IDPs) are often faced with
barriers to access basic water supply and sanitation services. Almost a quarter of these
displaced people live in camps, but the overwhelming majority are hosted in cities, towns
and villages. These refugees, asylum seekers, IDPs and stateless persons are often not
officially recognized by local or national government and are therefore excluded from
development agendas.

Away from home, refugees
and internally displaced
people are often faced
with barriers to access
basic water supply and
sanitation services

Mass displacement places strain upon water resources and related services, including
sanitation and hygiene, at transition and destination points, creating potential
inequalities between existing populations and new arrivals. Host governments often
refuse to accept that the displacement situation may become protracted, and insist that
refugees/IDPs remain in camps with ‘temporary’ or ‘communal’ facilities at a lower level
of service than the surrounding host community. The reverse situation may also occur,
where refugees receive higher-quality WASH services than what is available for nearby
communities.
States have a responsibility to ensure that all refugees/IDPs are granted the rights to
adequate sanitation and water, without regard to their legal residence, nationality or
other classifications that may serve as hindrances. Like all individuals, refugees/IDPs
should have access to information and the opportunity to participate in decision-making
processes that affect their rights.
States are encouraged to avoid ‘encampment’ policies for refugees/IDPs, as these can
lead to marginalization (directly linked to legal status and the ‘right to work’ or ‘freedom
of movement’), which can exacerbate resource competition with host communities
and make it difficult for refugees/IDPs to access labour markets. Instead, states are
encouraged to pursue policies for the inclusion of refugees/IDPs within existing urban
and rural communities.

Regional perspectives

The Arab region
Water scarcity on a per person basis in the Arab region will continue to increase due
to population growth and climate change. The challenge of ensuring access to water
services for all under water-scarce conditions is exacerbated in conflict settings where
water infrastructure has been damaged, destroyed and targeted for destruction.
A large proportion of refugees tend to remain in protracted situations for decades.
Humanitarian assistance has become increasingly intertwined with development work
aimed at providing more permanent water supply and sanitation facilities in refugee
camps and informal settlements. This has at times caused conflict and tensions with
host communities, particularly if the parties do not have equal access to water services.
Additional attention has been paid to this problem in recent years with governments,
donors and humanitarian agencies recognizing that leaving no one behind means
serving refugees and IDPs as well as host communities.

Asia and the Pacific
In 2016, 29 out of 48 countries in the region qualified as water-insecure due to low
availability of water and unsustainable groundwater withdrawal. Water scarcity is
compounded by the effects of climate change. Natural disasters are becoming more
frequent and intense, and disaster risk is outpacing resilience. This has major impacts
for the provisioning of WASH services in areas affected by disasters, due to damaged
water supply and sanitation infrastructure and water quality issues. It is also a significant
challenge to provide adequate services to the areas that receive people who have been
displaced from disaster-struck areas.

6

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Disasters cause disproportionately higher losses to poorer countries and people, as these
often lack resilience and the capacity to mitigate the impact of disasters. Disasters are
also found to have impacts on gross domestic product (GDP), school enrolment rates,
per capita expenditure on health, and can also cause the near poor — those living on
between US$1.90 and US$3.10 per day — to fall into extreme poverty.

Europe and North America
Access to safely managed sanitation services remains a challenge in many countries,
especially in rural areas. While the situation is particularly severe for a major part of
the population in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, many citizens in
Western and Central Europe, as well as in North America, also suffer from the lack of or
inequitable access to water and sanitation services. Inequities are frequently related to
sociocultural differences, socio-economic factors and the geographical context.
Inequities in access therefore must be fought on three fronts: by reducing geographical
disparities, by addressing specific barriers faced by marginalized groups and people
living in vulnerable situations, and by reducing affordability concerns.

Latin America and the Caribbean
Millions of people in the region are still without an adequate source of drinking water,
while even more suffer the absence of safe and decent facilities for the disposal of
excreta. Many people without access to services are concentrated in peri-urban areas,
mainly in the poverty belts that exist on the periphery of many of the cities in the region.
It has proved difficult to provide these marginal areas with services of acceptable quality.
In many countries, decentralization has left the water supply and sanitation sector
with a highly fragmented structure made up of numerous service providers, without
real possibilities to achieve economies of scale or economic viability, and under the
responsibility of municipalities that lack the necessary resources and incentives to
deal effectively with the complexity of the processes involved in providing services.
Decentralization has also reduced the size of service areas and made them more
homogeneous, thus limiting the possibilities for cross-subsidies and facilitating the
‘cream skimming’ that marginalizes low-income groups away from service provision.

Disasters cause
disproportionately
higher losses to poorer
countries and people

Sub-Saharan Africa
The lack of water management infrastructure (economic water scarcity), in terms of
both storage and supply delivery, as well as for improved drinking water and sanitation
services, plays a direct role in the persistence of poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa.
People living in rural areas account for about 60% of the total population of Sub-Saharan
Africa, and many of them remain in poverty. In 2015, three out of five of the region’s
rural residents had access to at least a basic water supply and only one in five had access
to at least basic sanitation. About 10% of the population still drank untreated surface
water, and many poor people in rural areas, particularly women and girls, spent a
considerable amount of time collecting water.
More than half of the population growth expected by 2050 (1.3 out of 2.2 billion globally)
will occur in Africa. Providing this growing population with access to WASH services,
however, is not the only challenge for Africa, as the demands for energy, food, jobs,
healthcare and education will also increase. Population growth especially occurs in
urban areas, and without proper planning, this might lead to a dramatic increase
of slums. Even if countries have steadily improved living conditions in urban slums
between 2000 and 2015, the rate of new home construction lagged far behind the rate of
urban population growth.

Strategies and response options

From a technical perspective, the potential responses to address the lack of drinking
water supply and sanitation services to groups in disadvantaged situations can
vary significantly from one place to another. Whereas sizeable high-density urban
communities provide opportunities for large-scale centralized WASH infrastructure and

7

facilities though resource-sharing and economies of scale, less costly decentralized water
supply and sanitation systems have been shown to be successful solutions in smaller
urban settlements, including refugee camps. For people in low-density rural areas, one
main objective is to bring more adequate facilities closer to people’s homes. The basic
principle behind selecting WASH technologies is therefore not necessarily one of ‘best
practice’, but one of ‘best fit’.
Insufficient funding and lack of effective financing mechanisms have created a barrier
to achieving the WASH targets for disadvantaged and marginalized groups. A certain
proportion of the investment gap could be overcome through increased system
efficiency, which uses already available finances more effectively and can significantly
reduce overall costs. However, targeted subsidies for vulnerable groups and equitable
tariff structures will remain an important source of funding and cost recovery. The
support of the international donor community will remain critical in the developing
world but cannot be the main source of funding. Official development assistance (ODA)
is particularly helpful in mobilizing investments from other sources, such as commercial
and blended finance, including from the private sector. However, it will be incumbent
upon national governments to dramatically increase the amounts of public funding
made available for the expansion of WASH services.

The basic principle
behind selecting WASH
technologies is not
necessarily one of ‘best
practice’, but one of
‘best fit’

However, increasing the amount of funding and investment alone does not necessarily
ensure that WASH services will reach all those who are most disadvantaged. Subsidies
must therefore be appropriately designed, transparent and targeted, and tariff
structures need to be designed and implemented with the objectives of achieving equity,
affordability and the appropriate level of service for each targeted group.

Scientific research, development and innovation are essential to support informed
decision-making. Although some progress has been made in terms of designing equable
tariff structures that benefit — rather than penalize — people in poor and disadvantaged
situations, further research and analysis into the economic dimensions of WASH
services in support of inclusion is required. The information and capacity-building
needs of disadvantaged rural communities are often similar to those described above
for the urban poor, but also include knowledge related to water resource allocation
and the securing of water rights. Monitoring progress is another important aspect of
knowledge and capacity development. Disaggregated data (with respect to gender, age,
income groups, ethnicity, geography, etc.) and social inclusion analyses are critical tools
in determining which groups are at greatest risk of being ‘left behind’, and why. Further
research in science and engineering is also needed to develop affordable, safe and
efficient WASH infrastructure and related devices (e.g. mobile filters, toilets).
Community-based action is critical in addressing the root causes of ‘leaving people
behind’ with respect to water and sanitation. Good governance seeks to move away from
hierarchical power structures while embracing concepts of accountability, transparency,
legitimacy, public participation, justice and efficiency — principles that are in line with
the HRBA. Water resource allocation mechanisms can be established to achieve different
socio-economic policy objectives — such as safeguarding food and/or energy security,
or for promoting industrial growth — but ensuring that enough water is available (and
of suitable quality) to meet everyone’s basic human needs (for domestic as well as
subsistence purposes) must be a guaranteed priority.
The linkages between water and migration have been attracting increasing attention,
although they have yet to be fully incorporated into international migration policy. The
WASH-related challenges faced by refugees and IDPs require special focused political
responsiveness. In the case of service provision in refugee camps, harmonization
of service levels with surrounding community/national standards is essential for
combatting social discrimination and creating access equality.

8

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

All actors involved in the realization of the human rights to water and sanitation on
a non-discriminatory and equal basis hold specific obligations and responsibilities.
Human rights define individuals as rights-holders entitled to water and sanitation,
and states as duty-bearers that have to guarantee access to WASH for all, using the
maximum of their available resources. Non-state actors also have human rights
responsibilities and may be held accountable for the infringement of human rights.
NGOs and international organizations can play an important role in service provision
and need to ensure substantive equality and accountability in such endeavours.
International organizations, such as the United Nations, international trade and
financial institutions, and development cooperation partners are called upon to
ensure that their assistance is channelled towards the countries or regions that are
least able to realize the rights to water and sanitation.

Coda

Unless exclusion and
inequality are explicitly
and responsively
addressed in both policy
and practice, water
interventions will continue
to fail to reach those most
in need and who are likely
to benefit most

People from different groups are ‘left behind’ for different reasons. Discrimination,
exclusion, marginalization, entrenched power asymmetries and material inequalities
are among the main obstacles to achieving the human rights to safe drinking water
and sanitation for all and realizing the water-related goals of the 2030 Agenda. Poorly
designed and inadequately implemented policies, inefficient and improper use of
financial resources, as well as policy gaps fuel the persistence of inequalities in access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. Unless exclusion and inequality are explicitly
and responsively addressed in both policy and practice, water interventions will
continue to fail to reach those most in need and who are likely to benefit most.
Improving water resources management and providing access to safe and affordable
drinking water and sanitation for all is essential for eradicating poverty, building
peaceful and prosperous societies, and ensuring that ‘no one is left behind’ on the
road towards sustainable development. These goals are entirely achievable, provided
there is a collective will to do so.

9

A boy looking at a wooden boat in the middle of a drought

Prologue

10

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

WWAP | Richard Connor, Stefan Uhlenbrook, Tais Policanti, Engin Koncagül and Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara

The Prologue provides a general overview of the global status and the
main trends on water-related issues, including the state of the world’s
water resources; the latest figures regarding the global coverage of
water supply, sanitation and hygiene services; as well as metrics
concerning a broad range of socio-economic development indicators
related to the theme of the report: ‘Leaving no one behind’.

Introduction
Inequities afflicting the world’s poor, disadvantaged and/or marginalized people
can be manifested in several different ways. The aim of this report is to highlight
how improvements in water resources management and access to water supply
and sanitation services are essential to addressing various social and economic
inequities, such that ‘no one is left behind’ when it comes to enjoying the
multiple benefits and opportunities that water provides.
As in other recent editions of the World Water Development Report, the
Prologue provides a summary overview of latest information — status and
trends — regarding global water-related issues and challenges, in terms of
both water resources management and water supply and sanitation services.
This edition’s Prologue also provides a summary overview of a broad range of
statistics and trends regarding key socio-economic indicators associated with
the theme of the report: ‘Leaving no one behind’.
The trends outlined below collectively illustrate that, despite progress made
since the turn of the millennium across several sectors, much remains to be
done in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and to
truly succeed in ‘leaving no one behind’. The SDG 6 Synthesis Report clearly
demonstrated that, if the current pace of progress remains unchanged, the
world will not achieve SDG 6 by 2030 (UN, 2018a).
Several of these trends are already well known and well documented. For
example, Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia clearly stand out as regional
‘hotspots’, where population growth, urbanization and poverty remain high and
access to basic services such as education, electricity and safely managed water
supply and sanitation remain grossly inadequate.
It is also clear that women are likely to fare less well than men in nearly all
economic indicators, including extreme poverty, land tenure and labour force
participation. And with a few exceptions, such as life expectancy, the same
applies to social and health-related indicators, including education, food
insecurity, disability and even internet access, where women are noticeably at
a disadvantage.

Prologue

11

Figure 1

Average annual impact from inadequate drinking water and sanitation services,1 water-related disasters, epidemics and 		
earthquakes, and conflicts
Water-related
Inadequate water
and sanitation

Drought

Flooding

Earthquakes
and epidemics

Conflict

No data

55 million

106 million

6 million

65 million

780 000
(deaths from diarrhoea
and cholera)

1 100

6 000

56 000

75 000
(war deaths)

No data

US$5.4 billion

US$31.4 billion

US$30 billion

No data

People affected*

People killed

*People affected are defined
as those requiring immediate
assistance during a period of
emergency; this may include
displaced or evacuated people.
Economic damage
Source: Adapted from PBL Netherlands
Environmental Assessment Agency (2018,
p. 14). Licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC BY 3.0).

However, global, regional and even country-level trends do not necessarily reflect
local realities and discrepancies. For example, the challenges of living in poverty
can differ considerably between urban and rural settlements, just like the potential
responses and solutions. Improving access to water supply and sanitation services in
rural environments will probably require different approaches than addressing the
needs of the growing populations of urban centres, where informal settlements (slums)
pose a particularly difficult and urgent challenge. In addition, whereas labour market
opportunities in rural areas are likely to remain dominated by food and agriculture
(a highly water-dependent sector), employment opportunities in urban and periurban areas may evolve rapidly as the result of current technological changes and the
digitalization of the economy (or ‘Industry 4.0’).
Another water-related linkage between seemingly different trends is the relationship
between rapid urbanization, increased vulnerability to floods and droughts, and the
increased risk of displacement (particularly in the case of informal settlements).
However, in terms of both the number of people affected and (especially) the number of
people killed, the impacts of floods, droughts and conflicts are grossly outweighed by the
number of those affected or killed by inadequate drinking water and sanitation services
(Figure 1).
These and other trends point to the number of complex and emerging challenges that
will require a comprehensive approach based on human rights, involving governments,
the private sector, civil society and the international community.

1

12

In 2015, an estimated 2.1 billion people lacked access to safely managed drinking water services and
4.5 billion lacked access to safely managed sanitation services (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). However, there
are no data available estimating what proportion of these people were ‘affected’, nor what the resulting
overall economic damage would equate to.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Section 1
The state of the
world’s water
resources

i. Water demand and use

Water use has been increasing worldwide by about 1% per year since the 1980s
(AQUASTAT, n.d.). This steady rise has principally been led by surging demand
in developing countries and emerging economies (although per capita water
use in the majority of these countries remains far below water use in developed
countries — they are merely catching up). This growth is driven by a combination
of population growth, socio-economic development and evolving consumption
patterns (WWAP, 2016). Agriculture (including irrigation, livestock and
aquaculture) is by far the largest water consumer, accounting for 69% of annual
water withdrawals globally. Industry (including power generation) accounts for
19% and households for 12% (AQUASTAT, n.d.).
Global water demand is expected to continue increasing at a similar rate until
2050, accounting for an increase of 20 to 30% above the current level of water use
(Burek et al., 2016). Although specific projections can somewhat vary, current
analysis suggests much of this growth will be attributed to increases in demand
by the industrial and domestic sectors (OECD, 2012; Burek et al., 2016; IEA, 2016).
Agriculture’s share of total water use is therefore likely to fall in comparison with
other sectors, but it will remain the largest user overall over the coming decades, in
terms of both water withdrawal and water consumption2 (Figure 2).

ii. Water availability

Figure 3 provides a global overview of countries experiencing different levels of
water stress.
Over 2 billion people live in countries experiencing high water stress. Although
the global average water stress is only 11%, 31 countries experience water stress
between 25% (which is defined as the minimum threshold of water stress) and
70%, and 22 countries are above 70% and are therefore under serious water stress
(UN, 2018a). Growing water stress indicates substantial use of water resources,
with greater impacts on resource sustainability, and a rising potential for conflicts
among users.

Figure 2 Global water demand by sector to 2040

Withdrawal
Power generation
Industry
Municipal

Consumption

5 000

km3

km3

Primary energy production*

2 500

4 000

2 000

3 000

1 500

2 000

1 000

1 000

500

Agriculture

*Primary energy production includes fossil
fuels and biofuels. Water withdrawals and
consumption for crops grown as feedstock
for biofuels is included in primary energy
production, not in agriculture.

2014

Source: IEA (2016, fig. 1, p. 12).

2

2025

2040

2014

2025

2040

Water withdrawal: The volume of water removed from a source; by definition withdrawals are always
greater than or equal to consumption.
Water consumption: The volume withdrawn that is not returned to the source (i.e. it is evaporated or
transported to another location) and by definition is no longer available for other uses locally.

Prologue

13

Several other important aspects of water stress need to be highlighted. Firstly, since
water availability can be highly variable from season to season, data averaged over the
entire year do not show periods of water scarcity. For example, it has been estimated
that about 4 billion people, representing nearly two-thirds of the world population,
experience severe water scarcity during at least one month of the year (Mekonnen
and Hoekstra, 2016). Secondly, such data aggregated at the country level can mask
(sometimes enormous) differences in water availability across various river basins
within a given country or region. For example, the country-wide low water stress in
several countries/regions in Figure 3, such as Australia, South America and Sub-Saharan
Africa, should not be misinterpreted, as water stress at the basin or local level can be
very significant. Thirdly, physical water stress does not take account of economic water
scarcity, where access to water is not limited as a result of the amount of existent water
resources themselves, but by a lack of infrastructure to collect, transport and treat
water for human purposes. For example, the indicated low water stress in many African
countries in Figure 3 does not take the lower status of water resources development into
account. Most of these countries have less than 6% of their cultivated area equipped with
irrigation systems (AQUASTAT, n.d.) and, therefore, a low withdrawal rate compared to
the available freshwater resources at country level/scale, despite potentially severe water
stress at local levels.
Levels of physical water stress are likely to increase as populations and their demands for
water grow, and the effects of climate change intensify (UN, 2018a). Climate change and
increasing climate variability are also likely to vary at the local and basin scales and over
different seasons. For the most part, however, dry areas will tend to become drier and
wet areas wetter (Figure 4), such that climate change will likely exacerbate water stress in
areas that are already the most affected.
Estimates suggest that if the degradation of the natural environment and the
unsustainable pressures on global water resources continue, 45% of the global
gross domestic product (GDP), 52% of the world’s population and 40% of global
grain production will be at risk by 2050. Poor and marginalized populations will be
disproportionately affected, further exacerbating already rising inequalities (UN, 2018a).

Figure 3 Level of physical water stress*

>70%
25–70%
10–25%
0–10%
Not applicable
Insufficient data

*Physical water stress is defined here as the ratio of total freshwater withdrawn annually by all major sectors, including environmental water requirements, to the
total amount of renewable freshwater resources, expressed as a percentage.
Source: UN (2018a, p. 72, based on data from AQUASTAT). © 2018 United Nations. Reprinted with the permission of the United Nations.

14

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 4 Change in net precipitation, 2010–2050

mm/day
< -0.5
-0.5 – -0.1
-0.1 – 0.1
0.1 – 0.5
> 0.5

Source: Adapted from PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (2018, p. 23). Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC BY 3.0).

iii. Water quality

Water quality problems persist in developed and developing countries alike, and
include the loss of pristine-quality water bodies, impacts associated with changes in
hydromorphology, the rise in emerging pollutants and the spread of invasive species
(UN, 2018a). Poor water quality directly impacts people who rely on these sources as
their main supply by further limiting their access to water (i.e. water availability) and
increasing water-related health risks (not to mention their overall quality of life).

Poor water quality
directly impacts people
who rely on these sources
as their main supply by
further limiting their
access to water (i.e.
water availability) and
increasing water-related
health risks

Several water-related diseases, including cholera and schistosomiasis, remain
widespread across many developing countries, where only a very small fraction (in
some cases less than 5%) of domestic and urban wastewater is treated prior to its
release into the environment (WWAP, 2017).
Nutrient loadings remain one of the most prevalent forms of water pollution and the
majority of nutrient emissions originate from agriculture. “For most regions, nutrient
emissions to surface waters are projected to increase, with hotspots in South and East
Asia, parts of Africa and Central and Latin America. However, the rapidly growing
cities in the developing countries are projected to become major sources of nutrient
emissions” (PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, 2018. p. 42),
especially where a rapidly growing number of households lack adequate wastewater
treatment systems.

iv. Extreme events

About 90% of all natural disasters are water-related. Over the period 1995–2015, floods
accounted for 43% of all documented natural disasters, affecting 2.3 billion people,
killing 157,000 more and causing US$662 billion in damage. Droughts accounted for
5% of natural disasters, affecting 1.1 billion people, killing 22,000 more, and causing
US$100 billion in damage over the same 20-year period. Over the course of one
decade, the number of floods rose from an annual average of 127 in 1995 to 171 in 2004
(CRED/UNISDR, 2015). Figure 5 provides a country-level overview of the occurrence of
floods and droughts between 1996 and 2015, as well as the number of people affected.

Prologue

15

Figure 5   The geography of droughts and floods

Drought occurrences
1996–2015
Droughts occur on
all continents, but
predominantly in the
southern hemisphere.
Number of occurrencies
10

People annually
affected by drought
1996–2015

People’s Republic
of China

Droughts lead to water
scarcity for people, severe
agricultural production
loss, local food shortages,
and wildfires.

16.5

million

Number of people affected,
annually
10 million

India

17.5

million
Ethiopia

2.5

million

Flooding events
1996–2015
Flooding events lead
to casualties, result in
temporary displacement
out of the area and
high economic losses
affecting both industries
and households.

Number of occurrences
100

India

19

million

People annually
affected by flooding
1996–2015
Flooding occurs all
over the world, but
the majority of the
people affected live in
Southeast Asia.

People’s Republic
of China

67

million

Number of people affected,
annually
Bangladesh

5

35 million

million

Source: Adapted from PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (2018, p. 16). Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported (CC BY 3.0).

16

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

The number of people affected and the estimated damage from water-related disasters
continue to rise. This increase can be partially explained by the improved reporting
and documentation of these disasters and their consequences. Fortunately, the higher
number of people affected is not accompanied by a higher number of casualties,
although women and children remain disproportionally vulnerable. In fact, the number
of people killed by weather-related disasters has decreased over the last decades. This
suggests that some areas of disaster risk management, such as improved early warning
systems and increased disaster management capacity, are leading to positive results
(UNISDR/UNECE, 2018).
Climate change is expected to increase the frequency and magnitude of extreme
weather events. The Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development (OECD)
Environmental Outlook (OECD, 2012) estimates that the number of people and the value
of assets at risk from floods will be significantly higher in 2050, compared to today:
“... The number of people at risk from floods is projected to rise from 1.2 billion today to
around 1.6 billion in 2050 (nearly 20% of the world’s population) and the economic value
of assets at risk is expected to be around US$45 trillion by 2050, a growth of over 340%
from 2010.” (p. 209).
Urbanization will increase the demand for flood protection and mitigation, raising the
issue of the allocation of flood risks across sectors and areas, including agricultural lands
(OECD, 2016).

Climate change is
expected to increase
the frequency and
magnitude of extreme
weather events

v. Transboundary water resources and water-related conflicts

The concept of ‘war over water’, where nations engage in military conflict over finite
water resources has received considerable attention through the media and other public
forums. Given ever rising levels of local water stress (see Prologue, Section 1ii), combined
with the fact that there are 286 international rivers and 592 transboundary aquifers shared
by 153 countries (UN, 2018a), it could be expected that water-related conflicts have been
increasing and/or are likely to increase in the future. However, current evidence does not
fully support this hypothesis. Conflicts are often difficult to attribute to a single reason;
however, water is often one among several contributing factors.
Water conflicts can arise because of several factors, including territorial disputes,
competition over resources, or political strategic advantage. They can also be categorized
based on the use, impact, or effect that water had within the conflict. The Pacific
Institute’s chronological list Water Conflict Chronology (Pacific Institute, n.d.) defines
three such categories:
• Trigger: Water as a trigger or root cause of conflict, where there is a dispute over the control
of water or water systems or where economic or physical access to water, or scarcity of water,
triggers violence.
• Weapon: Water as a weapon of conflict, where water resources, or water systems themselves,
are used as a tool or weapon in a violent conflict.
• Casualty: Water resources or water systems as a casualty of conflict, where water resources, or
water systems, are intentional or incidental casualties or targets of violence.

Items are included in the chronological list when there is violence (injuries or deaths) or
threats of violence (including verbal threats, military manoeuvres, and shows of force).
During the period 2000–2009, there were 94 registered conflicts where water played a
role (49 as a Trigger, 20 as a Weapon and 34 as a Casualty3). The period 2010–2018 (up to
May 2018) reported 263 registered conflicts (123 with water as a Trigger, 29 as a Weapon,
and 133 as a Casualty). Although this might suggest an increasing trend in water-related
conflicts overall, these data must be interpreted with caution, as much of the increase
could be attributable to greater awareness (and reporting) of such incidents. The eruption
of armed conflict in several regions of the world during the period from 2010 to 2018 may
also have influenced this apparent trend.

3

The different categories add up to more than the total number, because some conflicts have been listed in
more than one category.

Prologue

17

Section 2
Water supply,
sanitation and
hygiene

i. Drinking water

Three out of ten people (2.1 billion people, or 29% of the global population) did not
use a safely managed drinking water service4 in 2015, whereas 844 million people still
lacked even a basic drinking water service5 (Figure 6). Of all the people using safely
managed drinking water services, only one out of three (1.9 billion) lived in rural
areas (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
There has been progress during the implementation phase of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). The global population using at least a basic drinking
water service increased from 81 to 89% between 2000 and 2015. However, among the
countries that had a coverage of less than 95% in 2015, only one in five is on track to
achieving universal basic water services by 2030 (UN, 2018a).
Coverage of safely managed water services varies considerably across regions (from
only 24% in Sub-Saharan Africa to 94% in Europe and Northern America). There can
also be significant variability within countries between rural and urban areas, wealth
quintiles and subnational regions, as exemplified by the stark contrast between the
provinces of Luanda and Uige (Angola) (Figure 7) (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
By 2015, 181 countries had achieved a coverage of over 75% for at least basic drinking
water services (Figure 8). Of the 159 million people still collecting untreated (and
often contaminated) drinking water directly from surface water sources, 58% lived in
Sub-Saharan Africa (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

Figure 6 Global and regional drinking water coverage, 2015 (%)

Surface water

100

Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic

100

2

6
4
17

5
31

80
31

Safely managed

60

60

40

94

40 34

71

57
20

20

65

91

94

100

34

S
tr
La al A ubSa
tin
si
ha
Am a a
ra
n
d
n
er
S
Af
ic
N
o
a
or
an uth rica
th
er
er
d
n
n
t
As
Am he
W
ia
er Car
es
ic
ib
te
a
be
Es
rn
an
an
te
As
d
rn
Eu
i
As a a
ro
nd
ia
Oc pe
an
N
or
ea
d
th
So
Au
er nia
ut
st
*
n
hra
Ea Afr
lia
ic
s
an
a*
te
La
rn
d
nd
N
ew As
lo
i
ck
Ze a*
ed
al
De
an
L
v
d*
Sm eas elop
tD
in
al
g
ev
lI
C
sl
an elop ou
nt
d
e
rie
d
De
ve Cou s
lo
n
t
pi
ng ries
St
at
es
*

Ce
n

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

33

82

h

0
World

28

52

24
0

29

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, figures 2 and 3, p. 3).

4

5

18

Drinking water from an improved water source that is located on premises, available when needed and
free from faecal and priority chemical contamination (‘improved’ sources include: piped water, boreholes
or tube wells, protected dug wells, protected springs, rainwater, and packaged or delivered water).
Drinking water from an improved source, provided collection time is not more than 30 minutes for a
round trip, including queuing.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 7 Inequalities in basic drinking water

Proportion of the population
using basic drinking water services (%)

100

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 47, p. 35).

100

World
Richest

80

Luanda

80

Urban
60

40

60

Sub-Saharan
Africa

20

Angola

40

Rural

20

Uige
Poorest

0

0

Figure 8 Proportion of population using at least basic drinking
water services, 2015
100

<50%
50–75%
76–90%
91–100%
Not applicable
Insufficient data

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

■ <50%
■ 50-75%
■ 76-90%
■ 91-100%
■ INSUFFICIENT DATA
■ NOT APPLICABLE

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 4, p. 3).

ii. Sanitation

Worldwide, only 2.9 billion people (or 39% of the global population) used safely managed
sanitation services6 in 2015 (Figure 9). Two out of five of these people (1.2 billion) lived
in rural areas. Another 2.1 billion people had access to ‘basic’ sanitation services.7 The
remaining 2.3 billion (one out of every three people) lacked even a basic sanitation service,
of which 892 million people still practiced open defecation (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
Progress was also achieved in sanitation coverage during the implementation phase of the
MDGs, but it still lags behind compared to the progress in drinking water supply. By 2015,
154 countries had achieved a coverage of over 75% for at least basic sanitation services. The
global population using at least a basic sanitation service increased from 59 to 68% between
2000 and 2015. However, among the countries with a coverage of less than 95% in 2015, only
one out of ten is on track to achieving universal basic sanitation by 2030 (UN, 2018a).

6

7

Use of improved facilities that are not shared with other households and where excreta are safely disposed of
in situ or transported and treated off-site (‘improved’ facilities include flush/pour flush to piped sewer systems,
septic tanks or pit latrines; ventilated improved pit latrines, composting toilets or pit latrines with slabs).
Use of improved facilities that are not shared with other households.

Prologue

19

Figure 9 Global and regional sanitation coverage, 2015 (%)
100

Open defecation

80

Basic

12

32

80

8

Unimproved
Limited

100

12

60

Safely managed

60

29

40

63

53

22

40
55

20

39

20
22

0

19

68

78

68
50

34

28

36

32

40

La

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

tin
Am
W
e
es
te rica
Es
rn
an
te
As
d
rn
i
As a a the
n
Ca
ia
d
rib
an
N
or
d
be
th
So
Au
an
e
ut
rn
st
h
r
Af
N
or alia -Ea
ric
s
th
a
er and ter
n
n
N
Am
ew As
i
er
Ze a
ic
Su a a ala
n
n
bCe
Sa d E d
ur
nt
ha
op
ra
ra
lA
e
n
Af
si
a
ric
an
Oc a*
d
So
ea
u
ni
th
La Lea
a*
e
st
rn
nd
De
As
lo
ck
ve
ia
*
lo
Sm ed
pe
al Dev
d
lI
C
e
l
ou
sl
an opi
nt
n
d
De g C ries
o
ve
un *
lo
tr
pi
ng ies
St *
at
es
*

0
World

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, figures 5 and 6, p. 4).

Similarly to drinking water, a very large level of variability can be observed in
terms of access to basic sanitation within countries, as exemplified by the stark
contrast between the provinces of Panamá and Guna Yala (Panamá) (Figure 10)
(WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
By 2015, 154 countries had achieved over 75% coverage with at least basic
sanitation services (Figure 11). Overall coverage is generally lower for basic
sanitation than for basic water, and no SDG region (with the exception of
Australia and New Zealand, where coverage is already nearly universal) is on
track to achieving universal basic sanitation by 2030 (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

Figure 10 Inequalities in basic sanitation

Latin America and
the Caribbean

Richest

Proportion of the population
using basic sanitation services (%)

100

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 47, p. 35).

80

World

Panama
Poorest

60

Rural
40

20

0

100

20

Panamá

Urban

80

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019
60

Guna Yala

Figure 11 Proportion of population using at least basic sanitation services, 2015

<50%
50–75%
76–90%
91–100%
Not applicable
Insufficient data

■ <50%
■ 50-75%
■ 76-90%
■ 91-100%
■ INSUFFICIENT DATA
■ NOT APPLICABLE

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 7, p. 4).

iii. Hygiene

Coverage of basic handwashing facilities with soap and water varied (on a regional average)
from 15% in Sub-Saharan Africa to 76% in Western Asia and Northern Africa (Figure 12).
However, data available for 2015 (representing only 30% of the global population) were
insufficient to produce a global estimate, or estimates for other SDG regions. As with water
supply and sanitation, there can be significant inequalities within countries, as shown by
the example of Tunisia (Figure 13) (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

Figure 12 Proportion of population with basic handwashing facilities in 70 countries, 2015

(%)
0

20

40

60

80

100

Northern America and Europe (n=2)
Central Asia and Southern Asia (n=8)
Western Asia and Northern Africa (n= 7)
Latin America and the Caribbean (n=14)
Eastern Asia and South-Eastern Asia (n=5)
Sub-Saharan Africa (n=34)
Australia and New Zealand

(no data)

Oceania

(no data)

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 8, p. 5).

Section 3
Socio-economic
development
indicators

i. Demographics

Global population growth
Population growth is a significant driver of increasing water demand, both directly
(e.g. for drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and household uses) and indirectly (e.g. through
growing demands for water-intensive goods and services, including food and energy).
The global population reached 7.6 billion people as of June 2017. It is expected to reach about
8.6 billion by 2030 and further increase to 9.8 billion by 2050 (Figure 14) (UNDESA, 2017a).
Africa and Asia account for nearly all current population growth, although Africa is
expected to be the main contributor beyond 2050 (Figure 15) (UNDESA, 2017a).

Prologue

21

20

20

0

0

Figure 13 Inequalities in basic hygiene

Urban

100

Proportion of the population
using basic hygiene facilities (%)

Western Asia
and North Africa

Tunis

100

Tunisia

80

80

60

60

Rural
No global
estimate

Poorest

40

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 47, p. 35).

Richest

Sidi Bouzid

20

20

0

0

Figure 14 Population of the world: Estimates (1950–2015), and medium-variant projection with 95% prediction intervals (2015–2100)

14
12

Medium
Estimates

Population (billion)

95% prediction intervals

10
8
6
4
2

Source: UNDESA (2017a, fig. 2, p. 2).
© 2017 United Nations. Reprinted with
the permission of the United Nations.

Africa and Asia account
for nearly all current
population growth,
although Africa is
expected to be the main
contributor beyond 2050

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2090

2100

Urbanization and informal settlements
Nearly all net population growth is taking place in cities and the world is becoming
increasingly urbanized, creating new and difficult challenges for urban water
management (see Chapter 6). Over half (54%) of the global population currently lives
in cities. The ratio of urban-to-rural population is expected to increase to two-thirds
(66.4%) by 2050 (UNICEF, 2017). Sustainable development challenges will therefore
be increasingly acute in cities, particularly in the lower and middle-income countries
where population growth and the pace of urbanization are greatest (Figure 16).
However, people in rural areas, who account for the vast majority of the extreme poor
(see Chapter 7), must also not be ‘left behind’ in terms of development policy.
Although the overall proportion of the urban population living in slums worldwide
fell from 28% in 2000 to 23% in 2014, in absolute terms, the number of urban residents
living in slums rose from 792 million to an estimated 880 million over the same period.
In Least Developed Countries, nearly two-thirds (62%) of urban dwellers live in slum
conditions (Figure 17). Slums remain most pervasive in Sub-Saharan Africa (UN, 2017).

22

40

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 15 Population by region: Estimates (1950–2015), and medium-variant projection (2015–2100)
Estimates (1950–2015)
Africa

Projections (2015–2100)

5

Northern America
Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Oceania

Total population (billion)

Europe
4

3

2

1
Source: UNDESA (2017a, fig. 3, p. 3).
© 2017 United Nations. Reprinted with
the permission of the United Nations.

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

2060

2070

2080

2090

2100

Figure 16 Growth rates of urban agglomerations by size class: 2018–2030 projections

Annual growth rate
<1%
1–3%
3–5%
>5%

City population in 2018
500–750 thousand
750–1 000 thousand
1–5 million
5–10 million
10 million or more

Source: UNDESA (2018). Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY 3.0 IGO).

Age distribution
Life expectancy, which has risen by five years globally between 2000 and 2015
(WHO, 2016a), has become a significant driver of population growth. Life
expectancy for both sexes combined is projected to rise from 71 years in 2010–2015
to 77 years in 2045–2050, with women living on average four years longer than men.
With the exception of Africa, all regions of the world will have nearly a quarter or
more of their populations at ages 60 and above by 2050 (UNDESA, 2017a).
There are also more young people in the world than ever before — about 1.8 billion
between the ages of 10 and 25 (UNFPA, 2014). Nearly 80% of the world’s 2.3 billion
young people (aged 15 to 34) live in low- and middle-income countries, and they
constitute a large share of the population in countries experiencing rapid economic
growth (Kwame, 2018), although they do not all necessarily directly benefit from
such growth.

Prologue

23

Figure 17 Proportion of urban population living in slums, 2000 and 2014

Sub-Saharan Africa

2000
2014

Central and Southern Asia

46

32

Eastern and South-Eastern Asia

28

38

24
24

Oceania

23
22

Northern Africa and Western Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean

21

29

0.1
0.1

Europe and Northern America
Australia and New Zealand

65

56

0.03
0.03

Least Developed Countries
Landlocked Developing Countries

59

World

Source: UN (2017, p. 40). © 2017 United Nations. Reprinted with
the permission of the United Nations.

78

62

23
0

67

28

20

40

60

80

(%)

ii. Poverty and income disparity

Poverty
People living in poverty struggle every day to fulfil their most basic needs, including access
to water and sanitation, healthcare, education, and a reliable source of energy. They are
also particularly vulnerable to impacts of climate change (Castaneda Aguilar et al., 2016).
In 2013 (the most recent estimates available), 767 million people (more than 10% of the
global population) were living below the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90
per day (2011 PPP)8, and 2.1 billion people (about 30% of the global population) were
living on less than US$3.10 a day (2011 PPP). Nearly 80% of the extreme poor lived in
rural areas. The overwhelming majority of people living below the international extreme
poverty line lived in Southern Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank, 2016a).
The absolute number of people living in extreme poverty fell from 1.85 billion in 1990
to 0.76 billion in 2013. Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region that between 1990 and
2013 registered an increase in the absolute number of people living in extreme poverty,
although the overall share of people in extreme poverty in the region dropped from 54%
to 41% over that period (Figure 18) (World Bank, n.d.).

In 2013, nearly 80% of
the extreme poor lived
in rural areas

Children account for 44% of the extreme poor worldwide and poverty rates are highest
among children (Figure 19). As girls and boys grow older, the gender gap widens between
the ages of 20 and 35, with 122 women living in poor households for every 100 men of the
same age group (Munoz Boudet et al., 2018).
Sex disparities in poverty rates for adults aged 20 to 40 are closely linked to marital and
parenthood status. One of the contributing factors to poverty for working-age women
in some countries is the increasing proportion of non-partnered women with children
(UNDESA, 2015).

8

24

‘2011 PPP’ stands for 2011 purchasing power parity. The international poverty line for extreme poverty is
US$1.90 a day 2011 PPP and the ‘median’ poverty line is US$3.10 a day 2011 PPP.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 18 Population living in extreme poverty* by world region, 1987–2013
Total population living in extreme poverty, in millions of people
2 000
1 800

Latin America and the Caribbean

1 600

East Asia and the Pacific
South Asia

1 400

Middle East and North Africa

1 200

Europe and Central Asia

1 000

Sub-Saharan Africa

800

World

600
400
200
0
1987

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2013

Share of population living in extreme poverty
*Extreme poverty is defined as living with
per capita household consumption below
US$1.90 per day (2011 PPP).

60
50

Notes: International dollars are adjusted
for inflation and for price differences
across countries. Consumption per capita
is the preferred welfare indicator for the
World Bank’s analysis of global poverty.
However, for about 25% of the countries,
estimates correspond to income, rather
than consumption.

(%)

40
30
20
10

Source: Adapted from Roser and Ortiz-Ospina (2018,
based on data from World Bank PovcalNet). Licensed
under Creative Commons (CC BY-SA 4.0).

0
1987

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2013

Figure 19 Global extreme poverty rates by gender and age: Share of women and men living in extreme poor households (IPL of US$1.90 per day)*

Women

25

Source: Munoz Boudet et al.
(2018, fig. 3, p. 12). © World Bank.
openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/29426. Licensed
under Creative Commons
(CC BY 3.0 IGO).

Population (%)

*IPL: International
poverty line.
Note: The total sample
size is 89 countries.

Men

20
15
10
5
0

0–4

5–9

10–14 15–19 20–24 25–29 30–34 35–39 40–44 45–49 50–54 55–59

60–64 65–69 70–74

Age (years)

Prologue

25

Eight out of ten of the children living in extreme poverty live in rural, rather than
urban, areas. Over 25% of children living in rural areas live in extreme poverty,
compared to just over 9% of children in urban areas (UNICEF/World Bank, 2016).
Poverty is by no means limited to developing countries. An estimated 30 million
children — one in eight — living in the world’s richest countries are growing up poor
(UNICEF, 2014).

Eight out of ten of
the children living in
extreme poverty live
in rural, rather than
urban, areas

Income disparity
While the global income share of the bottom 50% earners has oscillated around 9%
since 1980, the global top 1% income share rose from 16% in 1980 to around 20% by
2015 (Figure 20).
Income disparity varies considerably across different regions. It is generally lowest in
Europe and highest in the Middle East (Figure 21) (Alvaredo et al., 2018).

Figure 20 The rise of the global top 1% versus the stagnation of the global bottom 50%, 1980–2016

Share of global income (%)

Global top 1%

Source: Alvaredo et al. (2018, fig. E5, p. 13).
Licensed under Creative Commons
(CC BY-NC 4.0).

20

15
Global bottom 50%
10

5
1980

1985

1990

2000

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 21 Top 10% national income share across the world, 2016

70

61

Share of national income (%)

60
50
40

37

46

47

Russia

USA and
Canada

54

55

55

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Brazil

India

41

30
20
10
0

Source: Adapted from Alvaredo et al. (2018, fig. E1, p. 9).
Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC 4.0).

26

Europe

People’s
Republic of
China

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Middle East

According to the World Inequality Report 2018, “Economic inequality is largely driven by the
unequal ownership of capital, which can be either privately or public owned. We show that
since 1980, very large transfers of public to private wealth occurred in nearly all countries,
whether rich or emerging. While national wealth has substantially increased, public wealth is
now negative or close to zero in rich countries. Arguably this limits the ability of governments
to tackle inequality; certainly, it has important implications for wealth inequality among
individuals.” (Alvaredo et al., 2018, p. 14).

iii. Health and nutrition

Burden of disease
According to global estimates of cause-specific disability-adjusted life years9 (DALYs), the
number of DALYs per 100,000 population dropped from 45,000 in 2000 to 36,300 in 2015,
suggesting an improvement in the overall disease burden over that 15-year period. There was
a drop in DALYs related to nearly all nutritional deficiencies and communicable diseases,
including diarrhoeal diseases, which fell over 50% from 2,530 to 1,160 DALYs per 100,000
population. The rate of the decline in diarrhoeal diseases DALYs was similar across all income
groups. However, waterborne diseases remain a significant disease burden among vulnerable
and disadvantaged groups worldwide, especially among low-income economies where 4%
of the population (an estimated 25.5 million people, 1 in 25) suffered from diarrhoea in 2015,
among whom 60% were children under the age of five (WHO, 2016b).
Disabilities
People with disabilities can often face difficulties in accessing water access points and
sanitation facilities, often not designed to account for their particular needs. About 1 billion
people (15% of the world’s population) experience some form of disability. Of this number,
between 110 million and 190 million adults experience significant difficulties in functioning.
It is estimated that some 93 million children — or 1 in 20 of those under 15 years of age — live
with a moderate or severe disability (WHO, 2015). Global prevalence is greater for women than
men, standing at 19% and 12%, respectively. In low and middle-income countries, women are
estimated to comprise up to three-quarters of persons with disabilities (UN Women, 2017).

Deteriorations in
food security have
particularly been
observed in situations
of conflict, especially
when combined with
droughts or floods

People with disabilities are more likely to experience adverse socio-economic outcomes than
people without disabilities. These outcomes include lower education levels, poorer health,
inferior levels of employment, and higher rates of poverty (WHO, 2011).
The number of people who experience disability will continue to increase as populations age,
aligned with a global increase in chronic health conditions (WHO, 2015).
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO): “Disability disproportionately affects
women, older people, and poor people. Children from poorer households, indigenous
populations and those in ethnic minority groups are also at significantly higher risk of
experiencing disability … [and] face particular challenges in accessing services.” (WHO, 2015,
pp. 2–3).

Nutrition and food insecurity
The number of chronically undernourished people on the planet increased from 777 million
in 2015 to 815 million in 2016 (even if it is still less than the 900 million in 2000). Deteriorations
in food security have particularly been observed in situations of conflict, especially when
combined with droughts or floods. The situation has worsened in particular in parts of SubSaharan Africa, South-Eastern Asia and Western Asia. Women are slightly more likely to be
food insecure than men in every region of the world (Figure 22) (FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/
WHO, 2017). At the same time, obesity has nearly tripled worldwide since 1975. In 2016, more
than 1.9 billion adults (older than 18 years) were overweight and more than one-third of these
(over 650 million) were obese (WHO, 2018).
Globally, 155 million children under five years of age suffer from stunted growth, although
the prevalence of stunting fell from 29.5% to 22.9% between 2005 and 2016. In 2016,
41 million children under five years of age were overweight (FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/
WHO, 2017). Lack of access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) contributes to

9

DALYs are years of healthy life lost to premature death and disability.

Prologue

27

Figure 22 Prevalence of severe food insecurity among women and men by region
30
Women

25.2

25

Men

23.7

(%)

20

Note: Comparison of the
prevalence of severe food
insecurity among men and
women aged 15 years and older
(2014–2016 three-year average).
Source: FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/WHO
(2017, fig. 3, p. 11).

15

10

7.9

7.3

6.6

6.0

5

5.0

4.3
1.4

0

World

Africa

Asia

Latin America

1.3

North America
and Europe

undernutrition by transmitting pathogens, while infections inhibit nutritional uptake
(World Bank, 2017a). These factors are related to retarded growth among children
(UN, 2018a).

iv. Education and literacy

Education
Water and sanitation facilities in schools are fundamental for promoting good hygienic
behaviour and children's health and well-being. Lack of latrines and safe water for
drinking and hygiene, and otherwise inappropriate and inadequate sanitary facilities,
contribute to absenteeism and high drop-out rates, especially among girls.
In 2016, an estimated 58 out of the 92 countries surveyed had over 75% coverage of
drinking water in schools (Figure 23). Nearly half of schools in Sub-Saharan Africa, and
over a third of schools in Small Island Developing States had no drinking water service
(WHO/UNICEF, 2018a).

Water and sanitation
facilities in schools
are fundamental for
promoting good hygienic
behaviour and children’s
health and well-being

Furthermore, in 2016, 67 out of 101 countries had over 75% coverage of improved singlesex sanitation facilities classified as providing a basic sanitation service (Figure 24). An
estimated 23% of schools had no sanitation service, (defined as an unimproved facility
or no facility at all), and over 620 million children worldwide lacked a basic sanitation
service at their school (WHO/UNICEF, 2018a).
Early childhood education opportunities are often distributed in a highly unequal
fashion. In low and middle-income countries, just over two 3- to 4-year-olds from the
poorest quintile of households attended an organized learning programme, for every ten
children from the richest quintile. In Serbia and Nigeria, the attendance rate was over
80% for the richest children and no more than 10% for the poorest (UNESCO, 2017a).

Literacy
Literacy can be a major catalyst for eradicating poverty and improving hygiene and
family health. Fifty years ago, almost one-quarter of youth lacked basic literacy skills
compared to less than 10% in 2016. However, 750 million adults — two-thirds of whom
are women — remain illiterate. 102 million of the illiterate population are between 15
and 24 years old. The global adult literacy rate was 86% in 2016, while the youth literacy
rate was 91%. The adult and youth literacy rates are estimated to have grown by only 4%
each over the 2000–2015 period. The lowest literacy rates are observed in Sub-Saharan
Africa and in Southern Asia (Figure 25) (UNESCO, 2017b).

28

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 23 Proportion of schools with a basic drinking water service, by country, 2016

<50%
50–75%
76–90%
91–100%
Not applicable
Insufficient data

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2018a, fig. 4, p. 5).

Figure 24 Proportion of schools with a basic sanitation service, by country, 2016

<50%
50–75%
76–90%
91–100%
Not applicable
Insufficient data

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2018a, fig. 7, p. 6).

v. Labour and employment

Labour force participation
An estimated four out of five jobs are water-dependent. Examples of sectors with
heavily water-dependent jobs include agriculture, forestry, inland fisheries and
aquaculture, mining and resource extraction, power generation, and manufacturing
and transformation industries (WWAP, 2016).
The global labour force participation of the world’s working-age population has been
on a downward trend since 1990, and this trend is projected to continue until at least
2030, driven mainly by a steady decline in Asia and the Pacific. Africa is the only
region where the labour force participation rate is expected to increase in the coming
decades (ILO, 2017a).
The lack of access to adequate sanitation facilities in the workplace can dissuade
women from seeking employment in establishments and institutions that do not
provide adequate facilities (e.g. different washroom areas for women and men). This
contributes to the already lower participation rates of women and girls in national
employment figures (UNESCWA, 2013).

Prologue

29

Figure 25 Adult and youth literacy rates by country, 2016

Adult (more than 15 years old)
literacy rate
<50%
50–59%
60–69%
70–79%
80–89%
90–100%
No data

Youth (15–24 years old)
literacy rate
<50%
50–59%
60–69%
70–79%
80–89%
90–100%
No data
Source: UNESCO (2017b, fig. 1, p. 4).

On average, women make up about 43% of the agricultural labour force in developing
countries. Evidence indicates that if women had the same access to productive
resources — including land and water — as men, they could increase yields on their
farms by 20 to 30%, raising total agricultural output in these countries by 2.5 to 4%.
This could reduce the number of hungry people in the world by around 12 to 17%
(FAO/IFAD/WFP, 2012).
Agriculture is the largest employer of the youth labour force, particularly in rural
areas in low- and middle-income countries (Yeboah, 2018). These jobs are particularly
vulnerable to the impacts of extreme events such as droughts and floods.

Digitalization and Industry 4.0
Service sector jobs tend to be less water-dependent than those in agriculture and
industry (WWAP, 2016). The digitalization of the economy (or Industry 4.0) will likely
have significant consequences for job creation/destruction. However, the extent to
which broader application of information and communication technology (ICT) and
new digital technologies (including artificial intelligence, utilization of big data, etc.)
will cause change, eliminate existing jobs, and create new activities and jobs remains
the subject of some debate. Globalization, economic developments and the changing
preferences of consumers and producers will also change labour demand and supply
(EESC, 2017).

30

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Current technological changes have created huge productivity gains. However, some
evidence indicates that the current technological changes may further segment the labour
market and widen wage inequality (ILO, 2015).

vi. Ethnicity and culture

Racial, ethnic, religious and other minorities are often more at risk of being ‘left behind’ in
terms of water than others.

Minorities
There is often discrimination against migrants and ethnic minorities with respect to access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. This can occur in response to tensions arising from
international migration and the increasing salience of religious tensions, and persistent
discrimination against the elderly in many countries and regions. There are substantial
non-ascriptive minorities who also face persistent discrimination. In Sub-Saharan Africa,
for example, sufferers of HIV-AIDS are liable to mistreatment and exclusion (Foa, 2015).
Indigenous peoples
Indigenous peoples number about 370 million, accounting for about 5% of the global
population. They are over-represented among the poor (15% of the total and one-third of
the world’s 900 million extremely poor rural people),10 the illiterate and the unemployed.
Even in developed countries, indigenous peoples consistently lag behind the nonindigenous populations in terms of most indicators of well-being, including access to
water supply and sanitation services.
Many indigenous women and men find employment in the informal economy and engage
in a range of activities such as casual and seasonal wage work on farms, plantations,
construction sites in informal enterprises, street vending or as domestic workers.
Indigenous peoples tend to have relatively higher rates of unemployment than
non-indigenous peoples in urban areas (ILO, 2017b).

vii. Migration11

Migrants can face exceptional difficulties and challenges in accessing safe and reliable
water supply and sanitation services in transit and destination areas. Migration occurs as
a result of a complex interplay of social, economic and environmental factors acting at
different levels (individual, household, external).

Migrants can face
exceptional difficulties
and challenges in
accessing safe and
reliable water supply
and sanitation services

International migration
By December 2017, there were an estimated 258 million people living in a country other
than their country of birth — an increase of 49% since 2000. Over 60% of all international
migrants live in Asia (80 million) or Europe (78 million). Northern America hosted the
third largest number of international migrants (58 million), followed by Africa (25 million),
Latin America and the Caribbean (10 million) and Oceania (8 million) (UNDESA, 2017b).
In 2017, 48.4% of international migrants were women. Female migrants outnumbered
males in all regions except Africa and Asia (UNDESA, 2017b).
According to a report from the Population Division of the United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), “Large and persistent economic and demographic
asymmetries between countries are likely to remain key drivers of international migration
for the foreseeable future. Between 2015 and 2050, the top net receivers of international
migrants (more than 100,000 annually) are projected to be the United States of America,

10

11

Although these figures are frequently cited in several recent reports by United Nations agencies (among
others), including ILO (2017b) as cited in this report, these estimates are based on reports published as far
back as 2003 (i.e. World Bank, 2003).
Migrants are defined here — and elsewhere in the report — as people who have chosen to move from one
place to another mainly to improve their lives (e.g. finding work, seeking better education, reuniting with
family), not because of a direct threat or persecution. It is critical to distinguish between people who are
forcibly displaced and those who leave for other reasons. Detailed metrics and information on refugees,
asylum seekers and internally displaced people (IDPs) are provided in Chapter 8.

Prologue

31

Germany, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia and the Russian Federation. The
countries projected to be net senders of more than 100,000 migrants annually include
India, Bangladesh, China, Pakistan, and Indonesia.” (UNDESA, 2017a, p. 10).
However, evidence shows that migration flows between developing countries are
larger than those from developing to developed countries. In 2015, the number
of people that moved between developing countries represented 38% of the total
number of international migrants, compared to 35% of those who moved from south
to north (FAO, 2018a). Similarly, in Sub-Saharan Africa people tend to move mostly to
neighbouring countries or within the region (Mercandalli and Losch, 2017).

Internal migration
The vast majority of migrants do not cross borders but remain within their own
country. Data concerning this type of migration are sparse, although the total number
of internal migrants was ‘conservatively’ estimated at 740 million in 2009 (UNDP, 2009).
The current number is likely to be significantly higher. Internal migration patterns are
prevalently rural-rural and rural-urban (Mercandalli and Losch, 2017).

viii. Access to resources (land, energy and ICT)

Land tenure
Access to water resources is often related to land tenure, particularly in rural settings.
Less than 20% of the world’s landholders are women. In Sub-Saharan Africa, women
make up an average of 15% of all agricultural land owners (Figure 26), while in North
Africa and Western Asia they represent fewer less 5% (FAO/IFAD/WFP, 2012).
Land tenure security is closely linked to poverty reduction. According to the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), “In rural societies, the
poorest people often have weak or unprotected tenure rights. They therefore risk
losing land they depend on to more powerful neighbours, to private companies —
domestic or foreign — and even to members of their own family. […] Women are
particularly vulnerable because their land rights may be obtained through kinship
relationships with men or marriage. […] Lack of secure land tenure exacerbates
poverty and has contributed to social instability and conflict in many parts of the
world.” (IFAD, 2015, p. 1).

Figure 26 Distribution of female agricultural holders

<10%
<20%
<30%
<40%
>=40%

Source: FAO (n.d.).

32

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Energy
Water and energy are closely linked. Whereas energy is required for the pumping and
distribution of water (including for irrigation), water supply, wastewater treatment and
water desalination, the energy sector also requires water to cool thermal power plants,
generate hydropower and grow biofuels (WWAP, 2014).
The number of people without access to electricity fell from 1.7 billion in 2000 to
1.1 billion in 2016. However, despite progress in the last few years, the electrification
rate in Sub-Saharan Africa remains below 45% (IEA, 2017). Of those gaining access
to electricity worldwide since 2010, the vast majority (80%) are in urban settlements
(UNSD, n.d.).

Digitalization
As of January 2018, over 4 billion people around the world have internet access (We
are Social and Hootsuite, 2018). However, despite the rapid rise in the number of
people online, there are still significant differences between the richest countries and
the rest of the world (Figure 27).
About 80% of the population in developed countries is online, compared to 40% in
developing regions and 15% in the Least Developed Countries. In 2016, the global
rate of internet user penetration was 12% lower for women than for men. The gender
gap remains even larger in the Least Developed Countries, at 31%. Fixed-broadband
services remain largely unaffordable and unavailable throughout large segments of
the developing world (UNESCO, 2017a).
Figure 27 Percentage of adults who use the internet at least occasionally or report owning a smartphone

Poland 69
Germany 85

Russia 72

Ukraine 60

UK 88

Canada 90

France 75
Spain 87

USA 89

Turkey 72

Italy 72

Burkina Faso 18

Mexico 54

Venezuela 67

Japan 69

China 65

Pakistan 15

South Korea 94

India 22

Viet Nam 50

Senegal 31

Philippines 40

Ethiopia 8

Peru 52

Uganda 11 Kenya 40
Ghana 25
Nigeria 39
Tanzania 21

Brazil 60

South Africa 42

Lebanon 66

Indonesia 30

Jordan 67
Palestine 72

Israel 86

Chile 78

Malaysia 68

Australia 93

Argentina 71
0
Less
internet
access

20

40

60

67%

80

Global median

100
More
internet
access

No data

Source: Adapted from Poushter (2016, fig. 2, p. 4). © Pew Research Center.

Prologue

33

CHAPTER 1

A boy enjoying drinking water

The human rights to water and
sanitation and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development

34

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

OHCHR | Rio Hada
WWAP | Lucilla Minelli, Richard Connor, Engin Koncagül and Stefan Uhlenbrook
With contributions from: Léo Heller (Special Rapporteur on the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation); Marianne Kjellén (UNDP); Ileana Sinziana Puscas and Daria Mokhnacheva (IOM); Maria Teresa
Gutierrez and Carlos Carrion-Crespo (ILO); Solène Le Doze (UNESCAP); Ryan Schweizer (UNHCR); Andrei
Jouravlev (UNECLAC); and Jenny Grönwall (UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility)

This introductory chapter frames the report by
describing the main concepts related to the human
rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, with an
empahsis on targeting disadvantaged groups and
people in vulnerable situations.
“As we embark on this great collective journey, we pledge that no one
will be left behind. Recognizing that the dignity of the human person is
fundamental, we wish to see the goals and targets met for all nations and
peoples and for all segments of society. And we will endeavour to reach
the furthest behind first.”
Transforming our world: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(UNGA, 2015a, para. 4)

1.1
Introduction
Water is the essence of life. Safe drinking water and sanitation are recognized
as basic human rights, as they are indispensable to sustaining healthy
livelihoods and fundamental in maintaining the dignity of all human beings.
People-centred policies to provide water and sanitation services, and sound
and sustainable management of water resources and of our ecosystems as
a whole, are therefore integral to sustainable development and to the full
enjoyment of the human rights to water and sanitation, as well as a wide range
of other human rights, including the rights to life, health and food.
Since 2000, billions of people have gained access to basic water and sanitation
services, thanks to concerted global efforts under the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Yet globally, 2.1 billion people lack access to safe, readily
available water at home, and 4.5 billion people lack safely managed sanitation
in 2015. Huge inequalities exist between and within countries, and between the
richest and the poorest (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
Almost half of people drinking water from unprotected sources live in SubSaharan Africa (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a), where the burden of collecting water
lies mainly on women and girls, many of whom spend more than 30 minutes
on each trip to collect water (UNICEF, 2016). Without safe, accessible water
and sanitation, these people are likely to face multiple challenges, including
poor health and living conditions, malnutrition, and lack of opportunities for
education and employment. Water stress, including insufficient access to water
and sanitation services, has been associated with social unrest, conflict and
even violence, and ultimately with increasing trends in human displacement
and migration (Miletto et al., 2017).

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

35

‘Leaving no one behind’ is at the heart of the commitment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which aims to allow all people in all countries to benefit from socio-economic
development and to achieve the full realization of human rights, without discrimination
on the basis of gender, age, race, language, religion, political (or other) opinions, national
or social origin, property, disability, residency status (including citizenship, residency,
immigration, refugee, statelessness, etc.) or any other social, economic or political status.
Achieving the 2030 Agenda and its promise of ‘leaving no one behind’ requires a peoplecentred focus grounded in international human rights and an integrated approach among the
social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development in partnership
with all stakeholders.
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with their 169 targets respond to this vision
and were designed to be comprehensive and indivisible (UNGA, 2015a). More often than not,
the SDGs are not isolated objectives, but prerequisites to achieve all the others. The SDG 6 on
clean water and sanitation is considered to be one of these central SDGs, because of its vital
functions related to human health, dignity, environmental integrity and prosperity, and the
very survival of the planet (UN, 2018a). Achieving the targets of SDG 6, and particularly those
that specifically address water and sanitation services, will require improvements in the levels
of planning, capacity, governance and funding at both national and local levels.

International human
rights law obliges
states to work
towards achieving
universal access to
water and sanitation
for all, without any
discrimination, while
prioritizing those most
in need

The human rights to water and sanitation are inextricably linked to the management of
water resources and the environment as a whole. The interlinked and interdependent
nature of human rights and the call to ‘leave no one behind’ require more holistic,
integrated and people-centred approaches to water resource management and
environmental policy-making, a challenge addressed through the concept of ‘integrated
water resources management’ (IWRM). When people are able to learn about and exercise
their rights, and are empowered to participate in the decisions that affect them, they can
help to ensure that those decisions respect their need for water security and a sustainable
environment.
The human rights-based approach (HRBA) provides a critical perspective to examine specific
groups that are lagging or are being left behind due to discrimination or an unequal access
to resources and opportunities to participate in decision-making processes. It can also help
identify legal obligations and standards to guide potential actions and responses to ensure
that the human rights to water and sanitation are fulfilled.

1.2
The human rights
to water and
sanitation

Access to safe drinking water and sanitation are internationally recognized human
rights, derived from the right to an adequate standard of living under Article 11(1) of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR, 1967). On 28 July
2010, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly adopted a historical resolution recognizing
“the right to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right that is essential
for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights” (UNGA, 2010, para. 1). Furthermore, since
2015, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council have recognized both the right
to safe drinking water and the right to sanitation as closely related but distinct human rights
(UNGA, 2015b; HRC, 2016a).12
International human rights law obliges states to work towards achieving universal access to
water and sanitation for all, without any discrimination, while prioritizing those most in need.
The following sections describe the key content of the human rights to water and sanitation
as elaborated in the General Comment No. 15 of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (CESCR, 2002a), the work of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights to
water and sanitation, and the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council (OHCHR, n.d.).

12

36

Given this recognition by the United Nations in 2015, this Report refers to the human rights to water and
sanitation in the plural, except when directly quoting from the language contained in United Nations official
documents prior to 2015.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

1.2.1 Availability of water and sanitation

Availability of water means that the water supply is sufficient and continuous for
personal and domestic uses, including drinking, personal sanitation, washing clothes,
food preparation, and personal and household hygiene (CESCR, 2002a, para. 12).
According to the World Health Organization (WHO, 2017a), approximately 50 litres of
water per person per day are needed to ensure that most basic needs are met while
keeping public health risks at a low level. However, these amounts are indicative as
they might depend on particular contexts and some individuals and groups may also
require additional water due to health, climate and working conditions (CESCR, 2002a).
With respect to the availability of sanitation, there must be a sufficient number of
sanitation facilities within or in the immediate vicinity of each household, and all
health or educational institutions, workplaces and other public places to ensure that
all the needs of each person are met. Moreover, they should be available continuously
and in a sufficient number to avoid overcrowding and unreasonable waiting times
(HRC, 2009, para. 70).

1.2.2 Physical accessibility of water and sanitation

Water supply and sanitation infrastructure must be located and built in such a
way that it is genuinely accessible, with consideration given to people who face
specific barriers, such as women, children, elderly people, people with disabilities
and chronically ill people (De Albuquerque, 2014). Some aspects are particularly
important: the design of the facilities; the time and distance to collect water or to reach
a sanitation facility; and physical security.
Providing access to safely managed water, the agreed objective of SDG 6, is defined
by WHO/UNICEF (2017a, p. 8) as “drinking water from an improved water source
that is located on premises, available when needed and free from faecal and
priority chemical contamination”. While there is no international legal standard
for the physical accessibility of water, the criteria for a basic drinking water service
established by the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) states a maximum of 30 minutes
per round trip (including queuing time) to collect water from an improved source
located off-premises (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). There are no similar criteria established
in the context of the SDGs (in terms of disctance or time) for sanitation facilities, as
basic sanitation services require improved facilities that are not shared with other
households (and are thus located on-site).

Disconnection of water
services because of
failure to pay due to
a lack of means may
constitute a violation of
human rights

1.2.3 Affordability

Everyone must be able to afford water and sanitation services in a way that does not
limit one’s capacity to acquire other basic goods and services (such as food, health
and education) that are essential for the realization of other human rights. “While
human rights laws do not require services to be provided free of charge, States have
an obligation to provide free services or put adequate subsidy mechanisms in place to
ensure that services always remain affordable for the poor” (De Albuquerque, 2014,
p. 35). Moreover, disconnection of water services because of failure to pay due to a lack
of means may constitute a violation of human rights (HRC, 2014).
As the affordability of water supply and sanitation services is highly contextual
(see Section 5.3), states should determine such standards at the national and/or local
level, together with standards about the adequate quantity and quality as well as other
key elements of human rights to water and sanitation (see HRC, 2015). A number of
countries13 have defined national standards, and international organizations14 have
developed recommendations in this regard.

13

14

For instance, the regulatory authorities of the United Kingdom (UK) define any expenditure on water
above 3% of the household spending as an indicator of hardship (UNDP, 2006, p. 51).
For instance, the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council recommends that the costs for water
and sanitation services should not exceed 5% of a household’s income (UN-Water DPAC/WSSCC, n.d.).

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

37

1.2.4 Quality and safety

The human rights framework specifies that the water required for each personal or
domestic use must be safe and free from micro-organisms, chemical substances and
radiological hazards that constitute a threat to a person’s health. Furthermore, water
should be of an acceptable colour, odour and taste for each personal or domestic use
(CESCR, 2002a, para. 12b). Sanitation facilities must be hygienically safe to use, meaning
that the infrastructure must effectively prevent human, animal and insect contact with
human excreta; ensure access to safe water for hand washing and menstrual hygiene;
be designed in a way that takes the needs of persons with disabilities and children into
account; and be regularly cleaned and maintained.

1.2.5 Acceptability

All water facilities and services must be culturally acceptable and appropriate, and
sensitive to gender, life-cycle and privacy requirements (CESCR, 2002a, para. 12c). Cultural
values and different perspectives must be taken into account regarding design, positioning
and conditions for use of sanitation facilities. In most cultures, acceptability will require
separate facilities for women and men in public places, and for girls and boys in schools
(HRC, 2009, para. 80). Toilets for women and girls should take needs for menstruation
hygiene management into consideration, particularly with respect to ensuring privacy and
safety (HRC, 2018a, para. 78; UNGA, 2016, para. 44). Facilities need to allow for culturally
acceptable hygiene practices, such as hand washing and anal and genital cleansing.

1.3
Groups and
individuals ‘left
behind’ in terms
of access to water
and sanitation

The human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, as any other human right, are
deeply rooted in the indivisible principles of non-discrimination and equality (Box 1.1).
A better understanding of these concepts contributes to identifying specific groups that
currently are or at risk of being ‘left behind’ in terms of access to water and sanitations
services; at the same time, it also helps to highlight roles and responsibilities in ensuring
that everybody is treated fairly with equal access to resources and opportunities. “In
order to reach equality of water and sanitation service provision, States must work
towards eliminating existing inequalities. This requires knowledge of disparities
in access, which typically exist not only between and within groups with different
incomes, but also between and within rural and urban populations. There are further
disparities based on gender and the exclusion of disadvantaged individuals or groups.”
(De Albuquerque, 2014, p. 30)

Box 1.1 The indivisible principles of non-discrimination and equality
While human rights to water and sanitation, like other economic, social and cultural rights, are to be progressively realized
over time, there are certain obligations that are of an immediate nature. An important part of such immediate obligations is
the elimination of discrimination. Discrimination in international human rights law is defined as “any distinction, exclusion or
restriction which has the purpose or the effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal
basis with others, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other
field” (CEDAW, 1979, article 1). Moreover, Article 2 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights sets out the basic principle of
equality and non-discrimination as regards the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, forbidding “distinction
of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or
other status ...” (UNGA, 1948).
The principles of non-discrimination and equality recognize that people face different barriers and have different needs,
whether because of inherent characteristics or as a result of discriminatory practices, and therefore require differentiated
support or treatment. As further clarified by the Human Rights Committee, the equal enjoyment of rights does not mean
identical treatment in every instance (HRI, 1994).
The international human rights legal framework contains international instruments to combat specific forms of
discrimination; however, it is important to note that grounds of discrimination may change over time, and that no list of
prohibited grounds can be considered exhaustive.

38

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

1.3.1 Grounds for discrimination
Box 1.2 Intersectionality
and multiple forms of
discrimination

“Although women — at
every economic level, all
over the world — may suffer
disproportionate disadvantages
and discrimination, they cannot
be seen as a homogeneous
group. Different women are
situated differently and face
different challenges and
barriers in relationship to
water, sanitation and hygiene.
Gender-based inequalities
are exacerbated when they
are coupled with other
grounds for discrimination
and disadvantages. Examples
include when women and
girls lack adequate access to
water and sanitation and at
the same time suffer from
poverty, live with a disability,
suffer from incontinence, live
in remote areas, lack security
of tenure, are imprisoned or
are homeless. In these cases,
they will be more likely to lack
access to adequate facilities, to
face exclusion or to experience
vulnerability and additional
health risks. The effects of
social factors such as caste, age,
marital status, profession, sexual
orientation and gender identity
are compounded when they
intersect with other grounds for
discrimination.”
Source: HRC (2016b, para. 12).

There are multiple prohibitive grounds of discrimination that may have an impact on
access to water and sanitation services. These include, for example, political (or other)
opinion and marital/family status (CESCR, 2002a, para. 20). An analysis prepared by
UN-Water and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in 2015,
Eliminating discrimination and inequalities in access to water and sanitation (UN-Water,
2015), put a spotlight on the possible grounds for discrimination that cause certain
groups and individuals to be particularly disadvantaged in terms of access to water,
sanitation and hygiene. The following does not necessarily constitute an exhaustive
overview of such specific groups or individuals, and it is important to note that some
people may suffer from multiple forms of discrimination (intersectionality).

Sex and gender
In many parts of the world, women and girls experience discrimination and inequalities
in the enjoyment of their human rights to water and santiation (see UN-Water, 2015
and HRC, 2016b). However, women and girls should not be regarded as a homogeneous
group (Box 1.2). Based on assigned gender roles, women and girls often bear the
primary responsibility for domestic tasks such as fetching, managing and safeguarding
water, which are largely unpaid and unrecognized (WWAP, 2016). As a result, girls are
in effect obliged to drop out of school, forfeiting their right to education and other
opportunities. The absence of sanitation and menstrual hygiene facilities at schools
and in workplaces contribute to high rates of female absenteeism, which in turn leads
to further discrimination against women in the labour market. Pregnant women are
more vulnerable to consequences of water- and sanitation-related diseases. Women and
girls are also at risk of abuse (physical, mental and sexual) when they have to travel long
distances to fetch water, to visit public toilets or to go out at night for open defecation.
The taboo and stigma surrounding menstruation contributes to ignore women's specific
sanitation needs, forcing girls and women to use unhygienic sanitary methods and use
toilets only after dark, thus risking their safety. The lack of sex-disaggregated data is a
major obstacle to the production of scientific evidence on gender inequalities related to
water and to the formulation of evidence-based policies (WWAP, 2015).
Indigenous peoples, migrants, and ethnic and other minorities
In some countries, indigenous peoples living on reserves, nomadic/traveling
populations (such as Roma in many European countries) or people of certain ancestries
(e.g. castes) experience discrimination in access to water or sanitation services.
Religious and linguistic minorities also face inequalities in many countries.
In addition, even though accordingly with the General Comment No. 20 to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights “The Covenant rights
apply to everyone, including non-nationals, such as refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless
persons, migrant workers and victims of international trafficking, regardless of legal
status and documentation” (CESCR, 2009, item I, para. 30), asylum seekers and other
migrants often struggle to access water and sanitation facilities in receiving countries, as
do internally displaced people (see Chapter 8).
The rights to water and sanitation must be ensured throughout the migration cycle,
especially in situations of displacement. Migration, internally or across borders, often
results from unemployment, social unrest, food insecurity, disasters and the adverse
effects of climate change, including drought, among other factors. It is important to note
that water scarcity and exclusion from access to safe water and sanitation in countries
of origin could exacerbate these drivers. However, migration can also serve as a strategy
of adaptation to new climate and environmental conditions and have positive outcomes,
including increased access to water (FAO, 2017a). Moreover, “in the context of water
scarcity, vulnerability will depend on the incidence of climatic variability as well as on
a person’s or community’s resilience and adaptive capacity to this stressor, as adaptive
capacity is intrinsically linked to social structures, such as gender, class, caste and
ethnicity” (Miletto et al., 2017, p. 15).

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

39

Climate change and the poor urban communities

Disability, age and health status
Human rights law provides strong protections for persons with disabilities, in particular
through the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD, 2006).
Nevertheless, persons with some kind of physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairment are disproportionately represented among those who lack access to safe
drinking water and sanitation (HRC, 2010). Water and sanitation facilities may not be
designed to meet the needs of persons with disabilities. A case study in Ethiopia revealed
that the entrances to toilets are often too narrow for wheelchairs, forcing individuals
to crawl or drag themselves on the floor to reach the toilets (Wilbur, 2010). Accessibility
problems also apply to children, (chronically) ill and older people as facilities may not be
within easy and safe reach. Some illnesses can generate stigmatization (such as HIV/AIDS)
and people affected may suffer from exclusion and be denied access to facilities.

There is a huge
discrepancy in service
provision between
formal and informal
areas in cities

Property, tenure, residence, economic and social status
Global monitoring shows a stark discrepancy between persons living in rural and urban
areas. In 2015, two out of five people in rural areas had access to piped water supplies
(a form of ‘improved’ supply, but not necessarily a ‘safely managed’ supply), whereas four
out of five people in urban areas had piped supplies. Sewer connections dominate in
urban areas, where they are used by 63% of the population, compared to only 9% in rural
areas (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). However, rapid urbanization does not always keep pace
with the extension of public services to the poorest, and there is a huge discrepancy in
service provision between formal and informal areas in cities. Causes include reluctance
of governments to formalize informal settlements by extending service provision in these
areas as well as fear from people living in these settlements to claim access to clean water
and sanitation facilities (see Chapter 6). Such inactions by authorities are not in line with
the state obligations under international human rights law. More accurate data on the
actual situation in these settlements are needed to reveal existing inequalities.

1.3.2 Disadvantaged groups and people in vulnerable situations

There can be many different disadvantaged groups in a country, and a subset of people
living in vulnerable situations in the same country may face different challenges based
on their location, history, local culture and other factors (as noted above). People in
vulnerable situations or those who rely exclusively on amenities provided by the state,
for example people placed in institutions such as prisons, refugee camps, hospitals, care
centres and schools, must be given special attention (CHR, 2005). Box 1.3 provides a nonexhaustive list of groups that are particularly vulnerable to being ‘left behind’ in terms of
access to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) services (see Table 5.1).

40

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 1.3 Examples of groups and inviduals who live in vulnerable situations or are disadvantaged in terms of accessing
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services
•

People living in poverty face higher proportional costs to access WASH services than the better-off, while generally having
access to a lower level of service.

•

Slum dwellers tend to receive WASH services from informal providers and at very high prices, while higher service levels
are often either inaccessible or the initial capital investment in infrastructure is unaffordable.

•

Population groups living in remote and isolated places tend to pay higher prices, as the unit costs of service provision
usually increase with distance.

•

Many indigenous peoples and ethnic groups tend to live in remote and isolated places (which can increase the costs of
service provision).

•

Single-headed households, especially those headed by single women, are likely to have lower incomes than households
with two or more adults and may therefore not be able to afford WASH services.

•

Children may face a lower service level since customs might prioritize the adults’ use of a household toilet, and schools
may provide poor WASH services. Access may also diminish in a large family with many dependents.

•

The elderly, the sick and physically disabled often require the support of technologies with specific features, which may
come at a high cost. At the same time, their financial resources may be limited since they often do not earn income (and
safety nets or pensions barely exist in many nations).

•

Limited WASH options are available to people faced with emergencies (such as natural disasters), especially when they
are situated far away from population centres.

•

Refugees in the developing world are usually provided temporary solutions for their WASH needs, and their degree of
access to WASH services is left largely at the mercy of donors and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

•

Prisoners are often subject to poor WASH access, which leads to indignities and suffering.

Contributed by the World Bank.

1.4
Human rightsbased approach
to integrated
water resources
management
(IWRM)

Since water is multidimensional and essential for human well-being, economic and
social activities, energy and food production, and the maintenance of ecosystems, a
multitude of institutions are involved in its management. As pressures on the world’s
freshwater resources increase, organizations and all stakeholders dealing with IWRM
face increasing challenges.
IWRM covers both the ‘hard’ (e.g. infrastructure) and ‘soft’ (e.g. governance) aspects
of water resources management. In 2000, the Global Water Partnership formulated a
widely used definition of IWRM: “IWRM is a process which promotes the co-ordinated
development and management of water, land and related resources, in order to
maximize the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable manner without
compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems.” (GWP, 2000, p. 22).
SDG Target 6.5 aims to “by 2030, implement integrated water resources management
at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate”. This
commitment of states to IWRM and transboundary water cooperation has been a
significant step in the 2030 Agenda. Putting IWRM to practice is arguably the most
comprehensive step that states have made towards achieving SDG 6. The United
Nations (UN, 2018a) shows that the global average degree of implementation of
IWRM is considered medium-low (ca. 48%) and that there are significant variations
among countries and regions. Only 25% of the countries in the three lower human
development index (HDI) groups reached the medium-low classification. The global
progress over the past 10–12 years has been classified as modest. However, most
states will not meet the target by 2030 at their current speed of implementing IWRM,
including the transboundary component (UN, 2018a).

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

41

The human rights framework establishes water for human consumption as the priority
water use. The many competing — and sometimes conflicting — demands on water
resources will give rise to questions of justice, such as the question what would be
considered to be a ‘balanced’ allocation of water for different uses (Cap-Net/WaterLex/
UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017). Taking account of disadvantaged individuals and
groups, which may in some cases also include the environment as a legal persona,
is particularly important but also challenging, and is usually framed under a human
rights-based approach (HRBA). Figure 1.1 shows how the concepts of HRBA and IWRM
may overlap and differ in their elements. The HRBA can provide a helpful ‘perspective’
to understanding and implementing IWRM with emphasis on its accountability,
participation and non-discrimination principles.
Caution must be taken in order to clearly differentiate between water resources
management (including water rights) and the human rights to water and sanitation
(Box 1.4). The types of approaches that move water towards equity include: treating
water as a common good, not an economic resource; making WASH decision-making
transparent and participatory; adopting water policies that recognize and address
political and economic imbalances; and ensuring that water is available for future as
well as present uses (Wilder and Ingram, 2018).

Figure 1.1

Relationship of a human rights-based approach to water and sanitation in relation to the elements of integrated water 		
resource management

HRBA

IWRM
Universality

Indivisibility
Interdependence
Accountability
/rule of law

Equality
Equity

Economic efficiency

Participation
Governance

Environmental
sustainability

Source: WaterLex (2014).

Box 1.4 Distinguishing water rights from the human rights to water and sanitation

“The human right to water is held by every individual, regardless of who he or she is, or where he or she lives, and safeguards
his or her access to water for personal and domestic use. Water rights, on the other hand, are generally conferred to an
individual or company through property rights or land rights, and are rights to access or use a water resource. These are
generally gained through land ownership or through an agreement with the State or landowner, and are granted for a variety
of water uses, including for industry or agriculture.” (De Albuquerque, 2014, p. 39).
People availing themselves of their water rights may be violating other people’s human rights to water and sanitation, for
example, in cases of over-extraction or pollution. A water right is a temporary right that can be provided to an individual and,
importantly, that can be withdrawn from that individual. The human right to water is not temporary, it is not subject to state
approval, and it cannot be withdrawn (Cap-Net/WaterLex/UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017).

42

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

1.5
Links between
the human rights
to water and
sanitation and other
human rights

The human rights to water and sanitation do not exist in isolation from other
human rights. Good water management and governance are fundamental to and
have an impact on the realization of a range of human rights, including the right to
life, the right to health, the right to food and the human rights related to a healthy
environment.
Priority should be given to the supply of water for domestic and personal use, as
well as to the requirements of the other Covenant rights; for example, water for
substistence farming and for health interventions that protect people from disease
(CESCR, 2002a). Water and sanitation are indispensable to human dignity as their
lack can be linked to the human right to life (UNGA, 1948, article 3; ICCPR, 1966,
article 6(1)) and jeopardize the right to health (UNGA, 1948, article 25; ICESCR, 1967,
article 12). For the realization of the right to adequate housing, access to essential
services such as water and sanitation is indispensable (OHCHR/UN-Habitat/WHO,
2010). Privacy and physical security (ICCPR, 1966, article 9) are also at risk in
situations where women and children use shared latrines or open spaces to defecate,
as such a situation makes them particularly vulnerable to harassment, attacks,
violence or rape (OHCHR/UN-Habitat/WHO, 2010). Moreover, the right to education
(UNGA, 1948, article 26; ICESCR, 1967, articles 13 and 14) cannot be guaranteed
if water is not available at school and sanitary facilities are not separated by sex,
because often girls will not attend school during their menstrual periods if sanitation
is inadequate. Access to water is essential for subsistence farming and therefore to
the realization of the right to adequate food (ICESCR, 1967, articles 11(1)(2)). Water
access and availability can have an impact on the right to freedom of movement as
well, as water access and availability can determine whether people can stay in their
homes and communities or are forced to move temporarily or even permanently
in search of water sources and green pastures for themselves, their families and
their livelihoods (Mach, 2017). The right to work can be negatively affected if
there is a lack of access to water and sanitation at the workplace, particularly for
women during menstruation and pregnancy (HRC, 2009). Human rights and the
environment are interdependent, and there are human rights obligations related to
the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and sustainable environment (HRC, 2018b).
Finite resources must be protected from overexploitation and pollution (HRC, 2013),
and facilities and services dealing with excreta and wastewater should ensure a
clean and healthy living environment (Razzaque, 2002; UNGA, 2013). The prohibition
of discrimination and the right to equality, including gender equality, and the rights
to information and to free, full and meaningful participation are also essential for
the realization of the human rights to water and sanitation, with realization of each
right having an impact on the others (OHCHR/UN-Habitat/WHO, 2010).

The human rights to water and sanitation and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

43

CHAPTER 2

Rossens Dam in Switzerland

Physical and
environmental
dimensions

44

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNU-INWEH | Nidhi Nagabhatla
UNU-FLORES | Tamara Avellán
With contributions from: Panthea Pouramin, Manzoor Qadir and Pream Mehta (UNU-INWEH);
John Payne (UNIDO Department of Environment, Industrial Resource Efficiency Division); Catalin
Stefan (TUD); Stephan Hülsmann (UNU-FLORES); Tommaso Abrate and Giacomo Teruggi (WMO);
Frederik Pischke (GWP); Robert Oakes (UNU-EHS); Serena Ceola and Christophe Cudennec (IAHS);
and Ignacio Deregibus and Stephanie Kuisma (IWRA)

This chapter examines the physical and environmental
dimensions of water provisioning and sanitation
services, with a particular focus on addressing the
specific needs of disadvantaged groups, viz. slumdwellers, displaced people, women and girls, and
communities living in vulnerable situations.

2.1
Water-provisioning systems
Three out of ten people worldwide did not have access to safely managed
water supply services in 2015 (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a; see Prologue, Section 2.i).
To ensure water-provisioning services, such as drinking water for all, a set
of preconditions are: i) water needs to be available; ii) water needs to be
accessible; and iii) water needs to be sufficiently treated. Water availability
depends upon the amount of water physically available, and how it is stored,
managed and allocated to various users.15 Water accessibility refers to how
water is delivered (or obtained) across different socioeconomic groups and
demographics, including women, children and communities in vulnerable
situations. Water treatment relates to the importance of safe water, free
of bacterial contamination, free of heavy metals, free of foul odour, and
possessing little to no turbidity.

2.1.1 Water availability

Surface water
The most commonly known options for collecting and storing surface water
(and thus enhancing supply) include dams, reservoirs and other storage
structures. Larger structures usually operate at community to regional scales,
but there are also smaller-scale options suitable for individual or household
needs (e.g. wells, ponds and ditches).
Dams and river systems have long served to cope with seasonal changes in
water availability and provide water for various sectoral users when most
needed. Overall, dams have served human population growth and development
by enhancing capabilities of managing water resources, and thus helped
sustain food and energy security (Chen et al., 2016). The size and type of built

15

Groups and communities living in vulnerable situations include but are not limited to people
living in poverty (in rural and urban areas), people with disabilities, displaced people, people
living with HIV, and the elderly. This applies wherever the term is used in this chapter.

Physical and environmental dimensions

45

dams and reservoirs can vary enormously, depending on their purpose and site-specific
conditions, ranging from sand dams in seasonal rivers to mega-projects such as the Three
Gorges Dam in the People’s Republic of China (see Box 2.1 in WWAP/UN-Water, 2018).
In rural communities and smaller villages, locally suited fit-for-purpose dams and
reservoirs hold potential to provide water to disadvantaged groups that traditionally
encounter particular challenges in obtaining and securing water supplies. Emerging
innovative solutions similar to small-scale infrastructure (e.g. sand dams) are typically
local-scale interventions and are noted to have profound positive impacts on local
communities, especially in water-scarce areas as in Kenya (Ryan and Elsner, 2016).
Large-scale dam projects principally require large direct investments and can come with
high environmental as well as socio-economic costs. The sociocultural and financial
consequences of building dams could adversely impact communities and people
living in vulnerable areas, particularly women and girls, who may be burdened by
displacement during the construction of canals, irrigation schemes, roads, power lines
and accompanying developments (Ronayne, 2005). Such arguments are made in the case
of the Sardar-Sarovar Dam and Tehri Dam projects in India (Banerjee et al., 2005).
The International Commission on Large Dams database (ICOLD, n.d.) shows that
approximately 74% of all registered dams16 are single-purpose, with roughly 13% of them
being used for water supply and 50% for irrigation. However, multi-purpose facilities
are becoming more popular, especially in the case of rehabilitating old dams (Bonnet et
al., 2015; Branche, 2015). Small-scale, local and fit-to-purpose dams and reservoirs can
contribute to water security and flood protection, as well as provide renewable energy for
local populations.

Appropriately designed
nature-based solutions
(NBS), which provide
water management
services that can
replace, augment or
work in parallel with
those delivered by grey
infrastructure, can
improve surface water
retention

Appropriately designed nature-based solutions (NBS), which provide water management
services that can replace, augment or work in parallel with those delivered by grey
infrastructure (WWAP/UN-Water, 2018), can improve surface water retention. This in
turn can enhance infiltration to groundwater and thus provide increased storage (WWAP/
UN-Water, 2018). Natural and constructed wetlands can also help improve water quality
(WWAP/UN-Water, 2018; Nagabhatla and Metcalfe, 2018) but do not usually guarantee a
quality of water that is safe for drinking.

Groundwater
Sub-surface water storage can complement surface water availability, especially during
periods of water scarcity. In addition to potentially being accessed directly (via wells,
for instance), aquifers can also augment surface water availability via lateral groundwater
flows into natural waterways.
Managed aquifer recharge (MAR) provides natural storage for groundwater by
intentionally recharging an aquifer with surface water for later use or to provide
environmental benefits (Dillon, 2005). Medium- and long-term benefits in both rural
and urban areas include: the securing and enhancing of seasonal water availability; the
improvement of land value and biodiversity; mitigation of flood-related risks; protection
against aquifer salinization; freshening of coastal aquifers affected by saltwater intrusion;
maintenance and augmentation of environmental flows and groundwater-dependent
ecosystems; and improvements in water quality through soil-aquifer treatment (Dillon
et al., 2009). MAR has been successfully tested in various parts of the world for the
restoration of affected groundwater-dependent ecosystem services, as detailed in Box 2.1.

Unconventional water resources
Unconventional water resources are a by-product of specific processes or can result from
specialized technology to collect/access water. These resources often need proper pre-use
treatment, and when used for irrigation, they require appropriate on-farm management
(Qadir et al., 2007). Key examples of unconventional water resources include groundwater
confined in deep geological formations; atmospheric moisture harvested through cloud
seeding and fog collection (Box 2.2); physical transportation of water through icebergs;

16

46

There are about 59,100 registered dams (ICOLD, n.d.).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 2.1 Using check dams to increase water availability in Rajasthan, India
Mosaic irrigation1 with groundwater provides the primary source of income for most farming villages in southern Rajasthan.
The relatively low monsoon rainfall (600mm) lasts an average of only 30 days in the wet season, and most rain quickly
runs off the hard rock upland catchments. The monsoon is followed by a 9-month period with only negligible rainfall,
characterized by high evaporation rates. As a coping mechanism, thousands of check dams2 are built on streams to reduce
the streamflow of the water and to increase groundwater recharge (Dashora et al., 2017). The MARVI (Managing Aquifer
Recharge and Groundwater Use through Village-Level Intervention) project (Maheshwari et al., 2014) trained farmers to
measure groundwater levels in order to assess the resource and to plan their planting schedules accordingly. It also trained
them to monitor check dam water levels to determine their effectiveness and the need for silt-scraping in the dry season
to maintain recharge rates. Four monitored check dams near Dharta are responsible for on average 200,000 m3/year each,
securing approximately 16% of dry-season crops in adjacent villages (Dashora et al., 2017).
1

Mosaic irrigation is an alternative to large irrigated systems and includes “number of small, localised irrigated areas dispersed as a mosaic across the landscape.”
(Paydar et al., 2010, p. 455).

2

A check dam is a small, sometimes temporary, dam in a small watercourse, built to reduce streamflow, minimize erosion and/or divert water.

Box 2.2 Fog water collection in Morocco: Aït Baamrane
The biggest fog water collection system is at Mount Boutmezguida, Aït Baamrane, Morocco. This project combines
technology and research to achieve community development by enhancing access to clean water and sanitation in rural
Berber communities. The fog collectors installed have an estimated daily water production of 6,300 litres, providing water to
a total of 500 people in the community during fog events. Women and children perceived the major positive impacts in the
community, which address health, culture and educational challenges. Multiple stakeholders, including local communities,
rural community authorities and international researchers, participate in the initiative, and multiple partners (e.g. the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID), Munich Re Foundation and other public and private parties) provide
financial support for technology improvements and comprehensive community development.
Source: Dodson and Bargach (2015).

micro-scale capture of rainwater where it otherwise evaporates; desalinated water; and
residual water from urban areas and agriculture (Figure 2.1).

Water reuse offers
opportunities for
enhancing conventional
water supplies, especially
in cities relying on more
distant sources of water

Upscaling unconventional methods can balance the amount of water currently
extracted from surface and groundwater sources while minimizing environmental
degradation and conflicting/competing usages.
Water reuse offers opportunities for enhancing conventional water supplies, especially
in cities relying on more distant sources of water. Treating wastewater to a quality
standard that is safe and susceptible to a user (i.e. ‘fit-for-purpose’ treatment) not only
improves its overall appeal, but also makes water reuse more economically feasible
(WWAP, 2017). Furthermore, some states and communities plan to implement the
vision of zero discharge and 100% recycling of wastewater in industrial settings through
processes such as stream separation, material and energy recovery, as well as various
wastewater management tools (WWAP, 2006, 2017).
Despite multiple benefits, the potential of most unconventional water resources —
and especially water reuse and recycling — is still highly under-explored and underexploited (WWAP, 2017; Qadir et al., 2018). While both the technologies and the
knowledge for the development of unconventional resources are emerging along with
an increasing number of applications, there are financial, technological and policy
barriers to exploiting their full potential. Most unconventional water resources are not
part of national water policies and budgets, even in countries with high potential.

Physical and environmental dimensions

47

Figure 2.1 Examples of unconventional water resources

Atmospheric moisture
harvesting (cloud
seeding, fog water
collection)

Micro-scale capture
of rainwater where it
otherwise evaporates

Unconventional
water resources

Transportation of water
through icebergs or by
super-tankers

Source: Based on Qadir et al. (2007) and
UNU-INWEH (n.d.).

Used water from urban
and rural settlements
(stormwater, municipal
wastewater, agricultural
drainage water)

Desalinated seawater
and highly brackish
groundwater

Groundwater confined
in deep geological
formations

Two additional examples of alternatives for managing water availability include rainwater
harvesting and inter-basin transfers (IBTs). Managing water availability using rainwater
harvesting is mostly done at small or local scales and involves collecting, storing and
using rainwater when it falls for industrial and domestic uses, thereby helping to meet the
high demand of water. Rainwater harvesting is advantageous as it is cost-effective, and
water is provided near the household, decreasing the burden of travelling long distances
for collection, particularly for women and children (Helmreich and Horn, 2009; Ojwang
et al., 2017). IBTs have been utilized for millennia and still represent a very common
means of enhancing water availability through transfer of water from one river basin
to a geographically different one, or from one river system to another. At the turn of the
millennium, they accounted for 540 km3 or 14% of the global water withdrawals (ICID, 2005)
and this ratio was predicted to rise over the near future (Gupta and Van der Zaag, 2008).
The local institutions supporting specific water resources such as micro-scale rainwater
harvesting and safely managed wastewater use are often still limited or lacking capacity for
scalability. However, solutions exist in the form of indoor water conservation technologies,
for example low-volume toilets, water-saving devices for faucets (Hejazi et al., 2013) or
outdoor conservation technologies, such as xeriscaping17 or roof-top rainwater harvesting.

2.1.2 Water accessibility

The vast majority of the 5.2 billion people with access to safely managed drinking water
services (see Prologue, Section 2.i) rely on piped networks, along with other conventional,
centralized and decentralized water supply and treatment systems. Most urban dwellers
have access to safely managed drinking water services, and a source of water located on
their premises, available when needed and free from contamination.
Piped water is the least costly method to transport water. However, it is far too often
unavailable to the poor, thus aggravating inequality, especially in urban slums and in
remote and rural areas. Where water supply via piped networks is unavailable, people
mostly rely on wells or community water supply systems (e.g. water delivery through kiosks
and vendors, trucking water) to access water. In the latter case, they generally pay prices
several times higher per litre of water compared to individuals or communities serviced by
water pipe systems (see Chapters 5 and 6), further exacerbating inequities between the rich

17

48

Xeriscaping can be referred to as smart landscaping whereby native plants with low water demands are used
in arid regions (Vickers, 2006).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

and disadvantaged. For example, WaterAid (2016) reported that poor people in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs) can typically spend 5–25% of their income on water
to meet their basic needs (about 50 litres per person per day), and in certain parts of
Madagascar and Papua New Guinea, some people spend over half of their income to
buy water from vendors. The point being, in many (if not most) cases, the poor pay
more to receive less water, and it is often of lower quality.
Of the 844 million people currently lacking basic drinking water services, 263 million
people (4% of the population) spend over 30 minutes in round trips collecting water
from an improved source, while 159 million people collect drinking water directly
from surface water sources. Nearly 60% of the latter group lives in Sub-Saharan Africa
(WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

Piped water is the
least costly method to
transport water

In many rural environments, local streams, ponds or lakes are sources for water
collection. Small reservoirs can also play a pivotal role in facilitating accessibility of
water resources, making water available and in some cases, physically accessible.
The burden of collecting water in these settings falls disproportionately on women
and girls (Figure 2.2) as “women and girls are responsible for water collection in 8 out
of 10 households with water off premises, so reducing the population with limited
drinking water services will have a strong gender impact.” (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a, p. 11).
Consequently, the lack of WASH leads to physical and psychosocial stress, increasing
the risk of mortality (i.e. preterm birth and low infant birth weight causing maternal
and child mortality) (Baker et al., 2018). Fetching water over long distances poses
several challenges for communities, groups and people living in disadvantaged and
vulnerable situations, including risks to physical safety when collecting water, lost
time for education and other income-generating activities, as well as adverse health
outcomes. Carrying a heavy load over long distances can also take a physical toll, often
leading to increased musculoskeletal injuries. A study from Limpopo Province in
South Africa illustrates how women experience spinal pain potentially associated with
carrying water for domestic purposes (Geere et al., 2010).

Women pushing Hippo Water Rollers

Innovations like WaterWheels (Patwardhan, 2017) and the ‘Hippo Water Roller’
(see photo), a container that can be rolled along the ground with a capacity of up to 90
litres of water, have been developed to reduce the burden of travelling long distances
for obtaining water. The advantage is that transporting water is less strenuous for the
elderly and children and allows transportation of a larger quantity of water, thereby
reducing the number of trips needed. These innovations have somewhat assisted those
with basic drinking water needs, but the lack of access to safely managed drinking
water is still a persisting problem.

Physical and environmental dimensions

49

Figure 2.2

Burden for collecting water in rural areas, by gender and age (%), in countries where at least 1 in 10 households have water 		
off-premises

South Sudan

5

84

Guinea-Bissau

3

72

Central African Republic

14

76

Zambia

8

69

Democratic Republic of the Congo

9

75

Chad

7

71

Ethiopia

12

76

Burundi

17

78

Madagascar

15

69

Liberia

20
24
12

69

Somalia

61

Togo

61

Niger

26

65

Lesotho

17

61

Sierra Leone

20

66

Nepal

3

56

Sao Tome and Principe

16

59

Zimbabwe

9
5
11

54

Gambia

53

Kenya

53

Benin

9

56

Myanmar

17

48

Tajikistan

8

47

Ghana

16

49

Mali

4

60

India

7

42

Côte d’Ivoire

3

42

Mauritania

21

41

Cameroon

31

48

Timor-Leste

9

44

Yemen

9

42

Nigeria

31
5
11

42

Senegal

34

Swaziland*

34

Vanuatu

17

34

Namibia

13

32

Lao People’s Democratic Republic

7

27

Mongolia

50

25

Afghanistan

15

Peru

7
8

Indonesia

8

Georgia

14
14
13

Albania

6

Men

16

Djibuti

2

8

Honduras

4

5

Jamaica

7

3

Cuba

8

0

Girls

4

Syrian Arab Republic

10

Women

8

Kazakhstan

12

20

19

Republic of Moldova

16

Boys

29

Azerbaijan

5

40

26

Uzbekistan

16
29

60

81

Malawi

6

80

84

Burkina Faso

8

100

90

Mozambique

7

2

0

20

*The country name was changed to Eswatini from the former name of Swaziland as of 19 April 2018.
See www.un.org/en/member-states/.

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017b, fig. 20, p. 31).

50

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

40

60

80

100

Water kiosks provide an alternative and potentially affordable solution to accessibility
challenges, and are a prominent feature in areas where water supply is otherwise
limited or unavailable, including urban slums (Contzen and Marks, 2018). In Kenya
(Box 2.3), water kiosks make up approximately 23% of water vendors and provide
the most affordable option for those living in slums (US$0.03 for 20 litre jerry can
units from kiosks vs. an average of US$0.15 for 20 litre jerry can units across pushcart
vendors) (UNDP, 2011a). Water kiosks can also help lower disease burdens, as
reported in Haiti during the cholera epidemic (UN News, 2016). In Mombasa (Kenya),
where 50% of the population were only receiving water 2 to 3 days per week, water
kiosks or vendors have helped improve access to drinking water (Economic and
Social Rights Centre, 2016). In high-income countries (HICs), residential use rates in
2014 ranged from 200 litres to as much as 600 litres per person per day (IWA, 2014).

Water kiosks provide
an alternative and
potentially affordable
solution to accessibility
challenges

Another method of providing access to water includes water tinkering (or water
trucking), which also serves as a rapid way to transport water during emergencies
(WHO/WEDC, 2011). However, trucking is an expensive alternative and can be timeconsuming to administer. Water trucking is not limited to developing countries. In
Canada, for example, over 13% of homes on native reserves are dependent on water
tankers as the primary source of potable water supply (WaterCanada, 2017). Water
tankers also provide a solution for disadvantaged groups, including people living in
refugee camps (e.g. the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan) (see Box 9.1) where water
supply and wastewater disposal are constant concerns (EcoWatch, 2018).
Future efforts to improve global accessibility of clean water require innovative
solutions at the local level. Scaling locally adopted methods of managing availability
and accessibility need to account for local geography, culture and level of technical
capacity (Carter et al., 2010). Context-specific, place-based and fit-for-purpose
solutions for water delivery and access need to be selected based on their cost and
payment structures or mechanisms to ensure that groups are not denied access due to
cost and/or distance (see Chapter 5) (Fonseca and Pories, 2017).
Other issues need to be addressed besides considering costs and payment structures
associated with purely conventional water supply methods. For instance, without a
comprehensive analysis, the costs of producing unconventional water resources can
be perceived to be high. However, with conventional storage and distribution systems,
women and girls spend hours fetching water over long distances and are exposed to
waterborne diseases. These risks are reduced with unconventional water resources,
such as fog water collection or trucking, which should be accounted for when assessing
their overall monetary cost. Furthermore, the potential to use the increased water
and time availability for other income-generating activities, thereby enhancing
opportunities for women to partake in other tasks and for girls to remain in school,
should also be taken into consideration.

Box 2.3 Delegated Management Model for improving water quality and affordability – the case of slum dwellers in Kisumu,
Kenya
While addressing some problems of non-revenue water1 and to better serve Kisumu’s large informal settlements, Kisumu
Water and Sewerage Company (KIWASCO) installed meter chambers at various points on their bulk water supply network
and appointed Master Operators (MOs) to run the water supply from those chambers. The MOs are registered groups coming
from the community to be served, with the intention of improving the water-provisioning services and facilitating greater
stakeholder participation in decision-making. Over time, the intervention created a generally positive impact on the extent as
well as quality of services received by residents. In 2012, the project was serving around 64,000 people through 366 kiosks and
590 individual household connections. Prices for water were lowered from US$0.20 to US$0.03 per 20 litres and the quantity of
non-revenue water recorded a 6.5% reduction. Fewer water shortages were recorded. Women and children travelled shorter
distances and noted less time for water collection. Residents were also empowered to influence decisions at the utility, while
also serving as master operators.
Source: UN-Habitat (n.d.).
1

Non-revenue water is the difference between the volume of water put into a water distribution system and the volume that is billed to customers.

Physical and environmental dimensions

51

Box 2.4 Poor drinking water
quality and some solutions for
indigenous communities in
Canada
While Canada is known for
its abundance of freshwater,
a disproportionate number
of the approximately 90,000
cases of illnesses caused by
contaminated drinking water
each year occur in indigenous
communities. In 2010, 40% of
the First Nations communities
across Canada were under a
drinking water advisory, or a
‘boil water advisory’ (Metcalfe
et al., 2011). There has been a
history of poor water quality,
inadequate treatment of
drinking water, as well as a
lack of running water and
proper sanitation provided to
these communities. Despite
being in a developed country,
indigenous communities in
Canada often find themselves
with limited financial and
human resources, and
confronted with a lack of
enforcement of regulations and
policies regarding access to
safe water and sanitation. Since
the identification of this issue,
the Provincial Government
of Ontario has played a role
in reducing the incidences of
drinking water contamination
in First Nations communities,
while other provinces are also
taking steps to address these
problems (ECO, 2017).

The most common
methods of water
purification depend upon
electricity/energy being
available around the
clock – which is certainly
not a reality everywhere

52

2.1.3 Water treatment

In 2012, the Global Burden of Disease Study found that unimproved water and
sanitation continue to contribute to the disease burden, particularly in childhood
communicable diseases (Lim et al., 2012). These health impacts disproportionately
affect groups/people living in vulnerable situations within LMICs, such as women
and girls during different reproductive life stages, particularly in rural areas
(Baker et al., 2017). Providing safe drinking water to individuals in disadvantaged
situations is a challenge even in HICs (Box 2.4).
In many LMICs, women are not only mainly responsible for collecting and
storing water, but also for disposing of wastewater that contains contaminants
including chemicals or microbes, further increasing their disease burden.
Collecting water from untreated surface water sources (e.g. rivers, streams) and
washing clothes in contaminated water expose them to waterborne diseases
(e.g. typhoid, cholera, dysentery, diarrhoea). One study has demonstrated that,
under such conditions, pregnant women are at increased risk of infection from
Hepatitis E (Navaneethan et al., 2008).
For treating water to drinking level quality, centralized water management
employs pipe network systems, while decentralized supply systems involve three
critical categories: point-of-use system (POU), point-of-entry system (POE), and
small-scale system (SSS). These categories are classified based on the quantity of
treated water that they can supply (Peter-Varbanets et al., 2009), as illustrated in
Figure 2.3.
The most common methods of water purification depend upon electricity/energy
being available around the clock, which is certainly not a reality everywhere.
POU and POE systems use purification methods consisting of three main
categories (Peter-Varbanets et al., 2009):
•
•
•

Heat or radiation
Chemical treatment
Physical removal processes

Heat or radiation can effectively destroy pathogens (e.g. techniques include
boiling, solar radiation, etc.). Even if these methods kill the pathogens, they do
not offer protection against recontamination. Chemicals are widely used to purify,
disinfect and protect against recontamination. Physical removal helps reduce
microbial and chemical contaminants, by separating pollutants from the water,
using sedimentation or filtration techniques. The technologies utilised by SSS are
generally the same as in POU and POE systems. The difference is that they are
scaled up, providing drinking water for communities in quantities of 1,000–10,000
litres per day, and can include technologies applied on a large scale. SSS is also
most often employed to provide emergency water supply.
Source water can be naturally contaminated (with arsenic, for instance), or
it can be contaminated from industrial, domestic/municipal, or agricultural
sources. A number of emerging pollutants, such as pharmaceutical substances,
may be posing increasing health risks (WWAP, 2017). Phytoremediation, which
uses plants to degrade (by removing or transforming) toxic chemicals in soils,
groundwater, surface water and the atmosphere, can be an effective technology
for cleaning polluted areas (WWAP/UN-Water, 2018). Furthermore, groundwater
bioremediation has been practiced for years, particularly in industrial settings
(existing and legacy sites) for cleaning up organic contamination (experiments
have been conducted by Gross et al., 1995 and Jewett et al., 1999). While biological
processes are energy-efficient, the remediation cycle is often long and the toxic
plant material requires safe disposal. Thus, the development of innovative,
high-performance and low-cost remediation techniques could be valuable
for marginalized communities residing in or alongside contaminated sites
(Nagabhatla and Metcalfe, 2018).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 2.3 Different supply systems at the household (POU) and community or village levels (POE, SSS)

Treats all water entering into
a household, usually as an
additional purification of water
from a centralized supply

Treats approximately
25 litres per day for
one household

Point-of-entry
(POE)

Point-of-use
(POU)

Small-scale
systems (SSS)

Source: Based on Peter-Varbanets et al. (2009).

2.2
Sanitation

Provides water to communities in
quantities of 1 000–10 000 litres per day,
and often employed as emergency camp
water supply systems

Only two of out five people worldwide had access to safely managed sanitation
services in 2015 (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a; see Prologue, Section 2.ii). Menstrual health
management (MHM) is rarely considered in a traditional sanitation context, and, as a
result, women’s reproductive and sexual health needs are not being fully met in many
countries (see Box 2.5), with direct impacts on the well-being of women and girls.
Generally, sanitation comprises on- or off-site facilities for the collection, transport,
treatment and disposal of waste under hygienic conditions. Collection systems usually
refer to a toilet system. Transportation in the context of typical grey infrastructure
refers to a piped underground sewage system, although in some instances waste is

Box 2.5 WASH in the context of menstrual health management (MHM)
WASH is pivotal to improve women and girls’ reproductive and sexual health, and thereby for allowing women to be
productive members of society. Meeting MHM1 goals are central to the health and well-being of women and girls. However,
this dimension is often lacking or insufficiently addressed in many low- or middle-income countries (LMICs). A key
consequence of this oversight includes women and girls using unsanitary materials, thereby increasing incidences of
infection and the disease burden, augmenting, for instance, the risk of urinary tract infections (UTIs). UTIs are a public
health problem globally and are pervasive within LMICs (Sumpter and Torondel, 2013). In case of school-going girls, often
low attendance or drop-out from education is attributed to lack of MHM facilities. The spill-over effect of this situation is lack
of future employment opportunities, and women becoming less productive (see Box 14.1 in WWAP, 2016).
Furthermore, UTIs are associated with an increased risk of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection (Atashili
et al., 2008). The state of women’s reproductive health is concerning, especially within LMICs, where women are at higher
risk of developing infections during birth due to facilities lacking WASH provisions. Approximately 38% of healthcare
facilities in 54 countries do not have access to basic water sources and around 20% do not have access to primary sanitation
infrastructure (WHO/UNICEF, 2015a). Impoverished conditions exist in Sub-Saharan Africa where, among 39 of 46
countries analysed, less than 15% of women who delivered at home had access to WASH infrastructure (Gon et al., 2016).
1

MHM is defined as: “Women and adolescent girls using a clean menstrual management material to absorb or collect blood that can be changed in privacy as
necessary for the duration of the menstruation period, using soap and water for washing the body as required, and having access to facilities to dispose of used
menstrual management materials.” (Budhathoki et al., 2018, p. 2).

Physical and environmental dimensions

53

transported by trucks, and treatment, when available, usually involves centralized
sewage treatment plants or localized systems (e.g. septic tanks). Disposal of end
products is usually split into liquid and solid waste that can be disposed of safely into the
environment or, if not, can be collected in hazardous waste facilities to be destroyed in
an incinerator. However, a large amount of variation exists within each of these steps to
address various types of situations.

2.2.1 Waste collection

Even though the collection of wastewater has little effect on the final quality of water
that is disposed of or the efficiency of treatment, it is often the most costly part of the
system (WWAP, 2017). Flush toilets have provided safe sanitation systems in developed
and developing regions of the world for a very long time. While this has solved issues of
pathogen exposure on site, it is only useful in the context of the advanced sewage and
wastewater treatment infrastructure, for which many LMICs are lacking the facilities,
financing and capacity. The amount of water needed for flush toilets can also create
a burden on available water resources and thereby increase water stress in densely
populated areas. Also, the available nutrients and organic matter contained in human
faecal waste becomes diluted and mixed, making their recovery more difficult. Box 2.6
provides an example of communities in Haiti solving the problem of lacking wastewater
infrastructure by using dry toilets and community-led transport to produce fertilizer
from human waste.

Box 2.6 Using waste to fertilize soils in Haiti
Communities in Haiti have been benefiting from dry toilets as well as community-driven transported composting of human
waste to produce resources such as fertilizer. The group called Sustainable Organic Integrated Livelihoods (SOIL) empowers
people within a community to transform their waste into a resource. This is done through using EkoLakay household dry
toilets whereby SOIL workers weekly collect human waste to transform into compost through a waste treatment facility.
This promotes development by creating new jobs and providing sustainable sanitation options.
The social business model works because customers rent a toilet that is built by local contractors using local materials for
approximately US$5 per month. This fee also includes carbon cover material (used for covering up waste material to avoid
smell) and weekly waste collection, which SOIL then transports to compost sites. Through a carefully monitored process,
the waste is transformed into nutrient-rich compost. The compost is sold for use in agriculture and reforestation projects,
providing an environmentally friendly alternative to chemical fertilizers while simultaneously generating revenue to
support the provision of sanitation services.
Figure | Ecological Sanitation Method
SOIL toilets provide people
with access to safe, dignified
sanitation

Plants bear nutritious,
organic food for people to
eat (and then excrete)

Waste is collected and
transported to one of SOIL’s
waste treatment sites

The Poop Loop
Waste is transformed into
compost through a carefully
monitored process that
includes thorough lab testing

Plants growing in SOIL’s
compost help reforest and
stabilize Haiti’s environment

Source: Adapted from SOIL (n.d.).

54

Finished compost is a valuable
resource that nourishes the soil

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

2.2.2 Treatment

The centralized approach of wastewater treatment has a long history of use, especially
in HICs. It includes the collection and disposal of wastewater at centralized points
(Massoud et al., 2009). Another approach is decentralized wastewater treatment,
whereby wastewater is treated close to the place of origin and, in most cases, reused
or disposed of near or at the site of its generation (see Chapter 6). The strengths and
weaknesses for both systems are summarized in Table 2.1.

2.2.3 Waste disposal

Disposal of treated wastewater and solid waste (e.g. garbage, greases and oils,
sludge, etc.) needs to be carried out in an environmentally sound manner to reduce
contamination and disease risk. Worldwide, over 80% of all wastewater returns to the
environment without being treated (WWAP, 2017). Treated wastewater is generally
released into surface water bodies, while sludge and other solid waste are sent to
landfills. The need for innovative technologies and fit-for-pupose and cost-effective
solutions remains pertinent to ensure the safe collection, transport, treatment and
disposal of waste. Valorizing sludge as a resource for other purposes, such as biogas
production, co-incineration or as fertilizer in landscaping and agriculture, can provide
additional revenue for communities. Solutions should also be locally adapted and
implemented in a collaborative and inclusive manner, involving all key stakeholers,
beneficiaries and leaving no one behind (WWAP, 2017).

Table 2.1 Advantages and disadvantages of centralized and decentralized systems, with limitations or benefits
Centralized sewage system

Decentralized sewage system

Advantage

Disadvantage

Advantage

Disadvantage

Does not require the participation
and information of the
population, at least not to a
degree that is necessary for the
decentralized approach (Barnard
et al., 2013).

Collection of wastewater is
expensive, and can pose a
serious threat to environment
and public health (e.g. leaks,
flooding or destruction of
treatment sites) (Gikas and
Tchobanoglous, 2009).

Collection of wastewater from
various sites is not necessary
(Massoud et al., 2009).

Maintenance of treatment
facilities is time-consuming
and if faulty or broken can
pose dangerous threats to the
environment and population
(Massoud et al., 2009).

Wastewater treatment is
controllable and provides
power to the local authorities
and governments to effectively
implement their goals and
measures; processes can be
monitored by trained personnel
(Oakley et al., 2010).

The costs of wastewater
collection are even greater for
remote locations or densely
populated areas, because
sewer systems need to reach
isolated places and cover greater
distances.

Wastewater composition and
variability in quantity and quality
can be better estimated (Almeida
et al., 1999; Anh et al., 2002).
Predictability of composition
allows for specialized treatment
methods that can be optimized
(Gillot et al., 1999).

Wastewater treatment is
less controllable as more
stakeholders can be involved.
Insufficient oversight can
cause serious problems and
endanger the success of the
project (Lienert and Larsen,
2006; Libralato et al., 2012).

Methods have been optimized
for decades, providing a large
amount of experience in
maximizing the potential (and
addressing the limitations)
of centralized wastewater
treatment (Anh et al. 2002).

Mixture of different flows of
wastewater makes wastewater
difficult to control (Anh et al.
2002). Municipal wastewater
generation varies depending on
the time of the day, holidays,
population growth, or in- or
defluxes in the long term.

New opportunities for optimized
treatment effort; growing potential
for reclaimed wastewater use.
Specialized treatment methods
can reduce treatment time and
costs, and raise the potential of
reuse in the surrounding area
(Asano and Levine, 1996).

Limitations or benefits of centralized sewage systems

Limitations or benefits of decentralized sewage systems

Requires sufficient funding (from government or other sources) to
manage the systems in a sustainable manner.

Information about the area of implementation are very difficult to
obtain (Tsagarakis et al., 2001), especially in regions that can profit
the most (rural or isolated, poor, sparsely populated).

Requires adequate technical and human capacity to manage,
operate and monitor treatment of wastewater.

Can provide a multitude of benefits for certain regions under the right
conditions (Massoud, et al., 2009).
Adaptability of such systems, as they are often built modularized and
can be expanded or reduced to meet the current needs (Otterpohl et
al., 2004), especially for refugee camps or other temporary shelters.

Source: UNU-FLORES.

Physical and environmental dimensions

55

2.3
Disaster risk
reduction

Water-related natural hazards, such as floods and droughts, can affect water supply and
sanitation infrastructure, leading to significant economic and social losses and impacts
(see Prologue, Section 1.iv). Such hazards are projected to increase in frequency and
intensity as a result of climate change. The short and long-term impacts of water-related
extreme events include loss of life, spread of communicable diseases, interruptions in
water and food-provisioning systems, damage to financial assets and social disruption
(Mata-Lima et al., 2013).
The impact of disasters in LMICs is often exacerbated due to a combination of poor
infrastructure and weak governance. Further investigation is needed to create a climateand hazard-resilient water supply and sanitation infrastructure, and to increase the
transferability of knowledge and technologies.

Valorizing sludge as
a resource for other
purposes, such as
biogas production,
co-incineration or as
fertilizer in landscaping
and agriculture, can
provide additional
revenue for communities

56

To mitigate the impacts caused by climate change and disasters, a paradigm shift
from post-disaster response to proactive risk reduction is needed. This approach
requires hydrological data and information to support science-based risk management
decisions, as well as investments in early warning systems (EWS) that provide lead
time and integrate forecasting. EWS combined with public awareness, education and
preparedness can allow people to quickly respond to hazard information, thereby
increasing human safety while reducing potential human losses. The myth of absolute
control over natural disasters and absolute safety from them should also be abandoned,
in favour of solutions that promote mitigation and adaptation strategies. Furthermore,
an integrated approach to water management needs to be applied, abandoning measures
with a narrow sectoral focus and adopting a holistic approach that encompasses land
management, environmental protection, and social and economic aspects. Women and
girls often bear the burden of adverse impacts, due to their gendered role, particularly

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Aerial view of Neretva River valley, Croatia

in water-related crisis scenarios. For instance, when analysing disaster mortality, it has
been established that in less developed countries, women have higher mortality rates
resulting from floods and tropical cyclones than men (Cutter, 2017).

2.4
Conclusions

For millions of individuals, including women and girls in vulnerable situations, access
to acceptable and affordable drinking water is a persisting problem. Similarly, access
to sanitation services is another major development challenge, mostly in LMICs and
for groups/people living in poverty and disadvantaged situations. Place-based, fit-forpurpose solutions are required to provide for the safe collection, transport, treatment
and disposal of human waste at multiple scales and in multiple geographies.
Low-technology solutions similar to Hippo Water Rollers, community-managed smallscale reservoirs etc. demonstrate potential for increasing the availability, accessibility
and quality of water, even in water-scarce areas. However, the scalability of these
solutions in LMICs and among groups, communities and people in vulnerable and
disadvantaged situations requires focused efforts and investments. While innovative
solutions are increasingly reported within regions and communities, offering potential
to enhance water availability, quality and access, barriers to scalability include financing
and social acceptance. Another crucial paradigm is managing the demand–supply
dynamics. In water management scenarios worldwide, the water supply cannot always
meet water demand, but adopting a demand-driven approach can help to overcome this
challenge to a fair extent. It is widely argued that various, innovative and geographically
fitting solutions to managing water availability, acessibility and quality, including options
explained as nature-based solutions, can potentially assist in overcoming the challenge
of mitigating water stress, and achieving water security.

Physical and environmental dimensions

57

CHAPTER 3

Terraced rice fields in Yuanyang county, Yunnan, People’s Republic of China

Social
dimensions

58

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNESCO-IHP | Alexander Otte
With contributions from: Marianne Kjellén (UNDP); Indika Gunawardana (Cap-Net UNDP); Julia Heiss, Jyoti
Hosagrahar, Akane Nakamura, Christine Delsol, Nada Al Hassan, Susanna Kari, Laicia Gagnier, Nina Schlager,
Nicole Webley and Giuseppe Arduino (UNESCO); Maria Teresa Gutierrez and Rishabh Kumar Dhir (ILO); Lesha
Witmer (WfWP); Rio Hada (OHCHR); and Andrei Jouravlev (UNECLAC)

This chapter describes the key mechanisms of
exclusion and the drivers behind social inequality
and discrimination over access to water supply and
sanitation services, with a focus on specific groups
in potentially vulnerable situations.

3.1
Introduction
The human rights to water and sanitation entitle everyone, without
discrimination, to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and
affordable water for personal and domestic use. This includes water for
drinking, personal sanitation, washing of clothes, food preparation, and
personal and household hygiene (see Chapters 1 and 4). The Member States
of the United Nations have explicitly acknowledged that access to clean
drinking water and sanitation are fundamental to the realization of all human
rights, underlining the importance of water and sanitation for a dignified life,
livelihoods and peaceful development, especially for populations in the most
vulnerable situations (UNGA, 2010; UN-Water, 2015).
The resolution recognizing the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation and other relevant agreements and declarations (see Chapters 1
and 4) underline particular social challenges that need to be overcome to
ensure respect for human rights and the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). These challenges are not limited to SDG 6, as the
cross-cutting nature of water and sanitation affects the implementation of
most other SDGs. The transversal role of water across all segments of societies
contributes to the complexity of ensuring respect for the related human rights
for all, leaving no one behind.
The United Nations Human Development Report 2016 highlights that
groups living in poverty or in marginalized and disadvantaged situations
are also those requiring most attention to ensure they benefit from the
implementation of the SDGs. This includes indigenous peoples, ethnic
minorities, refugees (see Chapter 8) and migrants. Women also often are
disadvantaged in terms of their enjoyment of human rights across several
societies worldwide. Key barriers and mechanisms of exclusion (Figure 3.1),
which have come into existence either intentionally or unintentionally,
deprive certain groups of people from the possibility to realize their full
potential (UNDP, 2016).

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

59

Figure 3.1 Barriers to the universal implementation of human rights

Intolerance
and exclusion

Weak
bargaining power

Discriminatory laws
Social norms
Violence

Inequality
Lack of voice

Barriers to
universalism

Narrow
self-identities

Elite capture
of institutions

Nationalism
Identity politics

Rise of 1%
Lack of pluralism

Source: Adapted from UNDP (2016, fig. 4, p. 7).

3.2
Impediments to
implementing the
rights to water
and sanitation

3.2.1 Social and cultural drivers of inequality and discrimination

The social and cultural reasons behind the difficulties in implementing the rights to
safe drinking water and sanitation for everyone are complex and intertwined. They
closely relate to political and institutional factors (see Chapters 1 and 4) and to the socioeconomic status of disadvantaged and marginalized groups (see Chapters 5 and 6, and
Section 9.4). The normative cultural settings and resulting mindsets are sometimes also
reflected in development approaches. The implementation of the human rights, which
the United Nations (UN) Member States recognize as indispensable for equitable human
development, is hampered by inequalities that relate to gender, age, poverty, ethnicity,
sexual orientation, disabilities, religion, socio-economic class and geographic location,
among other factors (see Chapter 1). Overlapping combinations of these factors can
aggravate discrimination and exclusion (HRC, 2016b).
The social and cultural factors that are driving exclusion and discrimination with regard
to access to water and sanitation services often depend on complex and diverse historical
developments, socioeconomic settings and cultural patterns, each varying among and
within countries, communities and social groups. They contribute to shaping mindsets,
attitudes, behaviours and policies (Hassan, 2011). This social complexity should be taken
into account when attempting to fulfil the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation, as well as to implement SDG 6.
To sustainably change such patterns can be a long process, especially when they are
anchored in traditions or belief systems that determine values and social norms for
coexistence in society and shape the perception of the individuals that constitute them.
Social norms can hinder the prospect of certain groups to enjoy their human rights.
Groups outside the normative frame of the mainstream society, for instance belonging
to a certain ancestry (e.g. castes), a low socio-economic status or an alternative sexual
orientation can be discriminated against in terms of access to water supply and
sanitation services. Gender can also be a determining factor, as social norms in many
countries reduce the choices and opportunities for women and girls as well as for people
with alternative gender identities.

60

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

The water governance principles, laid out by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), recognize the importance of promoting
“stakeholder engagement for informed and outcome-oriented contributions to water
policy design and implementation”, and notes that special attention should be paid “to
under-represented categories (youth, the poor, women, indigenous people, domestic
users)” (OECD, 2015, p.12).
Even among UN Member States that have recognized the human rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation, sometimes no effective implementation mechanisms are in place
and equality before the law is not guaranteed. The groups concerned may also lack
information about their rights and the options to ensure their realization, for instance
due to language and educational barriers, or geographical isolation. Enabling the access
to this information constitutes an important basis for human rights implementation
(Cap-Net/WaterLex/UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017). Persons with disabilities may have
particularly limited access to public information, due to reduced mobility and lack of
adapted information material, e.g. for blind people (House et al., 2017).
Discrimination may happen in various ways (see Section 1.3.1) and for different reasons
(Box 3.1).
“Direct discrimination occurs when individuals are discriminated against in laws, policies or
practices that intentionally exclude people from service provision or equal treatment. Direct
discrimination takes place when an individual or group is treated less favourably compared to
others in a similar situation for reasons related to a prohibited ground as described above.
“Discrimination, however, is also manifest in more indirect ways. Discrimination in practice
— indirect discrimination — occurs when laws, regulations, policies or practices seem neutral
at face value, but in practice have the effect of exclusion from the provision of basic services.
For instance, requiring a municipal registration certificate to subscribe to the local water
provider may seem neutral, but may in fact discriminate against persons that live in informal
settlements” (UN-Water, 2015, p. 8).

The supply and demand of water and the perception of scarcity can be considered as a
relative construct of, inter alia, cultural and economic value systems that affect water use
and distribution. Johnson et al. (2012) underline that “scarcity might reflect a person’s
economic ability to pay for water, or the customs, social conditions, and relationships
that privilege access for one person or group while withholding from others” (p. 266).
The United Nations Human Development Report 2016 recalls that “inequalities in
income influence inequalities in other dimensions of well-being, and vice versa”
(UNDP, 2016, p. 7). Many groups are excluded from social progress and their position is
weak when it comes to initiating positive change in institutions. Excluded groups “lack
agency and voice and so have little political leverage to influence policy and legislation”,
especially through traditional institutional means (UNDP, 2016, p. 7), which, in turn, also
makes them more vulnerable in the face of direct and indirect discrimination.

Box 3.1 Drivers of and against discrimination
Mechanisms/drivers of discrimination:
•
sex and gender
•
race, ethnicity, religion, national origin, birth, caste,
language and nationality
•
disability and health status
•
property, tenure, residence, economic and social status
•
multiple discriminations
•
limited access to justice

Mechanisms/drivers against discrimination:
•
substantive equality
•
legislation and policies
•
active participation
•
service provision
•
monitoring
•
access to justice

Source: UN-Water (2015).

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

61

This may also be the case in developed countries, as exemplified through the drinking
water pollution crisis in Flint, Michigan, the United States of America (USA), where the
city’s water users, including thousands of children, were exposed to unsafe levels of lead
and other toxins through the municipal drinking water system, leading to systematic
blood lead level monitoring documenting the contamination (Flint Water Advisory Task
Force, 2016; MDHHS, 2018). People in poor neighbourhoods and of low socio-economic
status were particularly exposed (MCRC, n.d.). Switzer and Teodoro (2017) describe how
socio-economic status constitutes a major variable for citizen participation in the political
process, which, in turn, impacts environmental equity, as well as access to safe drinking
water. Accommodation with below-standard water and sanitation infrastructure is highlighted
as one of the factors that generate particular vulnerability in poor and predominantly
non-white communities (MCRC, n.d.).

3.2.2 Water, sanitation and education

The basic provision of a safe, affordable and reliable water supply for human consumption,
including sanitation facilities at home and in the workplace, enhances workforce health and
productivity and can thus contribute to economic growth (WWAP, 2016). Evidence suggests
that people with less access to water and sanitation are more prone to also having other basic
needs unmet, a situation that exacerbates their economic condition and deprivation of human
development, prolonging the cycle of poverty. The education, health and income of parents
can play an important role with regard to the opportunities their children may have to move
out of poverty. In this way, poverty of one generation can be handed down to the following
(UNDP, 2016; World Bank, 2017a).

Many societies deny
women the access to
productive assets,
such as the right to
land, often linked to
access to water

The Global Education Monitoring (GEM) Report by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) suggests that students from poorer households have far
lower chances of attending a school with adequate water and sanitation facilities than those
of households with higher socio-economic status (UNESCO, 2017a). Inadequate water and
sanitation facilities in schools are long known to negatively impact education, especially of
girls, and to hamper social progress (UNDESA, 2004). Figures show that three in ten primary
schools lacked an adequate water supply in 2013 (UNESCO, 2016). In Latin America, “more than
four in five grade 3 students from the richest quarter of households in participating countries
attended schools with adequate water and sanitation facilities, compared to one in three from
the poorest quarter (Figure 3.2) (Duarte et al., 2017). In Mexico, only 19% of the poorest grade 3
students attended schools with adequate water and sanitation facilities, compared to 84% of the
richest students.” (UNESCO, 2017a, p. 228). “Improving water, sanitation and hygiene facilities
in education institutions can have significant positive effects on health and education outcomes.
Improved facilities, coupled with hygiene education, can also reduce absenteeism and increase
demand for education, particularly among adolescent girls, who may drop out due to a lack of
girls-only toilet facilities.” (UNESCO, 2016, p. 308).

3.2.3 Gender inequalities

Gender inequalities in access to water supply and sanitation are large and persistent in many
countries. According to the Human Development Index (HDI), women worldwide have a
lower HDI value, on average, compared to men (up to 20%, in South Asia), which hints at the
widespread impact of the inequalities affecting women. Among the multifaceted and dynamic
reasons are social norms. Some social norms are important for harmonizing community
life in societies, while others can lead to discrimination and exclusion, reducing choices and
opportunities for girls and women (UNDP, 2016).
Inequalities are especially striking when it comes to the collection of water (see Section 2.1.2).
According to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), three-quarters of households
without access to drinking water on their premises task women and girls with the primary
responsibility to collect it (UNICEF, 2016). Although water collection routines vary in different
parts of the world in terms of frequency, a study of time and water poverty in 25 Sub-Saharan
African countries estimated that women spend at least 16 million hours a day collecting
drinking water, while men spend 6 million hours, and children 4 million hours on the task
(WHO/UNICEF, 2012).

62

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 3.2

Percentage of grade 3 students who attend schools with adequate water and sanitation infrastructure, by socio-economic 		
status, in selected countries in Latin America, 2013

100
Richest
Average

80

Schools (%)

Poorest

60

40

Chile

Costa Rica

Brazil

Uruguay

Ecuador

Colombia

Peru

Mexico

Guatemala

Panama

Honduras

Dominican Republic

Source: UNESCO (2017a, fig. 16.4, p. 229).

Nicaragua

0

Paraguay

20

“Women across different regions, socio-economic classes and cultures spend an
important part of their day on meeting the expectations of their domestic and
reproductive roles.” (Ferrant et al., 2014, p. 1). On average, “women devote one to three
hours more a day to housework than men; two to ten times the amount of time a day
to care (for children, elderly, and sick), and one to four hours less a day on market
activities.” (World Bank, 2012, p. 80). This is in addition to their paid activities, thus
creating the “double burden” of work for women (Ferrant et al., 2014).
When paid and unpaid work (such as fetching water and providing domestic care) are
combined, women in developing countries work more than men, with less time for
education, leisure, political participation and self-care. At the same time, many societies
deny women the access to productive assets, such as the right to land, often linked to
access to water (see Prologue, Section 3.viii). “Only 10-20% of landholders in developing
countries are women” (UNDP, 2016, p. 5).
How society and policy-makers address issues concerning unpaid care work has
important implications for the achievement of gender equality and equal access to water
resources and services: they can either expand the capabilities and choices of women and
men, or confine women to traditional roles associated with femininity and motherhood.

3.2.4 Discrimination against indigenous peoples

Comparatively lower levels of access to water and sanitation services can be observed
among ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples (Clementine et al., 2016). Indigenous
peoples may have different or unique perceptions, modes of participation, and
recognition of rights towards access to water and sanitation (Boelens and Zwarteveen,
2005). An understanding of the term ‘indigenous’ is provided in Box 3.2. The patterns
of how indigenous peoples are deprived of access to water supply and and sanitation
services often combine characteristics and intersectionalities affecting an array of
disadvantaged groups.

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

63

Box 3.2 Defining ‘Indigenous’ in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Considering the diversity of indigenous peoples, an official definition of “indigenous” has not been adopted by any body
within the United Nations (UN) System. Instead, the system has developed a modern understanding of this term based on the
following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Self-identification as indigenous peoples at the individual level and acceptance by the community as their member;
Historical continuity with pre-colonial and/or pre-settler societies;
Strong link to territories and surrounding natural resources;
Distinct social, economic or political systems;
Distinct language, culture and beliefs;
Form non-dominant groups of society;
Resolve to maintain and reproduce their ancestral environments and systems as distinctive peoples and communities.

Source: Excerpt from UNPFII (n.d.).

Indigenous peoples account for about 5% of the world’s population, with an estimated
number of over 370 million persons (UNPFII, n.d.) in 70 countries. Yet, they constitute
approximately 15% of the world’s poor, and are often among the poorest (ILO, 2017b).18
The rights of indigenous peoples are recognized under international law, including
human rights law and other specific international instruments, such as the ILO
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Conventions No. 107 and No. 169, (ILO, 1957; ILO, 1989)
and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UN, 2008).
However, they “face discrimination and exclusion in the legal framework, in access to
education in their own language and in access to land, water, forests and intellectual
property rights” (UNDP, 2016, p. 5).
Indigenous peoples can be important actors in sustainable development and climate
action. A significant proportion of their livelihood practices, for instance small-scale food
production (which can be shared with other, often equally disadvantaged groups), are
arguably examples of sustainability and therefore warrant special consideration within
the text and the implementation of the SDGs (UNGA, 2015a). Indigenous peoples are
custodians of biologically and culturally diverse environments; their lands contain some
80% of the world’s biodiversity (Sobrevila, 2008; ILO, 2017b; WWAP/UN-Water, 2018) and
they possess invaluable knowledge of their water resources regarding resilience to climate
change (Denevan, 1995; Solón, 2007; Altieri and Nicholls, 2008). In many cases, indigenous
peoples’ knowledge systems and traditions have maintained a sustainable balance with
their living environment, including its water, for thousands of years. Their value expands
well beyond the cultural sphere that brought them to life (UNESCO, 2018a).

In many cases,
indigenous peoples’
knowledge systems
and traditions have
maintained a sustainable
balance with their living
environment, including
its water, for thousands
of years

The continuity of indigenous peoples’ cultural and geographical existence across
periods and throughout colonization often places them in antagonistic situations with
dominant political and economic actors and the mainstream of society and politics,
which have interests in disposing of land and water in ancestral indigenous territories,
as resources. This historically developed situation can generate direct and indirect
discrimination, and inequalities that can lead to exclusion. Indigenous peoples are
often ignored in decision-making on water, unequally treated in conventional water
management systems, and disproportionately affected by water conflicts (Barber and
Jackson, 2014), many of which are driven by conflicting water uses. These range from
mining and industrial agriculture to hydropower dams and large-scale infrastructure
(Jiménez et al., 2015), as well as other uses such as conservation and tourism. Such
conflicts are a threat to many indigenous peoples’ fundamental rights and well-being,
and can directly affect the development and operation of water projects. They exemplify
contradictions in terms of lifestyles, concepts and means of development, with
implications for human rights and sustainable development.

18

64

Although these figures are frequently cited in several recent reports by United Nations agencies (among
others), these estimates are based on reports published as far back as 2003 (i.e. World Bank, 2003).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Indigenous peoples, to some extent representative of many poor and disadvantaged
groups, often share strong cultural ties with their ecosystems and depend on renewable
natural resources for their economic activities and livelihoods, endangered by climate
variability and extremes. With high levels of exposure and vulnerability to climate change,
many indigenous peoples may be also forced to migrate, which could exacerbate social
and economic vulnerabilities, potentially forcing many into informal settlements with
inadequate access to water (ILO, 2017b).
The limited involvement in decision-making processes, combined with a lack of
recognition and institutional support, hampers access of many indigenous communities
to remedies, increases their vulnerability to climate change, undermines their ability to
mitigate and adapt to the changing environment, and consequently also poses a threat
to the advances made in securing their rights. Indigenous women, in particular, face
intersectional discrimination from both within and outside their communities, with
distinct implications for their access to water and sanitation (ILO, 2017b).
To highlight and ultimately alleviate another key factor limiting indigenous peoples’
bargaining power and enjoyment of rights, UNESCO, with the support of the United
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), facilitates 2019’s
International Year of Indigenous Languages.19
Indigenous peoples’ concerns receive increasing visibility worldwide (APF/OHCHR, 2013),
as well as greater international recognition for their distinct rights, interests and cultures.
Their participation in the global consultation process for the 2030 Agenda helped
“designing a framework that makes explicit references to Indigenous peoples’ rights and
development concerns, […] founded on principles of universality, human rights, equality
and environmental sustainability”, as stated by the UN Permanent Forum for Indigenous
Issues (UNPFII, 2016).

3.3
Inequalities
related to finance,
infrastructure
and beyond

Especially in developing countries, it is necessary to invest in infrastructure for water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services to overcome inequalities of socioeconomic and
discriminatory nature and accomplish SDG Targets 6.1 and 6.2, which call for “universal
and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water” and “access to adequate and
equitable sanitation and hygiene for all”, respectively (UNGA, 2015a).
While the scope of the infrastructure needs may vary and must be adapted to the dynamic
context and capacities of each country or community, a large financing gap remains one
of the main common barriers (see Chapter 5). A study by Hutton and Varughese (2016)
concludes that current levels of funding towards WASH services are mainly below the
capital costs required to meet basic WASH services by 2030 (see Figure 3.3). Furthermore,
these requirements fall far behind the investment needs for achieving safe WASH services
(SDG Target 6.1. and 6.2). To that end, a threefold increase in current annual investment
levels (to US$114 billion) would be required. It is noteworthy that the estimated resource
needs do not include operation and maintenance costs, thus, the actual funding
requirements are even higher.
Results of UN-Water’s Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
(GLAAS) 2017 study (WHO, 2017b) suggest that the insufficiency of financial resources
is a major constraint to achieving higher investment levels in most countries. Although
government WASH budgets are increasing at an annual average real rate of 4.9%, over
80% of monitored countries report having insufficient financing to attain their national
drinking water, sanitation and water quality objectives in urban areas, while this share
increases to 90% when referring to rural areas. The level of sufficiency of financial
resources allocated to meet national targets for sanitation (in 71 countries) is presented in
Figure 3.4.

19

For further information, please see en.iyil2019.org/.

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

65

Figure 3.3 Additional resources needed to meet targets for basic and safely managed WASH services

50

Annual requirements to meet
basic WASH by 2030
Annual requirements to meet
safely managed WASH by 2030

Expenditure (US$ billion)

Annual spending, 2000–2015

46

40

30

26.6

20
14.8

14.5
10

5.5
1.4

0

Source: World Bank/UNICEF (2017, fig. 2.5, p. 7). © World
Bank. openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/26458.
Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY 3.0 IGO).

25

2.5

1.4
Rural

Urban
Drinking water

4.0

6.8

Rural

7.8

Urban

Sanitation and hygiene

Figure 3.4   Level of sufficiency of financial resources allocated to sanitation to meet national targets (71 countries monitored)

More than 75% of what is needed for both urban and rural

Less than 50% of what is needed for both urban and rural

More than 75% of what is needed for urban or rural

Data not available

Between 50% and 75% of what is needed for urban and rural

Not applicable

Less than 50% of what is needed for urban or rural
Source: WHO (2017b, fig. 2, p. 6). © WHO. Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO).

These funding needs will be amplified as countries start to incorporate SDG targets into
their national plans, given the targets’ relatively high ambitions. Furthermore, achieving
financial sustainability in operations and maintenance (O&M) services constitutes
an equally relevant challenge, as these are key in avoiding deterioration of assets and
minimizing failure rates. In many cases, those disproportionally affect disadvantaged
populations.
In regions and countries where the infrastructure access gap is large and public budgets
are restricted, accounting for the different aspects of the decision-making process
becomes particularly relevant (Andrés et al., 2014). Governments need to define targets
for the water, sanitation and/or hygiene sector, including social priorities and desirable

66

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

service levels and standards. They also need to identify which reforms, including legal,
regulatory, organizational and institutional aspects, are required to improve the enabling
environment (of which equity, non-discrimination and the mitigation of social conflicts
are integral parts), and to implement the necessary policies to those ends (World Bank/
UNICEF, 2017).

It is important for
managers of water supply
and sanitation projects to
understand and respect
the different belief
systems and related habits

Also in countries where the water and sanitation infrastructure is largely in place, finance
and infrastructure measures, including maintenance, must go together with institutional
change, capacity development and participation to end inequalities, exclusion and
intersectional discrimination (see Chapter 4). In the United States of America (USA),
Switzer and Teodoro (2017, p. 11) find that “members of racial and ethnic minorities
face greater risk of unsafe drinking water” and that “the significance of race is most
pronounced in the very poorest communities”. In response to the Flint water crisis
(mentioned above in Section 3.2.1.), the Michigan Civil Rights Commission recommended
a series of measures centred around institutional and human capacity development to
build “a deeper understanding of the roles of structural racialization and implicit bias
and how they affect decision-making throughout all branches” of government in a given
context (MCRC, 2018, p. 7).
Finally, it is important for managers of water supply and sanitation projects to understand
and respect the different belief systems and related habits. A set of recommendations
(developed by the UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility) (Jiménez et al., 2014) on how
to work with indigenous peoples in rural water and sanitation projects emphasizes the
importance of continuous dialogue to generate mutual trust and maintain long-term
supportive relations. The sensitization of project managers and stakeholders regarding
equality and non-discrimination in community-led total sanitation programmes for poor
communities in developing countries is also at the core of the approach used by the Water
Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC) (House et al., 2017), which pays
particular attention to vulnerabilities related to age, disabilities, gender and diversity.

3.4
Supporting the
implementation
of the human
rights to water
and sanitation

Equality and non-discrimination, with a particular focus on gender, go together with
empowerment and participation of those whose right to safe drinking water and
sanitation has yet to be realized. However, the groups that must not be left behind are
highly diverse, and solutions for inequality and discrimination must be adapted and
tailored to the respective contexts to strengthen opportunities and capacities. This applies
to the integration of local and indigenous knowledge through methods of integrated
water resources management (IWRM), to infrastructure development, as well as to
education. A guiding principle for empowering change is the adage Nothing about us,
without us.

3.4.1 Valuing local, traditional and indigenous knowledge

Taking into account local and traditional knowledge and customary water arrangements
(where these exist) can be an effective means to enhance sustainable development
in a river basin. The IWRM approach (see Sections 1.4 and 4.2.3) provides a possible
means of addressing the lack of participation of marginalized groups, as it seeks to
enhance dialogue between different stakeholders and favours decision-making at the
lowest appropriate institutional level. Good water governance (see Chapter 4) allows
and encourages decision-making processes that are inclusive of all stakeholders and
water practices without discrimination, integrating, for example, customary water
arrangements of indigenous peoples, tribes, rural communities and other groups. In this
endeavour, tools like Cap-Net’s manual for a human rights-based approach to integrated
water resources management (Cap-Net/WaterLex/UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017) or
the UNDP Training Package on Indigenous Peoples and Integrated Water Resources
Management (Cap-Net, n.d.) can be of substantial help (Box 3.3).
Valuing traditional knowledge through the recognition of indigenous peoples’
stewardship of land and water supports inclusion and access to human rights.

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

67

Box 3.3 Training package on indigenous peoples and integrated water resources management
Bringing the hidden indigenous and traditional knowledge into light, Cap-Net, UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility,
WaterLex, International Rivers, Nile IWRM Net and Justicia Hídrica jointly developed a training package on Indigenous
Peoples and Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM). The package provides ways for integrating indigenous
peoples into water management, including their specific knowledge for sustainable planning and resource management. It
also addresses the role of water in the fulfilment of indigenous rights and, in light of the many conflicts over resource uses,
provides guidance on conflict management.
Water use conflicts further increase indigenous peoples’ vulnerability. It is also important to note that traditional knowledge
can play a significant role in climate change mitigation and adaptation, for which its effective use is critical.
For instance, the Indigenous Peoples and IWRM training package discusses how an intercultural approach that recognizes and
integrates indigenous peoples’ rights, knowledge, perspectives and interests in any planned action can be used to create spaces
for the meaningful participation and continuous dialogue between all parties. Integrating the understandings and perspectives
of a specific group of people into decision-making promotes their fair treatment and inclusion.
Source: (Cap-Net, n.d.).

The creation of UNESCO’s International Indigenous Peoples Forum on World
Heritage recognizes that the nationally proposed, internationally highly visible
World Heritage sites must respect human rights, as well as land, resource and
tenure rights at the interface of culture and nature, and the capacity of indigenous
peoples to act as custodians, owners and decision-makers (IIPFWH, n.d.).
Water heritage reflects human ingenuity, tireless efforts and trial-and-errors to
achieve optimal use of water in often challenging natural environments. Social
organization that evolved along with this heritage has enabled people to manage
water in a cooperative and inclusive manner, often expressed in customary
water arrangements. Lessons can be learned from how people have organized
themselves around water (Box 3.4).

3.4.2 Inclusive infrastructure programmes

Water heritage reflects
human ingenuity,
tireless efforts and
trial-and-errors to
achieve optimal use
of water in often
challenging natural
environments

The Employment Intensive Investment Programme of the International Labour
Organization (ILO), promotes employment-intensive approaches and local
resource-based technologies in delivering public investments, in particular for
local infrastructure, as a technical solution to creating and maintaining assets,
as well as decent jobs and income. Combining local participation and the use
of locally available skilled and unskilled labour with local materials, knowledge
and appropriate technologies has proven to be an effective and economically
viable approach to infrastructure works and job creation in many local settings.
Community contracting provides a mechanism to empower communities by
promoting capacity development and providing experience in negotiating,
organizing and contracting (ILO, 2018a).
Community-led total sanitation programmes evolve and pay increasing
attention to age, gender and disabilities. The Equality and Non-Discrimination
in Community-Led Total Sanitation Programme of the WSSCC chartered options
for supporting the most disadvantaged groups (Figure 3.5). The study by House
et al. (2017) underlines the importance of time scale for behavioural change
programmes. Even if effective in the short term (e.g. providing freshwater and
menstrual hygiene facilities in schools or significantly reducing open defecation in
communities), change can only be lasting and sustainable if good practices are not
only executed upon initiation, but learned, adapted, integrated, maintained and
transmitted, thus empowering current and future generations. Water education
plays a crucial role in this regard.

68

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 3.5 Options for supporting people in the most disadvantaged situations through sanitation programmes

Within the household
Extended family
(including from the diaspora)
Local masons
Support from
family

Diaspora
Religious institutions
Neighbours

Local NGOs
Disabled persons’
organizations
Local businesses

Support from
NGOs, private
sector, others

Local groups
(savings-related; women’s;
widows; youth)

Support from
community

Support
for people who
may be
disadvantaged

Village leadership
(development and WASH
committees)
Community-based
organizations and unions
Youth

Village

Support from
government

District
National

Financial
alternatives

Support options for people who may be disadvantaged
From within
the community

From outside
the community

From either within or
outside the community

• Solidarity groups

• Provision of local materials

• Vouchers

• Free labour

• Reduced price (subsidised) materials

• Direct provision of finance

• Provision of purchased materials

• Subsidized low-interest loans

• Paid for skilled labour (masons)

• Community rewards

• Paid for physical labour
• Revolving funds
• Savings groups

Source: Adapted from House et al. (2017, fig. 4, p. 29).

3.4.3 Water education for sustainable development

Technical solutions alone have failed to lead to the lasting and sustainable realization
of the human rights to water and sanitation, or to water security. In the array of
transformative means, education and capacity development can provide the values,
knowledge and skills that are essential components of any meaningful strategy
towards implementing the SDGs.

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

69

Box 3.4 Putting traditional knowledge into practice
Recovery of the ancestral water system of Los Paltas, Ecuador
The recovery of the ancestral water system of Los Paltas to supply water to the city of Catacocha in southern Ecuador
exemplifies the benefits that traditional knowledge can have in improving access to water. The San Pedro Mártir micro-basin
provides 70% of the water of the city of Catacocha. In colonial times, the Spanish colons and mestizos transformed the basin’s
pre-Columbian hydrological system, based on lentic wetlands and dykes, to recharge the aquifers and to use the lands for
livestock and agriculture. This greatly diminished the vegetation cover and water availability in the ecosystem. The rediscovery
of ancestral local knowledge led to the restoration of the basin in an ecohydrological approach. The local population was
involved in the construction of very small dams along the micro-basin’s river course. This system reduces runoff, revitalizes the
plant cover and vegetation, increases infiltration, and replenishes the aquifer. The basin now provides more water, sufficient to
increase the water supply to households in Catacocha from previously one to now six hours per day (UNESCO-IHP, n.d.)
Traditional system of Corongo’s water judges, Peru
The Traditional System of Corongo’s Water Judges is an organizational method developed by the people of the district of Corongo
in northern Peru, embracing water management and historical memory. The system, which dates back to pre-Inca times, is
primarily aimed at supplying water fairly and sustainably, which also translates into proper land stewardship, and thereby
ensures the existence of these two resources for future generations (UNESCO Living Heritage, n.d.).
Water temples and subak of Bali, Indonesia
Water temples in Bali underpin the cooperative water management system of canals and weirs known as subak, which dates to
the ninth century and allows for the cultivation of rice. Water temple networks composed of farmers and others make democratic
decisions on water allocation and timing of water supply. Their decisions are supported by rituals, offerings and artistic
performances that aim to sustain a harmonious relationship between the natural, human and spiritual worlds, or the ancient
philosophical concept of Tri Hita Karana (UNESCO, 2018b; UNESCO World Heritage Centre, n.d.).

However, as noted by UNESCO (2017c, p. 7), “not all kinds of education support
sustainable development. Education that promotes economic growth alone may
well lead to an increase in unsustainable consumption patterns” that contribute to
aggravating the challenges to water security, like water scarcity, water pollution or the
transmission of discriminatory worldviews.

“The now well-established approach of Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD) empowers learners to take informed decisions and responsible actions for
environmental integrity, economic viability and a just society for present and future
generations. ESD develops competencies that empower individuals to reflect on their
own actions, taking into account their current and future social, cultural, economic and
environmental impacts, from a local and a global perspective. Individuals should also
be empowered to act in complex situations in a sustainable manner, which may require
them to strike out in new directions; and to participate in socio-political processes,
moving their societies towards sustainable development.” (UNESCO, 2017c, p. 7). ESD
provides an opportunity for learners, to receive a water-related education, including
science, sanitation and hygiene, as well as to develop the relevant knowledge, skills,
values and behaviours to encourage and promote water and sanitation sustainability.
Women, and particularly girls, are most affected by the lack of water supply and
sanitation services, and efforts should also be made to provide them with opportunities
to enhance their capacities and engagement. This means alleviating them of the waterfetching burden and providing dignity through adequate sanitation services. Lack of
such services often prevents girls from attending school and developing the means to
empower themselves at other levels of water management.

70

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Youth in Ecuador

To make the learning processes about sustainable water management more
effective, it should focus on cognitive as well as socio-emotional and behavioural
learning. Cognitive learning includes, for example, the understanding of water as
a fundamental condition of life itself, of the importance of its quality and quantity,
and of the causes, effects and consequences of water pollution, water scarcity and
unequal global distribution of access to safe drinking sources. This knowledge
needs to be complemented with socio-emotional learning, which involves the ability
to participate in activities to improve water and sanitation management in local
communities, as well as the cultivation of a feeling of responsibility for water use
and its related infrastructure and sanitation facilities. Behavioural learning includes
being able to contribute to effective water resources management at a local level, for
instance through technical and vocational education and training.
For ESD to be most powerful, educational institutions as a whole have to be
transformed. Schools and other educational environments need to promote
water sustainability and provide access to safe water and sanitation facilities.
Educational structures, policy and management need to provide guidance, oversight,
coordination, monitoring and evaluation to ensure an effective, sustainable and
institutionalized educational response to ensure the respect of human rights and the
implementation of SDGs for everyone.

Social dimensions: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

71

CHAPTER 4

Plenary room of the European Parliament in Brussels

Political, legal
and institutional
dimensions

72

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNDP | Marianne Kjellén
UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility | Jenny Grönwall and Alejandro Jiménez
With contributions from: Carlos Carrion-Crespo (ILO); Florian Thevenon and Rakia Turner (WaterLex);
Ignacio Deregibus and Heather Bond (IWRA); Antoine Delepière (UNDP); Alistair Rieu-Clarke, Sonja
Koeppel and Nataliya Nikiforova (UNECE); Léo Heller (Special Rapporteur on the human rights to safe
drinking water and sanitation); and Rio Hada (OHCHR)

This chapter outlines the legal, institutional
and political mechanisms and tools aimed at
promoting inclusive development in water
resources management and ensuring that no one
is left behind in relation to their basic rights to
water and sanitation.

4.1
Introduction
There are many reasons and great complexity involved in processes of
exclusion, through which people are alienated from their rights to influence
and be part of society, and from the full enjoyment of the benefits of
development (see Chapter 1). Ownership and control of resources across
the world are highly unequal, and this directly contributes to exclusion and
differentiation of income and livelihood opportunities (Alvaredo et al., 2018).
There is no single solution to this broader inequity, which greatly transcends
into the management and use of water resources, as well as the distribution of
and access to water and sanitation services.
Addressing fundamental inequalities calls for greater incorporation of
human rights into national legal systems in ways that benefit people who find
themselves in the most disadvantaged or vulnerable situations. This requires
a broader political consensus around the importance and relevance of human
rights, which can then become a vehicle to guide action, including compliance
and enforcement in practice.
The international human rights framework can serve as a basis for developing
national policy and domestic law but needs to be supported by capable
and accountable institutions to ensure inclusive and impartial policy
implementation. Insufficient capacity (of the public sector) increases the risks
of a widening ‘policy implementation gap’, causing well-intended initiatives to
be ineffective or to be captured by vested interests.
For an equitable and sustainable management of water and sanitation, it is key
to have inclusive institutional devices in place for dialogue, multi-stakeholder
involvement and cooperation, and the fundamental connectivity between
multiple layers of government as well as with broader society (private sector,
civil society).

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

73

4.2
Policy, politics
and processes

The adoption of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) signals a
firm global commitment to integrate environmental, economic and social development,
and to ultimately leave no one behind. The 2030 Agenda’s enveloped aspirations — the
foremost being universality — imply that the processes to achieve the SDGs must be
inclusive. Policies, laws and societal institutions comprise the enabling factors for driving
processes and actions towards inclusiveness and ensuring that no one is left behind, but
there are also limitations. Changing ‘business as usual’ might clash with existing political
interests and power relationships. Indeed, inclusive development requires commitment
and dedicated effort by new political alliances.
Water resources management, including the provision of water supply and sanitation
services, requires sound and democratic institutions that build on the rule of law. At
the national level, this involves a set of governance principles according to which all
persons and institutions are subject and accountable, as well as laws that are publicly
promulgated, equally enforced and independently adjudicated (United Nations Security
Council, 2004). It entails a separation of powers between a legislature that makes laws,
a judiciary that subsequently interprets the law (and, in common-law states, establishes
precedents), and an executive that administrates and implements policy.

4.2.1 International policy principles

At the international level, laws protecting the environment and regulating the uses
and benefits of shared water resources are based on certain recognized principles,
as developed through the interactions and relationships between autonomous states
alongside an ever-growing number of international organizations and companies.
What is expected and accepted conduct towards others in a modern, globalized world
is steadily evolving. Expectations reflect moral values as well as a gradually refined
scientific understanding of, among other things, natural ‘tipping points’, ‘planetary
boundaries’ and ‘resilience’.

Changing ‘business
as usual’ might clash
with existing political
interests and power
relationships

Customary international law is often founded upon national practice. At the same time,
there is an iterative process whereby international law can inspire national law, or must
be incorporated in it through a legally binding agreement. Turning political agreements
into legally binding rules through which rights-holders can hold duty-bearers answerable
constitutes a challenge, not least when there is a transboundary dimension involved.
At the global level, two legal instruments set forth key rules and principles for sharing
transboundary waters: the 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes (UNECE, 1992) serviced by the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) — the ‘Water Convention’, which was
subsequently amended in 2003 (entering into force on 6 February 2013) to allow
accession by all Member States of the United Nations (UN); and the 1997 UN Convention
on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses — the so-called
‘Watercourses Convention’, adopted by the UN General Assembly (UN, 1997).
Key principles of these conventions include equitable and reasonable utilization of
shared watercourses, obligations to take appropriate measures to prevent significant
harm, and duty to cooperate in good faith. Additionally, an overarching principle that
is imbedded in both instruments is the duty upon states to cooperate over their shared
watercourses, this duty is also expressed through SDG Target 6.5. Such principles can
serve as a key foundation upon which to foster cooperation between states and across
actors at different levels on the basis of equity.
Most important for the equitable sharing of water at the level of individuals — by way
of its distribution through water and sanitation services — is the acknowledgement of
the human rights to water and sanitation. Complementary to this are the international
labour standards, drawn up by the constituents (governments, employers and workers)
of the International Labour Organization (ILO), which set out basic principles and rights
at work, including the access to safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene (ILO, 2017c).

74

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Organizations such as UN agencies, the European Union and the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) lay down what is termed soft law
instruments: resolutions, general comments, principles, guidelines and codes of conduct.
While ‘soft law’ instruments are neither legally binding nor enforceable in the way that
treaties and customary international law are, they are deemed (more or less) authoritative
and can hold weight in policy discourse and negotiations.20 Additionally, they may reflect
or influence the development of customary international law. Soft law instruments can
also provide detailed baselines and frameworks that help clarify goals and ideals, in
turn promoting streamlined implementation at regional and national levels. A practical
example of the political importance of ‘soft law’ is how the various UN General Assembly
resolutions on the right to water (see Chapter 1) have heightened political awareness and
provided a basis for national policy-making and programme implementation.
In the current context of multi-level governance, the role of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in expressing the opinions of civil society and promoting the
public’s active participation (including broad dissemination via social media) has
become increasingly influential in policy formulation (Bache and Flinders, 2004;
Piattoni, 2010).
Other important players include large corporations whose economic clout may bring
about a great deal of influence over policy-making as well as policy outcomes. Actions
and non-actions by corporations are subject to (non-binding) standards, foremost the
Ruggie 'Protect, Respect and Remedy' Framework (HRC, 2008) and the UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights (HRC, 2011a, 2011b), under which private
actors have a responsibility to respect human rights, over and beyond national laws
that are not in compliance with international human rights law. This entails avoiding
activities with adverse impacts on human rights, as well as the responsibility to
participate in remedial mechanisms. States have the obligation to enact national laws
and regulations that actively monitor and address private actors’ actions, to ensure that
these do not impede human rights.
The human rights-based approach (HRBA), as presented in Chapter 1 and in Box 4.1,
advocates for the fundamental standards, principles and criteria of the (binding) human
rights frameworks. These include non-discrimination and participation that is active,
free and meaningful, as well as representation by and for people in disadvantaged or
vulnerable situations. HRBA serves to guide steps and processes across all types of
development cooperation.

Box 4.1 The human rights-based approach (HRBA)
The 1986 UN Declaration on the Right to Development (UNGA, 1986) was an important step for developing the human rightsbased approach (HRBA), which places human beings at the centre of development, and specifies responsibilities of different
actors for integrating human rights into development.
In 2003, the United Nations Development Group adopted a Common Understanding to ensure that agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations (UN) consistently apply the approach, including three fundamental elements (UNDG, 2003):
• Goal: All programmes of development cooperation, policies and technical assistance should further the realization of human
rights;
• Process: Human rights standards contained in, and principles derived from, the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and other international human rights instruments should guide all development cooperation and programming in all sectors
and in all phases of the programming process; and
• Outcome: Development cooperation should contribute to the development of the capacities of ‘duty-bearers’ to meet their
obligations and of ‘rights-holders’ to claim their correlative rights.

20

‘Hard law’ refers to legally binding obligations that are precise and that delegate authority for interpreting and
implementing the law. ‘Soft law’ is weaker in terms of obligation, precision or delegation, and may include
political arrangements in which legalization is largely absent (Abbott and Snidal, 2000).

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

75

Taking an HRBA to water resources management recognizes that different water-related
human rights and provisions of international law are duly interlinked, as the violation
of one right may affect the enjoyment of a wide range of others, and vice versa. The
principles of non-discrimination and meaningful participation are also important
elements of the HRBA and good governance.

4.2.2 Good governance

If day-to-day politics can become caught up with power struggles, ‘good governance’
holds promises of rising above vested interests and exclusionary practices. The
principles of HRBA overlap with those of good governance. Good governance relates to
systems of governance that have qualities of accountability, transparency, legitimacy,
public participation, justice and efficiency (Pahl-Wostl et al., 2008). This includes
important elements of (political) legitimacy and democratic citizenship, with effective
protection of human rights.
The term 'governance' (rather than 'government') denotes more inclusive and cooperative
forms of governing, involving a wider set of actors that co-create development outcomes
along with new forms of process-oriented societal co-steering through partnerships and
dialogue (Mayntz, 1998; Tropp, 2007; Bäckstrand et al., 2010). The broader shift from
‘government’ to ‘governance’ has been seen from the 1980s in many Western countries,
linked to the ‘legitimation crisis’, by which an organization does not possess the
necessary administrative capacity to achieve its objectives (Habermas, 1975). Part of this
transition has also been in conjunction with neoliberal policies and greater reliance on
the contribution of the private sector (Pierre, 2000).
The broader change from (state-led) ‘government’ towards (whole-of-society)
‘governance’ also relates specifically to the challenges of water management. At one
level, it has become clear that the government alone is not able to take on the full
responsibility and development challenge of ‘providing’ water supply and sanitation
services to all citizens, especially in low-income settings (Franks and Cleaver, 2007;
Jiménez and Pérez-Foguet, 2010). This relates closely to the general change of
governments’ role towards policy setting and regulation, with the actual provision
being carried out by non-state actors or increasingly decentralized or independent
departments. Similarly, the reduced per capita availability of water also necessitates
negotiation and water reallocation. This has reinforced the importance of governance in
water management and reuse (Niasse, 2017).21

Good governance relates
to systems of governance
that have qualities
of accountability,
transparency, legitimacy,
public participation,
justice and efficiency

The actors that participate in decision-making processes also have a bearing on what
issues are addressed and how they are formulated. As a duty-bearer, states have the
obligation to facilitate public participation and protect peoples’ rights to participate in
decisions that affect them. Delegated power and representative democracy are more
common types of participation, but these can raise equally important questions about
legitimacy and approval of representation by its constituents. Effective participation
needs to be free and meaningful, with genuine consultation processes: otherwise,
participatory processes can turn into unjust and illegitimate exercises of power (Cooke
and Kothari, 2001).
Because of the centrality of water to human survival, service providers, whether private
or public, are often perceived as having disproportionate power, a perception regularly
reinforced by information asymmetry among parties. Without institutions with sufficient
capacity to monitor and enforce agreed norms, and/or in situations where users do
not have adequate channels to signal their requests or express their dissatisfaction,
incentives to implement necessary policies will likely be weakened, derailed, or even
paralysed (OECD, 2015).

21

76

The role of water governance and the political nature of water management were emphasized in 2006 by the
UNDP Human Development Report and the UN-Water World Water Development Report (UNDP, 2006;
WWAP, 2006). As a guidance for governments, the OECD, through its Water Governance Initiative, has
developed principles providing the ‘must-dos’ for governments to design and implement effective, efficient and
inclusive water policies in shared responsibility with the broader range of stakeholders (OECD, 2015).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Another important aspect of good governance relates to accountability. Accountability
is the set of controls that hold officials and institutions answerable for their actions and
ensure that sanctions are applied against poor performance, illegal acts and abuses of
power (UNDP-SIWI WGF/UNICEF, 2015). Well-functioning accountability mechanisms
help institutions fulfil their mandates.
Human rights accountability exists when practices and procedures are in place that:
•

Oblige persons in authority or their institutions to take responsibility for their actions,
and to explain and justify their actions to those to whom they are answerable, against
standards of behaviour and performance which reflect and affirm international human
rights standards;

•

Subject those in authority to forms of enforceable sanction or appropriate corrective
action if their conduct is found to have breached human rights obligations. Procedures for
appraising and sanctioning conduct, whether judicial, administrative or other, should also
reflect and affirm international human rights standards; and

•

Enable those living in poverty who have been deprived of their rights to access fair and
transparent mechanisms to enforce their claim against those in authority, and to obtain
appropriate redress if their rights have been violated (OHCHR/CESR, 2013, p. 12).

4.2.3 Water rights, value and conflicting interests

As suggested above, the role of governance and multi-stakeholder processes has become
increasingly critical for resolving matters of water allocation and for protecting water
resources from contamination or abuse. Integrated water resources management
(IWRM) has been advocated for by international organisations for many years, and was
included in Agenda 21 (UN, 1992). In 2015, all states committed to IWRM through the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda (UNGA, 2015a). IWRM is closely associated with the Dublin
Principles — adopted at the International Conference on Water and Environment ahead
of the Rio Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 — which categorize
water as a “finite and vulnerable resource” to be managed participatorily with “decisions
taken at the lowest appropriate level” while acknowledging the “pivotal role of women”
(ICWE, 1992).
Dublin Principle number 4, which emphasizes the economic value of water in all its
competing use has been the subject of considerable debate. In spite of the recognition of
the social and environmental value of water, it is the idea of water as an economic good
which has been seen to lead the way to commodification (Castro, 2013) and has thereby
restricted access to water resources, water supply and sanitation services by some of the
people in the most disadvantaged or vulnerable situations.22
A set of more recent principles, contained in the Outcome Document by the High-Level
Panel on Water (HLPW, 2018), contains a clearer recognition of water’s multiple values,
the first of which is: The first of the Panel’s five principles for valuing water is:
[To] Recognize and Embrace Water’s Multiple Values. [We must] identify and take into
account the multiple and diverse values of water to different groups and interests in
all decisions affecting water. There are deep interconnections between human needs,
social and economic well-being, spiritual beliefs, and the viability of ecosystems
(HLPW, 2018, p. 17).

As explained in Chapter 1, IWRM promotes the coordinated development and
management of water, land and related resources for maximum economic and
social welfare in an equitable manner, without compromising the sustainability of
vital ecosystems. Rather than a one-off exercise, it is an iterative process to take the

22

Even though the explanation to the 4th principle suggests that water is also a basic right (“Within this
principle [no. 4 — ‘Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an
economic good’], it is vital to recognize first the basic right of all human beings to have access to clean water
and sanitation at an affordable price. [However] Past failure to recognize the economic value of water has led
to wasteful and environmentally damaging uses of the resource” — ICWE, 1992, p. 4), it is the push towards
greater emphasis on the economic value that has generated a great deal of criticisms with respect to the
Dublin Principles.

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

77

Box 4.2 Water resource conflicts
between indigenous peoples and
extractive industry in Peru

various uses of water and the range of people’s water needs into account (GWP, n.d.).
Contemporary applications of IWRM support the equitable, efficient and sustainable
use of water, and are vital to balancing the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development. The IWRM approach calls for coordination
among all involved sectors of management, development, regulation and decisionmaking processes related to water, land and related resources (GWP, 2000). As
suggested in Box 4.2, however, it is far from easy to resolve resource conflicts between
different uses and user groups.23

Mining activities have intensified
in the Andean regions since the
1990s, triggering a set of socioenvironmental conflicts. Many
of the conflicts are about access
to and control over land and
water, and the availability and
sustainability of those resources
for uses other than mining.

The practical means for allocating water resources is principally through water rights,
which are regulated under national laws. Water rights are conferred to an individual
or organization through property rights or land rights, or through a negotiated
agreement with the state or landowner (see Box 1.4). In distinction from human rights
to water, which relate to individual domestic use, a water right can be provided for a
variety of uses, is temporary and can be withdrawn.

In order to mitigate
environmental impacts,
solve conflicts and deal with
opposition to mining operations,
governmental actors and
mining companies make use
of a combination of legal and
technical strategies. Based on
research carried out in the
surroundings of the Yanacocha
gold mine in Cajamarca (Peru),
Sosa and Zwarteveen (2016,
p. 34) show that “although
legal and technical conflict
resolution strategies are
effective in temporarily diffusing
tensions, they do not address
the underlying political causes
of conflicts. Instead of these
seemingly objective, neutral
and quick solutions, […] solving
environmental conflicts around
large-scale mining operations
requires explicitly admitting and
dealing with the fact that these
conflicts are always inherently
political, situated, complex and
power-laden.”

Both land and water allocation is commonly based on customary law. However,
there may be several legal systems operating at various levels, which can also lead to
conflicts between systems operating in parallel. In many cases, statutory law trumps
community-derived rights (Cap-Net/WaterLex/UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017). The
resolution of such conflicts harbours great potential for furthering rights and access
to water resources for communities who find themselves in a disadvantaged or
vulnerable situation. Conflict resolution with this purpose seems to be on the rise.
The 2016 Kenya Community Land Act (Parliament of Kenya, 2016) formally recognizes
community ownership rights to registered and unregistered lands, including the
tenure rights of women and people in disadvantaged or vulnerable situations.
Further, in the same year, a ruling of the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights
recognized the customary land and forest rights (Rights and Resources Initiative,
2017). Societies that operate under a plural, or mixed, legal system, allow for statutory
law to coexist with customary law. General Comment 15 (CESCR, 2002b, para. 21) is
a reminder that states should refrain from “arbitrarily interfering with customary or
traditional arrangements for water allocation” as part of their obligations to respect
the human rights to water.
Given the importance of land ownership in many water rights allocation regimes,
inequalities of land ownership are translated into unequal access to and benefits
from water. This is manifested also in terms of gender differences in land ownership
(see Prologue, Section 3.viii), compounded by unequal inheritance laws in some
countries. Well-managed reform processes for agrarian land have the potential to
enhance equity and to revolutionize the efficiency of the whole economy. The related
matter of (secure) land tenure is critical. Insecure tenure tends to be a disincentive to
investment, and further hampers productivity of the dispossessed, exacerbating the
income inequality resulting from unequal access to resources, including water (Ostry
et al., 2014; Niasse, 2017).

Source: Sosa and Zwarteveen (2016).

4.3
Walking the talk:
Implementing
plans and policies

Creating coherence between the various institutional levels is essential to ensure
that policies deliver on their objectives. The public sector or other agencies involved
in service delivery or policy implementation need to possess the relevant capacity
and skills, while adhering to the core values of policy delivery (accountability,
professionalism, integrity, impartiality, responsiveness, non-discrimination and
participation).
Figure 4.1 illustrates how (potentially global) policy principles are institutionalized
through laws and regulations; how they are institutionalized through the palette

23

78

The problematic situation as regards water use conflicts between industry and indigenous peoples is
further highlighted by Jiménez et al. (2015), finding mining and hydropower to be the most conflict-ridden
types of projects, and that project closure or renegotiation affected a third of nearly 400 projects examined
in the study.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 4.1 Institutional levels, values, principles and approaches for equitable and inclusive policy-making and delivery

Universal access to water
and sanitation

Human
rights
Goals and
principles for
policy-making

Leave no one
behind

Goals and principles towards
equity and inclusiveness

Sustainable
development

Environmental
justice

Planetary boundaries

Laws
Regulations, policy instruments, programmes and plans

Means of
institutionalization

REGULATORY
INSTRUMENTS

ECONOMIC
INSTRUMENTS

INFORMATION,
AGREEMENTS

FINANCING AND
INVESTMENTS

• Standards

• Subsidies

• Guidelines

• Permits, quotas

• Charges, tariffs

• Zoning

• Market stimulation

• Advocacy
campaigns

• Investments
by industry,
households

• Bans

• National plans and
programmes

• Self-regulation
by industry and
households

• Extension of new
services
• External support
agencies

Professionalism
Integrity

Accountability
Values and
approaches for
policy delivery

Impartiality

Values and approaches for
equitable and inclusive
implementation
Responsiveness

Participation

Non-discrimination

Source: Based on WWAP (2017, fig. 3.1, p. 31).

of (mainly national) regulations, policy instruments, programmes and plans; and
eventually implemented (locally) in an equitable and inclusive manner — most effectively
so through transparent, responsive and professional civil servants or service providers.

4.3.1 The policy implementation gap

The misalignments or shortcomings that cause policies not to deliver the desired outputs
and outcomes are commonly referred to as ‘policy implementation gaps’. Such gaps
(or insufficiencies) need to be overcome in order to operationalize policy intentions.

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

79

Table 4.1 illustrates the policy implementation gap as a progressive decline of
proclaimed intentions as one moves from policy documents, to monitoring, and
finally to financial measures. ‘Pro-poor’ measures are far more common in policy
proclamations than in mechanisms for tracking or monitoring the rolling out of
services for the poor. The actual fulfilment of the policy can be further hampered by
the non-application of financial measures to implement pro-poor measures for the
reduction of disparities in water services.
Table 4.2 summarizes a set of causes associated with policy implementation gaps
at various levels or for various processes. Especially in aid-dependent countries,
governments can succumb to pressure (either explicit or implicit) to develop reforms
that might be neither truly demanded nor appropriately embedded in the social values
of stakeholders. In such cases, the necessary high-level political commitment for
effective implementation may be missing (IDB, 1999). The lack of stability of political
representatives within the government involves changes in priorities and hinders
perseverance and the pursuit of longer-term goals.
Another challenge partly linked to external pressure is the development of
overambitious policies, setting objectives that are disconnected from current national
reality and capacities. While these policies might adhere to international thinking on
good practice, the goals assigned result in unrealistic targets (Ménard et al., 2018).
In these situations, the gap is produced by a mismatch between the responsibilities
and the resources of the responsible entities (Crook, 2003; Ribot et al., 2006; Jiménez
Fernández de Palencia and Pérez-Foguet, 2011).
A partially related factor is the risk of policy capture by economic or political
elites. Complex policy measures like decentralization, public–private partnerships
or market-based water allocations, if implemented without the proper checks
and balances and without adequate administrative capabilities, may lead to local
elites strengthening their positions at the expense of politically and economically
marginalized groups (OECD, 2015).

Table 4.1 Presence of pro-poor policies, tracking systems and financial measures in water supply and sanitation

80–100%
60–79%
40–59%
0–39%

SANITATION

WATER

World Bank income group

Number of
countries

GOVERNANCE

MONITORING

FINANCE

Policies and plans have
specific measures to
reach poor population

Progress in extending
service provision to poor
populations is tracked
and reported

Specific measures in
the financing plan to
target resources to
poor populations are
consistently applied

All responding countries

74

74%

47%

19%

Low income

15

73%

33%

7%

Lower middle income

29

66%

48%

10%

Upper middle income

26

85%

58%

27%

All responding countries

74

74%

55%

27%

Low income

15

73%

53%

20%

Lower middle income

29

66%

48%

14%

Upper middle income

26

85%

69%

38%

Note: The percentage shown are calculated with the total number of responding countries in the income group as denominator; results for high-income
countries are not shown disaggregated due to the small number of responding countries in this income group. They are included in the overall results.
Source: WHO (2017b, table 12, p. 41). © WHO. Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO).

80

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Table 4.2 Types of gaps in policy implementation, and typical causes
Policy implementation gaps

Causes

Gaps in policy formulation process

•
•
•
•
•

Lack of transparency, oversight and influence over policy formulation
External pressure to adopt blueprint policies not adapted to the context
Lack of high-level political commitment
Lack of participation in policy formulation
Policy capture by elites or influential groups

Gaps in operationalization of the policy

•
•
•
•
•
•

Mismatch between the responsibilities and resources
Time needed to build capacity not adequately considered
Lack of legitimacy of institutions that implement policy
Misalignment between water policies and informal water institutions
Lack of capacity to monitor and enforce agreed norms
Ineffective channels for users to signal demands or express dissatisfaction

Gaps related to characteristics and
behaviour of stakeholders

•
•
•
•
•

Monopolistic position of providers
‘Third-party opportunism’
Quality of the representation of stakeholders
Policy processes ‘captured’ by specific interest groups
Corruption, inefficiency and inertia

Gaps related to the overarching country
governance situation

•
•
•
•
•

Political instability, protracted crisis and insecurity
Governments’ lack of capacity to carry out basic functions
Lack of accountability in the public sector
Poor (self-)discipline and leadership in government
Lack of ‘democracy’: insufficient debate, lack of consultation and participation

Source: Adapted from Ménard et al. (2018, table 1, p. 9).

Apart from derailing
policy implementation,
corruption also
reinforces existing
inequalities

Corruption, excessive regulation and/or rigid conformity to formal rules tend to
coincide with bureaucratic inertia, increase transaction costs, discourage investments,
and potentially derail or hinder water management reforms. Certain practices that in
contemporary societies are perceived as corrupt may in fact predate modern public
administrations. For example, public servants have not always had salaries, without
which rent-seeking (or other forms of financial compensation) will be a natural feature
of the carrying out of the office. Nevertheless, corruption is a symptom of severe
institutional weaknesses and poor governance (Menocal et al., 2015). Apart from
derailing policy implementation, corruption also reinforces existing inequalities
(Søreide, 2016), since payments trickle up to those with more (discretionary) power.
This may also be manifested in the different powers and resources available to women
and men (Purushothaman et al., 2012). Gendered roles and special responsibilities that
are associated with women in many societies make them subject to diverse forms of
corruption to obtain water for their household needs, some of which are very different
from those men encounter and engage in. This includes the use of sexual favours or
demands as a ‘currency’ of corruption (IAWJ, 2012; UNDP-SIWI WGF, 2017).
The next section explores the role that the legal system can play in closing the
policy implementation gap and furthering human rights into policy implementation
outcomes. The recognition of access to water and sanitation as human rights provides
court systems with an additional means of justification.

4.3.2 Using legal instruments to further water-related human rights

Courts and judges play critical roles in making sure human rights are also applicable
in domestic law. According to a principle adopted in some legal cultures, courts are
to interpret domestic law in conformity with the applicable human rights treaties and
thereby give an indirect effect to the provisions. Notwithstanding, the extent to which
judges actually recognize international obligations varies (De Londras, 2010).

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

81

Box 4.3 The human rights to
water in India’s slums
India has many laws and rules
regarding water but none of them
contain any explicit ‘rights to
water’. Instead, the right to life
under Article 21 of the country’s
Constitution has been interpreted
by the Supreme and High Courts
as including a right to clean and
sufficient water.
In Mumbai, a study of an illegal
slum area found that in 2012,
the median price paid for water
by residents was INR 135 (about
US$2) per cubic meter of water;
more than 40 times the standard
municipal water charge paid by
residents of notified slums and
more than 30 times the charge
paid by other city residents
(Subbaraman and Murthy, 2015).
In 2014, the state High Court
ordered that water supply to
occupants of Mumbai’s illegal
slums should not be tied to land
tenure (property rights) issues,
thereby allowing cutting through
what were previously considered
intractable legal barriers to water
access in non-notified slums. The
court further clarified the right to
water previously laid down in case
law, and in international human
rights law. Following the ruling,
the city government developed a
new policy for supplying water to
non-notified slum residents.
However, the court directed
the city government to prevent
illegal construction and carry
out demolition action against
structures that came up after this
date. It further stated that “[a]
citizen who stays in an illegal
slum or structure cannot claim
this right to get water supply at
par with law abiding citizens who
have constructed and occupied
authorised structures” (Pani
Haq Samiti v. Brihan Mumbai
Municipal Corporation, 2014,
para. 18).

82

There are specific cases where international human rights have helped
individuals or groups to enhance equity through, for instance, improved
access to water and sanitation services, or helped to support moral claims
and interests for protecting shared water resources. One compilation of
such cases can be found in WaterLex/WASH United (2014). Another review
from 2015 (Amnesty International/WASH United, 2015) commented on more
than 80 individual UN Member States’ positions with respect to resolutions
and declarations on the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation (HRWS). As
suggested in Boxes 4.3 and 4.4, below, the situation is generally complex, and
the final results of court action may be elusive.
The case from India (Box 4.3) suggests that legal, institutional and political
barriers can be greater obstacles to expanding water access than monetary
or technical challenges, especially for poor urban communities. While the
court ruled ‘in favour’ of the urban poor, it also created legal requirements
on constructions, which forfeited the purpose to protect the poorest from
exorbitant water prices.
Box 4.4 shows that wealthy countries can also struggle to make services
available to all, especially to homeless or migrant populations. UN observers
have a role as an authoritative observer to ensure that authorities live up to
human rights obligations.
The examples presented in boxes 4.3 and 4.4 illustrate the importance of
authoritative statements and rulings by judges and observers, in defence of
less influential populations. Nevertheless, a policy implementation gap clearly
exists, as the implementation of the eventually agreed or ‘ruled’ plans can
linger. Continued monitoring and pressure on responsible actors is required.

4.3.3 Towards inclusive processes

Including all and leaving no one behind requires action of many different
types and at many levels. Inclusive institutional devices that make room
for ‘voice’ in the policy-making process are necessary conditions to craft
realistic, implementable policies (Hirschman, 1970; OECD, 2011). Especially
important in that respect is the capacity to tailor participatory processes in a
way that mitigates power imbalances (COHRE/AAAS/SDC/UN-Habitat, 2007),
particularly for ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples (Jackson et al., 2012;
Jiménez et al., 2014).
Successful operationalization of policies also depends on their perception
as being legitimate, which requires them to be clearly understood and
effectively disseminated among all relevant stakeholders (SEI, 2013; OECD,
2015), particularly at the local level. Planning from the start for the full
operationalization is unusual and may involve unexpected resistance. Yet, this
is critical for overcoming the policy implementation gap, and essential for the
realization of the 2030 Agenda.
Good water governance involves pro-active measures and mechanisms,
ensuring guidance towards effective implementation along with sanctions
against poor performance, illegal acts and abuses of power (Cap-Net/WaterLex/
UNDP-SIWI WGF/Redica, 2017). Holding decision-makers accountable requires
ability, willingness and preparedness among rights-holders, and others on
behalf of them, to scrutinize actions and non-actions. In turn, this builds on
transparency, integrity and access to information. An HRBA can be key in
building capacities for taking responsibility, and acting in line with values like
non-discrimination, professionalism, responsiveness, and so on (Figure 4.1).
Successful policy implementation requires cooperative relationships between
parties, from transboundary negotiations to local deliberations. These

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 4.4 The human rights to water and sanitation in French migrant camps
In 2017, a local court found that the authorities must provide access to water and sanitation facilities to refugees and migrants
who have set up temporary camps in Calais, France. Upon appeal, this order was upheld by the Supreme administrative court,
Conseil d’État, ruling that the treatment of refugees and migrants was inhuman. The court said in a statement that these living
conditions reveal a "failure by the public authorities, and exposes people to be subjected, in the most perceptible manner, to
inhuman and degrading treatment." (Conseil d’État, 2017a).
The court ordered the Prefect of Pas-de-Calais and the commune of Calais to set up drinking water points throughout the
commune of Calais, to create free latrines on the territory of the commune of Calais, and to set up one or more facilities
enabling all homeless persons of French or foreign nationality, who are on the territory of the commune of Calais, to take a
daily shower (Conseil d’État, 2017a; 2017b).
Following this, the Government of France, through the voice of Minister of the Interior, announced that it is fully engaged in
improving the reception conditions of migrants and refugees and that it is willing to organize distribution points to ensure
better access to water (for meals, showers, toilets). The Special Rapporteurs of the United Nations (UN) on the human rights to
safe drinking water and sanitation, on the human rights of migrants, and on the adequate housing, urged the Government of
France to devise long-term measures to provide access to safe drinking water and sanitation for migrants in Calais and other
areas (OHCHR, 2017a).
Nine months later, the situation is still worrying (OHCHR, 2018). After a visit by the UN Special Rapporteurs on the human
rights to safe drinking water and sanitation in April 2018, they reported that “efforts have been made,” but “they are not
enough.” According to estimates quoted by three UN human rights experts, some “nine hundred migrants and asylum seekers
live in Calais, three hundred and fifty in Grande-Synthe, and an unknown number in other regions of the north coast of France
live without access to emergency shelters and without regular access to drinking water”.

may be operating within different institutional layers and include stakeholders
from government at various levels, the private sector and community-based
organizations. The building of trust requires dialogue and takes time, but
contributes to both the equity and the efficiency of initiatives.

Legal, institutional and
political barriers can
be greater obstacles
to expanding water
access than monetary or
technical challenges

Another path to inclusiveness is sharing knowledge and forming alliances on a
global scale. Shared knowledge that is accessible to everyone helps to ensure that
those in Developing and Least Developed Countries have the available resources
to meet the SDGs, particularly on water management guidance. In a digital age
where increasing parts of the global population have access to mobile phones and
internet, providing open-access information on best practices for water policies
through these mediums can have considerable impacts to ensure that no one is left
behind (Bimbe et al., 2015).
Further attention needs to be afforded to the underlying reasons for exclusion
and inequality: the unequal distribution of resources. In fact, redistribution has
been found not only to be ethically or socially desirable; it is also economically
efficient and conducive towards faster and more durable growth (Ostry et al., 2014).
This emphasizes the point that redistribution and pro-poor measures are not only
helping the poorest but contribute greatly to the overall growth of the economy
and health of the society. Still, to ensure that no one is left behind, all realms of
society need to subscribe to values of equity and inclusiveness, and these need
to saturate higher-level policy-making as well as front-line service delivery and
community work.

Political, legal and institutional dimensions

83

CHAPTER 5

Mother and child walking along an open sewer in a slum

Economic dimensions
of WASH services

84

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

World Bank | Luis Andrés and Ye-rin Um
With contributions from: Alejandro Jiménez and Pilar Avello (UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility);
Carlos Carrion-Crespo and Maria Teresa Gutierrez (ILO); and Lesley Pories (Water.org)

This chapter aims to advance the economic
understanding of how national (and subnational)
policies, plans and programmes can improve access
to WASH services for all, and particularly for people in
vulnerable situations.24 The topics examined include:
i) making an economic case for WASH; ii) assessing
the affordability of WASH services; iii) reducing costs
to improve affordability; iv) evaluating the role of
subsidies; and iv) analysing the funding and financing
of WASH services for vulnerable groups.

5.1
Introduction
A global vision of universal access to ‘safely managed’ water supply,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services, as set under the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), calls for attention to vulnerable groups and
equitable provision of WASH services. In many countries the water and
sanitation coverage of lower-wealth quintiles has increased at a slower rate
than that of the better-off quintiles (WHO/UNICEF, 2015b). Furthermore,
vulnerable groups, including indigenous and tribal peoples, suffer
disproportionately from inadequate access to safe drinking water and
sanitation services (ILO, 2016) and are not being explicitly considered in
countries’ national WASH policies. Hence, in the discussions that led to the
adoption of the SDGs’ WASH targets, many sector stakeholders proposed that
the service coverage of vulnerable groups be increased at a faster rate than
that of other unserved populations (WHO/UNICEF, 2013). Effectively closing
inequality gaps is a major challenge, as well as an indicator of progress on the
2030 SDG agenda.
WASH policies have implications for lessening inequality and enhancing
the status of vulnerable groups. According to an ethics-based, human rights
argument, society and the state have a duty to help people living in vulnerable
situations access essential services such as WASH. To provide basic services is
to respect human dignity. Going beyond this prescriptive statement, the value
of WASH provision becomes even greater when the impact on redistribution is
recognized. Indeed, addressing the basic needs (such as for WASH) of the

24

The paper ‘Counting the costs and benefits of equitable WASH service provision’ (Hutton and
Andrés, 2018) provided much of the basis for this chapter.

Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

85

less well-off can address the underlying causes of inequalities. For instance, poor water
supply and sanitation contribute to debilitating diseases such as diarrhoea and childhood
stunting. Such health disturbances additionally result in decreased school attendance
for children and time away from work for adults, further perpetuating cycles of poverty.
Targeting WASH resources where access is low and populations are particularly
vulnerable offers an efficient way to change the course of generational trends, by giving
all children a better chance of reaching their full potential.
There are a number of factors at play in the current WASH investment gap affecting
vulnerable groups. This is partly a question of information asymmetry — households
and entire communities are not aware of some of the benefits they would enjoy as a
result of better WASH services. Insufficient investment may also reflect the persistence
of traditional practices and preferences, which are dictated by social customs as to what
is considered normal or desirable. A third possibility is that although some households
would like to improve their condition, they might not be able to act. They might not have
the means to pay for the service, especially the up-front costs of investment, or they
might choose to devote limited household resources to other priorities.

5.2
Providing WASH
to vulnerable and
disadvantaged
groups:
A cost–benefit
analysis

Global cost–benefit studies have demonstrated that WASH services provide good
social and economic returns when compared with their costs. Economic evaluation
studies compare a programme’s costs with its benefits to estimate cost–benefit ratios or
annual rates of return. Evidence from global (Whittington et al., 2012; Hutton, 2012a)
as well as country studies (Hutton et al., 2014) generally shows high returns on WASH
spending, for example, with a global average benefit–cost ratio of 5.5 for improved
sanitation and 2.0 for improved drinking water.
A central element of national planning, priority setting and budgeting is an
understanding of the costs and benefits of reaching different population groups,
especially vulnerable ones. However, evidence specific to subpopulation groups is rare;
most studies present costs and benefits for the general population. In an evaluation
of efforts to improve sanitation in the Philippines, the World Bank estimates lower
cost–benefit ratios for poorer than for richer populations, due to the higher value of
time assigned to the rich (World Bank, 2011). However, when the net present value25
of sanitation interventions is compared with the average income of different income
quintiles, the very poor have five times the relative return of the non-poor. A study of
South Asia shows that costs per disease episode are relatively similar across wealth
quintiles, but medical expenses represent a significantly greater share of income among
poorer households (Rheingans et al., 2012). Jeuland et al. (2013) show that WASH-related
mortality benefits, in the long term, are larger in poorer than in richer countries of South
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Hence, improvement in WASH services in these regions
would have major implications for global equity.
WASH investments will do the most to reduce childhood deaths from diarrhoeal
disease when they target geographic areas where vulnerable populations have
little access to WASH services. A World Bank study (2017b) reveals that in developing
countries across the six major regions of the world,26 the greatest burden of disease
associated with unimproved water and sanitation is borne by the poorest across national,
urban and rural, and subnational populations. This is consistent with patterns of access
to water, sanitation and health services (oral rehydration therapy and the provision of
vitamin A), and the prevalence of undernutrition (measured by height and weight for
age). Rural populations across all 18 countries and economies analysed in the study had a
greater absolute and population-adjusted burden of WASH-related disease. However, the
disparity in the degree of access to WASH infrastructure between the poor and non-poor
was much greater among urban than rural households.

25

26

86

Net present value is the difference between the present value of the future benefits flows from an investment
and the amount of such investment.
East Asia and the Pacific, Europe and Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle East and
North Africa, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

It is likely that the benefits of improved WASH services for vulnerable groups would
change the balance of any cost–benefit analysis that accounts for changes in these
groups’ self-perceived social status and dignity, but further research is needed
(Hutton and Andrés, 2018). A few existing studies indicate that health costs are more
burdensome for poorer households than richer ones (World Bank, 2011; Rheingans et al.,
2012; Jeuland et al., 2013). However, few studies explore the full range of economic and
social benefits of access to improved WASH, or compare the barriers to WASH services
faced by vulnerable groups with those of the general population.27 Table 5.1 provides
an indication of the relative impact of selected WASH initiatives for various vulnerable
groups (see Box 1.3).28 More data are needed for further analysis.

Table 5.1 The relative possibility of gaining selected benefits from WASH interventions, by vulnerable population group
Population group

Health

Living
environment

Convenience
and time
savings

Dignity
(social)

Educational
outcomes*

People below national poverty line











Slum dwellers











Remote and isolated populations











Ethnic [minority] groups

















Children











Elderly, sick, and physically disabled people**









***

Emergency contexts











Refugees











Prison population









Women and female-heads of households



*Due to reduced stunting, reduced illness-related absence, and higher enrolment and completion rates (especially among girls).
**Buildings and other facilities, including toilets, are often not accessible to persons with mobility limitations due to the lack of an accessible design, such as an
entrance ramp, retrofitted bathrooms, or improved signage (ILO, 2017d).
***Educational gains for disabled children.
Note: The number of arrows is meant to illustrate the magnitude of the outcome expected for each population group.
Source: Hutton and Andrés (2018).

5.3
Affordability

It is clear that investing in WASH in general, and in WASH services for the vulnerable
and disadvantaged in particular, makes economic sense. One of the reasons behind
not providing adequate services to such groups is the assumption that they cannot
afford to pay for them. Yet the vulnerable and disadvantaged, who are typically not
connected to piped systems, often pay more for their water supply services than their
connected counterparts (World Bank, 2017b) (see Chapter 6). As such it makes sense to
explore the options for expanding access, and also to put into question what is meant by
‘affordability’ (see Section 1.2.3). This is especially critical given the core of SDG Targets
6.1 and 6.2: ‘universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water’ and
‘adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene’.

27

28

Jones et al. (2002) conducted a literature review to outline the various problems faced by disabled people in
accessing WASH. A study assessing barriers to WASH among disabled people in Malawi found that being
female, being from an urban area, and having limited wealth and education were likely to increase the
number and intensity of the barriers faced by an individual (White et al., 2016).
It should be noted that rural workers and their families are among the least protected in terms of access to
basic health services, workers’ compensation, long-term disability insurance, and survivors’ benefits.

Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

87

“Affordability is key for the realization of the human rights to water and sanitation.
Economic sustainability and affordability for all people are not impossible to
reconcile, but human rights require rethinking current lines of argumentation and
redesigning current instruments. The main challenge is to ensure that targeted
measures and instruments do, in fact, reach the people who rely on them most.
For instance, tariffs must be designed in such a way that the most disadvantaged of
those connected to formal utilities receive the assistance they need. It also requires
ensuring that public finance and subsidies reach the most marginalized and
disadvantaged individuals and communities, who are often not (yet) connected to a
formal network, who may live in informal settlements without any formal title or in
remote rural areas where self-supply is common, and who are often overlooked or
deliberately ignored in current policymaking and planning.” (HRC, 2015, para. 86).

The concept of affordability is not new, but no consensus has been reached on
the methodology for measuring it, although various options were proposed in
the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) era (Smets, 2009, 2012; Hutton, 2012b;
WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). There has been limited analysis of WASH affordability that
distinguishes different contexts, such as urban versus rural, households connected to
a piped system versus those not connected, and consumers of various types of water
sources, and the literature rarely encompasses sanitation and hygiene. In addition,
there has been limited study of how greater expenditure on drinking water (or WASH
in general) drives down the availability of disposable income for other non-water
consumption and the inverse, that is, how non-water expenditure crowds out funds
available for water (and WASH). Furthermore, to spend more on water does not
necessarily imply that the water is of greater quantity, or for that matter quality, as
this depends on its price, source, type of use, location and other factors. Affordability
as a concept will need to be further defined before it can be effectively measured. For
example, the prices of water or sanitation may decline and yet still be out of reach of
certain vulnerable groups.

To spend more on water
does not necessarily
imply that the water is
of greater quantity, or
for that matter quality,
as this depends on its
price, source, type of use,
location and other factors

The affordability of water and sanitation services is an important cross-cutting
concern that affects states’ ability to deliver on the human rights to water and
sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, 2013). The human rights to water and sanitation place
obligations on states and utilities to regulate payments for services and to ensure that
all members of the population can afford to access basic services. Expenditure on
drinking water and sanitation typically includes infrequent, large capital investments,
including the cost of connections, as well as recurrent spending on rehabilitation and
maintenance, both of which need to be considered in any affordability threshold that
may be established by governments or intergovernmental organizations. Rigorous
assessments of affordability also need to consider populations’ wealth or income, as
well as WASH sector subsidies or other social transfers provided by the state.
Evidence from willingness-to-pay studies points to the limitations of setting rigid
benchmarks that define what is and what is not affordable to (poor) households.
Households are often willing to pay significantly more than current tariffs if they are
guaranteed a level of water supply that meets their expectations. “Some households
are willing to pay more than 3–5% of their monthly income for a utility service, while
others would refuse to pay that much. In this sense, an affordability threshold analysis
does not help determine how many households in a particular utility’s service area
would see cost-recovery prices as a barrier to continuing to use improved water
services, nor whether affordable prices would be enough to induce unconnected
households to use the services” (Komives et al., 2005, p. 45).
An alternative way of defining water affordability is to establish an affordability
threshold that is based on a monetary value of the subsistence water ‘basket’. This
basket could accommodate, for instance, the service level mandated by SDG Targets 6.1
and 6.2, or it may be adapted to the level of access and quality set in national policies or
standards. The goal is that populations should, at a minimum, be getting water at the
‘defined’ level of services. In other words, the defined price of a particular water basket
is affordable for a population group, based on that particular group’s income level. The
assessment should consider that different population groups have different degrees

88

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

of access to services, at different prices. Ensuring that water is affordable to all
population groups in a given country will require tailored policy recommendations
for specific targeted population groups.
Understanding affordability could be facilitated through the use of a broad
framework that classifies population groups into one of four main categories,
depending on service level and ability to pay. It is important to note that this
categorization should be based on: i) a targeted minimum service level, since the
current level of service might fall below this threshold; and ii) a population group’s
ability to pay for the targeted service level, excluding any subsidy (Hutton and
Andrés, 2018).

5.4
Increasing
efficiency and
reducing unit costs

An obvious but often neglected way of increasing affordability is to lower the costs
of providing the service. This also has the benefit of improving the overall financial
performance of the service provider and making it more creditworthy, a route to
mobilizing additional financing (discussed more in later sections). Service costs can
often be reduced without any impact on the service level. There are many ways to
achieve this, and five examples are discussed below. The financial resources freed up
by efficiency gains can in turn enhance the provision of WASH services to groups in
vulnerable situations.
First, technological innovation and dissemination can lead to major cost
reductions over time. For example, as water and wastewater treatment technologies
advance, greater efficiency can be achieved, in which the costs per unit treated fall. In
addition, the falling prices and increasing performance of plastic products — not only
for latrine slabs but also for their superstructure — enable the production of latrines
at a lower cost. Hence, producers save costs in different parts of the production
process by investing in new technologies. Digital payment for service platforms,
already on the uptake in many countries in the developed and developing world, also
stand poised to facilitate reduced transaction costs on the part of payment and/or
tariff collection, particularly in remote areas that are harder to access.

Service costs can often
be reduced without any
impact on the service level

Second, much can still be done to reduce unit costs through input and scale
optimization. Identifying better-priced factors of production is the most conventional
way of cutting costs. Purchasing materials in bulk and exploiting economies of
scale, which involves spreading relatively fixed costs (e.g. overheads) over a larger
production base, are good examples. While the evidence is mixed on the optimal size
of a utility’s service area (as unit costs are very context-specific), authorities need to
make evidence-based decisions when dividing up cities or districts into service zones,
considering among other things the factors that are driving costs.
Third, more competition can be introduced into the provision of WASH services,
which is a natural monopoly due to its intensive capital investment requirements.
Many markets are highly regulated and monopolistic, with very limited competition.
In some cases, such as piped water or wastewater networks, it does not make
economic sense to have alternative networks competing for the same customers.
However, regulations on broader market entry can be reduced. Enabling more
producers and suppliers in the marketplace will increase competition, with benefits
that include lower costs, product or process innovation, and the availability of a
diverse range of products in the marketplace.
Fourth, enhancing management practices can improve production efficiency.
Production inefficiencies are caused by poor planning (e.g. overstocking,
underutilized resources), lack of accountability, and product wastage and leakage
(e.g. non-revenue water). By institutionalizing modern management practices and
identifying cost-effective interventions, costs can eventually be cut back and services
can be delivered to consumers at a lower cost. This is helped by opening markets up
to competition, in order to increase incentives for good performance.

Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

89

Fifth, production efficiency can be improved by good governance and increased
transparency. Governance aspects of utility management are also essential for
reducing the costs of service delivery and improving organizational management
(Box 5.1). The positive impact of good governance (and the negative impact of
corruption) has been proved to affect the efficiency of water utilities (Estache and
Kouassi, 2002) (see Chapter 4). When addressing these issues, water utilities should
allow for worker participation through social dialogue and collective bargaining.29
Corruption, in particular, is not only a blockage that needs correcting but a
disincentive for much-needed external investment. Increased transparency may
lead to increased investment from other sectors over time, as well as deepened
buy-in from potential clients — if people are more confident or have avenues for
resolution of their service quality complaints, they are more likely to be willing to
pay tariffs on time or to connect to a provider in the first place. Fonseca and Pories
(2017) observe that budget transparency is critical at all stages along the chain, from
national to local government, in order to ensure equity and efficiency. The financethemed 2017 UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking
Water (GLAAS) report (WHO, 2017b) has documented WASH government budgets,
sub-sector allocations, and disparities between budget and expenditure in an effort
to better monitor and hold governments accountable for how WASH priorities are
determined and ultimately implemented. The emerging UN-Water GLAAS TrackFin
Initiative (Tracking Financing to WASH) is another example that encourages budget
transparency, by identifying and tracking financing to the WASH sector at the
national or subnational level in a consistent and comparable manner. As of June
2018, TrackFin has been initiated in 15 countries with the support of a number of
development partners, and countries around the world continue to show interest
(WHO, n.d.).

5.5
Designing
subsidies and
tariffs

Subsidies will continue playing a key role, so they should be well designed,
transparent and targeted. Subsidies are a subset of funding flows between
governments, utilities and customers. National governments provide fiscal
transfers (in the form of budgetary allocations) to subnational government entities
(e.g. states, counties, parastatal organizations) that play either a direct or an
indirect role in water and sanitation service delivery. Under a broader definition,
subsidies can also take the form of implicit transfers through underpriced products
or services. The process by which developed countries achieved universal access to
water and sanitation clearly demonstrates that domestic public finance, including
targeted subsidies, has been and remains critically important, even in strongly
market-led economies (Fonseca and Pories, 2017). Thus, even with improved
efficiency, it is likely that subsidies will continue to be important to achieve
universal coverage (including vulnerable groups) in the WASH sector. When
designing and allocating subsidies, there are a number of points to be considered
so that scarce public resources reach those groups most in need.
First, the cost or programme components to be subsidized must be carefully
chosen. A common choice that policy-makers face is between: i) subsidizing
activities to promote household WASH investments and changes in social norms
and behaviours; or ii) subsidizing the costs of service, with a broad distinction
between subsidizing capital investment versus operation and maintenance
(O&M) costs. Historically, subsidies have played a major role in financing water
investments (i.e. capital infrastructure), with a large share of O&M expenditure
expected from each household (Danilenko et al., 2014). Because subsidies are most
often linked to capital expenditures and those are most often focused on relatively
well-off communities, the non-poor have often been the beneficiaries of subsidy
interventions intended to reach the poor (Fuente et al., 2016). Subsidizing capital

29

90

For example, the multi-employer collective agreement between the Water Employees Trade Union of
Malawi (WETUM) and the existing Water Boards, signed in 2014, provides for discussions regarding
productivity, capacity building, gender mainstreaming and discrimination, HIV and AIDS in the
workplace, corruption, water sector policies, and youth participation (Water Boards/WETUM, 2014).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 5.1 El Salvador: Integrity Pact promotes transparency around pipe replacement contracts
With the aim of building trust and increasing transparency around public procurement, the National Water and Sewerage
Administration of El Salvador (ANDA) has signed three Integrity Pacts around the tenders for pipe replacement in the greater
San Salvador area. Integrity Pacts are a tool developed by Transparency International and constitute an agreement between the
government agency offering a contract and the companies bidding for it. In this agreement, they declare that they will abstain
from bribery, collusion and other corrupt practices for the duration of the contract. To ensure that the Pact is being followed
by the parties, the Integrity Pact includes a delegated ‘monitor’ overseeing the bidding and execution process, providing
recommendations, and delivering a public statement. The role of the monitor is typically taken up by civil society groups.
The Integrity Pacts were signed by ANDA as the commissioning agency, the contractors as the bidders, and the Foundation for
Studies on the Application of Law in El Salvador (FESPAD) in the role of monitor. The UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility
(WGF) signed the Pact as the international witness and can give advice about the implementation of the Integrity Pact. The
financing of the Pact formed part of the activities included in the “Agreement on Technical Cooperation on Improving Integrity
in the Management of ANDA” between the UNDP-SIWI WGF and ANDA to improve the management of the organization through
the lens of integrity. The work was supported by the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation and Development (AECID).
FESPAD´s bidding process evaluation report1 was presented to the public in a press conference in 2016, in the presence of
AECID and ANDA. FESPAD´s final report was due to be presented in a press conference by the end of 2018.
The signing of the Integrity Pacts forms part of a series of initiatives undertaken by ANDA to progress towards a more open,
transparent and accountable management of the organization, with the aim of increasing resource use efficiency, reducing
the losses due to corrupt practices and building trust to attract better offers from the private sector. This includes a series of
workshops and activities to help the organization and its staff understand what integrity entails, how it can be pursued, what
bad practices are hindering its full realization, and what can be done collectively to increase ANDA´s integrity management.
Examples of measures include the adoption of results-based management or performance indicators for staff evaluation. The
workshops were conducted in collaboration with cewas, a Swiss non-for-profit organization, drawing on the methodology of
the Integrity Management Toolbox.
Contributed by UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility.
1

The evaluation report in Spanish can be accessed in the following link: fespad.org.sv/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Primer-informe-de-observaci%C3%B3nsocial-a-ANDA_etapa-1-1.pdf.

infrastructure may still make sense if vulnerable groups are clustered in a specific
location that can be targeted. Sanitation services may be more natural candidates for
subsidies than water services, since willingness to pay for such services is often lower and
the wider social benefits are higher (World Bank, 2002). Under the community-led total
sanitation (CLTS) approach, subsidies are calibrated to stimulate demand for sanitation,
allowing the market to respond to households’ increased willingness to pay.

Subsidies that promote
greater community
participation are being
proven effective, as they
empower vulnerable
groups to allocate
resources toward their
own priorities

Second, subsidies that promote greater community participation are being proven
effective, as they empower vulnerable groups to allocate resources toward their own
priorities. Incorporating transparent mechanisms for underserved people to easily
provide inputs into the design and decision-making processes behind infrastructure
projects could potentially allow them to compete with the more informal mechanisms
that richer populations use to influence decision-making. Involvement of communitybased organizations and user groups can lead to greater accountability and improved
performance, with benefits for poor and vulnerable households, through their
contribution to planning, implementation (e.g. raising awareness) and monitoring and
evaluation (Andrés and Naithani, 2013). These mechanisms are becoming part of the
policy toolkit as they are tested and mainstreamed.
Third, setting tariffs — ideally the major funding source of service provision — requires
striking a balance between several key objectives. In general, the design of water tariff
structures aims to accomplish the following four objectives (World Bank, 2002):
• Cost recovery. From the service provider’s point of view, cost recovery is the main
purpose of a tariff. Cost recovery requires that, on aggregate, the tariff faced by
consumers should generate revenues equal to the financial cost of supplying the
service over time.
Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

91

Large WASH service
providers can use
commercial financing
and indirectly support
vulnerable groups through
cross-subsidization

•

Economic efficiency. Economic efficiency requires that prices signal to consumers
the financial, environmental, social and other costs that their water use decisions
impose on the rest of the system and on the economy. In practice, this means that the
volumetric charge should be set equal to the marginal cost of bringing one additional
cubic meter of water into a city and delivering it to a particular customer. An efficient
tariff creates incentives that ensure that, for a given water supply and sanitation cost,
users obtain the largest possible aggregate benefits.

•

Equity. Equity means that the tariff treats similar customers equally, and that customers
in different situations are not treated the same. This usually means that users pay
monthly water bills that are proportionate to the costs they impose on the utility by
their use of the service.

•

Affordability. WASH services differ from many other services in that they are
considered a basic right and should be provided to people regardless of cost or ability
to pay.

Designing tariff structures is challenging precisely because these four objectives
conflict, and trade-offs are inevitable. For example, providing underpriced water
through private connections in order to achieve the objective of affordability conflicts
with the objectives of cost recovery and efficient water use. It may not appear equitable to
charge population groups that are relatively expensive to serve (due to, say, their outlying
location) the same as, or less than, other customers. At the same time, it might not be
equitable to charge the poor the same water price as other customers given the difference
in their ability to pay.
If, to meet affordability and equity objectives, subsidies are to be delivered through
water tariffs, then vouchers or cash distribution might be better than an increasing
block tariff (IBT). Despite the widespread implementation of IBTs in low- and middleincome countries, there is now broad consensus that IBTs do not effectively target subsidies
to the intended low-income customers due to several factors (Brocklehurst and Fuente,
2016; Burger and Jansen, 2014; Fuente et al., 2016). First, prices in most low- and middleincome countries are not sufficient to cover the full cost of water and sanitation services,
resulting in most customers being subsidized. Second, contrary to conventional wisdom,
metered water consumption might not be correlated to income since poor households
might have bigger family sizes. Third, low-income customers are typically more likely
to have a shared connection than wealthier customers and thus face the highest price
in IBTs. Finally, like all usage subsidies, IBTs apply only to those households connected
to a piped network and therefore exclude the poorest households, who often lack access
to piped water and sanitation services (Andrés and Fuente, 2017). Instead of IBTs, a
uniform volumetric tariff — where customers are charged the same amount per unit of
water they use — combined with a negative fixed charge or rebate for the target group is
recommended. The rebate could be delivered through vouchers or cash distributions.
While the mechanisms for identifying the targeted population tend to be challenging
and expensive, making use of robust mechanisms that identify deserving households or
individuals could be a viable option. In Mexico, for instance, energy subsidies are being
channelled this way, through a programme called Oportunidades (“Opportunities”) that
provides conditional cash transfers to the poorest segments of the population (Andrés and
Naithani, 2013).

5.6
Funding and
financing: Mobilizing
commercial sources
of investment

92

A lack of funding and financing mechanisms is a critical bottleneck to achieving the
SDG WASH targets for vulnerable groups. Funding refers to the financial resources of
the WASH sector, which are made up of: i) tariffs and fees paid by the WASH users; ii)
domestic tax revenues passed from the central or local governments to the WASH sector;
and iii) grants from international donors, charitable foundations and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) interested in supporting the sector. By contrast, financing is what
the WASH sector borrows from the donors or financial market and then repays in the
future, using funding. There is much scope for change in both the funding and financing
mechanisms so as to close the investment gap for vulnerable groups.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 5.2 Reducing the risk:
Encouraging the uptake and
scale of WASH microlending
Water.org’s WaterCredit initiative®
partners with local financial
institutions to help them design,
market and monitor the success
of WASH loans targeted at lowincome households. In this
model, carefully vetted financial
institutions receive a small grant
that essentially removes the
sunk costs of a new product by
paying for a market assessment,
associated research and design
costs, and WASH training and
monitoring. Financial institutions
then offer these loans through
their traditional funding channels
to low-income clients that fit their
eligibility criteria. The initiative
is designed to remove the risks
that make financial institutions
reluctant to pilot such loans
and encourage their eventual
mainstreaming into overall lending
portfolios as they witness their
success.
As of June 2018, the WaterCredit
initiative has invested US$21.7
million across partners in 12
countries. Those partners have
disbursed US$983 million via
2.9 million WASH loans to lowincome households, ultimately
enabling more than 12 million
people to fund their WASH needs.
Moreover, repayment rates are
above 95%. In monitoring the
outputs of these loans, Water.
org relies upon an appropriate
sample size rather than verifying
each individual toilet or water
connection to reflect realities of a
market-oriented system.
Water.org is diversifying its
partner channels and adapting
the WaterCredit model to support
rural and urban utilities and
actors along the WASH supply
chain, and using emerging digital
finance technology to reduce the
operational transaction costs of
offering these loans, driving down
the cost for the end borrower.
Contributed by Water.org.

Commercial financing involves a wide range of sources and terms, many of which
are utilized in the WASH sector in developing countries to some degree. This type
of financing comes from various domestic and international sources, such as water
equipment suppliers, microfinanciers, commercial banks or private and institutional
investors. Such providers of commercial finance are generally willing to take on varying
levels and types of risk, which can be complementary. Accessing commercial finance
is not equivalent to privatizing the sector, since both public and private operators can
and should utilize commercial finance for their infrastructure needs. Unfortunately,
commercial financing in emerging markets currently makes up only a small portion
of WASH investment worldwide — no aggregate numbers are available, but the WASH
sector on average attracted only 3% of all private sector participation in infrastructure
(energy, transport and water) projects in the years 2009–2014 (Goksu et al., 2017).
For households in vulnerable situations, a common bottleneck is the availability of
funds to pay up-front capital costs, and microfinance is growing but still rare. In order
to pay capital costs, many households are willing to take out a repayable loan, which can
be paid off over subsequent years. Ikeda and Arney (2015) have highlighted the potential
role microfinance can play in addressing the water and sanitation financing gap.
However, there are still many barriers to expanding microfinance to vulnerable groups,
including the unavailability of service in rural areas, especially those distant from
commercial centres. Furthermore, capital costs for water (and especially sanitation)
infrastructure may not be considered an eligible or viable purpose for getting a loan, and
even if they are, interest rates may be high, and vulnerable households in particular are
likely to lack collateral to offer against a loan.
Some success stories in microfinance exist. A number of initiatives have successfully
made microfinance loans accessible to vulnerable groups, addressing the barriers
above. Moreover, repayment data from WASH microfinance programmes around the
world prove that the poor are not only willing to take loans to finance their WASH assets
but also consistently repay these loans (Water.org, 2018). A well-known example is
that of Bangladesh’s Grameen Bank, which has successfully reached rural populations
with affordable loans for WASH, specifically targeting women (Khandker et al., 1995).
Another example is in Viet Nam, where many women’s unions have helped households
to invest in their own toilets through a revolving fund (Kolsky et al., 2010). Suppliers
have also provided microfinancing for pumps, meters and solar pumps. These examples
(including Box 5.2) show that if financial actors learn to perceive many substrata within
‘the poor’ as an untapped market to harness, tailored goods and services that cater to
specific needs and price points can emerge and change the nature of how low-income
groups address WASH.
Where small-scale local WASH service providers are significant, certain features of
the business environment need to be in place. These may include: i) financial products
that allow small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to manage pre-financing; ii) a
business support sector that can help SMEs achieve the formalities required to borrow
and to meet water sector licensing requirements; iii) an enabling environment for the
capital market; and iv) an efficient water services sector that provides investors with
access to competitive services, such as site surveying, well drilling and component
purchasing (World Bank, 2016b).
Large WASH service providers can use commercial financing and indirectly support
vulnerable groups through cross-subsidization. These service providers usually cover
a large service area where both the better-off and vulnerable groups reside. Where this
is the case, pricing mechanisms might allow for cross-subsidization between population
groups, using a uniform volumetric tariff with a rebate. If the service provider is
creditworthy — characterized by strong technical and financial performance, a sound
governance structure and solid business strategy and plans — and located in a country
where a robust financial market exists, additional resources can be brought in through
commercial financing. Loan or bond proceeds can be used to expand service coverage
and enhance service levels for all population groups. Ideally, the tariff level paid by the
customers who do not receive the rebate should be high enough to repay the principal
and interest at commercial terms. In some cases, other funding sources such as domestic
tax revenues and grants may supplement the tariff receipts.
Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

93

Well-designed public–private partnerships (PPPs) can improve access to WASH
services for vulnerable groups. A PPP is one of the legal structures in infrastructure
delivery, and it often utilizes commercial finance. WASH PPP projects specific to
certain vulnerable groups may not be feasible due to a lack of bankability, but efforts
can be made to protect and promote their representation in projects that serve a
wider population. For example, during the feasibility stage, data can be collected in a
disaggregated way to further understand the different needs, capacities and concerns
of various population groups. Legal frameworks governing PPPs can be reviewed to
ensure no biases exist against particular groups in vulnerable situations. Furthermore,
a consideration of certain vulnerable groups could be embedded in output
specifications for the private sector. For example, in a PPP project in Ghana, minimum
design and construction terms required separate toilet blocks for males and females,
and disposal units catering to women’s needs (World Bank, 2016c).

Blended finance shows
strong promise, but for
it to truly address the
funding gap all actors
must be willing to accept
roles and approaches
outside their traditional
operating procedures

‘Crowding in’ private investment for WASH requires a significant change in the
mindset that works for traditional funders. Experts within the WASH sector
repeatedly highlight the need to attract private finance and have called for the
strategic use of development assistance funding to serve as a guarantor for larger
private investment. Blended finance shows strong promise, but for it to truly address
the funding gap all actors must be willing to accept roles and approaches outside
their traditional operating procedures. Specifically, monitoring the outputs of
blended finance programmes requires flexibility and awareness of the degree of
efficiency required by the private sector, as well as recognition and acceptance of
the fact that private investment alone will not be able to serve the majority of the
target populations. As illustrated in Box 5.3, blended finance approaches will require
potentially complex combinations of development finance, private finance and
government subsidies to ensure that all target groups are being reached and no one is
being left behind.

Box 5.3 Kenya: Using blended finance to improve water services
Kenya’s national development plan seeks to make basic water and sanitation available to all by 2030. Building on utilities
reforms that started in 2002, the Kenyan government decided to mobilize commercial financing to help bridge the financing
gap for investments in water infrastructure.
The World Bank Group and international development partners supported the country through a series of measures
from 2007 to 2017. These included helping scale up the financial and operational performance of water service providers,
supporting creditworthiness assessments, and piloting financing initiatives focused on delivering improved water supply
and sanitation services to low-income homes. Technical assistance supported by multi-donor World Bank Group trust
funds — including the Public–Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), the Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
(GPOBA), and the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) — to borrowers and lenders has facilitated the process. The support
from the European Union and the credit guarantees by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID),
which provided partial risk cover to domestic lenders, helped scale up the efforts.
As of 2018, approximately 50 transactions have been completed, which raised more than US$25 million in private capital.
Investments in low-income areas were encouraged through results-based grants of US$21 million provided by GPOBA,
which enabled water service providers to obtain commercial funds for delivering water services to low-income areas. These
results-based projects have already provided water access to over 300,000 people, with another 200,000 expected to benefit
by the time the last project closes in December 2019.
Source: World Bank (2018).

94

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

5.7
Conclusions

In sum, the social and economic returns of investing in WASH services are significant.
When resources are limited, it makes most sense to target those areas where vulnerable
populations have little existing access. Here, tremendous benefits can be realized with
long-term implications — for example, if childhood diarrhoeal disease and subsequent
deaths can be mitigated, this would transform the economic prospects of the next
generation. If subsidies are to be applied, they might have a larger impact in the
sanitation sector, compared to the water supply sector. Improvements in sanitation have
far-reaching impacts, and populations are more likely to pay for drinking water than
for improved sanitation. WASH services in general would also benefit from the same
principles seen to benefit the private sector: competition, rigorous analysis of consumers’
willingness and ability to pay for a service (including questioning the common
assumption that the poor cannot pay), and the implementation of new technology, where
applicable.
To address the investment gap in the WASH sector, institutions must coordinate at
the planning stage and carefully consider priorities. Policy-makers are confronted
with myriad factors to consider during the investment decision-making process. The
problem of conflicting priorities is particularly acute in infrastructure decisions, which
often involve large investments, lock-in technologies and long-term maintenance
commitments. Planning authorities will need to base their programming on what service
level can be achieved using both public funds and tariffs recovered from users. If the
financial resource constraints are considerable, it will not be feasible to achieve all
elements of ‘safely managed’ services in the short or medium term. Planning authorities
will also face difficult decisions about whether to allocate funds to upgrade an existing
basic service to a safely managed one, or to provide a basic service to a community
with no access to it at all (World Bank, 2017b). Coordination among related agencies
and adequate budget allocation is critical to ensure that project delivery aligns with set
priorities.
Incentives to improve the provision of services to vulnerable groups may originate
from the transparency and accountability of decision-making processes. Government
officials are guided by incentives when making decisions about the allocation of financial
resources to investments and management. Examples from many countries show that,
if civil society receives information and is consulted, a higher level of transparency
is achieved and government decision-makers at different levels take the needs of
stakeholders, including groups in vulnerable situations, more directly into account.
Improving the provision of WASH services to vulnerable groups can often be achieved
by cross-subsidization, by which better-off users help cover the costs of the provision of
the service to those who can least afford it. Stakeholders are much more likely to agree
to changes, even those that may affect them in the short run, when their interests have
been considered and options have been discussed. Therefore, transparency, access to
information and the involvement of stakeholders are essential to ensure that WASH
services reach vulnerable groups (World Bank, 2013).
Given that poor and vulnerable groups are not homogeneous, WASH policies need
to distinguish between different populations and prepare specific actions to address
each of them. First, it is important to realistically identify the minimum service levels
needed for vulnerable groups to exercise the human rights to safe water and sanitation.
This policy needs to be backed up with a service-pricing mechanism, a financing strategy
and an implementation plan to ensure that the service level is affordable and sustainable
for vulnerable groups. Given scarce resources, governments should encourage service
providers to increase their efficiency — both to keep costs down (and hence make services
more affordable) and to improve their financial performance (and hence the opportunity
to access new, commercial, sources of financing). The policy’s success will depend on the
effectiveness of the targeting mechanisms, the availability of subsidies and the strength
of domestic financial markets, among other things. While there are many examples of
public actions to make water services more affordable, more evaluations are needed of
their successes and weaknesses, and conditions under which they do or do not work.

Economic dimensions of WASH services: Challenges and opportunities for inclusion

95

CHAPTER 6

Reflection of slums on a high-rise building in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Cities, urbanization
and informal
settlements

96

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UN-Habitat | Graham Alabaster
With contributions from: Jenny Grönwall (UNDP-SIWI Water Governance Facility)

This chapter focuses on urbanization and the fact
that many of the inequities in access to water and
sanitation services will be most keenly felt in urban
and peri-urban areas. This chapter therefore concerns
those who reside in an urban agglomeration of any
size, and who have a significantly lower level of
service than the average for the whole administratively
defined area in which they reside.

6.1
Defining who are left behind in urban
settings
There is cause for concern that a significant proportion of unserved and underserved urban residents in vulnerable situations are not counted (‘below the radar’)
in current methods used for estimating service coverage. There are many generic
urban settings where this is apparent, including the peri-urban areas of large
cities (which include intra-urban slums and low-income areas), and the secondary
urban centres, small towns and large villages where a significant proportion of
the urban population resides.
Peri-urban areas, although they often comprise the residential area for the
labour force of the city, are often not included in service schemes due to the
fact that their residents in many cases don’t pay taxes and their housing rental
arrangements are part of the informal economy (UN-Habitat, 2003). This is
not acceptable under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, as “no household should be denied the right to water on the
grounds of their housing or land status” (CESCR, 2002b, para. 16(c)). In these
settings, the wealthier enjoy in many cases high levels of service at (often very)
low cost, whereas the poor pay a much higher price for a service of similar or
lesser quality. Examples include cities in Sub-Saharan Africa, such as Nairobi,
where the low tariffs paid in the middle-class neighbourhoods are far lower
than the cost of water supplied to slum dwellers (Crow and Odaba, 2009). The
administrative inefficiency of formal service providers is such that water tariffs
are unrealistically low and do not even cover the cost of production. In such
settings, weak utilities fail to collect water user fees and consequently enter a
vicious cycle of inadequate cost recovery, poor investment in operations and
maintenance, and poor levels of service (UNDESA, 2007). People living in informal
settlements have to pay a much higher cost for water, often 10 or 20 times the cost
of their more affluent neighbours (UNDP, 2006). The poor end up paying dearly
for what the rich get (almost) for free.

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements

97

Many smaller urban centres in secondary urban settings do not have a centralized
reticulation of piped systems, or it may only cover a small part of the city/town.
This limited system may be run at a loss by the local council and is therefore a poor
investment choice for private utilities (Bhattacharya and Banerjee, 2015). The wealthier
often rely on groundwater resources, often on an individual or household basis (Healy
et al., 2018), with numerous private boreholes, without regulation. Aside from the
impact on the environment, inequities usually arise, and again the most disadvantaged
and vulnerable groups miss out. The lack of well-maintained water reticulation or offsite services for water supply is further exacerbated by the lack of effective sanitation
facilities. Many poorly designed or poorly located on-site systems rapidly contaminate
both surface water and groundwater, and poor solid waste management leads to blocked
drainage systems and flooding (Vilane and Dlamini, 2016). The levels of basic service
that low-income residents have access to are often far from satisfactory, and available
at a much higher cost than for residents from other areas of the same city. Most slum
dwellers pay between 10–25 times more for water in the city of Nairobi than what the
utility would charge (Migiro and Mis, 2014; Ng’ethe, 2018). Sanitation services are often
shared or poorly maintained and there are few connections to sewers. Solid waste
collection and garbage disposal is often non-existent and waste is removed primarily
through waste picking and informal recycling. Connections to the power grid are often
illegal and extremely dangerous.

The levels of basic service
that low-income residents
have access to are often
far from satisfactory,
and available at a much
higher cost than for
residents from other
areas of the same city

Understanding both the patterns of urbanization and some of the factors that contribute
to the inequities are critical in order to develop differentiated services at appropriate
levels (see Chapter 5).

6.2
Challenges of
monitoring
inequalities in
service

The definitions of ‘urban’ versus ‘rural’ can be rather difficult to distinguish.30 These
terms are often used for technical purposes and do not necessarily bear any relation to
size, population density, or indeed to governance structures. Most national statistics,
when disaggregated by rural and urban, use such imprecise definitions. As a result, when
aggregated at national level, there is seldom any pattern and it is impossible to compare
one country figure with another (see Figures 7, 10 and 13 of the Prologue). For example,
many small towns, while classified as rural, display urban characteristics in terms of
population density and service provision models. The speed with which many of these
‘rural towns’ are growing is unprecedented — for example, annual growth rates in excess
of 5% are typical in urban agglomerations in Sub-Saharan Africa (UN-Habitat, 2005). The
existence of different government structures (even in the same geographical region) adds
to this complexity, such that caution is needed when making policy decisions based on
national statistics. Within urban areas, the inter-urban differences in service levels are
perhaps a better indicator of overall delivery.
Failing to understand the complexity of urban settings is especially problematic as
aggregated national information or (even city-level data) can mask the minimal levels
of service and intra-urban differentials. Some of the problems lie in the ‘informal
status’ of certain urban settings, and their consequent exclusion from ‘official’ statistics,
whereas other problems result from the sampling frames used in household surveys
for the more well-established monitoring exercises such as the WHO-UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). The UN-Habitat Urban Inequities Survey
(UIS) (UN-Habitat, 2006) is one such survey method that is designed to highlight these
inequities in service provision. Figure 6.1 clearly indicates the impact of a water-focused
UIS in the urban centre of a small town in Uganda. The graph shows the situation with
respect to service coverage both before and after a water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)
intervention. The largest coverage percentage represents the published Joint Monitoring
Programme (JMP) figure for the respective years, based on data from the Demographic
and Health Surveys (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). The data were further analysed by applying

30

98

An overview of urban typologies in the context of wastewater and sustainable urban drainage issues is
provided in Table 5.1 of the World Water Development Report 2017 (WWAP, 2017, p. 51).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 6.1 Access to improved drinking water, taking account of additional criteria: The case of Kyotera Town Council, Uganda, 2007 and 2010
80
Improved drinking water source*

69

70

Improved and sufficient drinking water

60

Improved, sufficient, affordable and
accessible drinking water

50
(%)

Improved, sufficient and affordable
drinking water

40
30

35
23

20
* WHO/UNICEF JMP definition

10
0

Source: Alabaster (2015).

16

16

9
2
Kyotera 2007

1
Kyotera 2010

some additional criteria, going beyond the JMP definition31 of ‘improved’. The additional
criteria in the UIS (which incidentally were not considered in the JMP definitions in place
at the time) included the following, more stringent (but nonetheless reasonable) criteria:
•

the cost should not exceed 10% of the household income;

•

the volume available should be no less than 20 litres per capita per day; and

•

the time taken to collect the minimum volume should not be greater than 1 hour.

If these conditions (which are often not met in smaller urban centres) are applied, the
impact is dramatic, with coverage decreasing from 23% to 1% in 2007 as compared to a
decrease from 69% to 16% in 2010.
The grave reality is that small urban centres such as Kyotera in Uganda are typical of the
more than 250 smaller urban areas in the Lake Victoria basin, where service levels are
significantly less than reported by global monitoring programmes (Alabaster, 2015). The
cost of such a comprehensive monitoring exercise is of course prohibitive, but it is likely
that the same inequities exist in many other smaller urban settlements in Africa and
other regions. The example clearly illustrates the importance of disaggregated data and
how those who are left behind are ‘lost’ in aggregated national statistics.
The use of self-supplied groundwater among poor urban dwellers represents another
case where certain groups remain ‘invisible’ and are thus at greater risk of being ‘left
behind’ (Box 6.1).

6.3
Mapping and
data collection in
informal settlements

Community-led documentation and mapping have helped residents of informal
settlements to negotiate with governments and to generate new knowledge that makes
their vital interests and challenges more visible (Satterthwaite, 2012).
Many of the world’s poorest and most disadvantaged individuals are not recognized or
counted as they have no physical address (Patel and Baptist, 2012). In Sub-Saharan Africa,
for example, it is accepted that close to 60% of urban populations live in low-income
settings (UN-Habitat/IHS-Erasmus University Rotterdam, 2018). These individuals are not

31

According to the 2010 WHO/UNICEF JMP report (WHO/UNICEF, 2010), ‘improved’ sources of drinking
water include piped water on premises (piped household water connection located inside the user’s
dwelling, plot or yard; public taps or standpipes; tube wells or boreholes; protected dug wells; protected
springs; and collected rainwater). For monitoring purposes, the use of improved drinking water sources had
been equated to access to safe drinking water, but not all ‘improved’ sources in actual fact provide drinking
water that is ‘safe’.

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements

99

recognized as part of the formal system, and most importantly find difficulty in gaining
access to basic services. The inclusion of informal settlements in survey instruments
varies. For example, they are not included in Demographic and Health Surveys (or ‘DHS’
— the main source for JMP data), but they are included in censuses.
Having an appropriate spatial reference for the data is necessary if inequities are to be
fully understood, as the people in the most disadvantaged situations are often ‘hidden’
in aggregated statistics. Monitoring is an expensive business and many governments
may be understandably concerned over the cost of monitoring and reporting in the
context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) process, which so far remains
unquantified. It is without doubt important that more efforts are made to promote the
benefits of monitoring, including improved resources management and assistance
with policy- and decision-making. Most survey instruments used by National Statistical
Officers attempt to estimate slum populations through representative sampling, but in
reality many difficulties associated with slum monitoring persist.

6.4
Integrated urban
planning and
community
engagement

There is often a call for a more integrated approach to the provision of basic water
and sanitation services for the urban poor. In this regard, risk-informed development
towards more resilient and sustainable communities is also important, because the
poor or those who live in informal settlements are more likely vulnerable to disasters.
This is feasible in formally arranged cities and towns, but integrated planning in
low-income areas of large cities or smaller urban centres is often neglected, despite
the opportunities that come from increased community engagement. Box 6.2 below
gives an important example of the benefits of integrated infrastructure projects. The
particular case of Kibera highlights the added value of fully engaging the community
in the planning process, and also in the management of facilities. This planning is not
undertaken in the conventional sense, in the same way a new city would be designed,
but relies on modifying existing services (in this case not just with water and sanitation)
to accommodate community preferences (UN-Habitat, 2014).

Box 6.1 Self-supply and groundwater dependence among urban poor dwellers
While the water community is moving beyond the simple classification of water sources as ‘improved’ or ‘unimproved’
and striving instead to ensure access for all under the 2030 Agenda, it remains clear that some states are unable to provide
regulated, piped supplies to everyone. This is partly associated with trends in urbanization, where rapid, unplanned or
inadequately managed expansion leads to sprawl and unequal sharing of the benefits of development (Grönwall, 2016).
Hundreds of millions of people in low-income urban settlements rely on wells and boreholes as their primary or back-up
source of domestic water (Grönwall et al., 2010). Those groundwater sources are vital in that they provide opportunities for
low-cost self-supply systems developed and maintained by households, but awareness about point-of-use treatment lags
behind considerably.
The paradigms underpinning good water governance, the human right to water and the 2030 Agenda, classify a self-supplying
household as ‘underserved’, while they do not provide an all-applicable answer to who is accountable during this supposedly
transient stage before the household becomes connected to the public system (Grönwall, 2016).
Such a classification has led some city planners and decision-makers to avoid allocating (surface) water sources to these
groups, as their contextual entitlements are not clearly on the agenda. The implicit justification is that, in particular, shallow,
dug wells do not provide safe water, and that little can or should be done to protect or improve them as they essentially
characterize a transient phase that needs to be eliminated by the continued expansion of piped water systems.
An additional problem is the reliance on aggregate statistics and insensitive indicators, such as those normally used to classify
a households’ primary source of drinking water. These contribute to masking the realities faced by millions of low-income
urban dwellers, and ultimately lead to their omission from improved service delivery planning. For example, a household
survey in the low-income township of Dodowa on the fringe of Accra concluded that residents there relied on dug wells
almost twice as much (on average) as was reported by the census data in other parts of the District (Grönwall, 2016). The direct
dependence on groundwater from their own wells or those of neighbours therefore had been ‘invisible’, as was the potential
impact of sewage on the aquifers themselves.

100

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

6.5
Costs of service
provision in
high-density
low-income urban
settlements

One of the key factors in the selection of water and sanitation services is the per capita
cost. Although capital cost seems to be among the main selection criteria, operational
costs are not always considered. Many low capital-cost technologies have high
operational costs. For example, the capital cost of a pit latrine may be low, but the
associated desludging and disposal costs are high.
The population density of those served can dramatically affect costs, and although the
unit cost for on-site technologies remains the same, the per capita cost of networked
systems diminishes considerably (see Table 6.1) as population density increases. For
example, the per capita cost of a private tap in a deeply rural area is over 30 times the
cost of the same service in a dense urban settlement. This is also very apparent in
the provision of low-cost sewerage systems: at densities greater than 30,000 people
per km2, networked sewers are a cheaper option than on-site systems (Foster and
Briceño-Garmendia, 2010). The trunk facilities of a sewer may be available to all, but
for the poor, the cost of connection is often beyond their means.

Box 6.2 The Kenya slum upgrading project: Providing integrated infrastructure in Soweto East, Kibera, Nairobi
The Kenya Slum Upgrading Project was launched in 2003, reflecting the Government of Kenya’s commitment to look
more closely at improving the lives of slum dwellers. In the context of this project, a survey was undertaken to document
all of the 13 distinct villages that make up Kibera. Extensive consultations with communities were held through the
“Settlements Executive Committee” (SEC), which helped to plan the project’s progressive upgrade. Then, a pilot project
was developed that would use the provision of water and sanitation facilities as an entry point for slum upgrading in
the village of Soweto East. Additionally, the new idea of improving the road through the village was explored and then
facilitated. Importantly, it was deemed very critical that the new developments be compatible with the lifestyles of
residents and not imposed on them.
Many hours were spent in consultation with community stakeholders to decide on the best options and, most
importantly, to plan how the work would be carried out. This was a special challenge, as space in Kibera is at a premium
and the new facilities would need some residents to be relocated.
The construction was carried out over a period of 18 months. By 2008, when one of the first sanitation blocks was
complete, the village of Soweto East took on a new life and showed transformations that were not expected. For example,
it was appreciated that the odour from excreta had been reduced.
Within a short period of time, the road had become the public open space of choice; both day and night would see much
activity. During the day, traders were lining the new street and at night time residents enjoyed socializing in their new
town square.
We can see how unblocking the main artery to Soweto East has brought new life to the community. It has rejuvenated
areas and, most importantly, has improved the lives of Soweto East residents. In 2018, all except one of the original
toilet blocks were fully functioning. The Government of Kenya has replicated the concept of using roads. They have
additionally adopted the expansion by linking it to a youth employment scheme.
Although it was a single pilot project, it has given some good ideas for future slum upgrading. It has demonstrated how
creating good living space, both inside and outside the household, can greatly improve living standards. On top of that,
it has shown the importance of community engagement. Through this process, many invaluable lessons were learned
by a dedicated, multi-disciplinary and multi-agency project team. Given the challenges that have come with accelerated
urbanization in developing countries, as described above, these lessons are important.
Source: UN-Habitat (2014).

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements

101

Table 6.1 Capital cost (US$ per capita) of infrastructure provision, by density

Infrastructure type
Density (people/km2)

Secondary
cities

Large cities

Rural
hinterland

Deep
rural

30 000

20 000

10 000

5 008

3 026

1 455

1 247

38

13

Private tap

104.2

124.0

168.7

231.8

293.6

416.4

448.5

1 825.2

3 156.2

Standpost

31.0

36.3

48.5

65.6

82.4

115.7

124.5

267.6

267.6

Borehole

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

21.1

53.0

159.7

8.3

8.3

8.3

8.3

8.3

8.3

8.3

16.7

50.4

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

125.0

Improved latrine

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

57.0

Unimproved latrine

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

39.0

Water

Hand pump
Sanitation
Septic tank

Source: Adapted from Foster and Briceño-Garmendia (2010, table 5.6, p. 131). © World Bank. openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2692. Licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY 3.0 IGO).

6.6
Attracting
sustainable
investment at the
local level

Weak institutional structures at the local level are often cited as the root cause of
the inability to attract investments (see Chapters 4 and 5). This applies both to donor
financing and to domestic sources of finance, both private and public. In the past,
urban development projects were usually financed by loans, underwritten by national
governments. A larger proportion of this kind of financing was directed towards capital
cities and provincial centres, while small urban centres were neglected. The justification
for this has been the small centres’ inability to effectively coordinate and administer
finance, as well as their lack of institutional capacity.
Corruption plagues many institutions in urban areas. Accountability and transparency
are basic governance attributes, which promote good financial management. If cost
recovery is managed, urban development projects stand a better chance of success.
Pre-investment activities can offer greater opportunities to leverage resources from both
multilateral development banks and bilateral donors. The preparation period of many
projects that receive funding from Development Banks, both as grants and as loans, can
be enhanced by interventions to make the investments more sustainable in the long
term (UN-Habitat, 2011). Such activities include, for example:

Accountability and
transparency are basic
governance attributes,
which promote good
financial management

•

Preparation of business development plans for service providers;

•

Development of baseline assessments for project design;

•

Development of impact monitoring frameworks;

•

Capacity building to improve the utility capacity for servicing loans and sustaining
capital investments; and

•

Participatory methods to ensure the involvement of groups in disadvantaged or
vulnerable situations.

Many of these approaches offer great potential to prepare organizations for inward
investment. This is particularly of interest for sub-sovereign lending (UN-Habitat, 2011).
In the area of capacity building, participatory approaches can sharpen the focus of
project development and ensure more effective targeting of beneficiaries. One such
example is the fast-track capacity building of small water utilities to increase revenue
generation and cover operations and maintenance expenditure (IWA/UN-Habitat, 2011).

102

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

6.7
Financing WASH
in urban settings

Development banks often provide significant resources and expertise to augment the
capacity of governments to design and implement rural, urban and peri-urban water
and sanitation programmes. The ability to take on and service loan financing depends
on the capacity of the institutions and their stability. Trends in financing have focused
predominantly on sovereign lending, but with sector reform and decentralization,
service providers are also considering sub-sovereign lending. In many of the larger
urban areas, utilities have the capacity to service loans, but in the smaller urban
settlements, where the main growth during the coming decades will take place, there
is little capacity for repayment of loans, as such settings do not enjoy the economies of
scale. Flexible types of financing and grant/loan packages will be necessary in smaller
rapidly growing urban centres (see Chapter 5). Mixed technologies and service levels
can coexist in the same urban agglomerations but need to be carefully planned and
progressively upgraded as cities densify and the economic conditions improve in
lower-income areas.

6.8
Centralized vs.
decentralized
urban water
supply and
sanitation systems

Traditional approaches to sanitation and wastewater management in urban areas
tend to favour large-scale, centralized collection and treatment. This has historically
required significant investments. In order to get cost recovery, a sufficient number of
users must be connected. For the poor, the costs of connection are often prohibitive.
As mentioned in Section 6.5, the density of population frequently dictates the choice
of infrastructure and the decision to use networked systems or provide off-site
facilities. In reality, urban areas that fall somewhere between large urban centres
and rural settlements need hybrid approaches. The density may be too low to justify
the cost of household connections, and not high enough to permit conventionally
designed systems. Mara and Alabaster (2008) propose a new paradigm to connect
groups of households (and not individual households) in peri-urban low-income areas
and large villages, to reduce the investment cost while still allowing a good service
level for the poorest.
Although water supply systems are sometimes better served with smaller, easily
managed networks, the challenges of wastewater and sludge management are often
more complex. The main reason is the unwillingness to pay for sanitation services.
There have been numerous attempts to use resources recovery to offset some of
the costs of service provision (WWAP, 2017), but, as with all ‘waste’, if it needs to be
transported, the costs thereof often negate the benefits gained. From this perspective,
the idea of decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS) is becoming popular.
Not only are investment costs substantially lower, but the operational costs also. Using
DEWATS also means that carriage of wastewater can be simplified. For example,
pumping can often be avoided and low-cost sewerage technologies can be used.

The density of population
frequently dictates the
choice of infrastructure
and the decision to use
networked systems or
provide off-site facilities

Aside from efficient collection and treatment of wastewater, local reuse for crop
irrigation or fish production can lead to a market, based on the value of the treated
wastewater (WWAP, 2017). If the systems are simple to operate and maintain, they can
often be managed by relatively unskilled labour, sometimes by community groups.
A typical DEWATS system is shown in Figure 6.2. A combination of simple unit
processes is usually favoured, most often without the need for external power.
DEWATS also have the advantage that they can be connected to networks, or can be
decommissioned easily, should conditions dictate that larger-scale centralized systems
are more cost-effective, or that urban expansion puts heavy pressure to use the land.
They are particularly appropriate where low-income populations are at risk from
wastewater and faecal sludges directly contaminating water supplies.
One of the main challenges is land provision. In dense low-income settlements, land
is a premium and giving up space to treatment facilities is difficult. In these situations,
the use of low-cost sewerage to transport the wastewater to the periphery of the
settlement is favoured.

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements

103

Figure 6.2 Typical DEWATS system
SETTLER
(sedimentation)

ANAEROBIC BAFFLED REACTOR
(anaerobic digestion)
Biogas

Biogas

Manhole

Manholes

Sewage
inflow

Inflow
Scum

Outflow

Outflow

Sedimentation

Sludge

ANAEROBIC FILTER
(anaerobic digestion)
Biogas

PLANTED GRAVEL FILTER
(aerobic and facultative decomposition)

Manholes
Inflow

Outflow

Inflow

Manhole

Pump

Filtering material

Sedimentation

Treated
water
Source: Based on Ulrich et al. (2009, fig. 3.1, p. 35).

6.9
Conclusions
and policy
recommendations

Substantial inequality exists between slum and non-slum households in access to
water and sanitation facilities. Rapid urbanization coupled with inadequate control
over physical development and investments on the part of local authorities means that
pockets of slum areas will continue to emerge in small urban centres. This trend of slum
development has to be gauged and factored into the planning of water and sanitation
infrastructure. In particular, urban development and structure plans need to be
instituted, with clear strategies on slum upgrading that account for water and sanitation
services. New approaches to monitoring need to be developed to better account for intraurban differentials.
The provision of urban sanitation infrastructure lags far behind infrastructure for water
provision in most urban settings, but the poorest residents of slum areas are the most
affected. This sanitation deficit can erode the benefits of improved water provision in
many ways, with dire consequences on the environment and public health. Where there
is a significant improvement in water, this needs to be matched with a commensurate
investment in sanitation. Significant financial and political commitment has to be
channelled towards bridging the widening gap between water and sanitation provision
through novel business models and strategies that make urban sanitation an attractive
and cost-effective investment option for local government and businesses. This will need
appropriate blended financing approaches and a strengthening of local authority systems.
The widespread use of on-site sanitation technologies, designed mainly for the collection
and storage of human excreta, still predominates in urban areas, particularly in slum
areas. These on-site facilities place a significant economic and social burden on poor
households.

104

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

There is a need for a paradigm shift in urban sanitation monitoring strategies from unitary
monitoring to system monitoring. This means that improvements in urban sanitation will be
measured not only by ‘the number of on-site installations’ in the urban space, but by ‘on-site
installations with functional systems for the collection, transportation, treatment and safe
disposal/reuse of human excreta’. This way, the main functions of a sanitation system (i.e.
protection of human health and improvement of environmental quality) can be met. In framing
a monitoring framework, particularly the use of sanitation products will gain significant
prominence in urban areas during the coming decades, as worldwide, the so-called ecological
sanitation technologies and the use of wastewater/human excreta are being promoted.
Access to water through pipes into dwellings remains low, even though such facilities have the
potential to reduce children diarrhoea and lessen the burden of water collection on women
and children. In small urban centres, significant investments in piped water systems that are
connected to household dwelling units or are located on plots are needed to alleviate diarrhoeal
diseases and the burden of water collection on women and children. Better household
water management that safeguards the quality of drinking water has to be promoted for the
minimization of recontamination, particularly in areas where households’ dependence on
other improved water sources is widespread. This has to be combined with point-of-use water
quality monitoring.

One of the
root causes for
non-inclusion
of informal
settlements in
the provision of
services relates to
the legal tenure/
occupation of the
land on which they
are located

The proportion of urban households with access to improved water supply and sanitation
services decreases substantially when adjusting for additional indicators related to water
(quantity, time and cost) and sanitation (distance, cleanliness, hand-washing and safety)
(UN-Habitat, 2006). Some of these criteria, although not considered in early JMP reporting,
are highly relevant and now reflected in new JMP methodologies as developed for the SDGs
(WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). Additionally, in 2010, through Resolution 64/292 (UNGA, 2010), the
United Nations General Assembly explicitly recognized the human right to water and sanitation
and acknowledged that clean drinking water and sanitation are essential to the realization of all
human rights. This creates new opportunities to enhance and improve monitoring, which will
have to be progressively recognized in national laws and ordinances. Where data are available,
the monitoring of water provision should be based on indicators that systematically integrate
aspects of physical and economic accessibility of water (time/distance to collect water, and
amount spent to collect water), quantity of water (adequate amount of water for household use),
quality of water (uncontaminated water), and reliability of water (uninterrupted water supply).
Where data are available, the monitoring of sanitation provision should be based on indicators
that systematically integrate shared toilets, and account for factors directly related to the use
(distance, cleanliness and safety), hygiene (hand-washing facilities), emptying, treatment and
disposal/reuse. It is fully recognized that gathering quality data on the aforementioned key
indicators for the construction of an integrated monitoring framework can be an extremely
expensive and technically daunting process for the National Statistical Offices in developing
countries. Innovative data collection systems that build on existing local structures (including
water and sanitation committees and civil society) and make use of telecommunication
applications in synch with geographic information systems or similar platforms for the
establishment of user-friendly data portals offer new and potentially affordable opportunities.
The implementation of such data collection systems has to proceed with an incremental
inclusion of indicators, subject to the availability of resources.
The new paradigm proposed to supply groups of households (and not individual households) in
peri-urban low-income areas and large villages, reducing the investment cost while still allowing
a good service level for the poorest, offers promise as a way forward to ensure that the very
poorest are not ‘left behind’ (Mara and Alabaster, 2008).
The critical issue of population density will greatly influence both capital and operational costs
of both water supply and sanitation systems in low-income urban areas. The use of DEWATS will
most likely enable the use of networked systems, where previously only on-site systems would
be considered.
One of the root causes for non-inclusion of informal settlements in the provision of services
relates to the legal tenure/occupation of the land on which they are located. To address this
issue, aside from institutional recognition, there is a need to enact laws and policies to dissociate
the tenure status from service provision.

Cities, urbanization and informal settlements

105

Women walking among their fields in the Nyalungana swamp reclamation project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

CHAPTER 7

Rural poverty

106

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

FAO | Patricia Mejías-Moreno and Helle Munk Ravnborg
With contributions from: Olcay Ünver, Benjamin Davis, Maya Takagi, Daniela Kalikoski, Giorgia Prati and
Jacqueline Ann Demeranville (FAO)

This chapter examines the linkages between
rural poverty and water, with a focus on the role
of supplemental irrigation in rainfed agricultural
systems in contributing to poverty reduction among
smallholder farmers and ensuring food security at
local and national levels.

7.1
Introduction: Three paradoxes
to better understand rural poverty
and water
Paradoxes proliferate in the rural areas of the world. A look into three of these
paradoxes provides important guidance for efforts to achieve water security for
the millions of people living in poverty in the rural areas of the world.

Paradox 1: Supplying the bulk of food, and yet poor and hungry

More than 80% of all farms in the world are family farms smaller than 2 hectares
(HLPE, 2013; FAO, 2014). At the global level, smallholder family farmers operate
around 12% of the world’s farmland area, whereas in low and lower–middle income
economies, they are estimated to operate around a third of the total farmland
(FAO, 2014). In Africa, farms up to 2 hectares are estimated to constitute 75% of the
farms and operate 24% of the farmland (HLPE, 2013). Smallholder family farmers
constitute the backbone of national food supplies, contributing to more than half of
the national agricultural production in many countries (FAO, 2014).32
Yet, it is in the rural areas that poverty, hunger and food insecurity are most
prevalent (FAO/IFAD/WFP, 2015a). Extremely poor households are more likely to
depend on agriculture and natural resources for their livelihoods and food security:
76% of the extreme poor and 60% of the moderate poor in rural areas over the
age of 15 report primary employment in agriculture (Castaneda Aguilar et al.,
2016). Jobs in the agricultural sector are highly water-dependent (WWAP, 2016),
and access to water for irrigation is a major determinant of land productivity, as
irrigated land is twice as productive as rainfed land (Rapsomanikis, 2015).

32

In a cross-section of countries consisting of Bangladesh, Bolivia, Kenya, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Tanzania and Viet Nam, small family farms provide more than half, and in the case of Kenya up to
70%, of the total agricultural production.

Water and rural poverty

107

Approximately three-quarters (74%) of people living in extreme poverty33 live in rural
areas (FAO, 2017b) and the vast majority of the rural poor are in fact smallholders who
themselves suffer from food insecurity and malnutrition.
In 2017, there were 821 million chronically food-insecure and malnourished people
in the world, up from 804 million in 2016. Africa remains the continent with the
highest prevalence of undernourishment, affecting almost 21% of the population
(more than 256 million people). Women tend to be more undernourished than men.
Conflict and climate variability and extremes are making poverty reduction and food
security more challenging. The risk of hunger is significantly greater in countries with
agricultural systems that are highly sensitive to rainfall and temperature variability
and severe drought, and where the livelihood of a high proportion of the population
depends on agriculture. Severe droughts linked to the strong El Niño of 2015–2016
affected many countries, contributing to the recent increase in undernourishment
at the global level. For example, the drought caused by El Niño resulted in losses of
50–90 % of the crop harvest in the dry corridor, especially in El Salvador, Honduras
and Guatemala (FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/WHO, 2018).
The extremely poor in rural areas also face social exclusion and discrimination,
because of race, ethnicity and gender (De la O Campos et al., 2018). Indigenous peoples
make up a disproportional number of the world’s poor (see Section 3.2.4) and account
for around one-third of the extremely rural poor (UNDESA, 2009). Globally, women
are 4% more likely than men to live in extreme poverty (UN Women, 2018). Women in
agricultural rural areas have less access to productive resources, including water, than
men (FAO, 2011).

Indigenous peoples make
up a disproportional
number of the world’s
poor and account for
around one-third of the
extremely rural poor

Paradox 2: Substantive investments in water infrastructure in rural areas,
and yet the rural poor lack access to water

Roughly 70% and, in the world’s Least Developed Countries, over 90% of freshwater
withdrawals take place in rural areas, primarily for the irrigation of agricultural crops
(AQUASTAT, n.d.). A significant part of the water withdrawn is embedded in food and
fibres, most of which are processed and consumed elsewhere, either in urban areas or in
other parts of the world.
Globally, investments worth billions of dollars have been made in establishing water
infrastructure in rural areas, in large part for irrigation development and for energy
production (e.g. Zarfl et al., 2015; Crow-Miller et al., 2017). Irrigation can contribute to
poverty reduction by enhancing the productivity of labour and land and leading to higher
incomes and lower food prices (Faurès and Santini, 2009). However, with investments
in water-related infrastructure highly centred on the most productive areas, most of
the rural poor in other areas have not benefited from similar levels of investment and
infrastructure, hindering their access to water for agriculture, drinking and domestic
purposes.
Most of the people using unimproved sources of drinking water and lacking basic
sanitation services live in rural areas. In 2015, of the 159 million using surface water
(streams, lakes, rivers or irrigation channels), 147 million lived in rural areas, and over
half lived in Sub-Saharan Africa, where 10% of the population still drank untreated
surface water. Using surface water also implies that poor people in rural areas,
particularly women and girls, spend a considerable amount of time collecting water
(see Section 2.1.2). While three out of five people with safely managed sanitation lived
in urban areas (1.7 billion), the ratio drops to two out of five in rural areas (1.2 billion)
(WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

Paradox 3: Smallholder farmers being water-productive, and yet overlooked
Access to water for agricultural production, even if only for supplemental watering
of crops, can make the difference between farming as a mere means of survival and
farming as a reliable source of livelihoods. This importance is accentuated even further
in the current context of climate change, with its increasingly unpredictable and

33

108

The international poverty line for extreme poverty is $1.90 a day 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

erratic rainfall patterns. Across the world, millions of smallholder family farmers find
ways of accessing, storing and conducting water to their crops to make up for water
deficits during periods of dry spells or to secure food supplies during the dry season.
Yet, despite their often high level of water (and land) productivity (Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture, 2007) and their crucial role in
contributing to national food security, smallholders tend not to be the ones receiving
attention as part of ongoing efforts to formalize the allocation of water use rights
nor through the allocation of public subsidies for the establishment and operation of
irrigation infrastructure.

7.2
Emerging
challenges

7.2.1 Access to safe and affordable drinking water in rural areas

Millions of people in rural areas, particularly women and children in low- and middleincome countries, spend long hours fetching water from unsafely managed sources.
When water sources run dry, they also often face the competition for the limited
amounts of available water for domestic and productive uses, such as watering crops or
animals.
Access to safe drinking water and improved sanitation is used as an indicator in several
multidimensional poverty indices.34 Despite progress made to improve access to
drinking water over recent decades, the drudgery and unreliability that millions of rural
women and men still face across the world owes to the fact that water infrastructure
has been spread too thinly and is thus insufficient to ensure comprehensive coverage.
Moreover, the institutional capacity, including domestic resource mobilization and
budget allocations — both at national and subnational levels — has been insufficient
to cater for maintenance needs of the installed water infrastructure. However, the
burden is far from evenly distributed. Significant — and structural — inequalities exist
in drinking water access, not only between rural and urban areas, but also within rural
territories (WHO/UNICEF, 2017b).35
Very often, differences in economic wealth and skills as well as ethnicity and gender
spill over into power imbalances and abilities to influence political, technical and legal
decisions. Thus, empirical evidence starting to emerge (e.g. from Latin America and the
Caribbean) shows significant disparities in access to improved drinking water among
rural territories in a wide range of countries. Additional inequalities exist within rural
territories (e.g. along the lines of ethnicity), with indigenous households being less likely
to enjoy access to safely managed drinking water than non-indigenous households
(WHO/UNICEF, 2016). Empirical data from rural districts in Viet Nam, Nicaragua,
Bolivia and Zambia show that non-poor households are not only more likely to enjoy
access to publicly funded domestic water supply infrastructure than poor households,
but they also are more likely to enjoy access to such infrastructure within the immediate
vicinity of their homes (Cossio Rojas and Soto Montaño, 2011; Huong et al., 2011;
Mweemba et al., 2011; Paz Mena et al., 2011; Funder et al., 2012). Furthermore, they are
more likely to benefit from such infrastructure to water their crops and animals during
the dry season, often to the detriment of neighbouring, particularly poor, households’
access to water (e.g. Funder et al., 2012; Ravnborg and Jensen, 2012).36
Despite common scheme-level regulations that water provided should only be used for
domestic purposes, the potential economic gains associated with breaking the rules
often outweigh the risk of sanctions. A large body of research shows that, particularly in
rural areas, the distinction between domestic and productive water is difficult to

34

35

36

For example, the Global Multidimensional Poverty Index developed by the Oxford Poverty & Human
Development Initiative. For more information, please see: ophi.org.uk/multidimensional-poverty-index/.
Data on inequality in access to drinking water services are also becoming increasingly available from
national large-scale surveys such as the Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) (WHO/UNICEF, n.d.).
The MICS 2013 survey from Bangladesh is an example of this (BBS/UNICEF Bangladesh, 2014).
Testimonies of this are also given in video reports from Zambia and Nicaragua available at www.
thewaterchannel.tv/media-gallery/810-media-8-competing-for-water-when-more-water-leads-to-conflict
and www.thewaterchannel.tv/media-gallery/839-media-2-competing-for-water-the-challenge-of-localwater-governance.

Water and rural poverty

109

uphold (HLPE, 2015) and that instead water should be considered — and governed — as
a multiple-use resource. Thus, water infrastructure development that fails to provide
sufficient water to cater for the full spectrum of domestic needs, also during the dry
season, and that does not cater for even a minimum of productive uses of water, can easily
contribute to exacerbating rather than reducing socio-economic inequalities (Araujo et
al., 2008; Gómez and Ravnborg, 2011; Funder et al., 2012; Hellum et al., 2015).

7.2.2 Water for crops in the context of climate change

The major effects of climate change in rural areas will be felt through impacts on water
supply, food security and agricultural incomes. In some regions, shifts in agricultural
production are likely to take place, not only as a result of changes in temperature and
rainfall, but also through changes in the availability of water for irrigation. Climate
change will have a disproportionate impact on the welfare of the poor in rural areas,
including female-headed households and those with limited access to modern
agricultural inputs, infrastructure, and education (IPCC, 2014).

Climate change will
have a disproportionate
impact on the welfare of
the poor in rural areas

Increased rainfall variability and unpredictability, as well as more frequent and
prolonged droughts and floods, will accentuate the need for increased attention to water
management in agriculture. This is even to be more accentuated in the drylands, where
the extreme variability, rather than the total amount of rainfall, is the key limiting factor
for improving agricultural yields (Rockström et al., 2007).
Water management for smallholder family farmers needs to consider both rainfed and
irrigated agriculture. Approximately 80% of the global cropland is rainfed, and 60% of
the world’s food is produced on rainfed land. Soil management is an essential element
in rainfed and irrigated agriculture. Well-managed soils are capable of absorbing and
retaining water and are more resilient towards erosion following heavy downpours. Soil
management also limits soil evaporation and has been shown to be complementary to
other strategies such as supplemental irrigation in rainfed agricultural systems during
periods of dry spells (Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture,
2007; Rockström et al., 2007).
Research from different parts of the world shows that supplemental irrigation in rainfed
agricultural systems may not only ensure crop survival, but also double or even triple
rainfed yields per hectare for crops such as wheat, sorghum and maize (Oweis and
Hachum, 2003; Rockström et al., 2007; HLPE, 2015). Research also shows that water
productivity is highest at the lower end of the yield spectrum (Comprehensive Assessment
of Water Management in Agriculture, 2007), and can be higher in systems of supplemental
irrigation than in full-irrigation systems (Oweis and Hachum, 2003). Thus, the case
for strengthening small-scale farmers’ — men and women’s — access to supplemental
irrigation is strong, in terms of ending poverty and hunger, reducing inequalities, and
improving resource productivity.
Strengthening small-scale farmers’ ability to provide their crops with water during
periods of deficits also requires the infrastructure necessary to withdraw, harvest, or store
crops, and to conduct water to them. It is also important to formally recognize their right
to do so.
In many parts of the world, farmers have over the course of generations developed
systems of informal irrigation. Technologies are available and are constantly being
improved (Box 7.1). These range from simple drip irrigation systems constructed from
water-filled plastic bottles placed to irrigate seedlings, to elevated water drums from
where water is led to the plants through pipes and drip tape, to organizationally more
demanding systems of furrows and elevated seed beds in valley bottoms, possibly
combined with solar, treadle or diesel pumps (e.g. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007).
Opening up new opportunities for the rural poor in relation to managing water in the
context of climate change will require increased investment in water infrastructure,
such as water harvesting (Box 7.2) or irrigation, improving the advisory services for crop

110

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 7.1 Adapting small-scale irrigation to climate change in West and Central Africa
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, in collaboration with the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD) and national partners, is implementing the project “Adapting small-scale irrigation
to climate change in West and Central Africa” to improve sustainability and adaptation of small-scale irrigation across
the region. The objective of this project is to provide tools to enable stakeholders involved in water management, from
policy-makers to small-scale farmers, to make the right decisions about climate change adaptation strategies in small-scale
irrigation systems.
The project is being implemented in Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Mali and Niger, and has conducted the climate resilience
assessment of smallholder farmers across 21 irrigation sites.
Information was collected from 691 households who are mostly reliant on agriculture as their main source of livelihood
and for whom rainfall still constitutes the main source of water for crops. Farmers have noticed that precipitation patterns
have changed in the past 10 years. Water shortage due to decreased rainfall, the late start of the rainy season, and the
presence of extreme events such as floods and droughts has impacted farmers’ capacity to produce food. Indeed:
•
•
•
•

45% have experienced an increase in crop failure;
38% have seen a decrease of their farm income;
17% have observed a reduction in the availability of water for irrigation; and
13% of families have seen at least one of their relatives forced to migrate.

Climate variability and extreme events pose challenges to development, and farmers in West and Central Africa have
identified key aspects to be strengthened to enhance their capacity to adapt to climate change through:
•
•
•
•
•
•

increased investment and access to financing mechanisms to make equipment, sustainable energy sources and
technology for small-scale irrigation available to them;
improved irrigation and water conservation practices and increased water availability;
diversified sources of revenue outside agriculture;
improved soil fertility of irrigated land to avoid soil degradation;
enhanced access to information and knowledge; and
better access and connectivity to local markets.

Source: FAO (forthcoming).

Box 7.2 One million cisterns for the Sahel
In the Sahel, climate change exacerbates rainfall irregularity and climatic shocks, including droughts and floods. The
consequences can be devastating for the poorest rural households, who struggle to cope with these shocks and see their
vulnerability worsen. Efficient and sustainable management of water resources is more than ever a priority to improve the
resilience of vulnerable communities.
The programme ‘One million cisterns for the Sahel' aims to promote and facilitate the introduction of rainwater harvesting
and storage systems for vulnerable communities, especially women. The objective is to enable millions of people in the
Sahel to access safe drinking water, have a surplus to enhance their family agricultural production, improve their food
and nutrition security, and strengthen their resilience. Besides ensuring access to clean water during the dry season, the
programme promotes the participation of the communities in the construction of cisterns through cash-for-work activities.
Local communities are trained in the construction, use and maintenance of cisterns, thus becoming qualified for civil
construction works and infrastructure maintenance to enable income diversification and improved housing conditions.
It is inspired by the ‘Programme One Million Cisterns’, implemented in Brazil through the ‘Zero Hunger’ programme.
Source FAO (2018b).

Water and rural poverty

111

and water management, and planning and implementation of drought preparedness
plans. These actions, when coupled with better access to social protection, including
social security schemes (pensions and insurance) and more targeted social assistance
programmes, result in a better enhancement of the economic and productive capacity
of poor smallholder farmers and their families. New ways of providing the often
modest capital needs for undertaking necessary investments at farm level are also
required. The rapid expansion of internet connectivity, even in rural areas, combined
with conventional broadcasting and written and face-to-face communication, open up
such new opportunities, not only for developing technology information platforms, but
also for connecting (groups of) farmers to distant but organized groups of consumers
and investors (e.g. through crowdfunding platforms). Leaving no one behind will
require continuous support to such platforms, and assistance to ensure that young and
disadvantaged men and women can access and benefit from them.

7.2.3 Rural migration

Mobility is a widespread phenomenon in rural societies. Rural households have
traditionally adopted migration as a strategy to manage risk, diversify livelihoods and
adapt to a changing environment. It is estimated that around 40% of international
remittances are sent to rural areas, suggesting that a significant share of international
migrants comes from rural communities (IFAD, 2017). About 85% of international
refugees are hosted by developing countries, with at least a third — and in Sub-Saharan
Africa more than 80% — in rural areas (FAO, 2018a), which further emphasizes the rural
and agricultural dimension of migration and forced displacement.

Water stress can result
in declining agricultural
production and directly
and indirectly influence
migration patterns

Rural migration is closely related to structural factors that often characterize rural
settings, including poverty, food insecurity and limited income-generating activities,
as well as lack of employment and decent working conditions. Rural–urban inequality
can further push people to migrate to urban areas in search of better jobs and living
conditions, including access to education, health services and social protection. There
is growing evidence that the depletion of natural resources, such as water, due to a
combination of excessive use, environmental degradation and climate change, can be
a major driver of migration (FAO/GWP/Oregon State University, 2018). The advancing
threat of climate change with the risk of substantial negative effects on agriculture and
rural areas, in particular for people living in poverty, is increasingly perceived as a driver
of displacement and potentially vast migratory flows (Stapleton et al., 2017; FAO, 2018a;
Rigaud et al., 2018). Water stress can result in declining agricultural production and
directly and indirectly influence migration patterns.
Migration has different impacts on the rural areas of origin, transit and destination,
which may be positive or negative and differ according to the context. In rural areas
of origin, emigration of working-age people will affect the supply of labour and the
demographic composition of the remaining population. At the same time, rural outmigration can reduce pressure on natural resources, foster a more efficient allocation
of labour and lead to higher wages in agriculture. For rural areas in low- and middleincome transit countries, migration and protracted forced displacement can constitute
a challenge for local authorities to provide public services, while increasing pressure on
natural resources, such as water.
Migration can be one of many adaptation strategies to water stress. It can contribute to
agricultural and rural development in the areas of origin through financial remittances
that can help overcome lack of access to credit and insurance, and foster investments
in climate-resilient livelihoods. For example, in Sri Lanka, rural remittance-recipient
households tend to have improved recourse to farm inputs and better equipment (such as
tube wells and water pumps) than non-migrant households (FAO, 2018a). Migration can
also contribute to the transfer of knowledge and skills, which could enhance a more
sustainable use of natural resources in both receiving and sending communities.
Leaving no one behind requires efforts to give people in rural areas the choice to remain
where they live rather than to be forced to move due to the impossibility of sustaining
their livelihoods. Providing alternatives to migration includes creating stronger rural

112

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

communities that are more resilient to water stresses and other environmental and
non-environmental risks, as well as investing in local diversification and promoting policy
coherence and coordination. To tackle the challenges and harness the opportunities of
migration, comprehensive policies on migration and rural development that integrate the
water–migration nexus will be needed, as well as increasing support to origin, transit and
hosting communities to enhance resilience to water-related vulnerability.

7.2.4 The invisibility of small-scale irrigation: Dealing with water rights and
investment

Only a minority of the world’s small-scale users of water for irrigation hold a legally
sanctioned water right (Ravnborg, 2016).37 Historically, small-scale irrigation has escaped
official statistics (e.g. Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture,
2007; Kodamaya, 2009) and only recently, lessons learned from experience with water
use for irrigation have found their way into agricultural census designs,38 thus beginning
to provide a more comprehensive overview of small-scale irrigation. Also, many smallscale water users have been reluctant to register their water use in fear of the imposition
of water use fees. Yet, this ‘invisibility’ of small-scale irrigation may now put the water
security of small-scale water users at risk as legally sanctioned water rights regimes are
rolled out in many countries (Hodgson, 2004; 2016; Van Koppen et al., 2004; 2007; 2014;
Pedersen and Ravnborg, 2006; HLPE, 2013; 2015; Ravnborg, 2015; 2016; Van Eeden et al.,
2016) as part of ongoing water governance reforms, and as the use of available water is
gradually conceded to agricultural corporations, industries, and other major users.
There appears to be a (re)surge of large-scale water development projects, such as the
construction of storage and inter-basin water transfer infrastructure (e.g. Molle et al.,
2009; Crow-Miller et al., 2017), often with multiple objectives, including power generation
and agricultural development. Much of this infrastructure development takes place in
low- and middle-income countries (Zarfl et al., 2015; Crow-Miller et al., 2017), where
the water security of small-scale users is often at risk. These risks can escalate if public
transparency throughout the planning and implementation process is limited. While
water infrastructure development projects often provide broad-based societal gains, most
notably in the form of improved power supply, other gains such as irrigation development
tend to primarily benefit larger agricultural corporations. The mismatch between those
to whom benefits accrue (e.g. in terms of construction contracts, land developed for
irrigation, cheaper electricity, etc.) and those who pay for the costs (e.g. farmers, herders
and others losing their access to land and water, as well as tax payers) has frequently made
many of such investments politically contentious, not to mention the environmental costs.
Leaving no one behind in the effort to ensure secure and equal access to water in rural
areas, while providing opportunities for future water investments, will require continued
efforts to increase the visibility of small-scale users with regards to water for irrigation, as
well as greater recognition of their contribution to national food security. Water allocations
to large-scale users, whether for irrigation or other purposes, must not take place at the
expense of small-scale farmers’ legitimate needs, irrespective of their ability to demonstrate
formally sanctioned water use rights. The current dominant resource-focused approach,
based on the allocation of water use rights to the most productive and largest users, has to
be complemented with a user- and use-oriented focus that assigns equal priority to all users
on a territorial basis, irrespective of amounts of water used, and that takes the intended
use (e.g. food security, etc.) and the associated water productivity into consideration. This
invokes internationally agreed conventions and principles, including the 2004 Voluntary
Guidelines to support the progressive realization of the Right to adequate food in the
context of national food security (FAO, 2005) and the 2010 UN recognition of the human
right to water and sanitation (UNGA, 2010).

While water infrastructure
development projects
often provide broad-based
societal gains, most notably
in the form of improved
power supply, other
gains such as irrigation
development tend to
primarily benefit larger
agricultural corporations

37

38

Depending on the country, such formal water rights could be what Hodgson refer to as ‘traditional’,
e.g. land-based, formal water rights, or ‘modern’, e.g. administrative or permit-based, formal water rights
(Hodgson, 2016).
As part of the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture. For further information, please see
www.fao.org/world-census-agriculture/en/.

Water and rural poverty

113

Farmers in a rice field in Thailand

A high level of transparency and democratic control, with investments that involve
public resources (be they financial or other), is required to maximize the public
gains from such investments. Future investment plans for water infrastructure
should combine large- and small-scale interventions and be people-centred (Faurès
and Santini, 2009). Finally, support to small-scale agriculture should be specifically
recognized in national and regional development programmes.

7.2.5 Water quality: An ever-growing concern

Water quality is a growing concern in rural areas in both low- and high-income
countries.
In many countries, the biggest source of water pollution today is agriculture,
while worldwide, the most common chemical contaminant found in groundwater
aquifers is nitrate from farming. Pesticide accumulation in water and in the food
chain, with demonstrated ill effects on humans, led to the widespread banning
of certain broad-spectrum and persistent pesticides (such as DDT and many
organophosphates), but some such pesticides are still used in poorer countries,
causing acute and likely chronic health effects (FAO/IWMI, 2018). This puts farmers
and agricultural workers, often belonging to the poorer segments of the population,
at risk.39 The fact that part of these chemicals or their derivates may filtrate into the
groundwater or may reach surface water bodies through runoff from fields, as well
as through common practices of preparing and cleaning spraying equipment in or
near streams and rivers, gives rise to growing concern among experts, authorities
and rural citizens (UNDP, 2011b; HLPE, 2015).

39

114

Emblematic cases include the sugarcane workers in Nicaragua and other areas in Central America
(Ravnborg, 2013).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Streams and rivers play important roles for ecosystem health. Many people living
in poverty and in areas with inadequate water infrastructure (mainly women and
girls) rely on rivers and streams for doing their laundry. Children swim in rivers and
streams, and cattle drink from them. Hence, chemical pollution from agriculture,
mining and industry generates risks to ecosystems, but also to human health, both
through the direct use of this water for domestic purposes or via the watering of
crops and animals (Turral et al., 2011; UNDP, 2011b; HLPE, 2015). The poorest rural
populations, who depend on surface water or unimproved water sources such as
shallow wells and unprotected springs for domestic purposes, are therefore at risk of
being left behind with respect to access to safe water. Agricultural labourers living in
the vicinity or downstream of areas cultivated with the intensive use of agricultural
chemicals are exposed to similar risks.
The lower prevalence of improved water sources and safely managed sanitation in
rural areas (WHO/UNICEF, 2017b) also causes rural populations to be more exposed to
faecal contamination than their urban neighbours. As a case in point, recent data (2016)
from Ecuador show that while 15% of the urban population is exposed to E. coli from
their drinking water source, this is the case for 32% of the rural population (INEC, n.d.).
Unfortunately, however, using water from improved sources provides no guarantee that
water is free from faecal contamination (WHO/UNICEF, 2017b). Data on the presence of
toxic chemicals in water used for domestic purposes, whether supplied from improved
or from surface water sources, are lacking at the global and (in many cases) national
levels.

7.3
Promoting
pro-poor
multisectoral
policies

Agriculture will continue to play a crucial role in the transformation and development
of rural societies, and particularly in ending extreme poverty. As explained above,
any intervention in the water and agriculture sectors will need to strengthen the
livelihoods of the poorest and the people in the most vulnerable situations in rural
areas, ensuring food security and access to drinking water and sanitation services.
Nevertheless, agricultural development by itself will not be sufficient to end rural
poverty, and those in the agricultural sector need to work hand in hand with other
development actors.
Water-related ecosystems, including wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes, are crucial
for ensuring goods and services like drinking water, food, energy and climate
resilience. Natural resources like water, as well as ecosystem services, are the basis of
all agricultural systems. Interventions that preserve ecosystems can also benefit the
rural poor by securing their livelihoods and building resilience to climate change. A
better integration between agricultural and environmental policies is a prerequisite to
achieving sustainable development. Such integration, in order to be successful, needs
to put the rural poor at the forefront.
Agricultural, water and broader sustainable development programmes also need
to be coupled with other measures to ensure equality and social safety nets. For
instance, social protection programmes can be linked to actions aimed at improving
agricultural production and rural infrastructure development to ensure the reduction
of poverty and hunger while stimulating economic growth, particularly among the
poorest communities. It has been estimated that, to end hunger by 2030, additional
investments in agriculture amounting to US$265 billion per year between 2016 and
2030 will be required at the global level, US$41 billion of which should be committed
to social protection to reach the poorest in rural areas; and US$198 billion to pro-poor
investment in productive and inclusive livelihood schemes, including regarding water
(FAO/IFAD/WFP, 2015b).

Water and rural poverty

115

CHAPTER 8

Zaatari camp in Jordan

Refugees and forced
displacement crises

116

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNHCR | Murray Burt and Ryan Schweitzer
With contributions from: Eva Mach, Daria Mokhnacheva and Antonio Torres (IOM); Léo Heller (Special
Rapporteur on the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation); Alejandro Jiménez (UNDP-SIWI
Water Governance Facility); Maria Teresa Gutierrez (ILO); Amanda Loeffen and Rakia Turner (WaterLex);
Dominic de Waal (World Bank); and the Turkish Water Institute (SUEN)

This chapter focuses on the main drivers of displacement,
including armed conflict and persecution as well as
disasters and climate change, and describes the challenges
and potential response options for providing safe drinking
water and sanitation services to refugees and internally
displaced people.

8.1
Refugees and forced displacement:
A global challenge
The world is witnessing the highest levels of human displacement on record. By
the end of the year 2017, an unprecedented 68.5 million people around the world
have been forcibly displaced from their homes as a result of conflict, persecution,
or human rights violations (UNHCR, 2018a). In addition, an average of 25.3 million
people are displaced each year by sudden-onset disasters (IDMC, 2018), a trend likely
to continue with the adverse effects of climate change. Infrastructure development
related to megaprojects and mega-events has also led to the involuntary resettlement
of affected populations (Picciotto, 2013).
Away from home, refugees and internally displaced people (IDPs) are among the
most vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, often faced with barriers to access basic
water supply and sanitation services, due to various factors related to their ethnicity,
religion, gender, age, caste, class, physical or mental state, or other conditions.
Displacement has impacts on the security and safety, financial means, health and
well-being, education and employment opportunities, gender relations, nutrition and
food security, social networks, family relationships, and legal rights of the displaced.
Definitions of several key terms used in this chapter are provided in Box 8.1.

8.1.1 Displacement due to conflict and persecution

Of those displaced due to armed conflict or persecution, 40 million are recognized
as IDPs, forcibly displaced within their own country, while 25.4 million are
refugees, who have fled across an international border, and 3.1 million are asylum
seekers awaiting their refugee status determination (UNHCR, 2018a). In addition,
it is also estimated that there are more than 10 million stateless people who have
been denied a nationality and fulfilment of basic rights such as water, sanitation,
education, healthcare, employment and freedom of movement. During 2017,
16.2 million people were newly displaced due to conflict (UNHCR, 2018a). This
included 11.8 million individuals displaced within the borders of their own countries
(IDMC, 2018) and 2.9 million new refugees and asylum seekers (UNHCR, 2018a).

Refugees and forced displacement crises

117

Box 8.1 Definitions of key terms
Forced displacement is the movement of people who have been forced or obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places
of habitual residence, in particular as a result of, or in order to avoid the effects of, armed conflict, situations of generalized
violence, violations of human rights, or natural or human-made disasters (CHR, 1998).
A refugee is someone who has been forced to flee his or her country because of persecution, war or violence. A refugee has a
well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular social
group. Refugees are recognized under various international agreements. Some are recognized as a group or on a ‘prima facie’
basis while others undergo an individual investigation before being given refugee status. The 1951 Convention (UN, 1951) and
the 1967 Protocol (UN, 1967) provide the full legal definition of a refugee. The five countries hosting the most refugees at the end
of 2017 (in descending order) were Turkey, Pakistan, Uganda, Lebanon and the Islamic Republic of Iran (UNHCR, 2018a).
An asylum seeker is a person who is seeking sanctuary in a country other than their own, and are waiting for a decision about
their status. The legal processes related to asylum are complex and variable, which is a challenge when it comes to counting,
measuring and understanding the asylum-seeking population. When an asylum application is successful, the person is awarded
refugee status.
Internally displaced people (IDPs) are people who are forced to flee their homes as a result of, or in order to avoid the effects
of, armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights, or natural or human-made disasters, and
who have not crossed an internationally recognized state border (CHR, 1998). Unlike refugees, IDPs are not protected by
international law or eligible to receive many types of aid because they are legally under the protection of their own government.
In 2017, the three countries with the largest internally displaced populations (in descending order) were Colombia, the Syrian
Arab Republic, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (UNHCR, 2018a).
A stateless person is someone who does not have a nationality of any country. Some people are born stateless, but others
become stateless due to a variety of reasons, including sovereign, legal, technical or administrative decisions or oversights.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights underlines that “Everyone has the right to a nationality.” (UNGA, 1948,
article 15). Countries with the largest stateless populations in 2017 (in descending order) were Bangladesh, Côte d’Ivoire,
Myanmar, Thailand, and Latvia (UNHCR, 2018a).

Protracted conflicts within fragile states such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan and Yemen are causing forced displacement at an unprecedented level and
with a global impact. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
defines a protracted refugee situation as one in which 25,000 or more refugees from
the same nationality have been in exile for five or more years. Two-thirds of refugees
are in protracted refugee situations, with an average duration of more than 20 years
(UNHCR, 2018a), with some specific protracted situations now exceeding 30 years, such as
Palestinian refugees in Egypt and Afghans in Pakistan.
The global number of forcibly displaced people has increased by 50%, from 42.7 million
in 2007 to 68.5 by the end of the year 2017 (Figure 8.1). Almost a quarter of these displaced
people live in refugee/IDP camps, but the overwhelming majority are hosted in cities,
towns and villages (UNHCR, 2018a). These refugees, asylum seekers, IDPs and stateless
persons are often not officially recognized by local or national government and are
therefore excluded from development agendas.

8.1.2 Displacement due to disasters and climate change

In 2017, 18.8 million people across 118 countries were forced to leave their homes due to
disasters brought on by sudden-onset natural hazards (IDMC, 2018). While figures can
vary greatly from year to year depending on the occurrence and magnitude of disasters,
the overall risk of being displaced by disasters has doubled since the 1970s mainly due to
population growth and increased exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards. Climate
change, in tandem with poverty, inequality, urban population growth, poor land use
management and weak governance, is increasing the risk of displacement and its impacts.

118

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

70

Internally displaced persons

Displaced population (millions)

UNRWA* refugees
UNHCR** refugees
Asylum-seekers
Proportion displaced

* The United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East
** The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

10
9

60

8

50

7
6

40

5
30

4
3

20

2

10
0

Source: UNHCR (2018a, fig. 1, p. 6).

1
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

0

Proportion displaced
(number displaced per 1000 world population)

Figure 8.1 Trend of global displacement and proportion displaced, 2007–2017

Regional patterns suggest that most disaster displacement happens in Asia and the
Pacific, with 84% of the total displacement between 2008 and 2016 (IDMC, 2017).
Disasters triggered by weather-related hazards led to 95% of all new displacements
in 2017 (IDMC, 2018), even more than during the period from 2008 and 2016, when
86% of total displacements were weather-related (IDMC, 2017). Excluded from these
figures are those people that move due to slow-onset events and stressors (e.g. chronic
drought, sea level rise, desertification, or ecosystem loss, among others), as factors
behind such movements are often complex.

8.2
Marginalization
of the displaced:
Main drivers

There are many factors which influence the marginalization of displaced persons.
For example, refugees may be marginalized due to their ineligibility to vote, or
stateless people may be marginalized because they do not have identification
documents. The following sections highlight main drivers of marginalization as
related to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services.

8.2.1 Water as a direct and indirect driver of displacement

Vulnerability in relation to water supply can be a direct and indirect driver of
displacement, and it can also be linked to the scale, duration and location of the
displacement, and the buffering capacity of the environment in the host community
to support the increased demand.
Climate change is expected to increase the frequency and intensity of drought
and resultant population displacement. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) has highlighted the considerable risks posed by heat waves, droughts,
floods, cyclones and wildfires, as well as the vulnerability of water supplies and food
production capacity (IPCC, 2014). Regardless of the geographical location, poor and
marginalized populations are more exposed to the adverse consequences of extreme
events such as extreme water scarcity or drought. For example, in Viet Nam in 2017
there were 633,000 new displacements, many of which were caused by storms, which
are examples of the extreme weather predicted under the government’s climate
change models. These storms can disproportionately affect the poor, migrants or
IDPs, who often lack the income to cover the costs to rebuild or do not have access to
the social service systems (IDMC, 2018).
In arid and semi-arid climates, military targeting of water supply points has been
used to increase water resource scarcity with the purpose of forced displacement.

Refugees and forced displacement crises

119

For example, in Sri Lanka, an armed group closed the sluice gates of the Mavil
Oya reservoir which provided irrigation water for thousands of farmers in the
government-controlled area of the Eastern Province (UN, 2011). Bombardment
in southern Lebanon in July and August of 2006 damaged or destroyed water
supply infrastructure, displacing 25% of the 4 million inhabitants (Amnesty
International, 2006).

In arid and semi-arid
climates, military
targeting of water supply
points has been used to
increase water resource
scarcity with the purpose
of forced displacement

8.2.2 Drivers of marginalization after mass displacement

Mass displacement places strain upon water resources and related services,
including sanitation and hygiene, at transition and destination points for both
existing populations and new arrivals. This can result in marginalization of the
displaced population and restricted access to adequate services manifested in a
number of ways, as outlined below.

Water supply and sanitation service level inequality
Unplanned rapid population growth in the areas receiving displaced persons can
overwhelm existing WASH infrastructure. The immediate result is that the new
arrivals (e.g. refugees, IDPs) cannot access services and resort to practices such
as open defecation or drinking from unsafe surface water sources. This is most
recently documented in Colombia where over 440,000 Venezuelans have been
registered between May and June of 2018 and where WASH infrastructure in the
border towns is unable to cope with the massive influx (UNHCR, 2018b).
Box 8.2 Examples of social
discrimination
Burkina Faso and Mauritania:
Domestic workers within the
Malian refugee populations were
prevented from using the same
toilets as the general refugee
population, forcing them to
revert to open defecation, which
exposed them to violence.
They were not allowed by other
community members to attend
hygiene promotion sessions,
and were required to pass on
any relief items they obtained to
their ‘masters’.
Kenya and Djibouti: New
arrivals were stigmatized and
faced discrimination by the
refugees who had been living
in these camps and settlements
for several years. This
discrimination included limiting
the access time to WASH
facilities, such as water points
and communal latrines.
Source: House et al. (2014).

The average length of protracted refugee situations (i.e. those with 25,000 or
more persons of concern, displaced for 5 years or more) now exceeds 20 years
(UNHCR, 2004; 2018a). However, host governments often refuse to accept that the
displacement situation may become protracted, and insist that refugees and IDPs
remain in camps with ‘temporary’ or ‘communal’ facilities at a lower level of service
than the surrounding host community. As a result, WASH service level inequality
may develop, where refugees and IDPs receiving lower levels of WASH service when
compared to the hosting community. For instance, refugees in camps in Jordan
receive approximately 35 litres of water per day (UNHCR, 2018c), while the target
that the Jordanian government uses for citizen in towns outside of Amman is 100
litres of water per day (Ministry of Water and Irrigation of Jordan, 2015).
The reverse situation may also occur, where refugees receive higher-quality WASH
services than what is available for nearby communities. For example in Maban
(South Sudan), refugees receive 20 litres of chlorinated piped water per day, close to
their homes, while the host community relies on handpumps that may only provide
15 litres per day and that may be located very far from their homes (UNHCR, 2018c).

Social discrimination
Adequate WASH services may exist in areas where displaced people are hosted.
However, specific groups or individuals may be denied access to those services
due to their nationality, ethnicity, religion, sexuality, political opinion or other
conditions. As a result of this social discrimination, these groups or individuals
resort to accessing water from unsafe sources and may be forced to practice open
defecation or other unsafe sanitation behaviours (see Box 8.2).
Economic marginalization
Even if adequate WASH services exist, specific groups may not be able to afford
access to those services. This form of marginalization is directly linked to legal
status and the ‘right to work’ or ‘freedom of movement’. As a result of restrictive
legal policies, refugees and stateless persons are often the most marginalized in this
regard (see Box 8.3).
In some countries, particularly those that follow an ‘encampment’ policy for
refugees and IDPs, water supply and sanitation services may be provided free of
charge by the international humanitarian community. At the same time, the local
population is expected to pay for the same services provided through the national

120

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

or municipal system. This is the case in a number of areas such as the refugee camps in
Gambella (Ethiopia) and Kakuma (Kenya) (UNHCR, 2018d). This can result in tensions
between displaced populations and their hosting communities.

Environmental degradation
Hosting refugees or IDPs in areas that are environmentally sensitive can lead to tensions
with the host community regarding the perceived or actual depletion/degradation
of resources (e.g. aquifer depletion, surface water pollution and deforestation). In
such cases, competition for scarce resources, including water, food, fuel and building
materials, can cause conflict with the host community and further marginalization of the
refugee or IDP population. For example, aquifer drawdown as a result of pumping water
for IDP camps in Darfur (Sudan) resulted in drying of host community pastoralist wells,
causing further conflict, marginalization and increased displacement (Bromwich, 2015).
In other cases, the resource depletion due to the displaced population may be perceived,
and not real. For example, in Dadaab (Kenya) and in various camps in Yemen, rumours
circulated that water pumping for the camp’s water supply was adversely impacting the
groundwater aquifers. However, detailed studies showed that water extracted for these
camps’ water supply did, in fact, not have a significant impact on groundwater resources
(Zahir, 2009; Blandenier, 2015). Nevertheless, the perception of resource depletion can
still result in tensions between the hosting and the displaced communities, and in the
marginalization of the displaced.

8.3
Providing
displaced people
with access
to water and
sanitation

8.3.1 Crisis preparedness and response actions

Contingency planning and preparedness actions
Preparing countries for emergency situations and the arrival of refugees and IDPs
requires consolidated efforts aimed at strengthening standards, policies and institutions
relating to displacement, and empowering local actors to respond to emergency
situations. The creation of specific water supply and sanitation risk management plans
can help ensure adequate service provision during situations of rapid population
increase while taking account of social, economic and environmental challenges.
Successful contingency planning and preparedness actions also include preparation
for the coordination of humanitarian actors that may be involved in such response
actions, either through the coordination mechanisms of the United Nations (UN) —
e.g. the UNHCR Refugee Coordination model, the Cluster Coordination system — or
an equivalent national crisis coordination system. Increasing resilience and adaptive
capacity of water supply and sanitation systems are also essential components to be
considered in these plans (see Box 8.4).

Box 8.3 Refugees’ right to work
A 2016 study on 20 countries that host 70% of the world’s refugee population found widespread inconsistencies in the laws,
policies and practices with regard to the legal right to work for refugees. The right to work was often exclusively linked to
the recognition of refugee status, which is governed by a complex system that is difficult to navigate. This is compounded
by bureaucratic and administrative hurdles which can include work and/or residence permits required from refugees; the
financial costs of permits; and registration and banking regulations that negatively affect self-employed refugees and impede
payment of wages (Zetter and Ruaudel, 2016).
The vast majority of refugees work in the informal sector under much less satisfactory and more exploitative conditions than
nationals. In fragile economies, which host a large number of refugees, the informal sector can be constrained and provide
limited opportunities for refugees. For example, there are approximately 666,000 registered Syrian refugees in Jordan, and the
vast majority (80%) are hosted in cities and towns. These refugees do not have the right to work and without an income, they
are at risk of having reduced levels of access to WASH services (UNHCR, 2018a).

Refugees and forced displacement crises

121

Box 8.4 Examples of
contingency planning and
preparedness actions
Rwanda: The United Nations
High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the
government have set up a
pre-emergency task force
that meets when the risk of
influx increases, in order
to coordinate preparedness
actions and contingency
planning.
Côte d’Ivoire: UNHCR, the
Government and partners have
conducted an assessment of
reception capacity in border
villages in case of refugee
arrivals from Liberia before the
elections in that country. The
information from the recent
missions was used to define
a response strategy in the
updated contingency plan.
As part of UNHCR’s Policy
on Emergency Response
Activation, Leadership and
Accountabilities, operational
guidelines have been
developed. These include
various risk analysis tools
and audit processes that
can be used to produce a
Preparedness Package for
Refugee Emergencies (PPRE),
which identifies minimum
preparedness actions
(MPAs). This information is
consolidated in a database
called the High Alert List for
Emergency Preparedness
(HALEP) (UNHCR, n.d.).
Source: Examples from Rwanda
and Côte d’Ivoire are from internal
UNHCR documentation contained
in the HALEP system.

122

Immediate crisis response actions
States and other relevant stakeholders can benefit from close collaboration with
national and international humanitarian partners to provide appropriate services to
the displaced. Immediate crisis response actions principally involve:
•

Timely provision of life-saving WASH services including: access to potable water,
access to safe sanitation (e.g. toilets, bathing facilities, kitchens, laundries and
menstrual hygiene management), access to solid waste management and vector
control.

•

WASH service-strengthening measures in hosting areas for the short term
and system-strengthening measures for the medium term, based on ongoing
assessments. These include: providing additional staff, equipment and supplies
in order to increase production and maintain uninterrupted service delivery for
displaced people and their host communities.

•

Ongoing assessment of the WASH services and systems to monitor the impact of
displacement on national services and on the host community.

An example of effective crisis response is highlighted in Box 8.5.

8.3.2 Potential responses in ongoing situations

Inclusion of refugees, asylum seekers, stateless and internally displaced people
within national systems, and plans for SDG 6 to create water supply and sanitation
service level equality
Moving towards achievement of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 target of
safe drinking water and sanitation for all’ implies the inclusion of refugees, asylum
seekers, stateless people and IDPs in national development plans, and ensuring
that financing is adequate to reach these populations. Specifically, states have a
responsibility to:
•

Assess and monitor the impact of population growth as a result of displacement
on national WASH systems, including access to water, the quantity and quality of
water, and access to sanitation services, in order to identify appropriate measures
to increase access to services where required.

•

Review and strengthen national policies relating to the inclusion of refugees and
IDPs in national WASH systems, ensuring that they have the same level of access
to WASH services as nationals.

•

Include the needs of refugees and IDPs in national WASH-related strategies,
initiatives and action plans, national and local development plans, as well as in
strategies and plans designed to meet targets for SDG 6 ‘safe drinking water and
sanitation for all’ and other WASH-related SDGs.

•

Include refugees and IDPs in donor proposals and financing mechanisms to
ensure adequate quantity and quality of WASH services for refugees and hosting
communities, as well as refugee inclusion in the monitoring of outcome data.
At the same time, donors and financiers (both humanitarian and development)
need to commit multi-year, predictable funding for relevant stakeholders
(including Ministries of Water) to ensure that the immediate and ongoing needs
of both refugees/IDPs and affected host communities can be met, as well as to
promote resilience.

•

Incorporate WASH needs of refugees and IDPs into national contingency plans for
further displacement and disaster preparedness plans.

•

Improve monitoring and impact evaluation relating to WASH services for refugees
and IDPs by including them in national surveys, and disaggregate national WASH
data and SDG 6 reporting by refugee/displacement status on WASH services
utilization and access.

•

Ensure that WASH monitoring for refugees and IDPs includes relevant indicators
that account for the normative criteria of the human rights to safe drinking water
and sanitation (accessibility, availability, affordability, acceptability and quality).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

•

Refugee status should not
be grounds for unjustified
restrictions on freedom
of movement, nor for
stigmatization, removal
and other forms of
discriminatory practices

Eliminate service level inequality between the refugees/IDPs and the hosting
community by harmonization of service levels in refugee and IDP camps, as well as
in urban hosting areas, with national standards.

Removing social discrimination and creating access equality: Harmonizing service
levels with surrounding community/national standards
In order to remove social discrimination and create water supply and sanitation service
access equality, states in partnership with relevant stakeholders need to review and
strengthen national laws and policies in order to promote the principle that refugees and
IDPs should have access to WASH services just like any other person, and refugee status
should not be grounds for unjustified restrictions on freedom of movement, nor for
stigmatization, removal and other forms of discriminatory practices.

Box 8.5 Meeting water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) needs of Syrians under temporary protection in Turkey
Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees in the world, with over 3.9 million registered refugees, of which 90% are from
Syria (UNHCR, 2018e). Only 178,255 out of the 3.6 million Syrians in Turkey live in the 20 state-run centres operated in
southeastern Turkey, with the rest hosted in cities, towns and villages throughout the country, causing the populations in many
areas to dramatically increase (Ministry of the Interior of Turkey, 2018).
Figure | Distribution of Syrian refugees in the scope of temporary protection in Turkey by top ten provinces on 21 September 2018

İstanbul
560 980

Number of people
İstanbul

560 980

Şanlıurfa

469 096

Hatay

438 127

Gaziantep

399 732

Bursa
156 781

Konya

Adana

226 022

Mersin

207 064

İzmir

Bursa

156 781

139 282

İzmir

139 282

Kilis

126 531

Konya

97 029

Adana

Gaziantep

226 022

399 732

97 029

Şanlıurfa
469 096

Mersin
207 064

Hatay

Kilis

438 127

126 531

a
i
r
y

S
Source: Ministry of the Interior of Turkey (2018).

The dramatic population growth has resulted in stress on already scarce water resources, requiring additional administrative,
technical, financial and human capacity to maintain existing water infrastructure and to construct additional infrastructure.
Turkey has adopted the principle that humanitarian assistance must be paired with development investments that can
respond to the scale, scope and protracted nature of the refugee influx. Of the US$31 billion that has been spent, 5% has
focused on water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure and services, at the shelter centres and for those living outside
the centres. New dams, reservoirs and pipelines were constructed, enhancing the water and wastewater treatment capacities,
mainly in the border provinces of Gaziantep, Şanlıurfa, Kilis and Hatay. In addition, capacity-building projects have sought to
integrate Syrians into the social and economic life in Turkey to ensure an inclusive and sustainable WASH management and
promote regional development.
Contributed by the Turkish Water Institute (SUEN), based partly on metrics synthesized from internal documents.

Refugees and forced displacement crises

123

Refugees in Zaatari camp in Jordan

Moreover, with respect to aspects of non-discrimination and equality from a human
rights perspective, states need to give special attention to those who have historically
faced barriers to exercise their rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, such as
refugees/IDPs, particularly women and children. States have a responsibility to ensure
that refugees/IDPs, whether they are in camps or hosted in communities, are granted
the rights to water and adequate sanitation without regard to their legal residence,
nationality or other classifications that may serve as hindrances.

States are encouraged
to pursue policies
for the inclusion of
refugees and IDPs within
existing urban and rural
communities

Social discrimination resulting in access inequality and violation of the human rights
to safe drinking water and sanitation may be addressed with advocacy, mediation,
improved communication, or other similar interventions to promote peaceful
co-existence between refugee/IDP populations and hosting communities. Like all
individuals, refugees/IDPs should have access to information and the opportunity to
participate in decision-making processes that affect their rights.
States are encouraged to avoid ‘encampment’ policies for refugees/IDPs, as these can
lead to marginalization, particularly if camps are located in remote and resource-poor
regions, and if there is WASH service level inequality, which can exacerbate resource
competition with host communities and make it difficult for refugees/IDPs to access
labour markets. Instead, states are encouraged to pursue policies for the inclusion of
refugees/IDPs within existing urban and rural communities.
In the case of refugees/IDPs living in informal settlements in urban and peri-urban
areas, it is difficult to differentiate between different types of vulnerable populations
(refugees and other urban poor), and making such distinctions may not be beneficial
at all. In many contexts, it will also be difficult or even impossible to identify the ‘most
vulnerable’ groups. Interventions should therefore aim at improving access to water
supply and sanitation services for the broader populations in vulnerable situations,
including both refugees and urban poor.
While the monitoring of access to services in refugee camps is well established, little
information is available on the situation of people living outside the camps, among host
communities. It is often helpful to increase the knowledge about their situation through,
for example, surveys and other methods, instead of relying entirely on data provided by
the state (which often do not differentiate between refugees and other populations).

124

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Ensuring the right to work and supporting economic growth to pay for water supply
and sanitation services
Both issues of water supply and sanitation service affordability and water tariff inequity
for refugees/IDPs may be solved in the short term through international humanitarian
‘cash’ assistance, and in the long term, if hosting governments give refugees the ‘right to
access the labour market’ and to generate income so they can pay for the services.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (UN, 1951) requires hosting
governments to allow refugees the ‘right to work’ and ‘freedom of movement’. This has
the effect of allowing refugees to access livelihoods opportunities and to reduce the
burden of subsidizing their access. This means that refugees would be able to pay for
water supply and sanitation services in the same way as national citizens, which may
reduce social tensions or discrimination, while empowering refugees to integrate into
their host communities.

Globally, most nations
have a restrictive
approach to refugees’
rights to work and
freedom of movement

Although displaced persons are often perceived as a problem or threat, they could
be seen as an opportunity that host countries can benefit from, be it economically,
culturally, socially, or other. Host countries often economically benefit as displaced
persons are ‘consumers, producers, buyers, sellers, borrowers, lenders and
entrepreneurs’ (Betts and Collier, 2017). For example, Somali refugees have been
financially investing in Kenya in both formal and informal business of varying sizes
from petty traders to larger companies in a wide variety of sectors including real estate,
transportation, finance, import-export and others (Abdulsamed, 2011). In addition to the
economic benefits, there are also many social and cultural benefits that refugees and
migrants can offer the host community.
Globally, most nations have a restrictive approach to refugees’ rights to work and freedom
of movement. Many countries retain a strict policy of encampment or apply movement
restrictions, thereby increasing refugees’ difficulties in accessing employment and
livelihood opportunities. However, there are good examples of progress (see Box 8.6).
Development actors can insist that governments recognize human rights of refugees and
give them parity with other residents. However, this must go hand in hand with proactive
steps to harmonize relations between refugees and their host communities. Tensions are
often due to legitimate concerns from the host community about the impact of increased
numbers of job-seekers on local labour markets, impacts on environmental resources,
etc. Easing pressure on host communities and enhancing the self-reliance of refugees
are two of the key objectives of the Global Compact on Refugees (UNHCR, 2018f).

Box 8.6 Positive examples of supporting economic growth
Uganda – Refugees are allowed freedom of movement and the right to work. Some are given land for subsistence farming.
Refugees and host communities share access to education, health and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services and the
service levels in refugee-hosting communities has been improved. In addition, refugees starting businesses and working has
boosted the economy in these areas (UNHCR, 2017).
Jordan aims to provide up to 200,000 work permits for refugees, thereby creating new work opportunities for refugees and
Jordanians in selected labour market sectors and locations (mainly Special Economic Zones), and regularizing the situation of
refugees working in the informal economy (Zetter and Ruaudel, 2016).
Turkey – The government granted work permits to Syrians and other foreign nationals who are under temporary protection
(Council of Ministers of Turkey, 2016). The Turkish Employment Agency organizes training programmes to enhance the work
qualifications in areas of specific need in the labour market.
Ethiopia’s new “out of-camp” policy demonstrates a conditional relaxation of legislative restrictions on the movement and place
of residence for refugees. The International Labour Organization (ILO) and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) have partnered with Ethiopia’s Administration for Refugees and Returnee Affairs to promote self-employment in
camps and surrounding host communities (ILO, 2018b).

Refugees and forced displacement crises

125

Ensuring environmental sustainability of services
Environmental sustainability is integral to achieving the SDG targets. This will require
implementing a wide range of interventions, many of which are linked to integrated
water resource management activities, developing water safety plans, conducting
environmental impact assessments to understand the effects of displacements, as well
as ensuring robust systems for environmental monitoring, in particular water resource
monitoring. In protracted situations, sustainable access to WASH services for refugees,
IDPs, as well as host communities can be enhanced by technology solutions which are
both environmentally sustainable and cost-effective.
During the immediate phase after displacement, media attention and political interest
are high and funding sources plentiful. However, both decrease with time, which
makes it important to select WASH technologies that minimize long-term operation and
maintenance costs, as well as environmental impacts. Examples of such technologies,
which have been adopted in recent refugee situations, include photovoltaic solar
energy for water pumping (instead of diesel generators), waste reuse, and recycling
solutions such as biogas, conversion of waste to cooking fuels or fertilizer, and solid
waste recycling. Such technologies help to reduce carbon emissions, environmental
impacts and operation costs (see Box 8.7). There are additional technologies which can
be explored (e.g. decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS), as described
in Chapter 6), but all technological solutions need to be implemented in coordination
with national and local governments to ensure the appropriate capacity within the local
communities to take over management of these systems. While there are opportunities
to use innovative technologies and approaches in humanitarian contexts, a need to
continue with ‘traditional’ emergency response approaches (e.g. water trucking) will also
remain.

8.4
Fragile states and
states in fragile
situations

A fragile state is a low-income country characterized by weak state capacity and/or weak
state legitimacy, leaving citizens vulnerable to a range of shocks. The World Bank deems
a country to be ‘fragile’ if it: i) has had a UN peacekeeping mission in the last three years;
and ii) has received a ‘governance’ score of less than 3.2 (as per the Country Performance
and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) index of The World Bank) (World Bank, n.d.).
Two billion people now live in countries where development outcomes are affected by
fragility, conflict and violence. By 2030, 46% of the global poor could live in fragile and
conflict-affected situations, as defined by The World Bank Group’s (WBG) Fragile, Conflict
and Violence Group, which annually releases the World Bank Harmonized List of Fragile
Situations (World Bank, n.d.). Fragility and conflict can cross national borders, and the
consequences of conflict, such as forced displacement, further hinder the capacity of
countries and regions to find their path out of poverty.

Box 8.7 Future is bright with solar
The cost of solar photovoltaic panels reduced by a factor of 100 since 1977, with the current cost at less than US$1 per Watt of
solar electricity (ECHO Global Solar Water Initiative, 2017). Despite this, adoption of solar within the humanitarian context
remains low, due to a shortage of technical expertise, inability to communicate benefits to donors and decision makers, focus
on numerical targets for immediate beneficiaries reached, and a lack of standards, best practices and policy guidelines. The
Global Solar Water Initiative, funded by the European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO), has sought
to address these gaps by collating and sharing information on good practices, commissioning research, providing technical
resources for implementation, and improving technical expertise through trainings.

126

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Displacement crises can escalate very rapidly, as illustrated by the South
Sudanese case. As of the end of 2016, one in four people in South Sudan have
been forced from their homes. This translates to a total of 3.3 million, with
1.9 million IDPs and 1.4 million refugees in neighbouring countries. South
Sudan and the neighbouring countries are among the poorest and Least
Developed Countries in the world, with limited resources to deal with the needs
and challenges associated with hosting displaced people. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has been subject to a long-standing and complex
humanitarian crisis, the year 2016 saw 1.3 million IDPs in the eastern part of
the country. During the same year, 630,000 were displaced in Libya, 623,000 in
Afghanistan, 598,000 in Iraq and 467,000 in Yemen. All these countries are listed
as fragile states (UNHCR, 2018a).

It is important to
acknowledge that
for many parts of the
world, without huge
investment in sustainable
development, peace and
security, refugees are the
‘new normal.’

It has been argued by the Overseas Development Institute that fragile states
require approaches that are fundamentally different from the development
models exercised in more resilient countries, because of the different context of
risk (Manuel et al., 2012).
One such successful mechanism is community-driven development (CDD),
which gives control over planning decisions and investment resources for
local development projects to community groups. Often used by the World
Bank in conflict situations, CDD is fast, flexible and effective at re-establishing
basic services, which can range from health to clean water to education, and
has helped rebuild social capital and trust within communities and between
communities and governments (Wong and Guggenheim, 2018).
It is important to acknowledge that for many parts of the world, without huge
investment in sustainable development, peace and security, refugees are the
‘new normal.’

Refugees and forced displacement crises

127

CHAPTER 9

Aerial view of water tanks on the rooftops of Rocinha slum in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Regional
perspectives

128

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNECE | Chantal Demilecamps
UNECLAC | Andrei Jouravlev
UNESCAP | Aida Karazhanova, Ingrid Dispert, Solène Le Doze, Katinka Weinberger and Stefanos Fotiou
UNESCWA | Carol Chouchani Cherfane and Dima Kharbotli
WWAP | Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara and Richard Connor
With contributions from: Shinee Enkhtsetseg (WHO Regional Office for Europe); Simone Grego (UNESCO Multisectoral
Regional Office in Abuja); Abou Amani (UNESCO-IHP); and Noeline Raondry Rakotoarisoa (UNESCO-MAB)

Different regions of the world face particular challenges in
the attempt to provide safe, affordable and sustainable water
supply and sanitation services for all. This chapter highlights
some of these major challenges and potential responses from
the often unique perspectives of the five major global regions.

9.1
The Arab region
9.1.1 Regional context

The Arab region is the most water-stressed region in the world. Total renewable water
resources for the world average 7,453 m3 per person per year, while it stands at only
736 m3 per person per year in the Arab region based on latest available data from
AQUASTAT (n.d.). Water scarcity on a per capita basis has been increasing and will
continue to increase due to population growth and climate change. These trends have
contributed to increased groundwater depletion, loss of arable land for agricultural
production, and the movement of people when water resources are insufficient to
support health, welfare and livelihoods.
In the entirety of the Arab region, some 51 million people (or 9% of the total
population) lacked a basic drinking water service in 2015, 73% of whom lived in rural
areas (Figure 9.1) (WHO/UNICEF, 2018b).
Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in the Arab region suffer the greatest equity gap
with respect to ensuring access to basic water supply and sanitation services, and
particularly in rural areas. In Mauritania, 86% of the urban population has access
to basic drinking water services, compared to only 45% in rural areas. Disparities in
rural and urban access to basic drinking water services were also noted in Yemen
(85% in urban versus 63% in rural areas) and Sudan (73% in urban versus 51% in rural
areas) in 2015 (see Figure 9.2) (WHO/UNICEF, 2018b), and have likely worsened since
then given the ongoing conflicts.
The situation is not only limited to LDCs, however. In Morocco, access to basic water
services in urban areas reaches 96% versus only 65% in the rural parts of the country
(WHO/UNICEF, 2018b).
At the end of 2016, around 41% of the internally displaced people (IDPs) worldwide
were living in the Arab region, with numbers reaching over 16 million. Humanitarian
access has been a significant challenge, with roughly 4.9 million people of this
total living in hard-to-reach areas, including almost one million in besieged areas
(UNESCWA/IOM, 2017).
Regional perspectives

129

Figure 9.1 Drinking water and sanitation coverage in the Western Asia and North Africa region, 2015

100

Surface water
Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic

Coverage (%)

Safely managed

Open defecation
Unimproved

60

40

Limited
Basic

20

Safely managed

0

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

Total*

Rural*

Urban*

Total

Rural*

Drinking water

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Urban

Sanitation

Figure 9.2 Rural and urban drinking water coverage in selected countries of the Arab region, 2015

Surface water
Unimproved
Limited
Basic

Urban

Rural

Yemen

Urban

Rural

Urban

Rural

United Arab
Emirates

Urban

Rural

Urban

Rural

Tunisia

West Bank and
Gaza Strip

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Syrian Arab
Republic

Rural

Urban

Sudan

Rural

Urban

Oman

Rural

Urban

Morocco

Rural

Urban

Mauritania

Rural

Urban

Jordan

Rural

Urban

Iraq

Urban

Rural

Egypt

Algeria

Rural

Urban

Coverage (%)

Safely managed

By December 2016, the Syrian Arab Republic had more IDPs (6.3 million) than any
other country in the world, many of them having endured multiple displacements
(UNESCWA/IOM, 2017). High levels of internal displacement owing to conflict and
violence also persist in the Arab region’s LDCs, namely Somalia, Sudan and Yemen.
Sudan hosts the largest number of IDPs among the Arab LDCs, with over 3.3 million
at the end of 2016 (UNESCWA/IOM, 2017), as shown in Table 9.1.
In addition, natural disasters linked to climate change impacts have resulted in the
displacement of over 240,000 people across the Arab region in 2016, the vast majority
of them in the Arab LDCs (98%): 123,000 in the Sudan, 70,000 in Somalia, and 36,000
in Yemen (UNESCWA/IOM, 2017). This means that special attention must be focused
on enhancing the resilience of this group of displaced people, to ensure that no one is
left behind.

130

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Table 9.1 Internally displaced persons due to conflict and generalized violence in the Arab region (stock at year end), 2012–2016
Country

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Syrian Arab Republic

3 000 000

6 500 000

7 600 000

6 600 000

6 325 978

Sudan

3 000 000

2 424 700

3 120 000

3 264 286

3 320 000

Iraq

2 100 000

2 100 000

3 276 000

3 290 310

3 034 614

385 000

307 000

334 090

2 509 068

1 973 994

1 350 000

1 100 000

1 106 751

1 223 000

1 106 751

50 000

59 400

400 000

500 000

303 608

144 500

146 000

275 000

221 425

193 277

Yemen
Somalia
Libya
Palestine
Source: UNESCWA/IOM (2017, Box 1, p. 22).

9.1.2 Providing access to safe water and sanitation services under
conditions of war and conflict

The challenge of ensuring access to water services for all under water-scarce
conditions is exacerbated in conflict settings where water infrastructure has been
damaged, destroyed and targeted for destruction, as in parts of Iraq, Libya, Palestine,
Somalia, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. Not only have water reservoirs,
pumps, treatment facilities and distribution networks been affected by military
conflicts and occupation by foreign forces, but also have wastewater treatment
facilities and irrigation networks been destroyed during military incursions.
Operation and maintenance of water facilities is also limited during periods of
insecurity and occupation, which have affected the availability of fuel for pumping
water (e.g. in Yemen), the import of replacement parts (e.g. in Palestine), or access of
employees to operate water facilities (e.g. in Iraq).

The challenge of ensuring
access to water services
for all under water-scarce
conditions is exacerbated
in conflict settings where
water infrastructure
has been damaged,
destroyed and targeted
for destruction

Even prior to the current conflict in Yemen, its capital city Sana’a was expected to
run dry due to population pressures and unsustainable production and consumption
patterns (UNESCWA, 2011), with experts projecting “if current trends continue, by
2025 the city’s projected 4.2 million inhabitants will become water refugees, forced to
flee their barren home for wetter lands. In preparation, some officials have already
considered relocating the capital to the coast. Others have proposed focusing on
desalination and conservation to buy time.” (Heffez, 2013). Instead, Yemen suffers
the destruction of conflict and the plague of war with recurrent cholera outbreaks
due to insufficient water for safe sanitation and hygiene, and extreme water scarcity
caused by groundwater depletion and quality concerns. Lack of water for hygiene
and sanitation has become dire with the reporting of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) that 1 in every 200 Yemenis is suspected of having been infected
with cholera as of June 2017 (ICRC, 2017; OHCHR, 2017b).
A large proportion of refugees tend to remain in protracted situations for decades
(see Section 8.1.1). Humanitarian assistance has become increasingly intertwined
with development work aimed at providing more permanent water supply and
sanitation facilities in refugee camps and informal settlements. This has at times
caused conflict and tensions with host communities, who often do not have equal
access to water services as those served by humanitarian organizations. Additional
attention has been paid to this problem in recent years with governments, donors
and humanitarian agencies recognizing that leaving no one behind means serving
refugees and IDPs as well as host communities, as shown in Box 9.1.

Regional perspectives

131

Box 9.1 The Zaatari Syrian refugee camp in Jordan
The Zaatari refugee camp is located in the heavily water-stressed area of northern Jordan. It was initially set up in a haste in a
response to the sudden influx of refugees coming from Syria, and hence it lacked proper planning and basic infrastructure. This
resulted in outbreaks of measles, scabies, diarrhoea, hepatitis A and other diseases in the months following its establishment,
mainly attributed to deficient amounts of clean water and poor sanitation (UNESCWA/IOM, 2015). Tensions were also manifested
with neighbouring communities, who had long faced water scarcity constraints and were now seeing their limited resources
being diverted and unsustainably consumed.
In response, international humanitarian organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) started working with the
Jordanian Ministry of Water and Irrigation and with host communities to improve access to clean water supply and sanitation
services in the Zaatari refugee camp as well as in neighbouring areas. This included the rehabilitation of existing water wells and
drilling of additional wells to respond to the increasing water demands (UNESCWA/IOM, 2015). Details on water infrastructure
works are included in the table below.
Project

Description

Population served

Zaatari refugee camp

Digging 2 new wells and building their associated pump stations

120 000

Tabaqet Fahel well

Renovation and expansion of the well

63 000 (80 liters per day per capita)

Zabdah reservoir

Water saving through renovation to fix leaks and install insulation

27 000 (80 liters per day per capita)

Abu Al Basal pipeline

Installation of a 2.5 km pipeline for better water conveyance and distribution

Source: Mercy Corps (2014, p. 14).

Rehabilitation works were also performed on ageing water networks and transmission lines servicing the area. The wastewater
collection infrastructure was rehabilitated, and wastewater treatment plant capacities were expanded to accommodate the growing
volumes of wastewater generated. In addition to helping the refugees, these collective and cooperative efforts also contributed to
improving water infrastructure and services to host communities in this water-stressed region (UNESCWA/IOM, 2015).

9.2
Asia and
the Pacific

Achieving access to clean water and sanitation for all, as framed by Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, remains
a challenge in Asia and the Pacific as a whole.
In 2016, 29 out of 48 countries in the region qualified as water-insecure due to low
availability of water and unsustainable groundwater withdrawal, and 7 of the 15
countries with the largest estimated annual groundwater extractions are in Asia and
the Pacific (ADB, 2016). The increase in demand for irrigation for agriculture has led to
severe groundwater stress in some areas, especially in two of Asia’s major food baskets —
the North China Plain and Northwest India (Shah, 2005). Many large and medium-sized
cities in the region face the risk of water shortages, due to outdated water supply systems
and inadequate infrastructure to harvest and store rainwater (UNESCAP/UNESCO/
ILO/UN Environment/FAO/UN-Water, 2018). High levels of water pollution worsen
the situation in terms of drinking water availability, caused by the alarming rates of
untreated wastewater released into surface water bodies — 80 to 90% in the Asia and the
Pacific region — and high levels of chemical contamination in runoff water in some areas
(UNESCAP, 2010). Water scarcity is compounded by the effects of climate change and
worsened by the impacts of disasters.
Despite observable progress in terms of access to safe drinking water, one in ten rural
residents and 30% of the population living in landlocked developing countries did not
have access to it in 2015 (OECD, n.d.). That same year, 1.5 billion people did not have
access to improved sanitation facilities (UNESCAP, 2017).
However, vast sub-regional disparities can be observed. For example, while 89% of
the population in urban areas in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia has access to safely
managed drinking water services, in Central and Southern Asia this ratio drops to 61%
(WHO/UNICEF, n.d.) (Figure 9.3). Progress is stalling in North Asia, Central Asia and
the Pacific, and in LDCs (UNESCAP, 2016). Landlocked countries are facing the most
significant difficulties ensuring access to clean water and sanitation for all, with 30%
of the population living in landlocked developing countries not having access to safe
drinking water in 2015 (OECD, n.d.).

132

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 9.3  Drinking water coverage in the SDG sub-regions of Asia and the Pacific (excluding Australia and New Zealand), 2015

100
Surface water
Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic
Safely managed

Coverage (%)

60

40

20

0

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

Total

Rural

Urban

Central Asia and Southern Asia

Total*

Rural*

Urban

Eastern Asia and South-Eastern Asia

Total*

Rural*

Urban*

Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand

Drinking Water

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Similar disparities can be observed across the region in terms of sanitation (Figure 9.4).
There is also unequal access to improved sanitation between urban and rural areas in
the region: the gap was approximately 30% in 2015. Levels of improvement in terms of
access to sanitation differ considerably (WHO/UNICEF, n.d.). Since 2000, the proportion
of people in rural areas with access to basic sanitation has increased by 0.8% per year,
compared with 0.5% per year in urban areas (UNESCAP, 2017). This is mainly due to the
fast growth of the region’s urban population, which has more than doubled since 1950,
and the issues faced by cities in developing the adequate infrastructure to keep up with
the escalating water and sanitation needs. This inequality of access between rural and
urban areas varies among sub-regions, as shown in Figures 9.3 and 9.4. Within cities, it is
the poor urban populations that tend to be left behind.

Figure 9.4  Sanitation coverage in the SDG sub-regions of Asia and the Pacific (excluding Australia and New Zealand), 2015
100

Open defecation
Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic

Coverage (%)

Safely managed
60

40

20

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

0

Total*

Rural

Urban*

Central Asia and Southern Asia

Total

Rural

Urban

Eastern Asia and South-Eastern Asia

Total

Rural

Urban

Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand

Sanitation

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Regional perspectives

133

In addition, the region witnesses unsustainable practices and unequal access to
irrigation water in the rural areas of some sub-regions, with impacts in terms of
agricultural productivity and poverty alleviation, as many of the rural poor depend on
agriculture for their livelihoods.
Gender issues are also at play in the region in terms of access to clean water and
sanitation. Women and girls are traditionally responsible for domestic water supply and
sanitation in many countries, whilst at the same time being particularly affected by the
lack of availability of sanitation services in terms of health and safety (see Section 2.2).

9.2.1 Providing access to safe water and sanitation services in the face of
disasters in Asia and the Pacific

In Asia and the Pacific, the most disaster-prone region in the world, natural disasters
are becoming more frequent and intense, and disaster risk is outpacing resilience
(UNESCAP, 2018). This has major impacts for the provisioning of water, sanitation and
hygiene services in areas affected by disasters, due to damaged water and sanitation
infrastructure and water quality issues. It is also a very significant challenge to provide
adequate water and sanitation services to the areas that receive people who have been
displaced from disaster-struck areas. The magnitude of these displacements is extremely
high in Asia and the Pacific, with respectively 4.4 million and 1.2 million people
internally displaced in the People’s Republic of China and India in 2017 due to floods, and
2.5 million people in the Philippines due to typhoons the same year (IDMC, 2018).

Disasters cause
disproportionately
more significant losses
to poorer countries and
people, as these often
lack resilience and the
capacity to mitigate the
impact of disasters

Disasters cause disproportionately more significant losses to poorer countries and
people, as these often lack resilience and the capacity to mitigate the impact of
disasters. In addition to hitting the poorest, disasters can also cause the near poor —
those living on between US$1.90 and US$3.10 per day — to fall into poverty, as shown in
Figure 9.5 (UNESCAP, 2018). With over 50% of urban residents living in low-lying coastal
zones, these cities and towns in Asia and the Pacific are particularly vulnerable to
climate change and natural disasters. Disasters are also found to have impacts on gross
domestic product (GDP), school enrolment rates, and per capita expenditure on health
(UNESCAP, 2018). Analysis by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) among 19 countries in Asia and the Pacific indeed
suggests that each disaster in the region leads to a 0.13 point increase in the Gini
coefficient (UNESCAP, 2018), thus increasing income disparity.
The impacts and costs of these events are exacerbated by such factors as non-resilient
or unplanned urbanization and degradation of the ecosystems that support the
regulation of water flows and quality.

Figure 9.5 Estimated percentage of the near poor that have fallen into poverty as a result of (selected) water-related disasters

35.60

Pakistan, floods (2011)
23.60

Philippines, Cyclone Haiyan (2013)
14.50

Fiji, Cyclone Winston (2016)

12.60

Sri Lanka, floods and landslidess (2016)
2.30

Vanuatu, Cyclone Pam (2015)

0
0.0
Source: Adapted from UNESCAP (2018, fig. 2.6, p. 32).

134

5
5.0

10
10.0

15
15.0

20
20.0

(%)

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

25
25.0

30
30.0

35
35.0

40
40.0

Improving the resilience of water and sanitation services is therefore key to
maintaining access in a climatically uncertain future. Scaling up disaster risk
reduction and associated investments is critical to meet current and future needs.
In addition to its support to member states in Asia and the Pacific for their overall
disaster risk reduction, UNESCAP promotes the adoption of nature-based solutions
for disaster risk reduction (Eco-DRR) for water, in particular in coastal cities,
islands and coastal settlements. In coastal areas, mangroves and coral reefs provide
a natural line of defence against tsunamis and storms. They also improve water
quality and prevent salt water inundation and floods, while providing multiple
other environmental, economic and social benefits. Eco-DRR proves a worthwhile
approach in the region: a cost–benefit analysis in Viet Nam estimated that investing
in 12,000 hectares of mangroves to protect the coast was much cheaper than
infrastructural developments (US$1.1 million compared to US$7.3 million for the
maintenance of dykes) (Tallis et al., 2008).
UNESCAP’s Disaster Related Statistical Framework (ECOSOC, 2018) provides a
comprehensive framework for producing the basic statistics used in assessments
and other applications, including for the relatively smaller-scale but more
frequently occurring forms of disasters. When coupled with the development of
community-based participatory mapping, it may be adapted to operationalize clean
water and sanitation in urban areas and provide a sufficient level of granularity to
allow a focus on those usually ‘left behind’ by natural disasters.

9.3
Europe and
North America

Millions of people in this region drink contaminated water, often without knowing it.
As of 2015, those ‘left behind’ in the region include 57 million people who do not have
piped water at home, and 21 million people who still lack access to basic drinking
water services. In addition, 36 million people lack access to basic sanitation, using
unsafe, shared or unsustainable sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, n.d.). The World Health
Organization (WHO) estimates that, every day, 14 people die of diarrhoeal disease
due to inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene (Prüss-Ustün, 2016). Access to safely
managed sanitation services remains a challenge in many countries, especially in
rural areas (Figure 9.6). For example, in the regions of Central Asia and the Caucasus,
72% of the people without access to basic water services and 95% of the people using
surface water live in rural areas (UNECE, n.d.a).

Figure 9.6 Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Europe and North America, 2015

100

Surface water
Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic

Open defecation
Unimproved
Limited

Coverage (%)

Safely managed

60

40

Basic
Safely managed

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

20

0

Total

Rural*
Drinking water

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Regional perspectives

Urban

Total

Rural

Urban

Sanitation

135

While the situation is particularly severe for a major part of the population in Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, many citizens in Western and Central Europe,
as well as in North America, also suffer from the lack of or inequitable access to water
and sanitation services. Inequities are frequently related to sociocultural differences,
socio-economic factors and the geographical context (see Box 2.4).
Inequities in access therefore must be fought on three fronts: by reducing geographical
disparities, by addressing specific barriers faced by marginalized groups and people
living in vulnerable situations, and by reducing affordability concerns.

9.3.1 The Protocol on Water and Health: Driving progress in reducing
inequities in access to water and sanitation

The Parties to the Protocol on Water and Health of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe and the WHO Regional Office for Europe (UNECE/WHO
Europe, 1999) have committed to ensure equitable access to safe drinking water and
adequate sanitation through accession to or ratification of the Protocol. The Protocol
indeed requires its Parties to ensure access to water and sanitation for everyone, and
specifically to promote equitable access to water and sanitation “for all members of the
population, especially those who suffer a disadvantage or social exclusion” (UNECE/
WHO Europe, 1999, article 5l).
Since 2011, the Protocol on Water and Health has developed tools and carried out
country-level activities to support countries in their efforts to improve equitable access
to water and sanitation.
The publication No one left behind: Good practices to ensure equitable access to water
and sanitation in the pan-European region (UNECE/WHO Europe, 2012) presents good
practices and lessons learned from throughout the pan-European region on the policies
and measures to be enacted to provide equitable access.
An analytic tool, the Equitable Access Score-card (UNECE/WHO Europe, 2013) supports
governments (at the national, regional and municipal level) and other stakeholders to
establish a baseline measure of the equity of access, to identify priorities and to discuss
further actions to be taken to address equity gaps. It has already been applied in 11
countries of the pan-European region (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, France (Paris
Greater Area), Hungary, the Republic of Moldova, North Macedonia, Portugal, Serbia,
Spain (city of Castellón) and Ukraine) and additional countries have expressed interest
in applying it. Based on the outcomes of such assessments (UNECE, n.d.b), a number
of countries (Hungary, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, North Macedonia, Armenia,
Serbia and others) have taken concrete measures to improve the equity of access to
water and sanitation services, including:
•

the analysis and evaluation of existing plans, policies and programmes (e.g. in
Armenia, where a review of the legislative framework around water was conducted
to identify legislative barriers in ensuring equitable access);

•

legal and institutional reforms (e.g. in Serbia, where specific equitable access
targets were formulated under the Protocol on Water and Health);

•

targeted investments (e.g. North Macedonia, where toilets in village schools were
renovated); and

•

introduction of policy reforms (e.g. in Portugal, where new regulations on water
tariffs were developed, with mandatory rules for the general and social tariffs).

More information on these and other initiatives is available in Boxes 9.2, 9.3 and 9.4.
The publication Guidance Note on the Development of Action Plans to Ensure Equitable
Access to Water and Sanitation (UNECE/WHO Europe, 2016), so far used in North
Macedonia (Box 9.3) and Armenia (Box 9.4), helps governments to take a structured
approach to the development and implementation of actions to ensure equitable access
to water and sanitation.

136

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 9.2 Continuous progress to improve equitable access to water and sanitation in France
In 2013, the greater Paris area engaged in a detailed assessment of the level of equity of access to water and sanitation in the
area, applying the Equitable Access Score-card. The exercise unveiled problems of access for a minority, namely for homeless
people and nomadic communities, and also highlighted that the main challenge was to avoid disconnection from the water
grid for people who cannot afford to pay for the service (Eau de Paris/SEDIF/SIAAP/OBUSASS/Ministry of Social Affairs and
Health, 2013).
In France, several measures have been adopted at the national level to fight inequities in access. The second National Plan
on Household Sanitation 2014–2019 aims to improve household sanitation (which concerns nearly 20% of the French
population) through a better understanding of the challenges faced, improvements in the operation of sanitation facilities
and a reduction of the financial barriers to the population. The 3rd National Plan on Health and Environment 2015–2019
(Ministry of Solidarities and Health and Ministry of Ecological Transition and Solidarities, n.d.) aims, among others, to
strengthen the health–environment dynamics in the territories, in particular by supporting equitable access to safe drinking
water and sanitation and by promoting water safety planning and legal protection of 33,000 water catchments. Social pricing
of water is subject to an experimental scheme provided by law (Brottes Law) and reported to the National Water Committee
(French Parliament, 2013).

Box 9.3 Working with local authorities to improve equitable access to water and sanitation in North Macedonia
A Score-card self-assessment of equitable access to water and sanitation, carried out in 2015–2016 by the National Institute of
Public Health and the non-governmental organization (NGO) Journalists for Human Rights in 3 regions, helped understanding
the challenges faced in ensuring equitable access, beyond official statistics. Lack of menstrual hygiene management in
schools, lack of access to drinking water and sanitation for homeless people, and absence of toilets in religious facilities were
identified as major problems, together with the limited financing of the water and sanitation sector. Working closely with
local authorities and regional Centers of Public Health, as well as through local media, a campaign was launched to improve
the situation: the results of the assessment were not considered as criticisms to the local government, but as an incentive
to improve detected weaknesses and to promote access to water and sanitation for all, especially in public institutions and
schools. Some school toilets were already renovated in certain municipalities.
Source: National Institute of Public Health/Journalists for Human Rights (2016).

Box 9.4 A National Action Plan to ensure equitable access to water and sanitation adopted in Armenia
To address the main challenges identified in ensuring equitable access to water and sanitation, a national 2018–2020 Action
Plan to ensure equitable access to water and sanitation has been officially approved in August 2017 by the State Committee
of Water Economy of the Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources of Armenia. This action plan aims to
reduce equity gaps by improving access for the 579 rural communities not serviced by centralized water supplies, updating the
legislative and institutional framework to ensure alignment with the different dimensions of the human rights to water and
sanitation, and operationalizing water and sanitation systems in rural schools, among others.
Source: Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources of Armenia (2017).

Regional perspectives

137

9.4
Latin American
and the Caribbean

The governments of Latin American and Caribbean countries have long recognized
the importance of water supply and sanitation as a vital factor for the preservation and
improvement of health (UNECLAC, 1985), but millions of people in the region are still
without an adequate source of drinking water, while even more suffer the absence of safe
and decent facilities for the disposition of excreta.
In 2015, 65% of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean had access to safely
managed drinking water services, but only 22% to safely managed sanitation services.
In the same year, 96% used at least a basic water service and 86% at least a basic
sanitation service (Figure 9.7) (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). This means that in the region,
there are some 25 million people without access to a basic water service and 222 million
without safely managed drinking water services. For sanitation, the situation is far
worse: almost 89 million people in the region are without a basic sanitation service,
and 495 million without safely managed services (WHO/UNICEF, n.d.). There are large
differences between countries (Figure 9.8), but also within countries, as gaps in water
and sanitation coverage between the administrative regions within several countries
exceed 20 or even 30% (WHO/UNICEF, 2016).
The part of the population that does not have access even to basic water and sanitation
services has to adopt alternative solutions (such as, for water supply: individual wells,
illegal connections to the water network, water vendors, or taking water directly from
rivers, lakes and other water bodies; and for sanitation: latrines and open defecation)
(Jouravlev, 2004). Several of these options are expensive per unit of supply and/or do
not necessarily guarantee that the water is safe for drinking. Therefore, these ‘solutions’
are associated with significant health risks, and in the case of sanitation, are one of the
principal sources of water pollution.
The majority of people without access to water supply and sanitation services belong to
low-income groups and live in rural areas:
•

Although unequal income distribution has decreased in the region since the early
2000s, there were still 186 million poor in 2016, representing almost 31% of the
population, while 61 million people or 10% of the population were living in extreme
poverty (UNECLAC, 2018). Figures 9.9 to 9.12 show the gaps in coverage in different
countries by income quintile for water supply and sanitation in urban and rural
areas. Gaps in service coverage between income quintiles have slowly decreased
over time and are generally larger for sanitation (26% on average) than for water
supply (13%). Many people without access to services “are concentrated in peri-

Figure 9.7 Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2015

100

Surface water
Unimproved

80

Limited
Safely managed

Open defecation
Unimproved

Coverage (%)

Basic

60

40

Limited
Basic
Safely managed

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

20

0

Total

Rural*

Urban

Drinking water
Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

138

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Total

Rural*
Sanitation

Urban

Figure 9.8 Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean with low levels of access to at least basic water supply and sanitation services, 2015

Jamaica
Dominican Republic
Honduras
Suriname
Dominica
Panama
Nicaragua
Guatemala
Haiti

Sanitation (below 85%)

Haiti

Water supply (below 85%)

0

20

40

60

80

100

(%)
Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

urban areas, mainly in the poverty belts that exist on the periphery of many of the
cities in the region. It has proved difficult to provide these marginal areas with services
of acceptable quality. The main problems encountered in efforts to expand services to
marginal populations have been due, on the one hand, to the high poverty levels and
the low payment capacity and culture, and on the other hand, to high construction and
operation costs. These populations have often experienced explosive growth and have
developed in a disorganized manner, settling in areas far from existing networks and
with more difficult topographical conditions.” (Jouravlev, 2004, p. 14).
•

In the countries of the region, the levels of coverage of water supply and sanitation
services are significantly lower in rural areas than in urban areas. In terms of access to
at least a basic service, the difference between urban and rural areas is 13% for water
supply and 22% for sanitation services (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). Moreover, the technical
solutions used in rural areas (such as wells, septic tanks and latrines) usually do not
ensure a level of service quality or functionality that is comparable with those available
in cities (mainly household connections) (Jouravlev, 2004). Gaps in service coverage
between income quintiles are much larger in rural areas than in cities. Access to water
and sanitation also tends to be lower among indigenous peoples (WHO/UNICEF, 2016).
Lower levels of coverage in rural areas are explained by several factors, namely: low
population densities in rural areas making it difficult to organize service provision in an
efficient way and to take advantage of the economies of scale, as well as higher poverty
rates and the fact that rural communities tend to have less political influence and
visibility than urban populations.

The experience of provision of water supply and sanitation services in Latin America and
the Caribbean suggests the following minimum basic principles in order to realize the
human rights to water and sanitation, and to achieve SDG 6, so that no one is left behind:
•

Efficient service provision is essential for satisfying the human rights to water
and sanitation. By lowering the cost of service provision, efficiency leads to better
affordability and greater opportunities for use. Conversely, increased costs due to
inefficiency on the part of service providers, whether public or private, violate the
human rights to water and sanitation. Some of the most common forms of inefficiency
include overstaffing, corruption, manipulation of accounting and transfer prices,
excessive debts, high transaction costs, loss of economies of scale and scope, and
capture by special interest groups (unions, politicians or investors). In short, efficiency
and equity are not mutually exclusive, but rather complementary (UNECLAC, 2010).

Regional perspectives

139

Figure 9.9 Differences in access to water supply between the richest and poorest urban wealth quintiles in Latin America

Dominican Republic (2015)
El Salvador (2015)
Honduras (2015)
Peru (2015)
Venezuela (2014)
Guatemala (2014)
Nicaragua (2014)
Paraguay (2015)
Mexico (2014)
Bolivia (2015)
Ecuador (2015)
Colombia (2015)
Brazil (2015)
Costa Rica (2015)
Argentina (2014)
Chile (2015)
Uruguay (2015)

0

5

10

Source: Based on BADEHOG (n.d.).

15

20

25

(%)

Figure 9.10 Differences in access to water supply between the richest and poorest rural wealth quintiles in Latin America

Brazil (2015)
Dominican Republic (2015)
Honduras (2015)
Guatemala (2014)
Mexico (2014)
Bolivia (2015)
El Salvador (2015)
Ecuador (2015)
Paraguay (2015)
Costa Rica (2015)
Peru (2015)
Colombia (2015)
Nicaragua (2014)
Uruguay (2015)

0

•

Increased costs due to
inefficiency on the part
of service providers,
whether public or
private, violate the
human rights to water
and sanitation

140

5

10

15

20

25

(%)

Source: Based on BADEHOG (n.d.).

Efficiency in this sector is a function of service organization and management.
The ability to promote efficiency essentially depends on regulatory frameworks,
governance, institutional control, and political culture and will (UNECLAC, 2010).
Governments should impose appropriate regulation on both private and municipally
or state-owned service providers, based on the notions of fair and reasonable
rate-of-return, good faith, due diligence, the duty of efficiency, and the transfer to
consumers of the benefits of efficiency. The weight governments assign to the human
rights to water and sanitation is reflected in the seriousness and care they show when
developing, applying and respecting regulations and institutional frameworks and in
their decisions about budgetary allocations (UNECLAC, 2010).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 9.11 Differences in access to sanitation between the richest and poorest urban wealth quintiles in Latin America

Guatemala (2014)
Nicaragua (2014)
Dominican Republic (2015)
Peru (2015)
Paraguay (2015)
Brazil (2015)
Honduras (2015)
Bolivia (2015)
Venezuela (2014)
El Salvador (2015)
Ecuador (2015)
Mexico (2014)
Colombia (2015)
Uruguay (2015)
Costa Rica (2015)
Argentina (2014)
Chile (2015)

0

5

10

Source: Based on BADEHOG (n.d.).

15

20

25

20

25

(%)

Figure 9.12 Differences in access to sanitation between the richest and poorest rural wealth quintiles in Latin America

Paraguay (2015)
Guatemala (2014)
Dominican Republic (2015)
Ecuador (2015)
Bolivia (2015)
Honduras (2015)
Brazil (2015)
Colombia (2015)
Mexico (2014)
El Salvador (2015)
Nicaragua (2014)
Chile (2015)
Costa Rica (2015)
Peru (2015)
Uruguay (2015)

0

5

10

15

(%)

Source: Based on BADEHOG (n.d.).

•

These services are expensive to provide and the region has the worst income
distribution in the world (UN, 2013). As a result, the poor are not able to exercise
their human right to water and sanitation if they do not receive well-organized
state support, in the form of both consumption subsidies (to make the water bill
more affordable for the poor) and connection subsidies (to facilitate households’
connection to the network and the network’s expansion). Governments need to
recover their traditional role of financing investment in water supply and sanitation,
particularly for the purposes of extending coverage to low-income groups. In this
respect, political priorities are extremely important. These priorities should be
reflected in government budgets, not only in statements to the press (Solanes, 2007).

Regional perspectives

141

In many countries, decentralization has left the sector with a highly fragmented
structure made up of numerous service providers, without real possibilities to
achieve economies of scale or economic viability, and under the responsibility of
municipalities that lack the necessary resources and incentives to deal effectively
with the complexity of the processes involved in providing services. Decentralization
has also reduced the size of service areas and made them more homogeneous, thus
limiting the possibilities for cross-subsidies and facilitating the ‘cream skimming’ that
marginalized low-income groups from service provision. It is clearly necessary for
most countries to consolidate the sector's industrial structure (Jouravlev, 2004).

9.5
Sub-Saharan
Africa

The world’s population was almost 7.6 billion as of mid-2017, of which 17% live in
Africa (1.3 billion) (UNDESA, 2017a). Periodic and chronic water scarcity represents
a major challenge to Sub-Saharan Africa’s path to development. The poverty rate, as
the share of people living on less than US$1.90 a day in 2011 international purchasing
power parity (PPP), fell from 57% in 1990 to 43% in 2012. However, due to population
growth, the number of poor people has increased from 280 million in 1990 to 330
million in 2012 (Beegle et al., 2016). Moreover, poverty reduction has been slowest in
fragile countries, and there is a huge gap between urban and rural areas, as well as
across sub-regions.
Periodic and chronic water scarcity represents a major challenge to Africa’s path to
development. The lack of water management infrastructure (economic water scarcity),
in terms of both storage and supply delivery, as well as for improved drinking water
and sanitation services, plays a direct role in the persistence of poverty (FAO, 2016).
Agriculture contributes 15% of the region’s total GDP, with national figures ranging
from below 3% in Botswana and South Africa to more than 50% in Chad. Smallholder
farms directly employ about 175 million people (OECD/FAO, 2016). Irrigation is heavily
dependent on groundwater and evidence suggests that several aquifers are being
depleted: a study by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United
States (NASA) (2015) reported that eight major aquifers in Africa experienced little to
no refilling to offset water withdrawals between 2003 and 2013.

Periodic and chronic
water scarcity represents
a major challenge
to Africa’s path to
development

Changes in precipitation and temperature patterns further threaten water availability,
agricultural productivity and ecosystems balance. Among the threatened ecosystems
in Africa, Lake Chad presents a complex interaction between water security and
economic development, which led to a severe humanitarian emergency (Box 9.5).
Achieving the WASH targets of SDG 6 in Africa is yet another challenge that is
difficult to overcome, as the access to safely managed drinking water, safely managed
sanitation and handwashing facilities is amongst the lowest in the world (Figure 9.13).
In 2015, only 24% of the population of Sub-Saharan Africa had access to safe drinking
water (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a). However, there is a great variability among countries
(Figure 9.14).
In 2015, average access to basic sanitation services in Sub-Saharan Africa was only
28%. People lacking a basic sanitation service either had access to limited sanitation
facilities (improved facilities shared by two of more households — 18%), used
unimproved facilities such as pit latrines without a slab or platform, hanging latrines
or bucket latrines (31%), or practiced open defecation (23%). Only three countries
in Sub-Saharan Africa had data to estimate the access to safely managed sanitation:
Senegal (24%), Somalia (14%) and Niger (9%) (WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).
In 34 out of 38 African countries with data, less than 50% of the population had
basic handwashing facilities in their homes (Figure 9.15). From all Sub-Saharan
Africans having basic handwashing facilities, three out of five lived in urban areas
(WHO/UNICEF, 2017a).

142

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 9.13 Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015

100

Surface water
Unimproved
Limited

80

Basic

Coverage (%)

Safely managed

Open defecation
Unimproved

60

40

Limited
Basic

20

Safely managed

0

Total

Rural*

*Insufficient data to estimate
safely managed services.

Urban

Total*

Rural*

Drinking water

Urban*

Sanitation

Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Figure 9.14 Drinking water coverage, by country, in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015

100

Coverage (%)

80

60

40

20

Zambia

Zimbabwe

United Republic of Tanzania

Togo

Uganda

Swaziland*

South Sudan

Somalia

South Africa

Sierra Leone

Senegal

Seychelles

Saint Helena

Sao Tome and Principe

Rwanda

Réunion

Niger

Nigeria

Namibia

Mayotte

Unimproved

Mozambique

Mauritius

Mali

Mauritania

Malawi

Liberia

Madagascar

Kenya

Lesotho

Guinea-Bissau

Ghana

Guinea

Gabon

Gambia

Eritrea

Ethippia

Djibuti

Equatorial Guinea

Republic of the Congo

Congo

Côte d’Ivoire

Chad

Comoros

Cameroon

Burundi

Central African Republic

Surface water

Cabo Verde

Burkina Faso

Benin

Botswana

Angola

0

Limited
Basic
Safely managed
*The country name was changed to Eswatini from the former name of Swaziland as of 19 April 2018.
See www.un.org/en/member-states/.
Source: WHO/UNICEF (n.d.).

Regional perspectives

143

Figure 9.15

Population with basic handwashing facilities including soap and water at home in Africa, 2015

<5%
5–25%
26–50%
51–75%
76–100%
Insufficient data
Not applicable

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2017a, fig. 25, p. 19).

More than half of the population growth expected by 2050 will occur in Africa (more
than 1.3 billion, out of 2.2 billion globally) (UNDESA, 2017a). Population growth
especially occurs in urban areas, and without proper planning, this might lead to a
dramatic increase of slums. Currently, 189 million of slum dwellers live in Sub-Saharan
Africa (out of 883 million worldwide). Even if countries have steadily improved living
conditions in urban slums between 2000 and 2015, the rate of new home construction
lagged far behind the rate of urban population growth (UN, 2018b).
Giving access to WASH services to this growing population, however, is not the only
challenge for Africa, as the demands for energy, food, jobs and education will also
increase. Population growth can also be seen as an opportunity as ‘demographic pressure
can spur inventiveness’ (Boserup, 1965). However, education remains a challenge in
the continent as more than two in five adults are still illiterate (Beegle et al., 2016), and
the quality of schooling is often low. While in 2016 an estimated 85% of primary school
teachers worldwide were trained, the proportion was only 61% for Sub-Saharan Africa
(UN, 2018b). If equal opportunities, proper education and training are guaranteed, the
intellectual contribution that might come from this growing population could help Africa
get on track for achieving SDG 6.

144

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 9.5 BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT) project: Linking environmental restoration, transboundary
resources management and development
Located at the crossroads of Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, Lake Chad basin provides
freshwater and livelihoods to more than 40 million people, while sheltering a high diversity of wildlife (see Figure).
Since the early sixties, the surface of Lake Chad has changed significantly due to variations in rainfall and runoff (urban
and agricultural) to the lake and to escalating water use in the region. This caused a significant drop in the water level
and a substantial shrinking of the lake surface, by almost 90% from 1963 to 2010 (Gao et al., 2011). In addition to obvious
environmental and economic challenges, the shrinkage is seen as one of the reasons for regional insecurity and for the long
conflict that has destroyed livelihoods, displaced millions of people and, in general, affected vast portions of the four countries
around the lake, already dealing with water insecurity (Nigeria, Niger, Chad and Cameroon) (Okpara et al., 2015).
Figure | Lake Chad: Basin and population
Lake Chad

13 million
NIGER
Nguimi

Regularly flooded zones

km

Typical catchment area
Nguru

Hydrographical network

Major cities

Kano

0.1–0.5 million inhabitants

2 million

Kousseri

Abéché

47 million
Mangalmé

SUDAN

Bitkine
AmTiman

Kaduna

>1.5 million inhabitants
0.5–1.5 million inhabitants

CHAD

RigRig
Mao
Liwa
Bosso
BagaSola
Ngouri
Diffa
Bol
BagaKawa
Kukawa Blangoa
Massakoy
Guitté
Monguno Fotokol
Maltam
Marte
N’Djamena
Maiduguri Ngala

100

Zinder

km
300

Regularly flooded zones
(open water bodies and marshes)

Maroua

Bauchi

Jos
Yola

Abuja

Bousso
Bongor
Laï

Garoua

Moundou

NIGERIA

Birao

Sarh
Doba

Ndele
Ouadda

<0.1 million inhabitants

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Ngaoundéré
Enugu

Source: Lemoalle and Magrin

Bossangoa

CAMEROON
Bamenda
Bafoussam

(2014, fig. 6, p. 43).

Bouar

200 km

This led to a humanitarian emergency that is one of the world’s most severe. UNOCHA estimated that, in 2018, over 10.7 million
people will have needed relief assistance to survive, 72% of which are in Nigeria. The funds needed to address the humanitarian
challenges of the people living around the basin have been estimated at US$1.6 billion for 2018. These also include US$90 million
for interventions to provide safe and equitable access to water as well as improved facilities to 2.75 million people, many of
whom are internally displaced people (IDPs), women and children (UNOCHA, 2018).
Since the beginning of the crisis, governments and humanitarian organizations have developed strategies to work closely with
development actors to address the structural causes of the issues that are plaguing Lake Chad. Among these is the Programme
to Rehabilitate and Strengthen the Resilience of Lake Chad Basin Systems (PRESIBALT), launched by the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and funded by the African Development Bank (LCBC, 2016).
In the PRESIBALT framework, UNESCO is currently implementing the BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT)
project. The project aims to strengthen the capacity of Member States of the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) to safeguard
and sustainably manage the transboundary hydrological, biological and cultural resources of the Lake Chad basin, thereby
contributing to reducing poverty and promoting peace (UNESCO, n.d.).
With its focus on joint management of transboundary resources, including water, the project will contribute to addressing the
issues of discrimination and inequality in access to water and sanitation. This will be done through a set of actions that will
include capacity building for decision makers, experts and local communities on the management of transboundary waters,
using UNESCO’s methodology From Potential Conflict to Cooperation Potential (PCCP).1 In particular, the involvement of the
community-based organization for the duration of the whole project (not only for the trainings) will help to ensure that local
communities, who have often been left behind, will directly shape and benefit from the project outcomes.
1

www.unesco.org/new/en/pccp.

Regional perspectives

145

CHAPTER 10

World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Forum 2017 in Geneva, Switzerland

Strategies and
response options for
inclusive development

146

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

WWAP | Richard Connor, Stefan Uhlenbrook, Michela Miletto and Engin Koncagül
OHCHR | Rio Hada
With contributions from: Neil Dhot (AquaFed); Tamara Avellán (UNU-FLORES);
and Nidhi Nagabhatla (UNU-INWEH)

Taking account of the challenges and opportunities
presented throughout this report, this chapter describes
a series of strategies and response options that directly
address these challenges from technical, economic,
knowledge and governance perspectives.

10.1
Introduction
Earlier chapters of this report have examined challenges and opportunities
related to achieving universal access to water supply and sanitation — and
improving overall water resources management — through technical, social,
governance and economic approaches (Chapters 2–5). These challenges have
been further elaborated in the context of disadvantaged groups in urban and
rural settings (Chapters 6–7), for refugees and forcibly displaced populations
(Chapter 8), and across different regions (Chapter 9).
This chapter further builds on these opportunities for improvement and
attempts to address several basic questions, namely: What needs to be done
(and why action cannot be avoided), by whom, and how, in order to ‘leave no
one behind’ with respect to water.

10.2
Enhancing water supply and improving
accessibility
Water availability can be seen as a function of two distinct but inseparable features.
The first relates to water supply, which corresponds to the volumes of water that
can be withdrawn sustainably from surface and sub-surface sources, as well as
from unconventional sources. This includes desalination of sea water, water reuse
and recycling, and rainwater and fog harvesting. Increasing water use efficiency in
all major water use sectors (agriculture, energy, industry and municipal/domestic)
can also go a long way toward lowering overall demand and thus freeing up water
supplies for other users, including ecosystems. The second relates to accessibility,
which involves transporting water from the source and rendering it available to
different users in sufficient quantities and appropriate quality for its intended use.
Strategies and response options for inclusive development

147

Whereas the need to improve water resource management is particularly critical for areas
experiencing chronic or recurring water scarcity (where demand exceeds sustainable
supplies, or where supplies are compromised by pollution, land degradation or other
phenomena), the need to improve accessibility exists across all types of hydrological
regimes, even in places of relative water abundance. Barriers to improved accessibility are
often social and/or economic in nature.40 Although both supply and accessibility are critical
to ensuring water security for all, water accessibility has historically received less media
(and arguably political) attention. Yet, from the perspective of ‘leaving no one behind’ and
realizing the human rights to water supply and sanitation, overcoming the challenges of
accessibility can be equally — and in many specific cases even more — critical than that of
addressing issues of supply and scarcity.
From a technical perspective, the potential responses to addressing the lack of drinking
water supply and sanitation services to groups in disadvantaged and marginalized
situations can vary significantly from one place to another, depending on local physical
conditions and human and institutional capacities, among others (see Chapters 2, 3
and 4). Indeed, whereas sizeable high-density urban communities provide opportunities
for large-scale centralized water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) infrastructure and
facilities though resource-sharing and economies of scale, less costly decentralized
supply and sanitation systems have been shown to be successful solutions in smaller
urban settlements (see Chapter 6), including refugee camps (see Chapter 8). For people in
low-density rural areas, where shared facilities can offer a more affordable alternative to
household-level services, the objective is to bring these facilities closer to people’s homes,
while ensuring and maintaining their safety and affordability (see Chapter 7).

The need to improve
accessibility exists across
all types of hydrological
regimes, even in places of
relative water abundance

In terms of selecting the most appropriate WASH technology, the basic principle is
therefore not one of ‘best practice’, but rather one of ‘best fit’, based on current and
expected future socio-economic circumstances. And, in order to select the ‘best fit’, it is
essential to involve the different user groups during the initial decision-making process as
well as throughout the implementation and operational phases.
This does not necessarily imply that each specific case should be addressed without
any consideration of broader-scale realities. For example, integrated urban and rural
planning can provide exceptional dividends in terms of both water resources management
(e.g. source protection) and the provision of WASH and other water services, generating
co-benefits related to food and energy security, livelihoods and employment opportunities
(WWAP/UN-Water, 2018). Addressing the challenges faced by the rural poor, especially
in relation to managing water in the context of climate change, will require increased
investment in water infrastructure such as water harvesting or irrigation, improving the
advisory services for crop and water management, and planning and implementation of
drought preparedness plans. These actions, when coupled with better access to social
protection, including social security schemes (pensions and insurance) and more targeted
social assistance programmes, will improve the economic and productive capacity of poor
smallholder farmers and their families (see Chapter 7).

10.3
Addressing the
investment gap

Evidence suggests that the return on investment in WASH can be considerably high,
with a global average benefit–cost ratio of 5.5 for improved sanitation and 2.0 for
improved drinking water, when broader macroeconomic benefits are taken into account
(Hutton and Andrés, 2018). Yet water supply and sanitation remain grossly underfunded.
According to one study, a threefold increase in current annual investment levels
(to US$114 billion) would be required to meet WASH-related Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) Targets 6.1 and 6.2 (Hutton and Varughese, 2016). Notably, this estimated
investment does not include continuous operation and maintenance costs, nor
investments needed to achieve the other targets of SDG 6 related to ambient water quality,
water use efficiency, ecosystems, integrated water resources management (IWRM) and
means of implementation.

40

148

This notion of ‘accessibility’, or lack thereof, is somewhat synonymous with the concept of ‘economic
water scarcity’, “whereby access is not limited by resource availability, but by human, institutional and
financial constraints over distribution of the resource to different user groups” (WWAP, 2012, p. 126).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Insufficient funding and lack of effective financing mechanisms have created a
barrier to achieving the WASH targets for disadvantaged and marginalized groups. As
detailed in Chapter 5, large WASH providers can theoretically resort to commercial
financing, but in reality, WASH investment only makes up a small portion of private
sector financing, which is dominated by transportation and energy infrastructure.
Commercial financing can be even more difficult to obtain for smaller service
providers and households, who have to rely on other means, such as grants or
microfinancing (when available).
A certain proportion of the investment gap could also be overcome through increased
system efficiency, which uses already available finances more effectively and can
significantly reduce overall costs. However, targeted subsidies for vulnerable groups
and equitable tariff structures will remain an important source for cost recovery and
investments in WASH services.
The support of the international donor community will remain critical in the
developing world but cannot be the main source of funding. The WASH-related part
of official development assistance (ODA) has stabilized at about 5% of total ODA
commitments over the last years, and is unlikely to increase dramatically in the future
(UN, 2018a). ODA is particularly helpful in mobilizing investments from other sources,
such as commercial and blended finance, including the private sector. However, it
will be incumbent upon national governments to dramatically increase the amounts
of public funding made available for the expansion of WASH services. Such increases
in domestic public funding also help create an economic environment that facilitates
additional investments from other sources, including commercial/repayable finances.
Moreover, domestic public funds can be critical to de-risk water infrastructure
investments that often require large upfront investments with a relatively long payback
time. In many cases this will require reforms to increase the efficiency of the sector
and its utilities, and to increase its overall creditworthiness (for instance, by ensuring
that utilities are able to function on a cost recovery basis). Necessary reforms include
technical measures (e.g. distribution systems, reduction of non-revenue water,
metering, etc.) as well as non-technical/governance-related measures.

Insufficient funding and
lack of effective financing
mechanisms have created
a barrier to achieving
the WASH targets for
disadvantaged and
marginalized groups

In the water domain, the expression ‘privatization’ raises a question of terminology, as
it is used to designate two quite different notions. The first corresponds to the granting
of water licences to commodity companies that use water for products to sell. The
second characterizes the process of awarding the operations of a public drinking water
or wastewater service, in part or in whole, to an enterprise which operates under the
control of the awarding public authority. In both cases, the inclusion of the human
rights to water and sanitation must be ensured by private companies and private water
operators. In terms of the privatization of water supply and sanitation services,
good governance (see Chapter 4) is critical to ensure that sovereign responsibilities
rest with the designated officials, regardless whether operations are outsourced or
not. With or without privatization, weak governance is the root cause of failure of
water and sanitation operations, often caused by the lack of financial resources or
by failure to prevent corruption. When properly regulated through oversight of the
public authority, privatization can provide an additional means to increase overall
system efficiency and to bring more water and improved sanitation to more — ideally
all — people. Privatization can also enable accountability, services designed for users,
appropriate rules that protect human health and the environment, and sufficient
investment. However, prior to establishing such a project, the public authority should
answer the following questions: i) Is the public utility’s operation of existing assets
in a difficult situation (e.g. insufficient service, lack of qualified staff, continuous
maintenance)? ii) Is the public utility facing important investment programme
challenges, such as the extension of infrastructure, or the rehabilitation of existing
ones? If so, does this program cover the entire utility or parts thereof? iii) Is the utility
facing financial constraints (e.g. difficulty setting economic tariffs or issuing debt)?
According to the answers, the public authority will be able to determine if there
is scope for a public–private partnership (PPP), and which form of PPP could best
accommodate the need (e.g. concession, affermage/lease, build–operate–transfer
(BOT), etc.).

Strategies and response options for inclusive development

149

However, increasing the amount of funding and investment alone does not necessarily
ensure that WASH services will reach all those who are most disadvantaged. Indeed, as
described in Chapter 5 and Section 9.4, investments in WASH infrastructure have often
failed to reach the poorest people, households and communities. Subsidies must therefore
be appropriately designed, transparent and targeted, and tariff structures must be
designed and implemented with the objectives of achieving cost recovery and economic
efficiency, while also taking aspects of equity, affordability and the appropriate level of
service for each specific targeted population group into account (see Chapter 5).

10.4
Knowledge
and capacity
development

Scientific research, development and innovation are essential to support informed
decision-making. Technical solutions aimed at improving access to WASH services for all,
and particularly for groups in vulnerable and disadvantaged situations, require further
development. Although some progress has been made in terms of designing equable tariff
structures and other ways to improve affordability that benefit — rather than penalize
— people in poor and disadvantaged situations, further research and analysis into the
economic dimensions of WASH services in support of inclusion would also be beneficial.
For example, the tremendous long-term benefits of improved WASH services are well
documented (e.g. reduction of childhood diseases, improved education and workforce
participation, and benefits in the workplace and in schools, particularly for girls and
women), but more research is required to further develop economic models that can
robustly assess all benefits at local and even national scales.
Greater knowledge and information about the poorest and most disadvantaged groups
are required in order to develop effective policies and implement ‘best-fit’ WASH solutions
at the local/community level. Local and traditional knowledge can prove highly valuable
in this regard. Unfortunately, people living in informal urban and peri-urban settlements
(i.e. slums) are often lacking a recognized status (see Section 6.2), and very poor rural
communities are often not appropriately or fairly included in census taking, thus falling
‘under the radar’. Citizen- and community-led data collection and documentation can
generate new knowledge that helps to better understand needs, resources and capacities,
thus empowering local stakeholders to influence governments and openly participate in
the design and implementation of the most technically suitable, affordable and socially
acceptable WASH solutions.
It is also critical to recognize the very different realities and challenges afflicting the poor
and disadvantaged in rural and urban settings (see Chapters 6 and 7). With the vast majority
of population growth expected to occur in both large and smaller cities in developing
countries, accelerated urbanization poses a great challenge in terms of providing safe,
reliable and affordable water supply and sanitation services for the influx of new residents,
while maintaining the levels of service already provided to existing users. However, despite
sometimes severely restricted financial resources, this rapid urban growth also generates
opportunities for implementing locally appropriate WASH solutions — without necessarily
replicating the larger, often more investment — and capital-intensive centralized systems
that have dominated urban WASH services in most developed countries.

Greater knowledge
and information about
the poorest and most
disadvantaged groups
are required in order to
develop effective policies
and implement ‘best-fit’
WASH solutions at the
local/community level

Although sustainable development challenges will be increasingly concentrated in cities,
it is essential that rural populations are not ‘left behind’ in terms of policies and overall
support. The rural poor, who account for nearly 80% of people living in extreme poverty41
— the overwhelming majority of whom live in Southern Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa
(World Bank, 2016a) — must no longer be overlooked or deliberately ignored in policymaking and planning. The information and capacity-building needs of disadvantaged rural
communities are similar to those described above for the urban poor, but also include
knowledge related to water resource allocation and the securing of water rights, which they
need in order to improve livelihoods and expand their economic base beyond subsistence
farming, animal husbandry and/or fishing. Beside the economic status, differences in
societal structures and predominant social networks between poor urban and rural
communities also need to be considered.

41

150

The international poverty line for extreme poverty is US$1.90 a day in 2011 Purchasing Power Parity.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Governance structures
need to guarantee fair
and equitable allocation
of water resources to all

Monitoring progress is another important aspect of knowledge and capacity
development. Its value goes beyond accessing progress towards SDG Targets 6.1 and
6.2 to also provide valuable information about whether policies and technical solutions
adopted to improving WASH services are achieving specified objectives and, if not, what
can be done to improve performance. Disaggregated data (with respect to gender, age,
income groups, ethnicity, geography, etc.) and social inclusion analyses are key tools
in determining which groups are at greatest risk of being ‘left behind’, and why. Use of
information and communication technology (ICT) can greatly facilitate monitoring
progress through citizen data collection and improve overall access to knowledge.
However, although two-thirds of the global population use the internet, a much smaller
proportion has access to it in Africa and South Asia (Poushter, 2016; We are Social and
Hootsuite, 2018) (see Prologue, Section 3.viii).
All of these aspects also require improved institutional capacity to assist and facilitate
policy reforms and citizen participation at the appropriate levels of decision-making and
policy implementation on the ground. The development of human capacity — through
vocational, technical and academic training — needs to be supported, especially at the
local and community levels where efforts to achieve progress towards SDG Targets 6.1
and 6.2 are operationalized.

10.5
Governance

Several chapters of this report highlight the importance of community-based action
in addressing the root causes of ‘leaving people behind’ with respect to water and
sanitation. As described in Chapter 4, good governance seeks to move away from
hierarchical power structures while embracing concepts of accountability, transparency,
legitimacy, public participation, justice and efficiency — principles that are in line
with the human rights-based approach (HRBA). Inclusive, cooperative governance
involves the participation of government agencies as well as non-state actors actively
engaged in partnerships and dialogue. However, for policy development and (especially)
implementation to be truly effective at the community level, central or national
governments need to create an enabling institutional environment through which
participative governance can take place. This includes institutions with sufficient
capacity and authority to monitor and enforce agreed norms, and forums through which
stakeholders can provide constructive input or express their opinions. Such institutional
transformations are not only possible but are already happening, as exemplified by
examples from Armenia (see Box 9.4) and the Lake Chad basin (see Box 9.5).
Governance structures need to guarantee fair and equitable allocation of water resources
to all. Water resource allocation mechanisms can be established to achieve different
socio-economic policy objectives, such as safeguarding food and/or energy security,
or for promoting industrial growth, but ensuring that enough water is available (and
of suitable quality) to meet everyone’s basic human needs (for domestic as well as
subsistence purposes) must be a guaranteed priority. As highlighted in Chapters 4
and 7, inequalities in land ownership can translate into unequal access to and benefits
from water resources. For example, women’s unequal rights to inheritance and land
ownership in some countries can directly lead to discrimination with respect to water
allocation. Efforts to ensure secure and equal access to water in rural areas will require
continued efforts to increase the visibility of small-scale users with regards to water for
irrigation, as well as greater recognition of their contribution to national food security.
At the other end of the ‘local to global’ spectrum, the international community remains
heavily committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. ‘Leaving no one
behind’ with respect to water implies meeting SDG 6, and Targets 6.1 (drinking water)
and 6.2 (sanitation) in particular. It is incumbent upon the international community to
provide guidance, assistance and support to national and sub-national governments
and other actors in implementing policies to provide WASH services to all (and most
notably to the poorest and most disadvantaged groups), as well as monitoring and
reporting on progress.

Strategies and response options for inclusive development

151

Water conflict is a term used to describe water disputes resulting from divergent or
opposing interests between water users over access to and use of water resources and
its services. These can be states, groups or individuals. Although a wide range of water
conflicts appear throughout history, rarely have traditional wars been fought primarily
over water (Gleick, 1993). Water has more often been a source of tension and a factor
in conflicts that began for a range of reasons (see Prologue, Section 1.v). The flipside
of the coin is that water, or more specifically the joint management of water resources
and systems, can be an opportunity for cooperation between countries, groups or
individuals. Transboundary cooperation over water can be an important tool for
promoting collaboration between countries, which in turn supports peace and stability,
economic prosperity and environmental sustainability (Box 10.1).

Forced displacement as
a result of either armed
conflict or the sudden
onset of natural hazards
places people in highly
vulnerable situations with
respect to WASH services

The linkages between water and migration have been attracting increasing attention
(Miletto et al., 2017), although they have yet to be fully incorporated into international
migration policy (Mach and Richter, 2018).
Forced displacement as a result of either armed conflict or the sudden onset of natural
hazards places people in highly vulnerable situations with respect to WASH services.
Addressing this challenge would greatly benefit from increased harmonization
between developmental assistance (focused on prevention, risk reduction and longterm approaches to avoid crises) and humanitarian aid (which addresses crises as they
occur).
The WASH-related challenges faced by refugees and internally displaced people (IDPs)
require special focused political responsiveness. As described throughout Chapter 8,
both contingency planning and crisis response actions are necessary to ensure
that refugees and displaced people have access to safely managed WASH services.
In the case of service provision in refugee camps, harmonization of service levels
with surrounding community/national standards is essential for combatting social
discrimination and creating access equality. This should not be seen as an additional
burden but as an opportunity, since collective and cooperative efforts to provide WASH
to camps can also contribute to improving water infrastructure and services to host
communities (see Box 9.1).

Box 10.1 Conflict prevention and cooperation over transboundary water resources
The High-Level Panel for Water and Peace demonstrated that transboundary water cooperation can be an important tool
for promoting collaboration between countries (Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, 2017). Implementing truly
integrated water management in transboundary basins, considering all users and uses of water, supports regional integration
and can provide benefits far beyond the provision of water services to all members of society. These benefits can include peace
and stability, economic prosperity and environmental sustainability. It can also help to address migration crises, when used as
an adaptation strategy to cope with asymmetric/unbalanced availability of and access to water and other resources.
The percentage of a transboundary basin’s area covered by an operational agreement has been adopted as an indicator
to measure the degree of cooperation in place to implement integrated water resources management (IWRM) in a
transboundary context (Indicator 6.5.2 of SDG 6; UNECE/UNESCO, 2018). The operational agreements and the joint bodies
that oversee its implementation are very diverse. There is no universally applicable solution or ‘one model fits all’, as
solutions should be tailored to specific circumstances. The average percentage of transboundary river and lake basin area
covered by operational arrangements across 86 countries amounts to 64%. For aquifers, based on 63 countries, the ratio is
47% (UN, 2018a).
Countries reported several obstacles that were standing in the way of reaching agreements, including “lack of political will
and power asymmetries among riparian countries; fragmented national legal, institutional and administrative frameworks;
lack of financial, human and technical capacity; and poor data availability, especially in relation to transboundary aquifers
and their boundaries” (UN, 2018a, pp. 13–14). Achieving Target 6.5 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), whereby
all transboundary basins are covered under an operational agreement by 2030, will therefore require accelerated progress in
tackling the relevant challenges.

152

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

IWRM remains the central paradigm that underpins good water governance and, as
described in Chapter 1, an HRBA can provide a helpful perspective to understanding
and implementing IWRM, with emphasis on its accountability, participation
and non-discrimination principles. An HRBA to IWRM adds critical elements of
equality and non-discrimination, equitable distribution of resources and benefits,
and strengthened accountability and remedies. An HRBA seeks to identify groups
and individuals who are left behind from development progress, whose rights are
being violated or unfulfilled and whose voices are not heard, and to understand the
reasons why certain people are unable to claim their rights. An HRBA identifies
those who have the responsibility to act, and their obligations as duty-bearers under
international law, and works to strengthen the capacity of both duty-bearers to
fulfil their obligations and rights-holders to claim and exercise their rights. Private
businesses and water service providers also have specific responsibilities to respect
all human rights and ensure that their activities do not infringe upon the people’s
enjoyment of the human rights to water and sanitation.

In order to achieve equality,
states have an obligation
to prioritize individuals
and groups that are
particularly vulnerable to
discrimination or exclusion

Women occupy critical roles within water management and conservation, as women
possess a unique relationship with water at the household and community levels. One
example at the household scale is that women are primary influencers of children.
As such, they can instill values of water conservation and sustainable use, thereby
supporting future generations in valuing and managing water wisely. Women and
girls can also facilitate networking opportunities through participation in the water
economy, as tackling rigid gender roles in the water sector is a critical gap, more so in
communities living in vulnerable situations (Thompson et al., 2017).

10.6
Roles and
responsibilities
in realizing the
human rights
to water and
sanitation

All actors involved in the realization of the human rights to water and sanitation on a
non-discriminatory and equal basis hold specific obligations and responsibilities.

10.6.1 Obligations of states

Article 2 (1) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(ICESCR) requires states to take steps to progressively realize economic, social and
cultural rights, and declares that “such steps should be deliberate, concrete and
targeted as clearly as possible towards meeting the obligations recognized in the
Covenant” (CESCR, 1990, para. 2). Human rights define individuals as rights-holders
entitled to water and sanitation, and states as duty-bearers that have to guarantee
access to WASH for all, using the maximum of their available resources. According
to the ICESCR, State parties must respect, protect and fulfil human rights. These
obligations are clarified in General Comment No. 15 on the human right to water
(CESCR, 2002b):
•

Respect: States may not prevent people from enjoying their human rights
to water and sanitation and may not endorse, perpetuate and reinforce
discriminatory and stigmatizing practices.

•

Protect: States must prevent third parties from interfering with people’s
enjoyment of their human rights to water and sanitation and foresee remedy
infringements.

•

Fulfil: States are responsible for ensuring that the conditions are in place for
everyone to enjoy the human rights to water and sanitation, using the maximum
of their available resources.

In order to achieve equality, states have an obligation to prioritize individuals and
groups that are particularly vulnerable to discrimination or exclusion. The principles
of non-discrimination and equality recognize that people face different barriers and
have different needs, whether because of inherent characteristics or as a result of
discriminatory practices, and therefore require differentiated support or treatment.
Human rights law will sometimes require state parties to take affirmative action to
diminish or eliminate conditions that cause or perpetuate discrimination.

Strategies and response options for inclusive development

153

Under international human rights law, states are obliged to respect the enjoyment
of the human rights to water and sanitation in other countries, to refrain from actions
that interfere with the enjoyment of those rights, and to prevent their own citizens and
companies from violating those rights in other countries. Furthermore, states should
facilitate the realization of the right to water in other countries, for example through
provision of water resources, financial and technical assistance, and necessary aid when
required, in a manner that is consistent with the Covenant and other human rights
standards, as well as sustainable and culturally appropriate.

10.6.2 Responsibilities of non-state actors

States bear the main responsibility to protect individuals and communities against
infringements by non-state actors. However, non-state actors also have human rights
responsibilities and may be held accountable for the infringement of human rights
(HRC, 2014). For example, the corporate responsibility42 to respect human rights means
that corporations should act with due diligence to avoid infringing on the human rights
of others, and to identify, prevent and address any harms that do occur (OHCHR, 2011).
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and international organizations can play an
important role in service provision and they need to ensure substantive equality and
accountability in such endeavour.

42

154

As specified in the publication “Eliminating discrimination and inequalities in access to water and
sanitation” (UN-Water, 2015, p. 26), the term “responsibility” rather than “duty” is meant to indicate that
respecting rights is not currently an obligation that international human rights law generally imposes
directly on companies, although elements of it may be reflected in domestic laws. It is a global standard of
expected conduct acknowledged in virtually every voluntary and soft-law instrument related to corporate
responsibility. See: The UN “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework for Business and Human Rights
(HRC, 2008).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Sharing ideas during a meeting

10.6.3 International cooperation

International organizations, such as the United Nations (UN), international trade
and financial institutions, and development cooperation partners must ensure that
their policies and actions respect human rights. International organizations are called
upon to ensure that their assistance is channelled towards the countries or regions
that are least able to realize the rights to water and sanitation. Assessments show that
at the international level, only half of the development assistance directed towards
sanitation and drinking water is targeted at regions where 70% of the global unserved
live (WHO, 2012). Moreover, notwithstanding the increasing trend in the overall
availability of resources for development cooperation, meeting the world’s needs for
water and sanitation would require much more targeted and increased investment
in these sectors (UNGA, 2016, para. 22). This will also require the incorporation of
human rights frameworks in development cooperation partners’ funding policies and
programme design and implementation (UNGA, 2017, para. 84).
An important element of the human rights-based approach is to strengthen the
capacity of states as duty-bearers, as well as the capacity of rights-holders to
understand and claim their rights to water and sanitation. When resources are
insufficient, states must request external or international assistance (CESCR, 1990) and
financial institutions may impose conditions upon assistance for measures that are
not compliant with human rights. Promotion of national ownership of development
is crucial for the long-term sustainability and accountability of projects sponsored
with international support (HRC, 2010). Development partners can support existing
national action plans to reduce disparities in access to water and sanitation and build
the capacities of duty-bearers to meet their obligations (HRC, 2011c). However, states
remain the primary duty-bearer to ensure the progressive realization of the human
rights to water and sanitation for all on an equal basis, and have the ultimate obligation
to respect, protect and fulfil those rights.

Strategies and response options for inclusive development

155

CHAPTER 11

Gathering of women and man in a Maasai village in Kenya

The way forward

156

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

WWAP | Richard Connor, Stefan Uhlenbrook and Engin Koncagül

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with its Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), marks a new era of universality. The 193
countries of the United Nations (UN) General Assembly have committed to
eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development in all dimensions
within just, equitable, open and inclusive societies in which the water and
sanitation-related needs of everyone, especially those in the most vulnerable
situations, are met. The fulfilment of the human rights to safe drinking
water and sanitation is fundamental to the achievement of all the SDGs.
The links between water and broader decisions regarding food and energy
security, humanitarian crises, economic development, and environmental
sustainability often remain unrecognized or poorly understood. Yet, in
an increasingly globalized world, the impacts of water-related decisions
cross borders and affect everyone. The intensification of extreme events,
environmental degradation (including decreasing water availability
and quality), population growth, rapid urbanization, unsustainable and
inequitable patterns of production and consumption (within and between
countries), actual and potential conflicts, and unprecedented migratory
flows are among the interconnected pressures faced by humanity, hitting
those in vulnerable situations often the hardest through their impacts
on water. And, as the demand for limited water resources grows and the
impacts of climate change become more severe, so does the potential
for conflicts over competing uses and between different users of water.
However, cooperation and multi-sectoral water interventions can lead to
outcomes that are greater than the sum of their parts, for example, where
co-benefits along the water–food–energy–environment–poverty nexus
outweigh the costs and trade-offs. In this respect, a human rights-based
approach to integrated water resources management (IWRM) provides a
more holistic people-centred pathway for answering the call to ‘leave no
one behind’.
Progress towards the 2030 Agenda requires a renegotiation of power
relations at all levels, equitable participation and representation of all
groups being (or at risk of being) left behind, as well as new partnerships in
order to transform the economic, social and political processes that guide
water resources management and drive the provision of safe and affordable
water supply and sanitation services.
Those ‘left behind’ need appropriate representation in political and
other decision-making processes, either directly or through civil society
organizations with a clear mandate from those they represent. This is why
public awareness and the empowerment of communities are critical for
the realization of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation.
Providing people in disadvantaged situations with opportunities to actively
participate in determining and implementing their own water management
solutions can lead to more resilient communities, particularly for those
groups farthest from centres of power.

The way forward

157

Young Inuits performing during a ceremony in Ottawa, Canada

Good governance — with a focus on accountability for action, integrity and transparency
to build trust and empower the most disadvantaged groups — is essential for successful
implementation of water policies. Appropriate regulatory and legal frameworks, including
a mix of incentives and enforced penalties (‘carrots and sticks’), are also critical to achieving
progress. Evidence-based knowledge on water resources and water-related issues,
continually expanded and analysed, and adequate capacity development for the water
sector and beyond are essential in order to guide policy-making and practice. Sufficient
financing and the fair and effective management of financial resources form the ultimate
expression of political support and are crucial for fulfilling the human rights to safe
drinking water and sanitation and realizing the transformative Agenda 2030.
Although each of these responses generally applies to nearly all situations, addressing the
inequalities faced by disadvantaged groups will also require tailored solutions that take
account of the day-to-day realities of people and communities in vulnerable situations.
The challenges and lack of opportunities of people living in extreme poverty can be quite
distinct from one group to another. For example, the standard of living that can be achieved
for less than US$1.90 per day is likely to be very different for people in urban settlements
than for those living in rural communities. Beyond socio-economic and environmental
conditions, further distinctions can arise based on the region/country/neighbourhood
where they live, what ‘groups’ they belong to (including gender), and the extent to which
they may have (or lack) support from extended family or other social networks, among
other factors. Water supply and sanitation policies need to distinguish between different
populations and prepare specific actions to address each of them — hence the need for
solid, disaggregated data to inform tailored solutions.

158

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Unless exclusion and
inequality are explicitly
and responsively
addressed in both policy
and practice, water
interventions will continue
to fail to reach those most
in need and who are likely
to benefit most

Overcoming the financial challenges of fulfilling the human rights to water and
sanitation is entirely possible, but it is important to identify the most appropriate level
of service that is affordable and sustainable for groups in disadvantaged situations.
Population density will greatly influence both capital and operational costs of both
water supply and sanitation systems in low-income urban areas. For example, the
implementation of decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS) can be
appropriate for medium-density peri-urban areas and can enable the eventual use of
networked systems once the population density reaches a critical (and economically
viable) mass. Given scarce resources, governments should encourage service providers
to increase their efficiency, in order to keep costs down and hence to make services
more affordable. Improved financial performance can also help attract additional
external sources of financing. The recovery of water and useful by-products from
treated wastewater can generate supplementary revenue streams for service providers
and create new opportunities for local businesses and employment.
Change requires genuinely participatory processes, bringing in and valuing new and
diverse voices, so that people — including those ‘left behind’ — can, as rights-holders,
actually influence decisions. This requires shifting deep-seated and unconscious biases
and discrimination by changing attitudes and norms within water institutions and at all
levels. It also requires a recognition of states as the primary duty-bearers for ensuring
that the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation are realized for all, on a
non-discriminatory basis.

Coda

People from different groups are ‘left behind’ for different reasons. Discrimination,
exclusion, marginalization, entrenched power asymmetries and material inequalities
are among the main obstacles to achieving the human rights to safe drinking water
and sanitation for all and realizing the water-related SDGs of the 2030 Agenda. Poorly
designed and inadequately implemented policies, inefficient and improper use of
financial resources, as well as policy gaps fuel the persistence of inequalities in access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. Unless exclusion and inequality are explicitly and
responsively addressed in both policy and practice, water interventions will continue to
fail to reach those most in need and who are likely to benefit most.
Improving water resources management and providing access to safe and affordable
drinking water and sanitation for all is essential for eradicating poverty, building
peaceful and prosperous societies, and ensuring that ‘no one is left behind’ on the road
towards sustainable development. These goals are entirely achievable, provided there is
a collective will to do so.

The way forward

159

References
Abdulsamed, F. 2011. Somali Investment in Kenya. Briefing Paper. London, Chatam House. www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/
view/109621.
Abbott, K. W. and Snidal, D. 2000. Hard and soft law in international governance. International Organization, Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 421–456.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2016. Asian Water Development Outlook: Strengthening Water Security in Asia and the Pacific. Manila, ADB.
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/189411/awdo-2016.pdf.
Alabaster, G. 2015. Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Initiative. UN-Habitat. Unpublished Progress Report.
Almeida, M., Butler, D. and Friedler, E. 1999. At-source domestic wastewater quality. Urban Water, Vol. 1, pp. 49–55. doi.org/10.1016/S14620758(99)00008-4.
Altieri, M. and Nicholls, C. 2008. Los impactos del cambio climático sobre las comunidades campesinas y de agricultores tradicionales y sus
respuestas adaptativas [Climate change impacts on peasant and traditional farmer communities and their adaptation responses]. Revista
de Agroecología, (Murcia, Spain), Vol. 3, pp. 7–28. (In Spanish.)
Alvaredo, F., Chancel, L., Piketty, T., Saez, E. and Zucman, G. 2018. World Inequality Report 2018. Executive Summary. World Inequality Lab.
wir2018.wid.world/files/download/wir2018-full-report-english.pdf.
Amnesty International. 2006. Israel/Lebanon: Deliberate Destruction or “Collateral Damage”? Israeli Attacks on Civilian Infrastructure.
London, Amnesty International. www.amnesty.org/en/documents/MDE18/007/2006/en/.
Amnesty International/WASH United. 2015. Recognition of the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation by UN Member States at the
International Level: An Overview of Resolutions and Declarations that Recognise the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation. Amnesty
International/WASH United. www.amnesty.org/download/Documents/IOR4013802015english.pdf.
Andrés, L., Biller, D. and Herrera Dappe, M. 2014. Infrastructure Gap in South Asia: Infrastructure Needs, Prioritization, and
Financing. Policy Research Working Papers Series No. 7032. Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/504061468307152462/pdf/WPS7032.pdf.
Andrés, L. and Fuente, D. 2017. Scoping Study for Subsidies in Water. Washington, DC, World Bank. Unpublished.
Andrés, L. and Naithani, S. 2013. Mechanisms and Approaches in Basic Service Delivery for Access and Affordability. Washington, DC, World
Bank. Unpublished.
Anh, N. V., Ha, T. D., Nhue, T. H., Heinss, U., Morel, A., Moura, M. and Schertenleib, R. 2002. Decentralized wastewater treatment – new
concept and technologies for Vietnamese conditions. 5th Specialised Conference on Small Water and Wastewater Treatment Systems,
Istanbul, Turkey, 24–26 September 2002.
APF/OHCHR (Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions/Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights).
2013. The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: A Manual for National Human Rights Institutions. Geneva/
Sydney, APF/ OHCHR. www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/ipeoples/undripmanualfornhris.pdf.
AQUASTAT. n.d. AQUASTAT website. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/water_
use/index.stm. (Accessed 24 May 2018).
Araujo, M. C., Ferreira, F. H., Lanjouw, P. and Özler, B. 2008. Local inequality and project choice: Theory and evidence from Ecuador. Journal
of Public Economics, Vol. 92, No 5–6, pp. 1022–1046.
Asano, T. and Levine, A. D. 1996. Wastewater reclamation, recycling and reuse: Past, present, and future. Water Science and Technology,
Vol. 33, No. 10-11, pp. 1–14. doi.org/10.1016/0273-1223(96)00401-5.
Atashili, J., Poole, C., Ndumbe, P. M., Adimora A. A. and Smith, J. S. 2008. Bacterial vaginosis and HIV acquisition: A meta-analysis of
published studies. AIDS, Vol. 22, No. 12, pp. 1493–1501. doi.org/10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283021a37.
Bache, I. and Flinders, M. (eds.). 2004. Multi-level Governance. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
Bäckstrand, K., Khan, J., Kronsell, A. and Lövbrand, E. 2010. The promise of new modes of environmental governance. K. Bäckstrand,
J. Khan, A. Kronsell and E. Lövbrand (eds.), Environmental Politics and Deliberative Democracy: Examining the Promise of New Modes of
Governance. Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar.
BADEHOG (House Survey Data Bank). n.d. Digital Repository, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. repositorio.cepal.
org/handle/11362/31828.
Baker, K. K., Padhi, B., Torondel, B., Das, P., Dutta, A., Sahoo, K. C., Das, B., Dreibelbis, R., Caruso, B., Freeman, M. C., Sager, L. and
Panigrahi, P. 2017. From menarche to menopause: A population-based assessment of water, sanitation, and hygiene risk factors for
reproductive tract infection symptoms over life stages in rural girls and women in India. Plos One, Vol. 12, No. 12, e0188234. doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188234.
Baker, K. K., Story, W. T., Walser-Kuntz, E., and Zimmerman, M. B. 2018. Impact of social capital, harassment of women and girls, and water
and sanitation access on premature birth and low infant birth weight in India. Plos One, Vol. 13, No. 10, e0205345. journals.plos.org/
plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0205345.
Banerjee, P., Chaudhury, S. B. R. and Das, S. K. (eds.). 2005. Internal Displacement in South Asia: The Relevance of the UN’s Guiding
Principles. New Delhi/Thousand Oaks, Calif., Sage Publications.

160

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Barber, M. and Jackson, S. 2014. Autonomy and the intercultural: Interpreting the history of Australian Aboriginal water management in the
Roper River Catchment, Northern Territory. Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 670–693.
Barnard, S., Routray, P., Majorin, F., Peletz, R., Boisson, S., Sinha, A. and Clasen, T. 2013. Impact of Indian total sanitation campaign on
latrine coverage and use: A cross-sectional study in Orissa three years following programme implementation. Plos One, Vol. 8, No. 8,
e71438. doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0071438.
BBS/UNICEF Bangladesh (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics/United Nations Children’s Fund). 2014. Bangladesh Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey 2012-2013, Progotir Pathey: Final Report. Dhaka, BBS/UNICEF. microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2533.
Beegle, K., Christiaensen, L., Dabalen, A. and Gaddis, I. 2016. Poverty in a Rising Africa. Washington, DC, The World Bank. openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/22575/9781464807237.pdf?sequence=10&isAllowed=y.
Betts, A. and Collier, P. 2017. Refuge: Transforming a Broken Refugee System. UK, Penguin Books.
Bhattacharya, S., and Banerjee, A. 2015. Water privatization in developing countries: Principles, implementations and socio-economic
consequences. World Scientific News, No. 4, pp. 17–31. www.worldscientificnews.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/WSN-4-2015-17-31.pdf.
Bimbe, N., Brownlee, J., Gregson, J. and Playforth, R. 2015. Knowledge Sharing and Development in a Digital Age. IDS Policy Briefing No. 87,
Brighton, UK, Institute of Development Studies (IDS).
Blandenier, L. 2015. Recharge Quantification and Continental Freshwater Lens Dynamics in Arid Regions: Application to the Merti Aquifer
(Eastern Kenya). PhD Thesis presented at the Centre for Hydrogeology and Geothermics, University of Neuchâtel. Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
Boelens, R. and Zwarteveen, M. 2005. Anomalous water rights and the politics of normalization. D. Roth, R. Boelens and M. Zwarteveen,
Liquid Relations, Contested Water Rights and Legal Complexity. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University Press.
Bonnet, M., Witt, A. M., Stewart, K. M., Hadjerioua, B. and Mobley, M. 2015. The Economic Benefits of Multipurpose Reservoirs in the United
States-Federal Hydropower Fleet. Oak Ridge, Tenn., Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change under Population Pressure. Chicago, Aldine.
Branche, E. 2015. Multipurpose Water Uses of Hydropower Reservoirs. Sharing the Water Uses of Multipurpose Hydropower Reservoirs: The
SHARE Concept. Le Bourget du Lac Cedex, France, EDF/World Water Council (WWC). www.hydroworld.com/content/dam/hydroworld/
online-articles/documents/2015/10/MultipurposeHydroReservoirs-SHAREconcept.pdf.
Brocklehurst, C. and Fuente, D. 2016. Detailed review of a recent publication: Increasing block tariffs perform poorly at targeting subsidies
to the poor. WaSH Policy Research Digest, Issue No. 5, December 2016: Water tariffs and subsidies, pp. 1–4. Chapel Hill, NC, The Water
Institute at the University of North Carolina (UNC).
Bromwich, B. 2015. Nexus meets crisis: A review of conflict, natural resources and the humanitarian response in Darfur with reference to the
water–energy–food nexus. International Journal of Water Resources Development, Vol. 31, pp. 375–392.
Budhathoki, S. S., Bhattachan, M., Castro-Sánchez, E., Sagtani, R. A., Rayamajhi, R. B., Rai, P. and Sharma, G. 2018. Menstrual hygiene
management among women and adolescent girls in the aftermath of the earthquake in Nepal. BMC Women’s Health. Vol. 1, No. 18.
doi.org/10.1186/s12905-018-0527-y.
Burek, P., Satoh, Y., Fischer, G., Kahil, M. T., Scherzer, A., Tramberend, S., Nava, L. F., Wada, Y., Eisner, S., Flörke, M., Hanasaki, N.,
Magnuszewski, P., Cosgrove, B. and Wiberg, D. 2016. Water Futures and Solution: Fast Track Initiative (Final Report). IIASA Working Paper.
Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). pure.iiasa.ac.at/13008/.
Burger, C. and Jansen, A. 2014. Increasing block tariff structures as a water subsidy mechanism in South Africa: An exploratory analysis.
Development Southern Africa, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 553–562. doi.org/10.1080/0376835X.2014.906915.
CAP-Net. n.d. Indigenous People and IWRM. Training course. campus.cap-net.org/en/course/indigenous-people-and-iwrm/.
Cap-Net/WaterLex/UNDP-SIWI WGF (United Nations Development Programme and Stockholm International Water Institute Water
Governance Facility)/Redica. 2017. Human Rights-Based Approach to Integrated Water Resources Management: Training Manual and
Facilitator’s Guide. www.watergovernance.org/resources/human-rights-based-approach-integrated-water-resources-managementtraining-manual-facilitators-guide/.
Carter, R. C., Harvey, E. and Casey, V. 2010. User Financing of Rural Handpump Water Services. IRC Symposium 2010: Pumps, Pipes, and
Promises. UK, WaterAid. www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/Carter-2010-User.pdf.
Castaneda Aguilar, R. A., Doan, D. T. T., Newhouse, D. L., Nguyen, M. C., Uematsu, H., Wagner de Azevedo, J. P. 2016. Who are the Poor in
the Developing World? Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 7844. Washington, DC, World Bank Group. documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/187011475416542282/Who-are-the-poor-in-the-developing-world.
Castro, J. E. 2013. Water is not (yet) a commodity: Commodification and rationalization revisited. Human Figurations, Vol. 2, No. 1.
CEDAW (Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women). 1979. www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/text/
econvention.htm#intro.
CESCR (Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 1990. General Comment No. 3: The Nature of States Parties’ Obligations (Art. 2,
Para 1, of the Covenant). Fifth session, E/1991/23.
_____. 2002a. General Comment No. 15 (2002). The Right to Water (Arts. 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights). Twenty-ninth session, E/C.12/2002/11. Economic and Social Council, United Nations.
_____. 2002b. Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Comment No. 15. Twenty-ninth session. E/C.12/2002/11. New York, United Nations. www.undocs.org/e/c.12/2002/11.
_____. 2009. General Comment No. 20: Non-Discrimination in Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (Art. 2, Para. 2, of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). Forty-second session, E/C. 12/GC/20. Economic and Social Council, United Nations.
undocs.org/E/C.12/GC/20.

References

161

Chen, J., Shi, H., Sivakumar, B. and Peart, M. R. 2016. Population, water, food, energy and dams. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, Vol. 56, pp. 18–28. doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.11.043.
CHR (United Nations Commission on Human Rights). 1998. Report of the Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Francis M. Deng,
submitted pursuant to Commission Resolution 1997/39. Addendum: Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.
www.un-documents.net/gpid.htm.
_____. 2005. Economic, Social and Cultural Rights: Realization of the Right to Drinking Water and Sanitation – Report of the Special
Rapporteur, El Hadji Guissé. Fifty-seventh session, E/CN.4/Sub.2/2005/25. Economic and Social Council, United Nations. repository.
un.org/handle/11176/362459.
Clementine, M., Pizarro, D. M., Prereira Weiss, L. and Vargas-Ramirez, M. 2016. How to Provide Sustainable Water Supply and Sanitation to
Indigenous Peoples. The Water Blog, The World Bank. blogs.worldbank.org/water/reaching-last-mile-latin-america-and-caribbean-howprovide-sustainable-water-supply-and-sanitation.
COHRE/AAAS/SDC/UN-Habitat (Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, Right to Water Programme/American Association for the
Advancement of Science/Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation/United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2007.
Manual on the Right to Water and Sanitation: A Tool to Assist Policy Makers and Practitioners Develop Strategies for Implementing
the Human Right to Water and Sanitation. Geneva, COHRE. www.worldwatercouncil.org/fileadmin/wwc/Programs/Right_to_Water/
Pdf_doct/RTWP__20Manual_RTWS_Final.pdf.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water Management Institute (IWMI). www.iwmi.cgiar.
org/assessment/files_new/synthesis/Summary_SynthesisBook.pdf.
Conseil d’État. 2017a. Conseil d’État, 31 juillet 2017, Commune de Calais, Ministre d’État, Ministre de l’Intérieur, [Conseil d'État, 31 July
2017, Municipality of Calais, Minister of State, Interior Minister] Nos. 412125, 412171. www.conseil-etat.fr/Decisions-Avis-Publications/
Decisions/Selection-des-decisions-faisant-l-objet-d-une-communication-particuliere/Conseil-d-Etat-31-juillet-2017-Commune-deCalais-Ministre-d-Etat-ministre-de-l-Interieur. (In French.)
_____. 2017b. Conditions d’accueil des migrants à Calais : le Conseil d’État rejette les appels du ministre de l’intérieur et de la commune.
[Conditions of accommodation of migrants in Calais: The Conseil d'État rejects appeals made by the Interior Minister and the
municipality] www.conseil-etat.fr/Actualites/Communiques/Conditions-d-accueil-des-migrants-a-Calais. (In French.)
Contzen, N. and Marks, S. 2018. Increasing the regular use of safe water kiosk through collective psychological ownership: A mediation
analysis. Journal of Environmental Psychology, Vol. 57, pp. 45–52. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2018.06.008.
Cooke, B. and Kothari, U. E. 2001. Participation: The New Tyranny? New York, Zed Books.
Cossio Rojas, V. and Soto Montaño, L. 2011. Relación entre acceso al agua y nivel de bienestar a nivel de hogares en Tiraque-Bolivia [Relation
between Access to Water and Well-Being at the Household Level in Tiraque, Bolivia]. Reporte de Investigación Nro. 1. Cochabamba,
Bolivia, Centro Agua, Universidad Mayor de San Simón. (In Spanish.)
Council of Ministers of Turkey. 2016. Geçici koruma sağlanan yabancıların çalişma izinlerine dair yönetmelik [Regulation on work permits
for foreigners under temporary protection]. Official Gazette (Ankara), Decision No. 2016/8375, decided by the Council of Ministers on 11
January 2016. www.resmigazete.gov.tr/eskiler/2016/01/20160115-23.pdf. (In Turkish.)
CRED/UNISDR (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters/The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2015. The
Human Cost of Weather-Related Disasters 1995-2015. Brussels/Geneva, CRED/UNISDR. www.unisdr.org/2015/docs/climatechange/
COP21_WeatherDisastersReport_2015_FINAL.pdf.
Crook, R. C. 2003. Decentralisation and poverty reduction in Africa: The politics of local–central relations. Public Administration
Development, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 77–88. doi.org/10.1002/pad.261.
Crow, B. and Odaba, C. 2009. Scarce, Costly and Uncertain: Water Access in Kibera, Nairobi. Santa Cruz, Calif., Center for Global,
International and Regional Studies, University of California-Santa Cruz. escholarship.org/uc/item/8c10s316.
Crow-Miller, B., Webber, M. and Molle, F. 2017. The (re)turn to infrastructure for water management? Water Alternatives, Vol. 10, No. 2,
pp. 195–207.
CRPD (Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities). 2006. www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rightsof-persons-with-disabilities.html.
Cutter, S. L. 2017. The forgotten casualties redux: Women, children, and disaster risk. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 42, pp. 117–121.
doi.10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.12.010.
Danilenko, A., Van den Berg, C., Macheve, B. and Moffitt, L. J. 2014. The IBNET Water Supply and Sanitation Blue Book 2014: The
International Benchmarking Network for Water and Sanitation Utilities Databook. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Dashora, Y., Dillon, P., Maheshwari, B., Soni, P., Dashora, R., Davande, S., Purohit, R. C. and Mittal, H. K. 2017. A simple method using
farmers’ measurements applied to estimate check dam recharge in Rajasthan, India. Sustainable Water Resources Management, Vol. 4,
No. 2, pp. 301–316. doi.org/10.1007/s40899-017-0185-5.
De Albuquerque, C. 2014. Realising the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation: A Handbook by the UN Special Rapporteur Catarina de
Albuquerque. Portugal, Human Rights to Water and Sanitation UN Special Rapporteur. www.ohchr.org/en/issues/waterandsanitation/
srwater/pages/handbook.aspx.
De la O Campos, A. P., Villani, C., Davis, B. and Takagi, M. 2018. Ending Extreme Poverty in Rural Areas – Sustaining Livelihoods to Leave no
one Behind. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/3/CA1908EN/ca1908en.pdf.
De Londras, F. 2010. Dualism, domestic courts, and the rule of international law. M. Sellers and J. Maxeiner (eds.), Ius Gentium:
Comparative Perspectives on Law and Justice. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer.

162

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Denevan, W. 1995. 2 prehistoric agricultural methods as models for sustainability. Advances in Plant Pathology, Vol. 11, pp. 21–43.
doi.org/10.1016/S0736-4539(06)80004-8.
Dillon, P. 2005. Future management of aquifer recharge. Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 313–316. doi.org/10.1007/s10040-004-0413-6.
Dillon, P., Pavelic, P., Page, D., Beringen, H. and Ward, J. 2009. Managed Aquifer Recharge: An Introduction. National Water Commission
Waterlines Report Series No. 13. Canberra, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO).
Dodson, L. L. and Bargach, J. 2015. Harvesting fresh water from fog in rural Morocco: Research and impact Dar Si Hmad fogwater project in
Aït Baamrane. Procedia Engineering, Vol. 107, pp. 186–193. doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.06.073.
Duarte, J., Jaureguiberry, F. and Racimo, M. 2017. Sufficiency, Equity and Effectiveness of School Infrastructure in Latin America According
to TERCE. Santiago, Oficina Regional de Educación para América Latina y el Caribe (OREALC/UNESCO Santiago). https://publications.
iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/8158/Sufficiency-Equity-and-Effectiveness-of-School-Infrastructure-in-Latin-America-according-toTERCE.PDF?sequence=8.
Eau de Paris/SEDIF/SIAAP/OBUSASS/Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (Eau de Paris/Syndicat des eaux d’Ile-de-France/Syndicat
interdépartemental pour l’assainissement de l’agglomération parisienne/OBUSASS/Ministry of Social Affairs and Health). 2013. Assessing
Progress in Achieving Equitable Access to Water and Sanitation. Pilot Project in the Greater Paris Urban Area (France). Report. www.
unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/activities/Equitable_access/Country_report__Pilot_project_Greater_Paris_urban_area_rev.pdf.
ECHO (European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations) Global Solar Water Initiative. 2017. Humanitarian Reponse: The Future
is Solar. ECHO Global Solar Water Initiative online publication. views-voices.oxfam.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Project-flyer_
Solar-blog.pdf.
ECO (Environmental Commissioner of Ontario). 2017. The 2017 Environmental Protection Report. Good Choices Bad Choices:
Environmental Rights and Environmental protection in Ontario. Toronto, Canada, ECO. eco.on.ca/reports/2017-good-choices-badchoices/.
Economic and Social Rights Centre. 2016. State of Water and Sanitation Service Provision Performance in Mombasa County. Community
Score Card. Nairobi, Economic and Social Rights Centre (Hakijamii). www.hakijamii.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Final-CommunityReport-Card-Report.pdf.
ECOSOC (Economic and Social Council of the United Nations). 2018. The Disaster-Related Statistics Framework: Results of the Work of the
Expert Group on Disaster-related Statistics in Asia and the Pacific. Seventy-fourth session of the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission of Asia and The Pacific (UNESCAP). www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/E74_24E%5B1%5D_0.pdf.
EcoWatch. 2018. How Water Scarcity Shapes the World’s Refugee Crisis. www.ecowatch.com/refugee-crisis-water-shortage-2535042186.
html.
EESC (European Economic and Social Committee). 2017. Impact of Digitalisation and the On-Demand Economy on Labour Markets and the
Consequences for Employment and Industrial Relations. Brussels, European Union. www.eesc.europa.eu/resources/docs/qe-02-17-763en-n.pdf.
Estache, A. and Kouassi, E. 2002. Sector Organization, Governance, and the Inefficiency of African Water Utilities. World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 2890. Washington, DC, World Bank. https://ssrn.com/abstract=636253.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2005. Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the
Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-y7937e.pdf.
_____. 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap for Development. Rome, FAO. www.fao.
org/3/a-i2050e.pdf.
_____. 2014. The State of Food and Agriculture: Innovations in Family Farming. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i4040e.pdf.
_____. 2016. Coping with Water Scarcity in Agriculture: A Global Framework for Action in a Changing Climate. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/ai6459e.pdf.
_____. 2017a. Migration, Agriculture and Climate Change: Reducing Vulnerabilities and Enhancing Resilience. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/
I8297EN/i8297en.pdf.
_____. 2017b. The State of Food and Agriculture: Leveraging Food Systems for Inclusive Rural Transformation. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/ai7658e.pdf.
_____. 2018a. The State of Food and Agriculture. Migration, Agriculture and Rural Development. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/state-of-foodagriculture/en/.
_____. 2018b. Climate Change Adaptation, Social Protection and Resilience. Cisterns for the Sahel. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/ca0882en/
CA0882EN.pdf.
_____. Forthcoming. Adapting Irrigation to Climate Change (AICCA) in West and Central Africa. Project report validated by country
counterparts.
_____. n.d. Gender and Land Rights Database. www.fao.org/gender-landrights-database/data-map/statistics/en/?sta_id=1161.
FAO/GWP/Oregon State University (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/Global Water Partnership/Oregon State
University). 2018. Water Stress and Human Migration: A Global, Georeferenced Review of Empirical Research. Land and Water Discussion
Paper No. 11. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/I8867EN/i8867en.pdf.
FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/International Fund for Agricultural Development/
United Nation Children’s Fund/World Food Programme/World Health Organization). 2017. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the
World 2017: Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-I7695e.pdf.

References

163

_____. 2018. The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2018: Building Climate Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/I9553EN/i9553en.pdf.
FAO/IFAD/WFP (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/International Fund for Agricultural Development/World Food
Programme). 2012. Rural Women and the Millennium Development Goals. Fact sheet. fao.org/docrep/015/an479e/an479e.pdf.
_____. 2015a. The State of Food Insecurity in the World. Meeting the 2015 International Hunger Targets: Taking Stock of Uneven Progress.
Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i4646e.pdf.
_____. 2015b. Achieving Zero Hunger: The Critical Role of Investments in Social Protection and Agriculture. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/ai4951e.pdf.
FAO/IWMI (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/International Water Management Institute). 2018. More People, More Food,
Worse Water? A Global Review of Water Pollution from Agriculture. Rome/Colombo, FAO/IWMI. www.fao.org/3/ca0146en/CA0146EN.pdf.
Faurès, J. M. and Santini, S. (eds.). 2009. Water and the Rural Poor: Interventions for Improving Livelihoods in Sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/docrep/pdf/010/i0132e/i0132e.pdf.
Ferrant, G., Maria Pesando, L. and Nowacka, K. 2014. Unpaid Care Work: The Missing Link in the Analysis of Gender Gaps in Labour Outcomes.
OECD Development Centre. www.oecd.org/dev/development-gender/Unpaid_care_work.pdf.
Flint Water Advisory Task Force. 2016. Flint Water Advisory Task Force: Final Report. Office of Governor Rick Snyder, State of Michigan. www.
michigan.gov/documents/snyder/FWATF_FINAL_REPORT_21March2016_517805_7.pdf.
Foa, R. 2015. Creating an Inclusive Society: Evidence from Social Indicators and Trends. Presented at the Expert Group Meeting on “Social
Development and Agenda 2030”, 23 October 2015, New York. www.un.org/esa/socdev/egms/docs/2015/sd-agenda2030/RobertoFoaPaper.pdf.

Fonseca, C. and Pories, L. 2017. Financing WASH: How to Increase Funds for the Sector while Reducing Inequalities. Position paper for the
Sanitation and Water for All Finance Ministers Meeting. Briefing Note. The Hague, the Netherlands, IRC/water.org/Ministry of Foreign
Affairs/Simavi. www.ircwash.org/resources/financing-wash-how-increase-funds-sector-while-reducing-inequalities-position-paper.
Foster, V. and Briceño-Garmendia, C. (eds.). 2010. Africa’s Infrastructure : A Time for Transformation. Africa Development Forum. Washington,
DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/246961468003355256/pdf/521020PUB0EPI1101Official0Use0Only1.pdf.
Franks, T. and Cleaver, F. 2007. Water governance and poverty: A framework for analysis. Progress in Development Studies, Vol. 7, No. 4,
pp. 291–306. doi.org/10.1177/146499340700700402.
French Parliament. 2013. Loi n° 2013-312 du 15 avril 2013 visant à préparer la transition vers un système énergétique sobre et portant diverses
dispositions sur la tarification de l’eau et sur les éoliennes (1) [Law Nr. 2013-312 of 15 April 2013 aiming to prepare the transition towards a
lower energy use and setting out several provisions for water and wind energy tariffs (1)]. Journal Officiel de la République Française (Paris),
Vol. 0089, 16 April 2013, p. 6208. www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/loi/2013/4/15/DEVX1234078L/jo/texte. (In French.).
Fuente, D., Gakii Gatua, J., Ikiara, M., Kabubo-Mariara, J., Mwaura, M. and Whittington, D. 2016. Water and sanitation service delivery, pricing,
and the poor: An empirical estimate of subsidy incidence in Nairobi, Kenya. Water Resources Research, Vol. 52, No. 6, pp. 4845–4862.
doi.10.1002/ 2015WR018375.
Funder, M., Bustamante, R., Cossio Rojas, V., Huong, P. T. M., Van Koppen, B., Mweemba, C., Nyambe, I., Phuong, L. T. T. and Skielboe, T. 2012.
Strategies of the poorest in local water conflict and cooperation. Evidence from Vietnam, Bolivia and Zambia. Water Alternatives, Vol. 5,
No. 1, pp. 20–36.
Gao, H., Bohn, T., Podest, E. and McDonald, K. 2011. On the causes of the shrinking of Lake Chad. Environmental Research Letters, Vol. 6.
Geere, J.-A. L., Hunter, P. R. and Jagals, P. 2010. Domestic water carrying and its implications for health: A review and mixed methods pilot
study in Limpopo Province, South Africa. Environmental Health, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 1–13. doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-9-52.
Gikas, P. and Tchobanoglous, G. 2009. The role of satellite and decentralized strategies in water resources management. Journal of
Environmental Management, Vol. 90, No. 1, pp. 144–152. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.08.016.
Gillot, S., De Clercq, B., Defour, D., Simoens, F., Gernaey, K. and Vanrolleghem, P. A. 1999. Optimisation of Wastewater Treatment Plant Design
and Operation Using Simulation and Cost Analysis.
Gleick, P. H. 1993. Water and conflict: Freshwater resources and international security. International Security, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 79–112.
doi.10.2307/2539033.
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace. 2017. A Matter of Survival (Report). Geneva, Geneva Water Hub. www.genevawaterhub.org/
resource/matter-survival.
Goksu, A., Trémolet, S., Kolker, J. and Kingdom, B. 2017. Easing the Transition to Commercial Finance for Sustainable Water and Sanitation.
Working paper. Washington, DC, World Bank. openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27948.
Gómez, L. and Ravnborg, H. M. 2011. Power, Inequality and Water Governance: The Role of Third Party Involvement in Water-Related Conflict
and Cooperation. CGIAR Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights (CAPRi) Working Paper No. 101. Washington, DC,
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Gon, G., Restrepo-Méndez, M. C., Campbell, O. M. R., Barros, A. J. D., Woodd, S., Benova, L. and Graham, W. J. 2016. Who delivers without
water? A multi country analysis of water and sanitation in the childbirth environment. Plos One, Vol. 11, No. 8, e0160572. doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0160572.
Grönwall, J. 2016. Self-supply and accountability: To govern or not to govern groundwater for the (peri-) urban poor in Accra, Ghana.
Environmental Earth Sciences, Vol. 75, Art. 1163. doi.org/10.1007/s12665-016-5978-6.
Grönwall, J., Mulenga, M. and McGranahan, G. 2010. Groundwater, Self-Supply and Poor Urban Dwellers: A Review with Case Studies of
Bangalore and Lusaka. Human Settlements Working Paper No.26. London, International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
pubs.iied.org/10584IIED/.

164

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Gross, M. J., Albinger, O., Jewett, D. G., Logan, B. E., Bales, R. C. and Arnold, R. G. 1995. Measurement of bacterial collision efficiencies in
porous media. Water Research, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 1151–1158. doi.10.1016/0043-1354(94)00235-Y.
Gupta, J. and Van der Zaag, P. 2008. Interbasin water transfers and integrated water resources management: Where engineering, science and
politics interlock. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, Vol. 33, No. 1–2, pp. 28–40. doi.org/10.1016/j.pce.2007.04.003.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2000. Integrated Water Resources Management. GWP Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) Background
Paper No. 4. Stockholm, GWP. www.gwp.org/globalassets/global/toolbox/publications/background-papers/04-integrated-water-resourcesmanagement-2000-english.pdf.
_____. n.d. The Need for an Integrated Approach. GWP website. www.gwp.org/en/About/why/the-need-for-an-integrated-approach/.
Habermas, J. 1975. Legitimation Crisis. Boston, USA, Beacon Press.
Hassan, F. 2011. Water History for our Times, IHP Essays on Water History Vol. 2. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0021/002108/210879e.pdf.
Healy, A., Danert, K., Bristow, G. and Theis, S. 2018. Perceptions of Trends in the Development of Private Boreholes for Household Water
Consumption: Findings from a Survey of Water Professionals in Africa. RIGSS Working Paper. Cardiff, UK, Cardiff University. www.cardiff.
ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/1094769/Perceptions_of_trends_in_the_development_of_private_boreholes_for_household_water_
consumption.pdf.
Heffez, A. 2013. How Yemen chewed itself dry: Farming qat, wasting water. Foreign Affairs, July 2013. www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139596/
adam-heffez/how-yemen-chewed-itself-dry.
Hejazi, M., Edmonds, J., Chaturvedi, V., Davies, E. and Eom, J. 2013. Scenarios of global municipal water-use demand projections over the 21st
century. Hydrological Sciences Journal, Vol. 58, No. 3, pp. 519–538. doi.org/10.1080/02626667.2013.772301.
Hellum, A., Kameri-Mbote, P. and Van Koppen, B. (eds.). 2015. Water is Life: Women’s Human Rights in National and Local Water Governance
in Southern and Eastern Africa. Harare, Weaver Press.
Helmreich, B. and Horn, H. 2009. Opportunities in rainwater harvesting. Desalination, Vol. 248, No. 1-3, pp. 118–124. doi.10.1016/j.
desal.2008.05.046.
Hirschman, A. O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.
HLPE (High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security). 2013. Investing in Smallholder
Agriculture for Food Security. Report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food
Security. Rome. www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/hlpe/hlpe_documents/HLPE_Reports/HLPE-Report-6_Investing_in_smallholder_
agriculture.pdf.
_____. 2015. Water for Food Security and Nutrition. A Report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the
Committee on World Food Security. Rome. www.fao.org/3/a-av045e.pdf.
HLPW (High-Level Panel on Water). 2018. Making Every Drop Count: An Agenda for Water Action. Outcome Document.
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/17825HLPW_Outcome.pdf.
Hodgson, S. 2004. Land and Water – The Rights Interface. FAO Legislative Study No. 84. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/3/a-y5692e.pdf.
_____. 2016. Exploring the Concept of Water Tenure. FAO Land and Water Discussion Paper No. 10. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization or
the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/3/a-i5435e.pdf.
House, S., Cavill, S. and Ferron, S. 2017. Equality and non-discrimination (EQND) in sanitation programmes at scale, Part 1 of 2. Frontiers of
CLTS: Innovations and Insights, No. 10, Brighton, UK, Institute of Development Studies (IDS).
House, S., Ferron, S., Sommer, M. and Cavill, S. 2014. Violence, Gender and WASH: A Practitioner’s Toolkit – Making Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene Safer through Improved Programming and Services. London, WaterAid/SHARE.
HRC (Human Rights Council). 2008. Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Including the Right to Development. Protect, Respect and Remedy: A Framework for Business and Human Rights. Report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises, John
Ruggie. Eight session, 7 April 2008, A/HRC/8/5. www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/8session/A-HRC-8-5.doc.
_____. 2009. Promotion and Protection of all Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, including the Right to
Development. Report of the independent expert on the issue of human rights obligations related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque. Twelfth session, 1 July 2009, A/HRC/12/24. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/
G09/144/37/PDF/G0914437.pdf?OpenElement.
_____. 2010. Joint Report of the Independent Expert on the Question of Human Rights and Extreme Poverty, Magdalena Sepúlveda Cardona,
and the Independent Expert on the Issue of Human Rights Obligations related to Access to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation, Catarina de
Albuquerque. Fifteenth session, 22 July 2010, A/HRC/15/55. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G10/154/51/PDF/G1015451.
pdf?OpenElement.
_____. 2011a. Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework.
Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other
business enterprises, John Ruggie. Seventeenth session. 21 March 2011, A/HRC/17/31, www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Business/AHRC-17-31_AEV.pdf.
_____. 2011b. Human Rights and Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises. Seventeenth session, 6 July 2011, A/HRC/
RES/17/4, https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/G11/144/71/PDF/G1114471.pdf?OpenElement.
_____. 2011c. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque. Eighteenth
session, 4 July 2011, A/HRC/18/33. www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/18session/A-HRC-18-33_en.pdf.

References

165

_____. 2013. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque.
Twenty-fourth session, 11 July 2013, A/HRC/24/44. www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session24/Documents/AHRC-24-44_en.pdf.
_____. 2014. Common Violations of the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to
safe drinking water and sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque. Twenty-seventh session, 30 June 2014, A/HRC/27/55. www.ohchr.org/en/
hrbodies/hrc/regularsessions/session27/documents/a_hrc_27_55_eng.doc.
_____. 2015. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Thirtieth Session, 5 August 2015.
A/HRC/30/39. undocs.org/A/HRC/30/39.
_____. 2016a. The Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council on 29 September
2016, Thirty-third session, A/HRC/RES/33/10. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/850266?ln=en.
_____. 2016b. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right of Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Thirty-third Session, 27 July
2016, A/HRC/33/49. ap.ohchr.org/documents/dpage_e.aspx?si=A/HRC/33/49.
_____. 2018a. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation on his Mission to Mongolia.
Thirty-ninth Session, 18 July 2018. A/HRC/39/55/Add.2. undocs.org/A/HRC/39/55/Add.2.
_____. 2018b. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Issue of Human Rights Obligations relating to the Enjoyment of a Safe, Clean,
Healthy and Sustainable Environment. Thirty-seventh Session, 3 August 2018, A/HRC/37/59. undocs.org/A/HRC/39/55.
HRI (International Human Rights Instruments). 1994. Compilation of General Comments and General Recommendations adopted by
Human Rights Treaty Bodies. General Comment No. 18: Non-Discrimination. Thirty-seventh session, 29 July 1994, HRI/GEN/1/Rev. 1.
undocs.org/HRI/GEN/1/Rev.1.
Huong, P. T. M., Phuong, L. T. T., Skielboe, T. and Ravnborg, H. M. 2011. Poverty and Access to Water and Water Governance Institutions
in Con Cuong District, Nghe An Province, Vietnam – Report on the Results from a Household Questionnaire Survey. DIIS Working Paper
2011, No. 04. Copenhagen, Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS). www.diis.dk/en/research/poverty-and-access-to-water-andwater-governance-institutions-in-con-cuong-district-nghe-an.
Hutton, G. 2012a. Global Costs and Benefits of Drinking-Water Supply and Sanitation Interventions to Reach the MDG Target and
Universal Coverage. WHO/HSE/WSH/12.01. Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO). www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
publications/2012/globalcosts.pdf.
_____. 2012b. Monitoring ‘Affordability’ of Water and Sanitation Services after 2015: Review of Global Indicator Options. Working paper.
Submitted to the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Geneva. https://washdata.org/file/425/download.
Hutton, G. and Andrés, L. 2018. Counting the Costs and Benefits of Equitable WASH Service Provision. Working paper. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Hutton, G., Rodriguez, U-P., Winara, A., Nguyen, V. A., Phyrum, K., Chuan, L., Blackett, I. and Weitz, A. 2014. Economic efficiency of
sanitation interventions in Southeast Asia. Water Sanitation and Hygiene for Development, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 23–36. doi.org/10.2166/
washdev.2013.158.
Hutton, G. and Varughese, M. 2016. The Costs of Meeting the 2030 Sustainable Development Goal Targets on Drinking Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene. Water and Sanitation Program (WSP): Technical Paper. Washington, DC, The World Bank. www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
water/publication/the-costs-of-meeting-the-2030-sustainable-development-goal-targets-on-drinking-water-sanitation-and-hygiene.
IAWJ (International Association of Women Judges). 2012. Stopping the Abuse of Power through Sexual Exploitation: Naming, Shaming,
and Ending Sextortion. Washington, DC, IAWJ. www.iawj.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Corruption-and-Sextortion-Resource-1.pdf.
ICCPR (International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights). 1966. www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx.
ICID (International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage). 2005. Experiences in Interbasin Water Transfers for Irrigation, Drainage or
Flood Management (3rd Draft 15 August 2005). Unpublished report.
ICOLD (International Commission on Large Dams). n.d. World Register of Dams. General Synthesis. www.icold-cigb.net/GB/world_
register/general_synthesis.asp.
ICESCR (International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights). 1967. treaties.un.org/doc/Treaties/1976/01/19760103%20
09-57%20PM/Ch_IV_03.pdf.
ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross). 2017. Yemen: ICRC President Visits Country; 600,000 Cholera Cases Expected by End
2017. Press Release, 23 July 2017. intercrossblog.icrc.org/blog/peter-maurer-visits-yemen-cholera.
ICWE (International Conference on Water and the Environment). 1992. The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development.
Adopted on 31 January 1992. Dublin. www.un-documents.net/h2o-dub.htm.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 1999. Spilled Water. Institutional Commitment in the Provision of Water Services. Washington,
DC, IDB. publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/331.
IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre). 2017. Global Report on Internal Displacement (GRID) 2017. Geneva, IDMC. www.
internal-displacement.org/global-report/grid2017/.
_____. 2018. Global Report on Internal Displacement (GRID) 2018. Geneva, IDMC. www.internal-displacement.org/global-report/
grid2018/.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2016. Water Energy Nexus: Excerpt from the World Energy Outlook 2016. Paris, IEA Publications.
www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WorldEnergyOutlook2016ExcerptWaterEnergyNexus.pdf.
_____. 2017. Energy Access Outlook 2017: From Poverty to Prosperity. Paris, IEA Publications. www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/WEO2017SpecialReport_EnergyAccessOutlook.pdf.

166

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2015. Land Tenure Security and Poverty Reduction. Rome, IFAD. www.ifad.org/
documents/38714170/39148759/Land+tenure+security+and+poverty+reduction.pdf/c9d0982d-40e4-4e1e-b490-17ea8fef0775.
_____. 2017. Sending Money Home: Contributing to the SDGs, One Family at a Time. Rome, IFAD. www.ifad.org/
documents/38714170/39135645/Sending+Money+Home+-+Contributing+to+the+SDGs%2C+one+family+at+a+time.pdf/c207b5f1-9fef4877-9315-75463fccfaa7.
IIPFWH (International Indigenous Peoples’ Forum on World Heritage). n.d. Indigenous Peoples’ Involvement in World Heritage. IIPFWH
website. iipfwh.org/indigenous-involvement-in-world-heritage/.
Ikeda, J. and Arney, H. 2015. Financing Water and Sanitation for the Poor: The Role of Microfinance in Addressing the Water and
Sanitation Gap. Learning Note. Washington, DC, Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), World Bank. www.findevgateway.org/library/
financing-water-and-sanitation-poor-role-microfinance-institutions-addressing-water-and.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1957. Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention (No. 107). Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/dyn/
normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO:12100:P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:312252:NO.
_____. 1989. Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention (No. 169). Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:121
00:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C169.
_____. 2015. The Future of Work Centenary Initiative. ILC 104/2015, Report I. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/ilc/ILCSessions/104/reports/
reports-to-the-conference/WCMS_369026/lang--en/index.htm.
_____. 2016. Sustainable Development Goals: Indigenous Peoples in Focus. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/--ifp_skills/documents/publication/wcms_503715.pdf.
_____. 2017a. Labour Force Estimates and Projections (LFEP) 2017: Key Trends. LFEP Brief. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/ilostat-files/
Documents/LFEPbrief.pdf.
_____. 2017b. Indigenous Peoples and Climate Change: From Victims to Change Agents through Decent Work. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---gender/documents/publication/wcms_551189.pdf.
_____. 2017c. WASH@Work: A Self-Training Handbook. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---sector/
documents/publication/wcms_535058.pdf.
_____. 2017d. Understanding the Drivers of Rural Vulnerability: Towards Building Resilience, Promoting Socio-Economic Empowerment
and Enhancing the Socio-Economic Inclusion of Vulnerable, Disadvantaged and Marginalized Populations for an Effective Promotion
of Decent Work in Rural Economies. Employment Working Paper No. 214. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/employment/Whatwedo/
Publications/working-papers/WCMS_568736/lang--en/index.htm.
_____. 2018a. Employment Intensive Investment Programme (EIIP): Creating Jobs through Public Investment. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_policy/---invest/documents/publication/wcms_619821.pdf.
_____. 2018b. Market Systems Analysis for Refugee Livelihoods in Jigjiga, Ethiopia. Geneva, ILO. www.ilo.org/empent/Projects/refugeelivelihoods/market-assessments/WCMS_630984/lang--en/index.htm.
INEC (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos). n.d. Medición de los indicadores ODS de Agua, Saneamiento e Higiene (ASH) en el
Ecuador [Measuring SDG Indicators on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) in Ecuador]. www.ecuadorencifras.gob.ec/documentos/
web-inec/EMPLEO/2017/Indicadores%20ODS%20Agua,%20Saneamiento%20e%20Higiene/Presentacion_Agua_2017_05.pdf.
(In Spanish.)
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2014. Climate Change 2014. Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II
and III to the Fifth Assessment Report to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, IPCC. www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/.
IWA (International Water Association). 2014. Specific Water Consumption for Households for Capitals Cities in Liters/Capita/Day in
2010–2014. IWA website. waterstatistics.iwa-network.org/graph/19.
IWA/UN-Habitat (International Water Association/United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2011. Water Operators Partnerships:
Building WOPs for Sustainable Development in Water and Sanitation. London/Nairobi, IWA/UN-Habitat. mirror.unhabitat.org/pmss/
(X(1)S(0ksnuwnk52i4kekhnol4zmy0))/getElectronicVersion.aspx?nr=2851&alt=1.
Jackson, S., Tan, P. L., Mooney, C., Hoverman, S. and White, I. 2012. Principles and guidelines for good practice in Indigenous engagement
in water planning. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 474, pp. 57–65. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.12.015.
Jeuland, M. A., Fuente, D. E., Ozdemir, S., Allaire, M. C. and Whittington, D. 2013. The long-term dynamics of mortality benefits from
improved water and sanitation in less developed countries. Plos One, Vol. 8, No. 10, pp. e74804. doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0074804.
Jewett, D. G., Logan, B. E., Arnold, R. G. and Bales, R. C. 1999. Transport of Pseudomonas fluorescens strain P17 through quartz sand
columns as a function of water content. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology, Vol. 36, No. 1–2, pp. 73–89. doi.org/10.1016/S01697722(98)00143-0.
Jiménez, A., Cortobius, M. and Kjellén, M. 2014. Working with Indigenous Peoples in Rural Water and Sanitation: Recommendations
for an Intercultural Approach. Stockholm, Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI). www.watergovernance.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/06/2014-Recomendations-report-web.pdf.
Jiménez, A., Molina, M. F. and Le Deunff, H. 2015. Indigenous peoples and industry water users: Mapping the conflicts worldwide. Aquatic
Procedia, Vol. 5, pp. 69–80. doi.org/10.1016/j.aqpro.2015.10.009.
Jiménez, A. and Pérez-Foguet, A. 2010. Building the role of local government authorities towards the achievement of the right to water in
rural Tanzania. Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 93–105. doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-8947.2010.01296.x.
Jiménez Fernández de Palencia, A. and Pérez-Foguet, A. 2011. Implementing pro-poor policies in a decentralized context: The case of the
rural water supply and sanitation program in Tanzania. Sustainability Science, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 37–49.

References

167

Johnson, B. R., Hiwasaki, L., Klaver, I. J., Ramos-Castillo, A. and Strang, V. (eds.). 2012. Water, Cultural Diversity and Global Environmental
Change: Emerging Trends, Sustainable Futures? UNESCO/Springer SBM, Jakarta/Dordrecht, Netherlands. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0021/002151/215119e.pdf.
Jones, H., Parker, K. J. and Reed, R. 2002. Water Supply and Sanitation Access and Use by Physically Disabled People: A Literature Review.
Loughborough, UK, Water, Engineering and Development Centre, Loughborough University. wedc-knowledge.lboro.ac.uk/docs/research/
WEJY3/Literature_review.pdf.
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century. Serie Recursos Naturales e
Infraestructura No.74. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). repositorio.
cepal.org/handle/11362/6454.
Khandker, S., Khalily, B. and Khan, Z. 1995. Grameen Bank: Performance and Sustainability. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 306.
Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/893101468741588109/Grameen-Bank-performance-andsustainability.
Kodamaya, S. 2009. Recent Changes in Small-scale Irrigation in Zambia: The Case of a Village in Chibombo District. Project report for 2008
of the Vulnerability and Resilience of Social-Ecological Systems. Tokyo, Research Institute for Humanity and Nature. www.chikyu.ac.jp/
resilience/files/ReportFY2008/ResilienceProject_Report2009_10.pdf.
Kolsky, P. J., Perez, E. and Tremolet, S. C. M. 2010. Financing On-Site Sanitation for the Poor: A Six Country Comparative Review
and Analysis. Water and Sanitation Program Working Paper. Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/165231468341112439/Financing-on-site-sanitation-for-the-poor-a-six-country-comparative-review-and-analysis.
Komives, K., Foster, V., Halpern, J. and Wodon, Q. 2005. Water, Electricity, and the Poor: Who Benefits from Utility Subsidies? Washington,
DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/606521468136796984/Water-electricity-and-the-poor-who-benefits-from-utilitysubsidies.
Kwame, Y. F. 2018. Youth for Growth: Transforming Economies through Agriculture. Chicago, Ill., The Chicago Council on Global Affairs.
www.thechicagocouncil.org/publication/youth-growth-transforming-economies-through-agriculture.
LCBC (Lake Chad Basin Commission). 2016. Programme for the Rehabilitation and Strengthening of the Resilience of Socio-ecologic
Systems of the Lake Chad Basin (PRESIBALT): National Coordination of Cameroon Commissioned! Press Release, 28 October 2016.
www.cblt.org/en/news/programme-rehabilitation-and-strengthening-resilience-socio-ecologic-systems-lake-chad-basin.
Lemoalle J. and Magrin G. 2014. Le développement du lac Tchad : Situation actuelle et futurs possibles [The Development of Lake Chad :
Current Situation and Possible Futures]. Marseille, France, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD). www.documentation.ird.
fr/hor/fdi:010063402. (In French.)
Libralato, G., Volpi Ghirardini, A. and Avezzù, F. 2012. To centralise or to decentralise: An overview of the most recent trends in wastewater
treatment management. Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 61–68. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2011.07.010.
Lienert, J. and Larsen, T. A. 2006. Considering user attitude in early development of environmentally friendly technology: A case study of
NoMix toilets. Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 40, No. 16, pp. 4838–4844. doi.org/10.1021/es060075o.
Lim, S. S., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Danaei, G., Shibuya, K. et al. 2012. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury
attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010. The Lancet, Vol. 380, No. 9859, pp. 2224–2260. doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8.
Mach, E. 2017. Water and Migration: How Far would you go for Water? Caritas in Veritate Foundation. www.environmentalmigration.iom.
int/sites/default/files/Paper_in%20print.pdf.
Mach, E. and Richter, C. 2018. Water and Migration: Implications for Policy Makers. The 2018 High-level Political Forum Blog.
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf/2018/blog#20mar.
Maheshwari, B., Varua, M., Ward, J., Packham, R., Chinnasamy, P., Dashora, Y., Dave, S., Soni, P., Dillon, P., Purohit, R., Hakimuddin, Shah,
T., Oza, S., Singh, P., Prathapar, S., Patel, A., Jadeja, Y., Thaker, B., Kookana, R., Grewal, H., Yadav, K., Mittal, H., Chew, M. and Rao, R.
2014. The role of transdisciplinary approach and community participation in village scale groundwater management: Insights from
Gujarat and Rajasthan, India. Water, Vol. 6, No. 11, pp. 3386–3408. doi.org/10.3390/w6113386.
Manuel, M., King, M. and McKechnie, A. 2011. Getting Better Results from Assistance to Fragile States. ODI Briefing Papers. London,
Overseas Development Institute (ODI). www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/7297.pdf.
Mara, D. D. and Alabaster, G. 2008. A new paradigm for low-cost urban water supplies and sanitation in developing countries. Water Policy,
Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 119−129.
Massoud, M. A., Tarhini, A. and Nasr, J. A. 2009. Decentralized approaches to wastewater treatment and management: Applicability in
developing countries. Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 90, No. 1, pp. 652–659. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.07.001.
Mata-Lima, H., Alvino-Borba, A., Pinheiro, A., Mata-Lima, A. and Almeida, J. A. 2013. Impactos dos desastres naturais nos sistemas
ambiental e socioeconômico: O que faz a diferença? [Impacts of Natural Disasters on Environmental and Socio-Economic Systems:
What Makes the Difference?] Ambiente & Sociedade (São Paulo, Brazil), Vol.16, No. 3. dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1414-753X2013000300004. (In
Portuguese.)
Mayntz, R. 1998. New Challenges to Governance Theory. Jean Monnet Chair Papers. Florence, Italy, European University Institute (EUI).
MCRC (Michigan Civil Rights Commission). 2018. The Flint Water Crisis: Systemic Racism Through the Lens of Flint. One Year Later: An
Update on the Recommendations of the Michigan Civil Rights Commission. (March 26, 2018). MCRC. www.michigan.gov/documents/
mdcr/Flint_Water_Update_620973_7.pdf.
_____. n.d. MCRC Executive Summary – Flint Water Crisis Report. www.michigan.gov/documents/mdcr/MCRC_EXECUTIVE_SUMMARY_
RECOMMENDATIONS_031617_554730_7.pdf.

168

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

MDHHS (Michigan Department of Health and Human Services). 2018. Blood Lead Level Test Results for Selected Flint Zip Codes, Genesee
County, and the State of Michigan. Executive Summary. MDHHS. www.michigan.gov/documents/flintwater/2018-08-29_Monthly_Executive_
Blood_Lead_Report_Final_637980_7.pdf.
Mekonnen, M. M. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2016. Four billion people facing severe water scarcity. Science Advances, Vol. 2, No. 2. doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.1500323.
Ménard, C., Jiménez, A. and Tropp, H. 2018. Addressing the policy-implementation gaps in water services: The key role of meso-institutions.
Water International, Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 13–33. doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2017.1405696.
Menocal, A. R., Taxell, N., Stenberg Johnsøn, J., Schmaljohann, M., Guillan Montero, A., De Simone, F., Dupuy, K. and Tobias, J. 2015. Why
Corruption Matters: Understanding Causes, Effects and How to Address them. Evidence paper on corruption. London, UK Department for
International Development (DFID) and UKAid. assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/406346/corruption-evidence-paper-why-corruption-matters.pdf.
Mercandalli, S. and Losch, B. (eds.). 2017. Rural Africa in Motion. Dynamics and Drivers of Migration South of the Sahara. Rome, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement
(FAO/CIRAD).
Mercy Corps. 2014. Tapped Out: Water Scarcity and Refugee Pressures in Jordan. Portland, Oreg., Mercy Corps. www.mercycorps.org/sites/
default/files/MercyCorps_TappedOut_JordanWaterReport_March204.pdf.
Metcalfe, C., Murray, C., Collins, L. and Furgal, C. 2011. Water quality and human health in indigenous communities in Canada. Global
Bioethics, Vol. 24, No. 1–4, pp. 91–94. doi.org/10.1080/11287462.2011.10800705.
Migiro, K. and Mis, M. 2014. Feature – Kenyan Women Pay the Price for Slum Water “Mafias”. Online article. Reuters. in.reuters.com/article/
women-cities-kenya-water/feature-kenyan-women-pay-the-price-for-slum-water-mafias-idINKCN0JA0P620141126.
Miletto, M., Caretta, M. A., Burchi, F. M. and Zanlucchi, G. 2017. Migration and its Interdependencies with Water Scarcity, Gender and Youth
Employment. WWAP. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002589/258968E.pdf.
Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources of Armenia. 2017. Development of an Action Plan for the Provision of Equitable
Access to Water Supply and Sanitation in Armenia Country Report. www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/activities/Equitable_access/
Country_Report___Final_Action_Plan__29_05.2017_FINAL.pdf.
Ministry of Interior of Turkey. 2018. Migration Statistics, Temporary Protection. Website. Directorate General of Migration Management,
Ministry of Interior, Republic of Turkey. www.goc.gov.tr/icerik6/temporary-protection_915_1024_4748_icerik.
Ministry of Solidarities and Health/Ministry of Ecological Transition and Solidarities of France. n.d. Santé Environnement : 3e Plan National
2015 > 2019 [Health Environment: 3rd National Plan 2015 > 2019]. Paris, French Republic. solidarites-sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/pnse3_v_finale.
pdf. (In French.)
Ministry of Water and Irrigation of Jordan. 2015. National Water Strategy 2016–2025. Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan. www.mwi.gov.jo/sites/en-us/Hot%20Issues/Strategic%20Documents%20of%20%20The%20Water%20Sector/National%20
Water%20Strategy(%202016-2025)-25.2.2016.pdf.
Molle, F., Mollinga, P. and Wester, P. 2009. Hydraulic bureaucracies and the hydraulic mission: Flows of water, flows of power. Water
Alternatives, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 328–349.
Munoz Boudet, A. M., Buitrago, P., Leroy De La Briere, B., Newhouse, D. L., Rubiano Matulevich, E. C., Scott, K., Suarez Becerra, P. 2018.
Gender Differences in Poverty and Household Composition through the Life-Cycle: A Global Perspective. Policy Research Working Paper;
No. WPS 8360. Washington, DC, World Bank Group. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/135731520343670750/Gender-differences-inpoverty-and-household-composition-through-the-life-cycle-a-global-perspective.
Mweemba, C. E., Funder, M., Nyambe, I. and Van Koppen, B. 2011. Poverty and Access to Water in Namwala District, Zambia – Report on the
Results from a Household Questionnaire Survey. DIIS Working Paper 2011, No. 19. Copenhagen, Danish Institute for International Studies
(DIIS). doi.10.13140/RG.2.1.4078.2880.
Nagabhatla, N and Metcalfe, C. M. (eds.). 2018. Multifunctional Wetlands: Pollution Abatement and Other Ecological Services from Natural and
Constructed Wetlands. Springer International Publishing.
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration). 2015. Global Groundwater Basins in Distress. NASA Earth Observatory website.
earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/86263/global-groundwater-basins-in-distress.
National Institute of Public Health of Republic of Macedonia/Journalists for Human Rights. 2016. Achieving the Human Right to Water and
Sanitation: Introduction, Availability, Methodology of Work. www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/activities/Equitable_access/PDF_
ACHIEVING_THE_HUMAN_RIGHT_TO_WATER_AND_SANITATION__1_.pdf.
Navaneethan, U., Al Mohajer, M. and Shata, M. T. 2008. Hepatitis E and pregnancy: Understanding the pathogenesis. Liver International,
Vol. 28, No. 9. doi.org/10.1111/j.1478-3231.2008.01840.x.
Ng’ethe, V. 2018. Nairobi’s Water Supply: 2 Claims about Losses & High Prices in Slums Evaluated. Africa Check. africacheck.org/reports/
nairobis-water-2-claims-losses-high-cost-slums-evaluated/.
Niasse, M. 2017. Coordinating Land and Water Governance for Food Security and Gender Equality. Global Water Partnership Technical
Committee (TEC) Background Papers No. 24. Stockholm, Global Water Partnership (GWP).
Oakley, S. M., Gold, A. J. and Oczkowski, A. J. 2010. Nitrogen control through decentralized wastewater treatment: Process performance and
alternative management strategies. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 36, No. 11, pp. 1520–1531. doi.10.1016/j.ecoleng.2010.04.030.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2011. Water Governance in OECD Countries: A Multi-Level Approach.
OECD Studies on Water. Paris, OECD. www.oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/water-governance-in-oecd-countries_9789264119284-en.
_____. 2012. OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Paris, OECD Publishing. doi.org/10.1787/9789264122246-en.

References

169

_____. 2015. OECD Principles on Water Governance. Paris, OECD. www.oecd.org/governance/oecd-principles-on-water-governance.htm.
_____. 2016. Mitigating Droughts and Floods in Agriculture: Policy Lessons and Approaches, OECD Studies on Water. OECD Publishing,
Paris. dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264246744-en.
_____. n.d. OECD Data. data.oecd.org/.
OECD/FAO (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2016.
OECD–FAO Agricultural Outlook 2016–2025. Paris, OECD Publishing. www.fao.org/3/a-i5778e.pdf.
OHCHR (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights). 2011. Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing
the United Nations “Project, Respect and Remedy” Framework. New York, United Nations. www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/
GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf.
_____. 2017a. France must provide Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation for Migrants in the “Calais Jungle”, say UN Rights Experts. Geneva,
United Nations. ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=22240&LangID=E.
_____. 2017b. Mandates of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical
and Mental Health and the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Geneva, United Nations.
_____. 2018. France urged by UN Experts to take Effective Measures to bring Water and Sanitation Services to Migrants. Press release,
4 April 2018. Geneva, United Nations. www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=22917&LangID=E.
_____. n.d. Special Rapporteur on the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation. Resolutions. www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/
WaterAndSanitation/SRWater/Pages/Resolutions.aspx.
OHCHR/CESR (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights/Center for Economic and Social Rights). 2013. Who will be Accountable?
Human Rights and the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Geneva/New York, OHCHR/CESR. www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/
WhoWillBeAccountable.pdf.
OHCHR/UN-Habitat/WHO (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights/United Nations Human Settlements Programme/
World Health Organization). 2010. The Right to Water. Fact Sheet No. 35. Geneva, OHCHR. www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/
FactSheet35en.pdf.
Ojwang, R. O., Dietrich, J., Anebagilu, P. K., Beyer, M. and Rottensteiner, F. 2017. Rooftop rainwater harvesting for Mombasa: Scenario
development with image classification and water resources simulation. Water, Vol. 9, No. 5, Art. 359. doi.10.3390/w9050359.
Okpara, U. T., Stringer, L. C., Dougill, A. J. and Bila, M. D. 2015. Conflicts about water in Lake Chad: Are environmental, vulnerability and
security issues linked? Progress in Development Studies, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 308–325. doi.org/10.1177/1464993415592738.
Ostry, J. D., Berg, A. and Tsangarides, C. G. 2014. Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth. Discussion Note. International Monetary Fund
(IMF). Research Department. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2014/sdn1402.pdf.
Otterpohl, R., Braun, U. and Oldenburg, M. 2004. Innovative technologies for decentralised water-, wastewater and biowaste management
in urban and peri-urban areas. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 48, No. 11–12, pp. 23–32. doi.10.2166/wst.2004.0795.
Oweis, T. Y. and Hachum, A. Y. 2003. Improving water productivity in the dry areas of West Asia and North Africa. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker and
D. J. Molden (eds.), Water Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and Opportunities for Improvement. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture Series, No. 1. Wallingford, UK, CAB International.
Pacific Institute. n.d. Water Conflict. Pacific Institute website. www.worldwater.org/water-conflict/.
Pahl-Wostl, C., Gupta, J. and Petry, D. 2008. Governance and the global water system: A theoretical exploration. Global Governance, Vol. 14,
No. 4, pp. 419–435.
Pani Haq Samiti Vs. Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 2012. Public Interest Litigation No. 10 of 2012. Mumbai, India, Bombay High
Court. www.ielrc.org/content/e1407.pdf.
Parliament of Kenya. 2016. The Community Land Act. Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 148 (Acts No. 27). Republic of Kenya.
Patel, S. and Baptist, C. 2012. Editorial: Documenting by the undocumented. Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 3–12.
doi.org/10.1177/0956247812438364.
Patwardhan, A. 2017. This Incredible Innovation is lifting a Huge Weight off Women’s Shoulders in Maharashtra’s Villages. The Better India,
2 June 2017. www.thebetterindia.com/103278/incredible-innovation-lifting-huge-weight-off-womens-shoulders-maharashtras-villages/.
Paydar, Z., Cook, F., Xevi, E. and Bristow, K. 2010. An overview of irrigation mosaics. Irrigation and Drainage, Vol. 60, No. 4, pp. 454–463.
doi.org/10.1002/ird.600.
Paz Mena, T., Gómez, L., Rivas Hermann, R. and Ravnborg, H. M. 2011. Pobreza y acceso al agua e instituciones para la gobernanza
del agua en el municipio de Condega, Nicaragua – Informe sobre los resultados de una encuesta a hogares [Poverty, Access to Water
and Water Governance Institutions in the Municipality of Condega, Nicaragua – Report on the Results of a Household-Level Survey].
DIIS Working Paper 2011, No. 2. Copenhagen, Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS). www.diis.dk/files/media/documents/
publications/nicaragua_final_diis_wp_2011_02.pdf. (In Spanish.)
PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency. 2018. The Geography of Future Water Challenges. The Hague, BPL Netherlands
Environmental Assessment Agency. www.pbl.nl/node/64678.
Pedersen, C. A. and Ravnborg, H. M. 2006. Water Reform – Implications for Rural Poor People’s Access to Water. DIIS Brief. Copenhagen,
Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS).
Peter-Varbanets, M., Zurbrügg, C., Swartz, C. and Pronk, W. 2009. Decentralized systems for potable water and the potential of membrane
technology. Water Research, Vol. 43, No. 2, pp. 245–265. doi.10.1016/j.watres.2008.10.030.

170

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Piattoni, S. 2010. The Theory of Multi-Level Governance: Conceptual, Empirical, and Normative Challenges. Oxford, UK, Oxford
University Press.
Picciotto, R. 2013. Involuntary resettlement in infrastructure projects: A development perspective. G. K. Ingram and K. L. Brandt (eds.),
Infrastructure and Land Policies. Cambridge, Mass., Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. www.lincolninst.edu/sites/default/files/pubfiles/
involuntary-resettlement-in-infrastructure-projects_0.pdf.
Pierre, J. (ed.). 2000. Debating Governance: Authority, Steering, and Democracy. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
Poushter, J. 2016. Smartphone Ownership and Internet Usage Continues to Climb in Emerging Economies. But Advanced Economies still
have Higher Rates of Technology Use. Pew Research Center. assets.pewresearch.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/02/pew_research_
center_global_technology_report_final_february_22__2016.pdf.
Prüss-Ustün, A., Wolf, J., Corvalán, C., Bos, R. and Neira, M. 2016. Preventing Disease through Healthy Environments: A Global Assessment
of the Burden of Disease from Environmental Risks. Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO). www.who.int/quantifying_ehimpacts/
publications/preventing-disease/en/.
Purushothaman, S., Tobin, T., Vissa, S., Pillai, P., Silliman, S. and Pinheiro, C. 2012. Seeing Beyond the State: Grassroots Women’s
Perspectives on Corruption and Anti-Corruption. New York, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). www.undp.org/content/
dam/undp/library/Democratic%20Governance/Anti-corruption/Grassroots%20women%20and%20anti-corruption.pdf.
Qadir, M., Jiménez, G. C., Farnum, R. L., Dodson, L. L. and Smakhtin, V. 2018. Fog water collection: Challenges beyond technology. Water,
Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 372. doi.org/10.3390/w10040372.
Qadir, M., Sharma, B. R., Bruggeman, A., Choukr-Allah, R. and Karajeh, F. 2007. Non-conventional water resources and opportunities for
water augmentation to achieve food security in water scarce countries. Agricultural Water Management, Vol. 87, No. 1, pp. 2–22.
doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2006.03.018.
Rapsomanikis, G. 2015. The Economic Lives of Smallholder Farmers: An Analysis based on Household Data from Nine Countries. Rome,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/3/a-i5251e.pdf.
Ravnborg, H. M. 2013. Pesticides and International Environmental Governance. DIIS Policy Brief. Copenhagen, Danish Institute or
International Studies (DIIS). www.diis.dk/files/media/publications/import/extra/pb2013_pesticides-international-governance_hmr_web.
pdf.
_____. 2015. Water competition, water governance and food security. I. Christoplos and A. Pain (eds.), New Challenges to Food Security:
From Climate Change to Fragile States. London and New York, Routledge.
_____. 2016. Water governance reform in the context of inequality: Securing rights or legitimizing dispossession? Water International,
Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 928–943. doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2016.1214895.
Ravnborg, H. M. and Jensen, K. M. 2012. The water governance challenge: The discrepancy between what is and what should be. Water
Science and Technology: Water Supply, Vol. 12, No. 6, pp. 799–809. dx.doi.org/10.2166/ws.2012.056.
Razzaque, J. 2002. Human Rights and the Environment: Developments at the National Level, South Asia and Africa. Background Paper
No. 4, presented at Joint UNEP-OHCHR Expert Seminar on Human Rights and the Environment, 14–16 January 2002, Geneva.
Rheingans, R., Kukla, M., Faruque, A. S., Sur, D., Zaidi, A. K., Nasrin, D., Farag, T. H., Levine, M. M. and Kotloff, K. L. 2012. Determinants of
household costs associated with childhood diarrhea in 3 South Asian settings. Clinical Infectious Diseases, Vol. 55, Supplement 4, S327–
S335. doi.10.1093/cid/cis764.
Ribot, J. C., Agrawal, A. and Larson, A. M. 2006. Recentralizing while decentralizing: How national governments reappropriate forest
resources. World Development, Vol. 34, No. 11, pp. 1864–1886. doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2005.11.020
Rigaud, K. K., De Sherbinin, A., Jones, B., Bergmann, J., Clement, V., Ober, K., Schewe, J., Adamo, S., McCusker, B., Heuser, S. and
Midgley, A. 2018. Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate Migration. Washington, DC, World Bank. www.worldbank.org/en/news/
infographic/2018/03/19/groundswell---preparing-for-internal-climate-migration.
Rights and Resources Initiative. 2017. Securing Community Land Rights: Priorities and Opportunities to Advance Climate & Sustainable
Development Goals. Washington, DC, Rights and Resources Initiative. rightsandresources.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/StockholmPriorities-and-Opportunities-Brief-Factsheet.pdf.
Rockström, J., Habitu, N., Oweis, T. Y. and Wani, S. 2007. Managing water in rainfed agriculture. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture.
London/Colombo, EarthScan/International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Ronayne, M. 2005. The Cultural and Environmental Impact of Large Dams in Southeast Turkey. Fact-Finding Mission Report. Galway,
Ireland/London, National University of Ireland/the Kurdish Human Rights Project (KHRP).
Roser, M. and Ortiz-Ospina, E. 2018. Global Extreme Poverty. Our World in Data. ourworldindata.org/extreme-poverty.
Ryan, C. and Elsner, P. 2016. The potential for sand dams to increase the adaptive capacity of East African drylands to climate change.
Regional Environmental Change, Volume 16, No. 7, pp. 208–2096. doi.org/10.1007/s10113-016-0938-y.
Satterthwaite, D. 2012. What happens when slum dwellers put themselves on the map. Editorial note. Environment and Urbanization,
Vol. 24, No. 1. www.iied.org/what-happens-when-slum-dwellers-put-themselves-map.
SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute). 2013. Sanitation Policy and Practice in Rwanda: Tackling the Disconnect. Policy Brief. Stockholm,
SEI.
Shah. T. 2005. Groundwater and human development: Challenges and opportunities in livelihoods and environment. Water, Science &
Technology, Vol. 51, No. 8, pp. 27–37.

References

171

Smets, H. 2009. Access to drinking water at an affordable price in developing countries. M. El Moujabber, L. Mandi, G. Trisorio-Liuzzi, I.
Martín, A. Rabi and R. Rodríguez (eds.), Technological Perspectives for Rational Use of Water Resources in the Mediterranean Region. Bari,
Italy, Mediterranean Agronomic Institute (CIHEAM), pp. 57–68. (Options Méditerranéennes: Série A. Séminaires Méditerranéennes; n. 88).
_____. 2012. Quantifying the affordability standard. M. Langford and A. F. S. Russell (eds.), The Human Right to Water: Theory, Practice and
Prospects. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, pp. 225–275.
Sobrevila, C. 2008. The Role of Indigenous Peoples in Biodiversity Conservation: The Natural but often forgotten Partners. Washington, DC,
World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/995271468177530126/The-role-of-indigenous-peoples-in-biodiversity-conservationthe-natural-but-often-forgotten-partners.
SOIL (Sustainable Organic Integrated Livelihoods). n.d. About SOIL. www.oursoil.org/who-we-are/about-soil/.
Solanes, M. 2007. Fifteen years of experience. Circular of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management for
Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 26. repositorio.cepal.org/handle/11362/39396.
Solón, P. 2007. Diversidad cultural y privatización del agua [Cultural diversity and water privatization]. R. Boelens, M. Chiba, D. Nakashima
and V. Retana (eds.), El agua y los pueblos indígenas [Water and Indigenous Peoples]. Conocimientos de la Naturaleza 2. Paris, UNESCO.
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001453/145353so.pdf. (in Spanish.)
Sosa, M. and Zwarteveen, M. 2016. Questioning the effectiveness of planned conflict resolution strategies in water disputes between rural
communities and mining companies in Peru. Water International, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 483–500. doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2016.1141463.
Søreide, T. 2016. Corruption and Criminal Justice. Bridging Economic and Legal Perspectives. Cheltenham, UK/Northampton, Mass.,
Edward Elgar.
Stapleton, S. O., Nadin, R., Watson, C. and Kellett, J. 2017. Climate Change, Migration and Displacement: The Need for a Risk-Informed
nd Coherent Approach. London/New York, Overseas Development Institute (ODI)/United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
www.odi.org/publications/10977-climate-change-migration-and-displacement-need-risk-informed-and-coherent-approach.
Subbaraman, R. and Murthy, S. L. 2015. The rights to water in the slums of Mumbai, India. Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
Vol. 93, pp. 815–816. www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/93/11/15-155473/en/.
Sumpter, C. and Torondel, B. 2013. A systematic review of the health and social effects of menstrual hygiene management. Plos One, Vol. 8,
No. 4. doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0062004.
Switzer, D. and Teodoro, M. P. 2017. Class, race, ethnicity, and justice in safe drinking water compliance. Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 99,
No. 2, pp. 524–535. doi.org/10.1111/ssqu.12397.
Tallis, H., Kareiva, P., Marvier, M. and Chang, A. 2008. An ecosystem services framework to support both practical conservation and
economic development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS), Vol. 105, No. 28, pp.
9457–64. doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0705797105.
Thompson, K., O’Dell, K., Syed, S. and Kemp, H. 2017. Thirsty for change: The untapped potential of women in urban water management.
Deloitte Insights, 23 January 2017. www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/deloitte-review/issue-20/women-in-water-management.html.
Tropp, H. 2007. Water governance: Trends and needs for new capacity development. Water Policy, Vol. 9 (Supplement 2), pp. 19–30.
Tsagarakis, K. P., Mara, D. D. and Angelakis, A. N. 2001. Wastewater management in Greece: Experience and lessons for developing
countries. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 44, No. 6, pp. 163–172.
Turral, H., Burke, J. and Faurès, J. 2011. Climate Change, Water and Food Security. FAO Water Reports No. 36. Rome, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2096e/i2096e.pdf.
Ulrich, A., Reuter, S. and Gutterer, B. (eds.). 2009. Decentralised Wastewater Treatment Systems (DEWATS) and Sanitation in Developing
Countries: A Practical Guide. UK/Germany, Water, Engineering and Development Centre, Loughborough University/Bremen Overseas
Research and Development Association (WEDC/BORDA).
UN (United Nations). 1951. Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html.
_____. 1967. Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3ae4.html.
_____. 1992. United Nations Conference on Environment & Development: Agenda 21. sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/
Agenda21.pdf.
_____. 1997. Convention of the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses. legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/
conventions/8_3_1997.pdf.
_____. 2008. United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf.
_____. 2011. Report of the Secretary-General’s Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka. www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/Sri_Lanka/
POE_Report_Full.pdf.
_____. 2013. Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean: Follow-up to the United Nations Development Agenda beyond
2015 and to Rio+20. Preliminary version. United Nations. www.cepal.org/rio20/noticias/paginas/8/43798/2013-273_Rev.1_Sustainable_
Development_in_Latin_America_and_the_Caribbean_WEB.pdf.
_____. 2017. Sustainable Development Goals Report 2017. New York, United Nations. www.un.org/development/desa/publications/sdgreport-2017.html.
_____. 2018a. Sustainable Development Goal 6: Synthesis Report 2018 on Water and Sanitation. New York, United Nations. www.unwater.
org/app/uploads/2018/07/SDG6_SR2018_web_v5.pdf.
_____. 2018b. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2018. New York, United Nations. unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2018.

172

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2004. A Gender Perspective on Water Resources and Sanitation.
Background Paper No. 2. New York, United Nations. www.unwater.org/publications/gender-perspective-water-resources-sanitation/.
_____. 2007. Providing Water to the Urban Poor in Developing Countries: The Role of Tariffs and Subsidies. Sustainable Development
Innovation Briefs No. 4. United Nations. sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/no4.pdf.
_____. 2009. State of the World’s Indigenous Peoples. New York, United Nations. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/SOWIP/en/
SOWIP_web.pdf.
_____. 2015. The World’s Women 2015: Trends and Statistics. New York. United Nations. unstats.un.org/unsd/gender/worldswomen.html.
_____. 2017a. World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP/248.
New York, United Nations. esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/
_____. 2017b. International Migration Report 2017: Highlights. New York, United Nations. www.un.org/development/desa/publications/
international-migration-report-2017.html.
_____. 2018. World Urbanization Prospects 2018. Maps. esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Maps/.
UNDG (United Nations Development Group). 2003. The Human Rights Based Approach to Development Cooperation towards a Common
Understanding among UN Agencies. UNDG. undg.org/document/the-human-rights-based-approach-to-development-cooperationtowards-a-common-understanding-among-un-agencies/.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006. Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global
Water Crisis. New York, Palgrave Macmillan. hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/reports/267/hdr06-complete.pdf.
_____. 2009. Human Development Report 2009. Overcoming Barriers: Human Mobility and Development. New York, UNDP. hdr.undp.org/
sites/default/files/reports/269/hdr_2009_en_complete.pdf.
_____. 2011a. Small-Scale Water Providers in Kenya: Pioneers or Predators? New York, UNDP. www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/
Poverty%20Reduction/Inclusive%20development/Kenya%20paper(web).pdf.
_____. 2011b. Chemicals and Gender. Energy & Environment Practice Gender Mainstreaming Guidance Series. Chemicals Management.
www.undp.org/content/dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/environment-energy/www-ee-library/chemicals-management/
chemicals-and-gender/2011%20Chemical&Gender.pdf.
_____. 2016. Overview. Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for Everyone. New York, UNDP. hdr.undp.org/sites/default/
files/HDR2016_EN_Overview_Web.pdf.
UNDP-SIWI WGF (United Nations Development Programme-Stockholm International Water Institute Water Governance Facility). 2017.
Women and Corruption in the Water Sector: Theories and Experiences from Johannesburg and Bogotá. WGF Report No. 8. Stockholm,
SIWI. watergovernance.org/resources/wgf-report-8-women-corruption-water-sector-theories-experiences-johannesburg-bogota/.
UNDP-SIWI WGF/UNICEF (United Nations Development Programme-Stockholm International Water Institute Water Governance Facility/
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund). 2015. WASH and Accountability: Explaining the Concept. Accountability
for Sustainability Partnership. Stockholm/New York, UNDP-SIWI WGF/UNICEF. www.unicef.org/wash/files/Accountability_in_WASH_
Explaining_the_Concept.pdf.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 1992. Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes. Helsinki. www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_Text/ECE_MP.WAT_41.pdf.
_____. n.d.a. Countries are Committed to Address Inequities in Access to Water and Sanitation Services under the Protocol on Water and
Health. www.unece.org/info/media/news/environment/2018/countries-are-committed-to-address-inequities-in-access-to-water-andsanitation-services-under-the-protocol-on-water-and-health/doc.html.
_____. n.d.b. Equitable Access to Water and Sanitation. www.unece.org/env/water/pwh_work/equitable_access.html.
UNECE/UNESCO (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe/United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization).
2018. Progress on Transboundary Water Cooperation: Global Baseline for SDG Indicator 6.5.2. Paris, United Nations and UNESCO.
www.unwater.org/app/uploads/2018/11/SDG6_Indicator_Report_652_High_Quality_2018.pdf.
UNECE/WHO Europe (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe/World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe). 1999.
Protocol on Water and Health to the 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes.
United Nations. treaties.un.org/doc/source/RecentTexts/27-5a-eng.htm.
_____. 2012. No One Left Behind: Good Practices to ensure Equitable Access to Water and Sanitation in the Pan-European Region. New York
and Geneva, United Nations. www.unece.org/env/water/publications/ece_mp.wh_6.html.
_____. 2013. The Equitable Access Score-Card: Supporting Policy Processes to achieve the Human Right to Water and Sanitation. United
Nations. www.unece.org/index.php?id=34032.
_____. 2016. Guidance Note on the Development of Action Plans to ensure Equitable Access to Water and Sanitation. New York and Geneva,
United Nations. www.unece.org/index.php?id=44284.
UNECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). 1985. The Water Resources of Latin America and
the Caribbean and their Utilization: A Report on Progress in the Application of the Mar del Plata Action Plan. Santiago, United Nations.
repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/8494/S8500065_en.pdf.
_____. 2010. Editorial remarks. Circular of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management for Sustainable
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 31. repositorio.cepal.org/handle/11362/39406.
_____. 2018. Social Panorama of Latin America 2017. Santiago, United Nations. repositorio.cepal.org//handle/11362/42717.
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2010. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific
2009. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.unisdr.org/files/13373_ESCAPSYB2009.pdf.

References

173

_____. 2016. Asia-Pacific Countries with Special Needs. Development Report 2016 on Adapting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at National Level. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.unescap.org/publications/asia-pacific-countries-special-needs-developmentreport-2016-adapting-2030-agenda.
_____. 2017. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific 2016: SDG Baseline Report. Bangkok, UNESCAP. www.unescap.org/sites/default/
files/ESCAP_SYB2016_SDG_baseline_report.pdf.
_____. 2018. Leave No One Behind: Disaster Resilience for Sustainable Development. Asia-Pacific Disaster Report 2017. Bangkok, UNESCAP.
www.unescap.org/publications/asia-pacific-disaster-report-2017-leave-no-one-behind.
UNESCAP/UNESCO/ILO/UN Environment/FAO/UN-Water (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific/
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization/International Labour Organization/United Nations Environment/Food
and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations/United Nations Water). 2018. Clean Water and Sanitation: Ensure Availability and
Sustainable Management of Water and Sanitation for All. SDG 6 Goal Profile. www.unescap.org/resources/sdg6-goal-profile.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2016. Global Education Monitoring Report 2016. Place:
Inclusive and Sustainable Cities. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002462/246230E.pdf.
_____. 2017a. Global Education Monitoring Report Summary 2017/8: Accountability in Education: Meeting our Commitments. Paris,
UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002593/259338e.pdf.
_____. 2017b. Literacy Rates continue to rise from one Generation to the Next. Fact Sheet No. 45. Paris, UNESCO. uis.unesco.org/sites/
default/files/documents/fs45-literacy-rates-continue-rise-generation-to-next-en-2017_0.pdf.
_____. 2017c. Education for Sustainable Developments Goals: Learning Objectives. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0024/002474/247444e.pdf.
_____. 2018a. Culture for the 2030 Agenda. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002646/264687e.pdf.
_____. 2018b. UNESCO Policy on engaging with Indigenous Peoples. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002627/262748e.pdf.
_____. n.d. BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT) Project. UNESCO website. en.unesco.org/biopalt?language=en.
UNESCO-IHP (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization-International Hydrological Programme). n.d. Recovering
the Ancestral Water System of Los Paltas with Ecohydrological Approach to supply Water to the City of Catacocha in Southern Ecuador.
Ecohydrology Web Platform. ecohydrology-ihp.org/demosites/view/1046.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) Living Heritage. n.d. Traditional System of Corongo’s Water
Judges. UNESCO website. ich.unesco.org/en/RL/traditional-system-of-corongos-water-judges-01155.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) World Heritage Centre. n.d. Cultural Landscape of Bali
Province: The Subak System as a Manifestation of the Tri Hita Karana Philosophy. UNESCO website. whc.unesco.org/en/list/1194.
UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia). 2011. Water for Cities: Responding to the Urban Challenge
in the ESCWA Region. Technical Paper No. 1. Beirut, UNESCWA. www.unescwa.org/sites/www.unescwa.org/files/publications/files/e_
escwa_sdpd_11_technical_paper-1_e.pdf.
_____. 2013. Population and Development Report Issue No. 6: Development Policy Implications of Age-Structural Transitions in Arab
Countries. New York, United Nations. www.unescwa.org/sites/www.unescwa.org/files/publications/files/e_escwa_sdd_13_2_e.pdf.
UNESCWA/IOM (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia/International Organization for Migration). 2015. 2015
Situation Report on International Migration: Migration, Displacement and Development in a Changing Arab Region. Beirut, UNESCWA.
https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/sit_rep_en.pdf.
_____. 2017. 2017 Situation Report on International Migration: Migration in the Arab Region and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Beirut, UNESCWA. www.unescwa.org/sites/www.unescwa.org/files/publications/files/2017-situation-reportinternational-migration-english.pdf.
UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund). 2014. State of World Population 2014. The Power of 1.8 Billion: Adolescents, Youth and the
Transformation of the Future. New York, UNFPA. unfpa.org/swop-2014.
UNGA (United Nations General Assembly). 1948. Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly,
Third session, A/RES/3/217 A. www.un-documents.net/a3r217a.htm.
_____. 1986. Declaration on the Right to Development. Ninety-seventh plenary meeting. www.un.org/documents/ga/res/41/a41r128.htm.
_____. 2010. The Human Right to Water and Sanitation. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 28 July 2010, Sixty-fourth session,
A/RES/64/292. www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/64/292.
_____. 2013. Human Right to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Note by the Secretary-General. Sixty-eight session, A/68/264. undocs.
org/A/68/264.
_____. 2015a. Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on
25 September 2015. Seventieth session, A/RES/70/1. www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/generalassembly/docs/
globalcompact/A_RES_70_1_E.pdf.
_____. 2015b. The Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015,
Seventieth session, A/RES/70/169. undocs.org/A/RES/70/169.
_____. 2016. Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Note by the Secretary-General. Seventy-first session. A/71/302. undocs.
org/A/71/302.
_____. 2017. Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Note by the Secretary-General. Seventy-second session. A/72/127.
undocs.org/A/72/127.

174

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2003. The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements 2003.
London/Sterling, Va., Earthscan Publications.
_____. 2005. Urbanization Challenges in Sub-Saharan Africa. Nairobi, UN-Habitat. unhabitat.org/books/urbanization-challenges-in-subsaharan-africa/.
_____. 2006. Urban Inequities Survey. Manual. UN-Habitat. mirror.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/Urban-Inequities-Survey-Manual.pdf.
_____. 2011. Enhanced Partnerships between the Development Banks and UN-Habitat. Prepared as a background paper for GC 23 sidemeeting on Investments in Sustainable Urban Development, 12th April 2011. Unpublished report.
_____. 2013. State of the Worlds Cities Report 2012/2013: Prosperity of Cities. Nairobi, UN-Habitat. sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/
documents/745habitat.pdf.
_____. 2014. Kibera: Integrated Water Sanitation and Waste Management Project – Progress and Promise: Innovations in Slum Upgrading.
Post-Project Intervention Assessment Report. Nairobi, UN-Habitat. unhabitat.org/books/kibera-integrated-water-sanitation-and-wastemanagement-project/.
_____. n.d. World Urban Campaign. Delegated Management Model for Improving Access to Water in Urban Informal Settlements in Kenya.
World Urban Campaign website. www.worldurbancampaign.org/delegated-management-model-improving-access-water-urbaninformal-settlements-kenya.
UN-Habitat/IHS-Erasmus University Rotterdam (United Nations Human Settlements Programme/Institute for Housing and Urban
Development Studies-Erasmus University Rotterdam). 2018. The State of African Cities 2018 – The Geography of African Investment.
Nairobi, UN-Habitat. unhabitat.org/books/the-state-of-african-cities-2018-the-geography-of-african-investment/.
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2004. Protracted Refugee Situations. Thirtieth meeting of the Standing
Committee. www.unhcr.org/excom/standcom/40c982172/protracted-refugee-situations.html.
_____. 2017. ReHoPE – Refugee and Host Population Empowerment. Strategic Framework – Uganda.
_____. 2018a. Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2017. UNHCR website. www.unhcr.org/globaltrends2017/.
_____. 2018b. ACNUR felicita al Gobierno de Colombia por haber registrado más de 440 mil venezolanos en dos meses [UNHCR
congratulates the Government of Colombia for having registered over 440,000 Venezuelans in Two Months Time]. UNHCR website.
www.acnur.org/noticias/press/2018/6/5b27e1644/acnur-felicita-al-gobierno-de-colombia-por-haber-registrado-mas-de-440.html.
(In Spanish.)
_____. 2018c. Monitoring Reports. UNHCR internal monitoring reports. Unpublished.
_____. 2018d. Urban WASH Planning Guidance Note. UNHCR. wash.unhcr.org/download/urban-wash-planning-guidance-and-case-studies/.
_____. 2018e. UNHCR Turkey: Key Facts and Figures. UNHCR. reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/66218.pdf.
_____. 2018f. The Global Compact on Refugees: UNHCR Quick Guide. www.unhcr.org/5b6d574a7.
_____. n.d. High Alert List for Emergency Preparedness (HALEP). UNHCR website. emergency.unhcr.org/entry/190378/high-alert-list-foremergency-preparedness-halep.
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2014. 25 Years of The Convention on The Rights of the Child. Is the World a Better Place for
Children? A Statistical Analysis of Progress since the Adoption of the Convention of the Rights of the Child. New York, UNICEF. www.
unicef.org/crc/files/02_CRC_25_Years_UNICEF.pdf.
_____. 2016. UNICEF: Collecting Water is often a Colossal Waste of Time for Women and Girls. Press release. www.unicef.org/media/
media_92690.html.
_____. 2017. Country Urbanization Profiles: A Review of National Health or Immunization Policies and Immunization Strategies. New York,
UNICEF. www.unicef.org/health/files/Urban_profile_discussion_paper_vJune28.pdf.
UNICEF/World Bank. 2016. Ending Extreme Poverty: A Focus on Children. Briefing Note. www.unicef.org/publications/index_92826.html.
UNISDR/UNECE (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction/United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 2018. Words into
Action Guide: Implementation Guide for addressing Water-Related Disasters and Transboundary Cooperation. Integrating Disaster Risk
Management with Water Management and Climate Change Adaptation. New York/Geneva, United Nations.
United Nations Security Council. 2004. The Rule of Law and Transitional Justice in Conflict and Post-Conflict Societies. Report of the
Secretary General. www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2004/616.
UN News. 2016. UN inaugurates Water Project in Haiti benefiting 60,000 People as Part of Fight against Cholera. United Nations. news.
un.org/en/story/2016/12/547652-un-inaugurates-water-project-haiti-benefiting-60000-people-part-fight-against.
UNOCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs). 2018. Humanitarian Needs and Requirement Overview
2018: Lake Chad Basin Emergency. UNOCHA. reliefweb.int/report/nigeria/lake-chad-basin-emergency-2018-humanitarian-needs-andrequirement-overview-february.
UNPFII (United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues). 2016. Substantive Inputs to the 2016 High Level Political Forum,
Thematic Review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. United Nations. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/2016/
Docs-updates/INPUTS_2016_HLPF_eng.pdf.
_____. n.d. Who are Indigenous Peoples? Indigenous Peoples, Indigenous Voices: Factsheet. www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/
documents/5session_factsheet1.pdf.
UNSD (United Nations Statistic Division). n.d. Goal 7: Ensure Access to Affordable, Reliable, Sustainable and Modern Energy for All - SDG
Indicators. UNSD website. unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2016/goal-07/.

References

175

UNU-INWEH (United Nations University-Institute for Water Environment and Health). n.d. Uncover Resources: Alleviating Global Water
Scarcity through Unconventional Water Resources and Technologies. Project Flyer. inweh.unu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/
Unconventional-Water-Resources_Flyer.pdf.
UN-Water. 2015. Eliminating Discrimination and Inequalities in Access to Water and Sanitation. UN-Water. www.unwater.org/publications/
eliminating-discrimination-inequalities-access-water-sanitation/.
UN-Water DPAC/WSSCC (UN-Water Decade Programme on Advocacy and Communications/Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative
Council). n.d. The Human Right to Water and Sanitation. Media brief. www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/human_right_to_water_and_
sanitation_media_brief.pdf.
UN Women. 2017. Making the SDGs count for Women and Girls with Disabilities. Issue brief. UN Women. www.unwomen.org/en/digitallibrary/publications/2017/6/issue-brief-making-the-sdgs-count-for-women-and-girls-with-disabilities.
_____. 2018. Turning Promises into Action: Gender Equality in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. UN Women. www.unwomen.
org/en/digital-library/publications/2018/2/gender-equality-in-the-2030-agenda-for-sustainable-development-2018.
Van Eeden, A., Mehta, L. and Van Koppen, B. 2016. Whose waters? Large-scale agricultural development and water grabbing in the WamiRuvu River Basin, Tanzania. Water Alternatives, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 608–626.
Van Koppen, B., Giordano, M. and Butterworth, J. A. 2007. Community-Based Water Law and Water Resource Management Reform in
Developing Countries. Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture Series. Wallingford, UK, CABI International.
Van Koppen, B., Sokile, C. S., Hatibu, N., Lankford, B. A., Mahoo, H. and Yanda, P. Z. 2004. Formal Water Rights in Rural Tanzania:
Deepening the Dichotomy? Working Paper No. 71. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Van Koppen, B., Van der Zaag, P., Manzungu, E. and Tapela, B. 2014. Roman water law in rural Africa: The unfinished business of colonial
dispossession. Water International, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 49–62. doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2013.863636.
Vickers, A., 2006. New directions in lawn and landscape water conservation. Journal of the American Water Works Association, Vol. 98, No.
2, pp. 56–156. doi.org/10.1002/j.1551-8833.2006.tb07586.x.
Vilane, B. R. T. and Dlamini, T. L. 2016. An assessment of groundwater pollution from on-site sanitation in Malkerns, Swaziland. Journal of
Agricultural Science and Engineering, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 11–17.
WaterAid. 2016. Water at what Cost? The State of the World’s Water 2016. Briefing Report. https://washmatters.wateraid.org/sites/g/files/
jkxoof256/files/Water%20%20At%20What%20Cost%20%20The%20State%20of%20the%20Worlds%20Water%202016.pdf.
Water Boards/WETUM (Water Employees Trade Union of Malawi). 2014. Collective Bargaining Agreement between Water Boards and Water
Employees Trade Union of Malawi. mywage.com/labour-law/collective-agreements-database-malawi/collective-bargaining-agreementbetween-water-boards-and-water-employees-trade-union-of-malawi---2014.
WaterCanada. 2017. First Nations Water and Wastewater Under-Resourced in Federal Budget. WaterCanada. www.watercanada.net/pbobudget-sufficiency-first-nations-water-wastewater/.
WaterLex. 2014. Integrating the Human Right to Water and Sanitation in Development Practice. www.waterlex.org/waterlex-toolkit/how-toarticulate-the-human-right-to-water-and-sanitation-and-integrated-water-resources-management/.
WaterLex/WASH United. 2014. The Human Rights to Water and Sanitation in Courts Worldwide: A Selection of National, Regional and
International Case Law. Geneva, WaterLex and WASH United. www.waterlex.org/new/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Case-LawCompilation.pdf.
Water.org. 2018. Programmatic Impact Update: Second Quarter Report (January 2018–March 2018).
We are Social and Hootsuite. 2018. 2018 Digital Yearbook - Internet, Social Media, And Mobile Data for 239 Countries Around the World.
White, S., Kuper, H., Itimu-Phiri, A., Holm, R. and Biran, A. 2016. A qualitative study of barriers to accessing water, sanitation and hygiene
for disabled people in Malawi. Plos One, Vol. 11, No. 5, pp. e0155043. doi.10.1371/journal.pone.0155043.
Whittington, D., Jeuland, M., Barker, K. and Yuen, Y. 2012. Setting priorities, targeting subsidies among water, sanitation, and preventive
health interventions in developing countries. World Development, Vol. 40, No. 8, pp. 1546–1568. doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.03.004.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2011. World Report on Disability. Geneva, Switzerland. www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/
report.pdf.
_____. 2012. UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS) 2012 Report: The Challenge of Extending
and Sustaining Services. Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/glaas_report_2012/en/.
_____. 2015. WHO Global Disability Action Plan 2014–2021. Better Health for all People with Disability. Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/
disabilities/actionplan/en/.
_____. 2016a. World Health Statistics 2016: Monitoring Health for the SDGs. Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_
statistics/2016/en/.
_____. 2016b. Health Statistics and Information Services. Disease Burden and Mortality Estimates. WHO website. www.who.int/healthinfo/
global_burden_disease/estimates/en/index1.html.
_____. 2017a. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, Fourth Edition, incorporating the First Addendum. Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/publications/drinking-water-quality-guidelines-4-including-1st-addendum/en/.
_____. 2017b. UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS) 2017 Report: Financing Universal Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene under the Sustainable Development Goals. Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/
glaas-report-2017/en/.

176

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

_____. 2018. WHO Fact Sheet: Obesity and Overweight. WHO website. www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight.
(accessed July 27, 2018).
_____. n.d. TrackFin: Tracking Financing to Sanitation, Hygiene and Drinking-Water. WHO website. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
monitoring/investments/trackfin/en/.
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2010 Update.
Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/9789241563956/en/.
_____. 2012. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2012 Update. New York, UNICEF. www.unicef.org/publications/files/
JMPreport2012(1).pdf.
_____. 2013. Post-2015 WASH Targets and Indicators. www.unicef.org/wash/files/4_WSSCC_JMP_Fact_Sheets_4_UK_LoRes.pdf.
_____. 2015a. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Health Care Facilities: Status in Low- and Middle-Income Countries and a
Way Forward. WASH in Health Care Facilities for Better Health Care Services. Geneva, WHO. apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
handle/10665/154588/9789241508476_eng.pdf;jsessionid=58AC04B658866F927CD12D167D8A77AC?sequence=1.
_____. 2015b. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment. Geneva, WHO. files.unicef.org/publications/
files/Progress_on_Sanitation_and_Drinking_Water_2015_Update_.pdf.
_____. 2016. Inequalities in Sanitation and Drinking Water in Latin America and the Caribbean: A Regional Perspective based on Data from
the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation and an Inequality Analysis using Recent National
Household Surveys and Censuses. washdata.org/file/410/download.
_____. 2017a. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF. washdata.org/
sites/default/files/documents/reports/2018-01/JMP-2017-report-final.pdf.
_____. 2017b. Safely Managed Drinking Water – Thematic Report on Drinking Water 2017. Geneva, WHO. https://data.unicef.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/03/safely-managed-drinking-water-JMP-2017-1.pdf.
_____. 2018a. Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Schools: Global Baseline Report 2018. New York, WHO/UNICEF. https://washdata.
org/sites/default/files/documents/reports/2018-11/JMP%20WASH%20in%20Schools%20WEB%20final.pdf.
_____. 2018b. A Snapshot of Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in the Arab Region: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines. WHO/UNICEF
Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP). www.unescwa.org/sites/www.unescwa.org/files/events/
files/jmp_arab_region_snapshot_20march2018_0.pdf.
_____. n.d. Data. WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP). washdata.org/data.
WHO/WEDC (World Health Organization/Water, Engineering and Development Centre). 2011. Delivering Safe Water by Tanker. Technical
Notes on Drinking-Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Emergencies. Geneva/Loughborough, UK, WHO/WEDC. www.unicef.org/cholera/
Annexes/Supporting_Resources/Annex_9/WHO-tn12_safe_water_tanker_en.pdf.
Wilbur, J. 2010. Principles and Practices for the Inclusion of Disabled People in Access to Safe Sanitation: A Case Study from Ethiopia.
WaterAid Briefing Note. UK, WaterAid. www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/media/
principles_practices_inclusive_sanitation.pdf.
Wilder, M. and H. Ingram. 2018. Knowing equity when we see it: Water equity in contemporary global contexts. K. Conca and
E. Weinthal (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Water Politics and Policy. New York, Oxford University Press. doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199335084.013.11.
Wong, S. and Guggenheim, S. 2018. Community-Driven Development: Myths and Realities. Policy Research Working Paper No. 8435.
Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/677351525887961626/pdf/WPS8435.pdf.
World Bank. 2002. Water Tariffs & Subsidies in South Asia: Understanding the Basics. Working paper no. 1. Washington, DC, World Bank/
Water and Sanitation Program. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/466651468776100746/pdf/265380PAPER0WSP0Water0tariffs0no-01.
pdf.
_____. 2003. Implementation of Operational Directive 4.20 on Indigenous Peoples: An Independent Desk Review, Washington, DC, World
Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/570331468761746572/pdf/multi0page.pdf.
_____. 2011. Economic Assessment of Sanitation Interventions in the Philippines. Technical paper. Washington, DC, World Bank/Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP). documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/511481468094767464/pdf/724180WSP0Box30sessment0Philippines.pdf.
_____. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington, DC, World Bank. https://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTWDR2012/Resources/7778105-1299699968583/7786210-1315936222006/Complete-Report.pdf.
_____. 2013. Investment Project Financing: Economic Analysis Guidance Note. siteresources.worldbank.org/PROJECTS/
Resources/40940-1365611011935/Guidance_Note_Economic_Analysis.pdf.
_____. 2016a. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016: Taking on Inequality. Washington, DC, World Bank Group. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25078/9781464809583.pdf.
_____. 2016b. Science of Delivery for Quality Infrastructure and SDGs: Water Sector Experience of Output-Based Aid. Working paper.
Washington, DC, World Bank. documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/655991468143364878/pdf/Water-Sector-Study.pdf.
_____. 2016c. 5 Ways Public–Private Partnerships can promote Gender Equality. Infrastructure & Public-Private Partnerships Blog, World
Bank Group. https://blogs.worldbank.org/ppps/5-ways-public-private-partnerships-can-promote-gender-equality.
_____. 2017a. Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals: Synthesis
Report of the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative. WASH Synthesis Report. Washington, DC, World Bank Group. openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/27831/W17076ov.pdf?sequence=6.

References

177

_____. 2017b. WASH Inequalities in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals: Rising to the Challenge. Global Synthesis Report of the
Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative. Washington, DC, World Bank.
_____. 2018. Kenya: Using Private Financing to Improve Water Services. MFD briefs 05/2018. Washington, DC, World Bank. www.
worldbank.org/en/about/partners/brief/kenya-using-private-financing-to-improve-water-services.
_____. n.d. Harmonized List of Fragile Situations. World Bank website. www.worldbank.org/en/topic/fragilityconflictviolence/brief/
harmonized-list-of-fragile-situations.
World Bank/UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2017. Sanitation and Water for All: How can the Financing Gap be Filled? A
Discussion Paper. Washington, DC, World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/26458/114545-WPP157523-PUBLIC-SWA-Country-Preparatory-Process-Discussion-Paper-8-Mar-17.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2006. Water: A Shared Responsibility. The United Nations World Water
Development Report 2. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001454/145405E.pdf.
_____. 2012. The United Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, UNESCO. www.
unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SC/pdf/WWDR4%20Volume%201-Managing%20Water%20under%20Uncertainty%20
and%20Risk.pdf.
_____. 2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014: Water and Energy. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0022/002257/225741E.pdf.
_____. 2015. The WWAP Water and Gender Toolkit for Sex-Disaggregated Water Assessment, Monitoring and Reporting. Gender and Water
Series. UNESCO. www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/water-and-gender/water-and-gender-toolkit/.
_____. 2016. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016: Water and Jobs. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0024/002439/243938e.pdf.
_____. 2017. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2017: Wastewater – The Untapped Resource. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0024/002471/247153e.pdf.
WWAP/UN-Water (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme/United Nations Water). 2018. The United Nations World Water
Development Report 2018: Nature-Based Solutions for Water. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002614/261424e.pdf.
Yeboah K. F. 2018. Youth for Growth: Transforming Economies through Agriculture. Chicago, Ill., The Chicago Council on Global Affairs.
www.thechicagocouncil.org/publication/youth-growth-transforming-economies-through-agriculture.
Zahir, Y. 2009. Water Balance Study for Kharaz Camp, Ras Al Aara and al-Madarba District, Lahj Governate, Yemen. Research study prepared
for UNHCR. Unpublished report.
Zarfl, C., Lumsdon, A. E., Berklekamp, J., Tydecks, L. and Tockner, K. 2015. A global boom in hydropower dam construction. Aquatic
Sciences, Vol. 77, No. 1, pp. 161–170.
Zetter, R. and Ruaudel, H. 2016. Refugees’ Right to Work and Access to Labour Markets – An Assessment. Part 1: Synthesis. Working Paper.
Global Knowledge Platform on Migration and Development (KNOMAD). www.knomad.org/sites/default/files/2017-12/KNOMAD%20
Study%201-%20Part%20II-%20Refugees%20Right%20to%20Work%20-%20An%20Assessment.pdf.

178

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Abbreviations
and acronyms

180

AECID		
		

Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo – Spanish Agency for 		
International Cooperation and Development

AIDS		

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

ANDA		
		

Autoridades de la Administración Nacional de Acueductos y Alcantarillados – National 		
Water and Sewerage Administration of El Salvador

BIOPALT

BIOsphère et Patrimoine du Lac Tchad - BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad

BOT		

Build–operate–transfer

CDD		

Community-driven development

DALYs 		

Disability-adjusted life years

DDT		

Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane

DEWATS

Decentralized wastewater treatment systems

ECHO		

European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations

Eco-DRR

Nature-based solutions for disaster risk reduction

ESD		

Education for sustainable development

EWS		

Early warning systems

FAO		

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FESPAD
		

Fundación de Estudios para la Aplicación del Derecho – Foundation for Studies on 			
the Application of Law in El Salvador

GDP		

Gross domestic product

GEM		

Global Education Monitoring

GLAAS

Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water

GPOBA

Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid

HALEP

High Alert List for Emergency Preparedness

HDI		

Human Development Index

HICs		

High-income countries

HIV		

Human Immunodeficiency Virus

HRBA		

Human rights-based approach

IBT		

Inter-basin transfer (Chapter 2)

IBT		

Increasing block tariff (Chapter 5)

ICESCR

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

ICRC		

International Committee of the Red Cross

ICT		

Information and communication technology

IDPs		

Internally displaced people

IFAD		

International Fund for Agricultural Development

ILO		

International Labour Organization

IPCC		

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

IWRM		

Integrated water resources management

JMP		

Joint Monitoring Programme

LDCs		

Least Developed Countries

LMICs		

Low- and middle-income countries

MAR		

Managed aquifer recharge

MDGs		

Millennium Development Goals

MHM		

Menstrual health management

MICS		

Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey

NGO		

Non-governmental organization

ODA		

Official development assistance

OHCHR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

OECD		

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

O&M		

Operations and maintenance

POE		

Point of entry

POU		

Point of use

PPP		

Purchasing power parity (Prologue, Chapters 7 and 9)

PPP		

Public–private partnership (Chapters 5 and 10)

PRESIBALT
		
		

Programme de Réhabilitation et de Renforcement de la Résilience des Systèmes Socio-		
Ecologiques du Bassin du Lac Tchad - Programme to Rehabilitate and Strengthen 			
the Resilience of Lake Chad Basin Systems

SDGs		

Sustainable Development Goals

SMEs		

Small- and medium-sized enterprises

SOIL		

Sustainable Organic Integrated Livelihoods

SSS		

Small-scale system

SUEN		

Türkiye Su Enstitüsü – Turkish Water Institute

UIS		

Urban Inequities Survey

UK		

United Kingdom

UN		

United Nations

UNDESA

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

UNESCAP

United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNHCR

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund

USA		

United States of America

USAID		

United States Agency for International Development

UTI		

Urinary tract infection

WASH		

Water, Sanitation and Hygiene

WETUM

Water Employees Trade Union of Malawi

WGF		

Water Governance Facility

WHO		

World Health Organization

WSSCC

Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council

181

Boxes, figures
and tables
Boxes

182

Box 1.1

The indivisible principles of non-discrimination and equality 				

38

Box 1.2

Intersectionality and multiple forms of discrimination					

39

Box 1.3

Examples of groups and individuals who live in vulnerable situations or disadvantaged
in terms of accessing water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services				

41

Box 1.4

Distinguishing water rights from the human rights to water and sanitation 			

42

Box 2.1

Using check dams to increase water availability in Rajasthan, India				

47

Box 2.2

Fog water collection in Morocco: Aït Baamrane						

47

Box 2.3

Delegated Management Model for improving water quality and affordability – the case of
slum dwellers in Kisumu, Kenya							51

Box 2.4

Poor drinking water quality and some solutions for indigenous communities in Canada

52

Box 2.5

WASH in the context of menstrual health management (MHM)				

53

Box 2.6

Using waste to fertilize soils in Haiti							

54

Box 3.1

Drivers of and against discrimination							61

Box 3.2

Defining ‘Indigenous’ in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 		

64

Box 3.3

Training package on indigenous peoples and integrated water resources management		

68

Box 3.4

Putting traditional knowledge into practice						

70

Box 4.1

The human rights-based approach (HRBA)						

75

Box 4.2

Water resource conflicts between indigenous peoples and extractive industry in Peru		

78

Box 4.3

The human rights to water in India’s slums						

82

Box 4.4

The human rights to water and sanitation in French migrant camps				

83

Box 5.1

El Salvador: Integrity Pact promotes transparency around pipe replacement contracts		

91

Box 5.2

Reducing the risk: Encouraging the uptake and scale of WASH microlending 			

93

Box 5.3

Kenya: Using blended finance to improve water services					

94

Box 6.1

Self-supply and groundwater dependence among urban poor dwellers			

100

Box 6.2

The Kenya slum upgrading project: Providing integrated infrastructure in Soweto East,
Kibera, Nairobi 									101

Box 7.1

Adapting small-scale irrigation to climate change in West and Central Africa			

111

Box 7.2

One million cisterns for the Sahel							

111

Box 8.1

Definitions of key terms								118

Box 8.2

Examples of social discrimination 							120

Box 8.3

Refugees’ right to work								121
The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Box 8.4

Examples of contingency planning and preparedness actions				

Box 8.5

Meeting water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) needs of Syrians under temporary
protection in Turkey									123

Box 8.6

Positive examples of supporting economic growth						

Box 8.7

Future is bright with solar								126

Box 9.1

The Zaatari Syrian refugee camp in Jordan						

132

Box 9.2

Continuous progress to improve equitable access to water and sanitation in France		

137

Box 9.3

Working with local authorities to improve equitable access to water and sanitation in
North Macedonia									137

Box 9.4

A national Action Plan to ensure equitable access to water and sanitation adopted in Armenia

Box 9.5

BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT) project: Linking environmental restoration, 		
transboundary resources management and development					
145

Box 10.1

Conflict prevention and cooperation over transboundary water resources			

122

125

137

152

Figures
Figure 1

Average annual impact from inadequate drinking water and sanitation services,
water-related disasters, epidemics and earthquakes, and conflicts				

12

Figure 2

Global water demand by sector to 2040							

13

Figure 3

Level of physical water stress								14

Figure 4

Change in net precipitation, 2010–2050							15

Figure 5

The geography of droughts and floods							16

Figure 6

Global and regional drinking water coverage, 2015 (%)					

Figure 7

Inequalities in basic drinking water							19

Figure 8

Proportion of population using at least basic drinking water services, 2015			

19

Figure 9

Global and regional sanitation coverage, 2015 (%)						

20

Figure 10

Inequalities in basic sanitation								20

Figure 11

Proportion of population using at least basic sanitation services, 2015			

21

Figure 12

Proportion of population with basic handwashing facilities in 70 countries, 2015		

21

Figure 13

Inequalities in basic hygiene								22

Figure 14

Population of the world: Estimates (1950–2015), and medium-variant projection with 95% 		
prediction intervals (2015–2100)							22

Figure 15

Population by region: Estimates (1950–2015), and medium-variant projection (2015–2100)

23

Figure 16

Growth rates of urban agglomerations by size class: 2018–2030 projections			

23

Figure 17

Proportion of urban population living in slums, 2000 and 2014				

24

Figure 18

Population living in extreme poverty by world region, 1987–2013				

25

Figure 19

Global extreme poverty rates by gender and age: Share of women and men living in
extreme poor households (IPL of US$1.90 per day)						

25

Figure 20

The rise of the global top 1% versus the stagnation of the global bottom 50%, 1980–2016		

26

18

183

Figure 21

Top 10% national income share across the world, 2016						

26

Figure 22

Prevalence of severe food insecurity among women and men by region				

28

Figure 23

Proportion of schools with a basic drinking water service, by country, 2016 				

29

Figure 24

Proportion of schools with a basic sanitation service, by country, 2016 				

29

Figure 25

Adult and youth literacy rates by country, 2016							

30

Figure 26

Distribution of female agricultural holders							32

Figure 27

Percentage of adults who use the internet at least occasionally or report owning a smartphone		

Figure 1.1

Relationship of a human rights-based approach to water and sanitation in relation to the 			
elements of integrated water resource management 						
42

Figure 2.1

Examples of unconventional water resources 							48

Figure 2.2

Burden for collecting water in rural areas, by gender and age (%), in countries where at least
1 in 10 households have water off-premises							

50

Figure 2.3

Different supply systems at the household (POU) and community or village levels (POE, SSS) 		

53

Figure 3.1

Barriers to the universal implementation of human rights						

60

Figure 3.2

Percentage of grade 3 students who attend schools with adequate water and sanitation 				
infrastructure, by socio-economic status, in selected countries in Latin America, 2013			
63

Figure 3.3

Additional resources needed to meet targets for basic and safely managed WASH services		

Figure 3.4

Level of sufficiency of financial resources allocated to sanitation to meet national targets
(71 countries monitored)									65

Figure 3.5

Options for supporting people in the most disadvantaged situations through sanitation programmes

Figure 4.1

Institutional levels, values, principles and approaches for equitable and inclusive policy-making
and delivery											79

Figure 6.1

Access to improved drinking water, taking account of additional criteria: The case of Kyotera 			
Town Council, Uganda, 2007 and 2010								99

Figure 6.2

Typical DEWATS system 									104

Figure 8.1

Trend of global displacement and proportion displaced, 2007–2017					

119

Figure 9.1

Drinking water and sanitation coverage in the Western Asia and North Africa region, 2015		

130

Figure 9.2

Rural and urban drinking water coverage in selected countries of the Arab region, 2015			

130

Figure 9.3

Drinking water coverage in the SDG sub-regions of Asia and the Pacific (excluding Australia
and New Zealand), 2015									133

Figure 9.4

Sanitation coverage in the SDG sub-regions of Asia and the Pacific (excluding Australia
and New Zealand), 2015									133

Figure 9.5

Estimated percentage of the near poor that have fallen into poverty as a result of (selected)
water-related disasters									134

Figure 9.6

Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Europe and North America, 2015				

135

Figure 9.7

Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2015			

138

Figure 9.8

Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean with low levels of access to at least basic water supply
and sanitation services, 2015									139

Figure 9.9

Differences in access to water supply between the richest and poorest urban wealth quintiles
in Latin America 										140

33

65

67

Figure 9.10 Differences in access to water supply between the richest and poorest rural wealth quintiles
in Latin America										140

184

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

Figure 9.11 Differences in access to sanitation between the richest and poorest urban wealth quintiles
in Latin America										141
Figure 9.12 Differences in access to sanitation between the richest and poorest rural wealth quintiles
in Latin America										141
Figure 9.13 Drinking water and sanitation coverage in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015					

143

Figure 9.14 Drinking water coverage, by country, in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2015					

143

Figure 9.15 Population with basic handwashing facilities including soap and water at home in Africa, 2015		

144

Tables
Table 2.1

Advantages and disadvantages of centralized and decentralized systems, with limitations or benefits

Table 4.1

Presence of pro-poor policies, tracking systems and financial measures in water supply and 			
sanitation											80

Table 4.2

Types of gaps in policy implementation, and typical causes						

Table 5.1

The relative possibility of gaining selected benefits from WASH interventions, by vulnerable 			
population group										87

Table 6.1

Capital cost per capita (US$) of infrastructure provision, by density					

Table 9.1

Internally displaced persons due to conflict and generalized violence in the Arab region
(stock at year end), 2012–2016									131

55

81

102

185

Photo credits
Executive summary
p. xiv
© UNHCR/S. Phelps, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Prologue
p. 11
© piyaset/iStock/Getty Images
Chapter 1
p. 34
© Vinaykumardudan/iStock/Getty Images
p. 40
© Herianus/iStock/Getty Images
Chapter 2
p. 44
© repistu/iStock/Getty Images
p. 49
© Hippo Roller, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
p. 56
© Lara_Uhryn/iStock /Getty Images
Chapter 3
p. 58
© redtea/iStock/Getty Images
p. 71
© UNHCR, www.flickrs.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Chapter 4
p. 72
© Michailidis/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 5
p. 84
© John Wollwerth/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 6
p. 96
© Donatas Dabravolskas/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 7
p. 106 © Tanya Martineau, Prospect Arts, Food for the Hungry/USAID, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative
Commons (CC BY-NC 2.0)
p. 114 © Aksonsat Uanthoeng/iStock/Getty Images
Chapter 8
p. 116 © UNHCR/B.Sokol, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
p. 124 © UNHCR/B.Sokol, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Chapter 9
p. 128 © LesslieK/iStock/Getty Images
Chapter 10
p. 146 © ITU/R.Farrell, www.flickr.com, licensed under Creative Commons (CC BY 2.0)
p. 154 © Rawpixel/iStock/Getty Images
Chapter 11
p. 156 © Gudkov Andrey/Shutterstock.com
p. 158 © Art Babych/Shutterstock.com

186

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

LEAVING
NO ONE BEHIND

The 2019 Report seeks to inform policy and decision-makers, inside
and outside the water community, how improvements in water
resources management and access to water supply and sanitation
services are essential to overcoming poverty and addressing various
other social and economic inequities.
In an increasingly globalized world, the impacts of water-related
decisions cross borders and affect everyone. Extreme events,
environmental degradation, population growth, rapid urbanization,
unsustainable and inequitable consumption patterns, conflicts and
social unrest, and unprecedented migratory flows are among the
interconnected pressures faced by humanity, often hitting those in
vulnerable situations the hardest through their impacts on water.

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2018

Addressing the inequalities faced by disadvantaged groups requires
tailored solutions that take account of the day-to-day realities
of people and communities in vulnerable situations. Properly
designed and adequately implemented policies, efficient and
appropriate use of financial resources, as well as evidence-based
knowledge on water resources and water-related issues are also
vital to eliminating inequalities in access to safe drinking water
and sanitation.

Titled ‘Leaving No One Behind ’, the report reinforces the
commitments made by the UN member states in adopting the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in recognizing the
human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, both of which
are essential for eradicating poverty and for building prosperous,
peaceful societies.

This publication is financed by
the Government of Italy and Regione Umbria.

water and
sanitation

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

WWDR 2019

WWDR 2018

water and
sanitation

WWAP

WWAP

nanced by
taly and Regione Umbria

The annual editions focus on strategic water issues. UN-Water
Members and Partners as well as other experts contribute the latest
knowledge on a specific theme.

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

THE UNITED NATIONS
WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT
REPORT 2019

central to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
pment because they also generate social,
ronmental co-benefits, including human health
od and energy security, sustainable economic
bs, ecosystem rehabilitation and maintenance,
lthough NBS are not a panacea, they will play an
rds the circular economy and in building a more
or all.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2019

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2019

nt remains heavily dominated by traditional,
grey’) infrastructure and the enormous potential
nder-utilized. NBS include green infrastructure
, augment or work in parallel with grey
cost-effective manner. The goal is to find the
blend of green and grey investments to maximize
m efficiency while minimizing costs and trade-offs.

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2018

f the World Water Development Report seeks
nd decision-makers, inside and outside the water
the potential of nature-based solutions (NBS)
porary water management challenges across all
ularly regarding water for agriculture, sustainable
reduction and improving water quality.

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

The UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme brings together
the work of numerous UN-Water Members and Partners to produce
the United Nations World Water Development Report series.
LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND

Water Development Reports focus on strategic
Water Members and Partners as well as other
the latest knowledge on a specific theme.

Report
The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

s World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
y UNESCO. WWAP brings together the work of
er Members and Partners to produce the United
ter Development Report series.

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT

UNECE, UNECLAC,
UNESCAP, UNESCWA

water and
sanitation

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

Sustainable
Development
Goals

water and
sanitation

9 789231 003097

Sustainable
Development
Goals

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Sustainable
Development
Goals

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Sustainable
Development
Goals

ISBN 978-92-3-100264-9
© UNESCO 2018
156 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

ISBN 978-92-3-100309-7
© UNESCO 2019
202 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

WWDR 2018 Full colour, with boxes, figures, maps, tables, notes,
photographs, references, and list of abbreviations and acronyms, as
well as Forewords by UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay and
UN-Water Chair and IFAD President Gilbert F. Houngbo

WWDR 2019 Full colour, with boxes, figures, maps, tables, notes,
photographs, references, and list of abbreviations and acronyms, as
well as Forewords by UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay and
UN-Water Chair and IFAD President Gilbert F. Houngbo

To purchase a printed copy of the book, please visit: publishing.unesco.org
To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications, please write to: wwap@unesco.org
To download the PDF format of the report and associated publications, WWDR previous editions and media material, please visit:
www.unesco.org/water/wwap
USB key content: WWDR 2019, Executive Summary in nine languages, Facts and Figures in five languages and WWDR previous editions

ASSOCIATED PUBLICATIONS

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2019

The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2019

Leaving
no one
behind

Leaving
no one
behind
Executive Summary

Facts and Figures

water and
sanitation

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

water and
sanitation

Sustainable
Development
Goals

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Sustainable
Development
Goals

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2018

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2018

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2019

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2019

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German,
Hindi, Italian, Portuguese,
Russian and Spanish

Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German, Hindi,
Italian, Korean, Portuguese,
Russian and Spanish

Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

To download these documents, please visit: www.unesco.org/water/wwap

WWDR 2019
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

187

UN-WATER REPORTS

UN-Water coordinates the efforts of United Nations entities and international organizations working
on water and sanitation issues. By doing so, UN-Water seeks to increase the effectiveness of the
support provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving international agreements on
water and sanitation. UN-Water publications draw on the experience and expertise of UN-Water’s
Members and Partners.

Sustainable Development Goal 6 Synthesis Report 2018 on Water and Sanitation
The SDG 6 Synthesis Report 2018 on Water and Sanitation was published in June 2018 ahead of
the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development where Member States reviewed SDG 6
in-depth. Representing a joint position from the United Nations family, the report offers guidance to
understanding global progress on SDG 6 and its interdependencies with other goals and targets. It
also provides insight into how countries can plan and act to ensure that no one is left behind when
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Sustainable Development Goal 6 Indicator Reports
This series of reports shows the progress towards targets set out in SDG 6 using the SDG global
indicators. The reports are based on country data, compiled and verified by the United Nations
agencies serving as custodians of each indicator. The reports show progress on drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene (WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and
Hygiene for targets 6.1 and 6.2), wastewater treatment and ambient water quality (UN Environment,
UN-Habitat and WHO for target 6.3), water use efficiency and level of water stress (FAO for target
6.4), integrated water resources management and transboundary cooperation (UN Environment,
UNECE and UNESCO for target 6.5), ecosystems (UN Environment for target 6.6) and means for
implementing SDG 6 (UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
for targets 6.a and 6.b).
World Water Development Report
This annual report, coordinated and published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water, represents the
coherent and integrated response of the United Nations system to freshwater-related issues and
emerging challenges. The theme of the report is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day
(22 March) and changes annually.
Policy and Analytical Briefs
UN-Water’s Policy Briefs provide short and informative policy guidance on the most pressing
freshwater-related issues that draw upon the combined expertise of the United Nations system.
Analytical Briefs provide an analysis of emerging issues and may serve as basis for further research,
discussion and future policy guidance.

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2019
•

Update of UN-Water Policy Brief on Water and Climate Change

•

UN-Water Policy Brief on the Water Conventions

•

UN-Water Analytical Brief on Water Efficiency

188More

information on UN-Water Reports at: www.unwater.org/unwater-publications

The UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme brings together
the work of numerous UN-Water Members and Partners to produce
the United Nations World Water Development Report series.
The annual editions focus on strategic water issues. UN-Water
Members and Partners as well as other experts contribute the latest
knowledge on a specific theme.
The 2019 Report seeks to inform policy and decision-makers, inside
and outside the water community, how improvements in water
resources management and access to water supply and sanitation
services are essential to overcoming poverty and addressing various
other social and economic inequities.
In an increasingly globalized world, the impacts of water-related
decisions cross borders and affect everyone. Extreme events,
environmental degradation, population growth, rapid urbanization,
unsustainable and inequitable consumption patterns, conflicts and
social unrest, and unprecedented migratory flows are among the
interconnected pressures faced by humanity, often hitting those in
vulnerable situations the hardest through their impacts on water.
Addressing the inequalities faced by disadvantaged groups requires
tailored solutions that take account of the day-to-day realities of
people and communities in vulnerable situations. Properly designed
and adequately implemented policies, efficient and appropriate
use of financial resources, as well as evidence-based knowledge on
water resources and water-related issues are also vital to eliminating
inequalities in access to safe drinking water and sanitation.
Titled ‘Leaving No One Behind ’, the report reinforces the
commitments made by the UN member states in adopting the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in recognizing the
human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation, both of which
are essential for eradicating poverty and for building prosperous,
peaceful societies.

This publication is financed by
the Government of Italy and Regione Umbria.

9 789231 003097

