INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

WORLD
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK
A Long and Diﬃcult Ascent

2020

OC T

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

WORLD
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK
A Long and Difficult Ascent

2020

OC T

©2020 International Monetary Fund
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. |
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80
ISBN 978-1-51355-605-5 (English Paper)
978-1-51355-814-1 (English ePub)
978-1-51355-815-8 (English PDF)

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the
report on September 30, 2020. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2020. World Economic Outlook:
A Long and Difficult Ascent. Washington, DC, October.

Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org

CONTENTS

Assumptions and Conventions

viii

Further Information

x

Data

xi

Preface

xii

Foreword

xiii

Executive Summary

xv

Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies

1

Global Economy Climbing Out of the Depths, Prone to Setbacks
Considerations for the Forecast
Partial Recovery from Deep Recession Expected in 2021
Medium-Term Growth Reflects Damage to Supply Potential
Inflation Is Expected to Remain Low
Subdued Trade Flows, Smaller Deficits and Surpluses
Significant Risks of More Severe Growth Outcomes
Near-Term Policy Priorities: Ensure Adequate Resources for Health Care, Limit Economic Damage
Enhancing Multilateral Cooperation
Policies to Address Medium- and Long-Term Challenges
Scenario Box 1. Alternative Scenarios
Box 1.1. Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights
Box 1.2. Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the
Impact of COVID-19
Box 1.3. Rising Small and Medium Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:
Assessment and Policy Options
Box 1.4. Social Unrest during COVID-19
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
Box 1.SF.1. What Happened with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?
References
Chapter 2. The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects

1
6
8
12
15
16
18
21
22
24
28
31
34
38
40
43
54
61
65

Introduction
Cross-Country Evidence on Lockdowns and Economic Activity
Assessing the Impact of Lockdowns Using High-Frequency Data
The Unequal Effects of Lockdowns across Gender and Age Groups
Lockdowns and COVID-19 Infections
Individual Lockdown Measures and Nonlinear Effects
Conclusions
Box 2.1. An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns
Box 2.2. The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Evidence from the United States
References

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

65
67
68
70
73
74
75
77
79
81

iii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Chapter 3. Mitigating Climate Change—Growth- and Distribution-Friendly Strategies
Introduction
The Mitigation Toolkit: How Have Policies Worked So Far?
How to Reach Net Zero Emissions by 2050
How to Build Inclusion
Conclusion
Box 3.1. Glossary
Box 3.2. Zooming In on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization
References
Statistical Appendix
Assumptions
What’s New
Data and Conventions
Country Notes
Classification of Countries
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification
Table A. Classification, by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2019
Table B. Advanced Economies, by Subgroup
Table C. European Union
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region and Main Source of
Export Earnings
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position,
and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
List of Tables
Output (Tables A1–A4)
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)
Financial Policies (Table A8)
Foreign Trade (Table A9)
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)
Flow of Funds (Table A14–A15)

85
85
89
92
103
106
107
108
110
115
115
116
116
117
118
119
120
121
121
122
123
125
126
136
140
141
148
153
154
156
163
167

World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics

171

IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, October 2020

181

Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Prices
Table 1.1.1. Changes in World GDP Shares from Purchasing-Power-Parity Revisions
Table 1.1.2. Revisions to Real GDP Growth of World Economic Outlook Aggregates
Table 1.4.1. Cross-Sectional Regressions
Table 1.4.2. Dynamic Regressions: Epidemics
Table 1.SF.1. Coal Consumption, by Sector
Table 1.SF.2. Energy Mix, by Income Groups, 2017
Table 1.SF.3. Selected Recent Fast Coal Phaseouts

iv

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

9
11
31
33
41
42
48
50
51

contents

Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current
Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle Eastern and Central Asian Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current
Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output

55
56
57
58
59
60

Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor
Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing
and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government
Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in
Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings:
Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and
Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario:
Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Industrial Production and Retail Sales
Figure 1.2. Global Activity Indicators
Figure 1.3. Government Lockdowns and Economic Responses to COVID-19: Global Index
Figure 1.4. Commodity Prices
Figure 1.5. Global Inflation
Figure 1.6. Sectoral Growth and the Business Cycle

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

2
2
3
3
3
4

v

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Figure 1.7. Purchasing Managers’ Indices, 2020
Figure 1.8. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions
Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Monetary and Financial Conditions
Figure 1.10. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Figure 1.11. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, April–September 2020
Figure 1.12. GDP Losses: 2019–21 versus 2019–25
Figure 1.13. Per Capita GDP: Cumulative Growth, 2019–25
Figure 1.14. Ratio of Public Debt Service Costs to Government Tax Revenue
Figure 1.15. Change in Income Inequality since 1990
Figure 1.16. Contribution to Headline Inflation
Figure 1.17. Five-Year, Five-Year Inflation Swaps
Figure 1.18. Global Trade Volume Growth, Global Outward Foreign Direct Investment, and
Travel-Related Trade Services
Figure 1.19. Current Account and International Investment Positions
Figure 1.20. Fiscal Stance, 2019–21
Figure 1.21. Geopolitical Risk Index
Figure 1.22. Share of World Imports Affected by Countries’ Own Import Restrictions
Figure 1.23. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions
Figure 1.24. Output Gap Projections, 2020–23
Scenario Figure 1. Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against the COVID-19 Virus
Scenario Figure 2. Downside and Upside Scenarios: Global Real GDP
Figure 1.1.1. Purchasing-Power-Parity Revision for China
Figure 1.2.1. Positive Developments
Figure 1.2.2. Remaining Gaps
Figure 1.2.3. Telework Ability and Income Inequality
Figure 1.2.4. Beyond GDP Welfare Growth
Figure 1.3.1. Small and Medium Enterprises’ Liquidity and Solvency Concerns under
COVID-19 in 2020
Figure 1.3.2. Change in Share of Small and Medium Enterprises with Negative Equity,
by Policy Scenario and Region
Figure 1.4.1. Monthly Share of Countries Experiencing Unrest Implied by the Reported
Social Unrest Index
Figure 1.4.2. Daily Protest Articles for the United States, April–June 2020
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
Figure 1.SF.2. Oil Storage Capacity Utilization Rates
Figure 1.SF.3. Global Driving and Walking Mobility Indices
Figure 1.SF.4. Commodity Prices during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Figure 1.SF.5. Coal, 1850–2017
Figure 1.SF.6. Decomposition of Change in World Coal Intensity
Figure 1.SF.7. Coal Consumption, by Country
Figure 1.SF.8. Emission Factors
Figure 1.SF.9. Average Annual Carbon Dioxide Emissions
Figure 1.SF.10. Coal Phaseouts
Figure 1.SF.11. Levelized Cost of Electricity for New Investment, 2019
Figure 1.SF.12. Contribution to European Electricity Generation Growth
Figure 1.SF.13. Coal and Natural Gas Prices in 2020
Figure 1.SF.1.1. Contribution to World Emissions, by Country/Region
Figure 1.SF.1.2. Contribution to World Emissions, by Source
Figure 2.1. Lockdowns and Economic Activity

vi

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

4
5
6
7
7
12
12
13
14
16
16
17
18
18
20
20
21
21
28
29
32
35
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
43
44
44
45
47
47
48
49
49
50
51
52
52
54
54
67

contents

Figure 2.2. The Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social Distancing on Mobility
Figure 2.3. Further Insights into the Impact of Lockdowns on Mobility
Figure 2.4. The Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social Distancing on Job Postings
Figure 2.5. Job Postings, by Sector, around Stay-at-Home Orders
Figure 2.6. Differentiating the Mobility Impact of Lockdowns by Gender and Age Group
Figure 2.7. The Impact of Lockdowns on COVID-19 Infections
Figure 2.8. Individual Lockdown Measures and Nonlinear Effects
Figure 2.2.1. The Dampening Effects of Information Technology Adoption on US Unemployment
Figure 3.1. Risks from Unmitigated Climate Change
Figure 3.2. Environmental Policies and Share of Clean Innovation and Electricity Generation
Figure 3.3. Effect of Policy Tightening on Electricity Innovation, Electricity Generation, and
Employment, by Type of Technology
Figure 3.4. G-Cubed Model Simulations, Baseline
Figure 3.5. Global Temperature and CO2 Emissions
Figure 3.6. G-Cubed Model Simulations of Comprehensive Policy Package, Global Results
Figure 3.7. Medium- to Long-Term Output Gains from Climate Change Mitigation
Figure 3.8. Job Multipliers
Figure 3.9. G-Cubed Model Simulations of Comprehensive Policy Package,
Cross-Country Differences
Figure 3.10. G-Cubed Model Simulations, Partial Participation in Mitigation
Figure 3.11. Role of Green Technological Progress
Figure 3.12. Potential for Emission Reductions in the Electricity Sector
Figure 3.13. Distribution of Consumption, Employment, and Impact of Carbon Taxes
Figure 3.14. Public Opinion in Support of Environmental Protection
Figure 3.15. Distributional Impact of Feebates
Figure 3.2.1. Decarbonization of the Electricity Sector

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

68
70
71
71
72
73
74
79
86
90
91
95
95
97
98
98
100
101
102
103
104
104
106
108

vii

WORLD
WORLDECONOMIC
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK:
OUTLOOK:
TENSIONS
TK FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS

A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO).
It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July 24 to
August 21, 2020, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II
(ERM II), which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established
policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for
selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $41.69 a barrel
in 2020 and $46.70 a barrel in 2021 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the
six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on US dollar deposits will average 0.7 percent in 2020 and
0.4 percent in 2021; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average –0.4 percent in 2020 and –0.5 percent in
2021; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield, on average, 0.0 percent in 2020 and 2021. These
are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin
of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical
information available through September 28, 2020.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
–
between years or months (for example, 2019–20 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered,
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/
between years or months (for example, 2019/20) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of
1 percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and
government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2019 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please refer
to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts,
prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.
What is new in this publication:
• Following the recent release of the 2017 International Comparison Program (ICP) survey for new purchasingpower-parity benchmarks, the WEO’s estimates of purchasing-power-parity weights and GDP valued at
purchasing power parity have been updated. For more details, see Box 1.1 in the October 2020 WEO at
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2020/02/index.htm.
• Starting with the October 2020 WEO, data and forecasts for Bangladesh and Tonga are presented on a fiscal
year basis.
• Data for West Bank and Gaza are now included in the WEO. West Bank and Gaza is added to the Middle East
and Central Asia regional group.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
• If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.

viii

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Assumptions and Conventions

As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of
the weighted group data.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the
part of the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

ix

WORLD
WORLDECONOMIC
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK:
OUTLOOK:
TENSIONS
TK FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

FURTHER INFORMATION

Corrections and Revisions
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.

Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/29296.

Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the
IMF eLibrary at http://www.elibrary.imf.org/OCT20WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at
www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:

Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.

x

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

DATA

This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series
most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The historical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

xi

WORLD
WORLDECONOMIC
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK:
OUTLOOK:
TENSIONS
TK FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

PREFACE

The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department,
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Gita
Gopinath, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria Milesi-­Ferretti,
Deputy Director, Research Department, and Malhar Nabar, Division Chief, Research Department; Oya Celasun,
Division Chief, Research Department directed Chapter 3.
The primary contributors to this report are Philip Barrett, John Bluedorn, Christian Bogmans, Benjamin
Carton, Francesca Caselli, Johannes Eugster, Francesco Grigoli, Florence Jaumotte, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian,
Weifeng Liu, Adil Mohommad, Andrea Pescatori, Evgenia Pugacheva, Damiano Sandri, Marina Tavares, Nico
Valckx, and Simon Voigts.
Other contributors include Gavin Asdorian, Srijoni Banerjee, Eric Bang, Thomas Brand, Luisa Calixto, Sophia
Chen, Wenjie Chen, Gabriela Cugat, Sonali Das, Federico Diez, Angela Espiritu, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Jinjin He,
Mandy Hemmati, Youyou Huang, Benjamin Hunt, Christopher Johns, Jaden Jonghyuk Kim, Lama Kiyasseh,
Eduard Laurito, Jungjin Lee, Claire Mengyi Li, Chiara Maggi, Susanna Mursula, Futoshi Narita, Savannah
Newman, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Nicola Pierri, Yiyuan Qi, Daniela Rojas Fernandez, Max
Rozycki, Susie Xiaohui Sun, Nicholas Tong, Shan Wang, Julia Xueliang Wang, Yarou Xu, Hannah Leheng Yang,
and Huiyuan Zhao.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production
and editorial support from Christine Ebrahimzadeh, and editorial assistance from Lucy Scott Morales, James
Unwin, Harold Medina (and team), and Vector Talent Resources.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments,
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 30, 2020. However,
both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive
Directors or to their national authorities.

xii

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

FOREWORD

M

ore than one million lives have been lost
to COVID-19 since the start of the year
and the toll continues to rise. Many
more have suffered serious illness. Close
to 90 million people are expected to fall into extreme
deprivation this year.
These are difficult times, yet there are some reasons
to be hopeful. Testing has been ramped up, treatments
are improving, and vaccine trials have proceeded at
an unprecedented pace, with some now in the final
stage of testing. International solidarity has strengthened along some dimensions, from rolling back trade
restrictions on medical equipment to enhancing financial assistance for vulnerable countries. And recent
data suggest that many economies have started to
recover at a faster pace than anticipated after reopening from the Great Lockdown.
We are projecting a somewhat less severe though
still deep recession in 2020, relative to our June forecast. The revision is driven by second quarter GDP
outturns in large advanced economies, which were
not as negative as we had projected; China’s return
to growth, which was stronger than expected; and
signs of a more rapid recovery in the third quarter.
Outturns would have been much weaker if it weren’t
for sizable, swift, and unprecedented fiscal, monetary,
and regulatory responses that maintained disposable income for households, protected cash flow for
firms, and supported credit provision. Collectively
these actions have so far prevented a recurrence of the
financial catastrophe of 2008-09.
While the global economy is coming back, the
ascent will likely be long, uneven, and uncertain.
Indeed, compared to our forecast in June, prospects
have worsened significantly in some emerging market
and developing economies where infections are rising
rapidly. Consequently, emerging market and developing economies, excluding China, are projected to
incur a greater loss of output over 2020-21 relative to
the pre-pandemic projected path when compared to
advanced economies. These uneven recoveries significantly worsen the prospects for global convergence in
income levels.

Moreover, recovery is not assured while the pandemic continues to spread. With renewed upticks
in COVID-19 infections in places that had reduced
local transmission to low levels, re-openings have
paused, and targeted shutdowns are being reinstated.
Economies everywhere face difficult paths back to prepandemic activity levels.
Preventing further setbacks will require that policy
support is not prematurely withdrawn. The path
ahead will require skillful domestic policies that manage trade-offs between lifting near-term activity and
addressing medium-term challenges. The October
2020 Global Financial Stability Report highlights such
trade-offs for monetary policy. Sustaining the recovery will also require strong international cooperation
on health and financial support for countries facing
liquidity shortfalls. Finding the right policy mix is
daunting, but the experience of the past few months
provides grounds for cautious optimism that the priorities laid out in this report can be achieved.
A key aspect of combating the health crisis is to
ensure that all innovations, be they in testing, treatments, or vaccines, are produced at scale for the
benefit of all countries. Advance purchase commitments for vaccines under trial can help spur this
process for manufacturers who may otherwise hesitate
to bear the upfront cost. This effort should include a
strong multilateral component to help distribute doses
to all countries at affordable prices. More generally,
the global community will need to continue helping
countries with limited health care capacity through
sharing equipment, know-how, and through financial
support from international health agencies.
At the national level, governments have already
responded with a variety of fiscal countermeasures that
include efforts to cushion income losses, incentivize
hiring, expand social assistance, guarantee credit, and
inject equity into firms. These measures have prevented widespread firm bankruptcies and have helped
employment rebound partially. Employment and
labor force participation, however, remain well below
pre-pandemic levels, and many more millions of jobs
are at risk the longer this crisis continues. To preserve

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

xiii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

jobs, it is important for governments, where possible,
to continue to support viable but still vulnerable
firms with moratoria on debt service and equity-like
support. Over time, once the recovery has taken a
strong hold, policies should shift gradually to facilitating reallocation of workers from sectors likely to
shrink on a long-term basis (travel) to growing sectors
(e-commerce). Along the transition, workers will need
to be supported, including through income transfers,
retraining, and reskilling programs.
Advanced economies have generally been able to
deliver larger direct spending and liquidity support relative to GDP than others constrained by elevated debt
and higher borrowing costs. Those constrained countries will need to create room for immediate spending needs by prioritizing crisis countermeasures and
reducing poorly targeted subsidies. Some will require
additional help from creditors and donors through
debt restructuring, grants, and concessional financing,
building on important initiatives under way. The IMF
has been central to these initiatives through its joint call
with the World Bank on debt service suspension for
low-income countries, its call for reform of the international debt architecture, and its extension of funding at
unprecedented speed to several member countries.
Further complicating the task that countries face
is the need to address challenges coming out of the
pandemic. In this report we are releasing mediumterm growth projections for the first time since the
crisis started. While uncertainty remains substantial,
growth is expected to moderate significantly, following the projected rebound in global activity in 2021.
Both advanced and emerging market economies are
likely to register significant losses of output relative
to their pre-pandemic forecasts. Small states as well as
tourism-dependent and commodities-based economies
are in a particularly difficult spot.
Most economies will experience lasting damage
to supply potential, reflecting scars from the deep
recession this year and the need for structural change.
The persistent output losses imply a major setback to
living standards relative to what was expected before
the pandemic. Not only will the incidence of extreme
poverty rise for the first time in over two decades,
but inequality is set to increase because the crisis has
disproportionately affected women, the informally
employed, and those with relatively lower educational
attainment, as discussed in Chapter 2 of this report.
The loss of human capital accumulation after widespread school closures poses an additional challenge.
xiv

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Moreover, sovereign debt levels are set to increase
significantly even as downgrades to potential output
imply a smaller tax base that makes it harder to service the debt. On the plus side, the prospects of low
interest rates over a longer period, alongside the projected rebound in growth in 2021, can help alleviate
debt service burdens in many countries. To ensure
that debt remains on a sustainable path over the
medium-term governments may need to increase the
progressivity of their taxes and ensure that corporations pay their fair share of taxes while eliminating
wasteful spending.
Near-term support policies should be designed
with a view toward placing economies on paths
of stronger, equitable, and sustainable growth. As
discussed in Chapter 3 of this report, policymakers
can simultaneously aim to mitigate climate change
and bolster the recovery from the COVID-19 crisis.
This can be achieved through a comprehensive package that includes a sizable green public infrastructure
push, a gradual rise in carbon prices, and compensation for lower income households to make the
transition fair. More generally, expanding the safety
net where gaps exist can ensure the most vulnerable
are protected while supporting near-term activity, as
already seen, for example, in many advanced economies where disposable income remained relatively
stable even as GDP registered record collapses. And
investments in health and education (including to
remedy losses incurred during the pandemic) can
help achieve participatory and inclusive growth. The
October 2020 Fiscal Monitor makes a strong case
for public investment in these times of heightened
uncertainty.
We have already had significant policy innovations in the past few months: the establishment of
the European Union pandemic recovery package
fund, the launch of asset purchases by emerging
market central banks, and the novel use of digital
technologies to deliver social assistance in places like
sub-Saharan Africa. Such actions have prevented even
more extreme collapses and are a powerful reminder
that effective, well-designed policies protect people
and collective economic well-being. Building on these
actions, policies for the next stage of the crisis must
seek lasting improvements in the global economy that
create secure, prosperous futures for all.
Gita Gopinath
Economic Counsellor and Director of Research

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The global economy is climbing out from the
depths to which it had plummeted during the Great
Lockdown in April. But with the COVID-19 pandemic continuing to spread, many countries have
slowed reopening and some are reinstating partial
lockdowns to protect susceptible populations. While
recovery in China has been faster than expected, the
global economy’s long ascent back to pre-pandemic
levels of activity remains prone to setbacks.

Global Growth Outlook and Risks
Near-term outlook. Global growth is projected at
−4.4 percent in 2020, a less severe contraction than
forecast in the June 2020 World Economic Outlook
(WEO) Update. The revision reflects better-­thananticipated second quarter GDP outturns, mostly in
advanced economies, where activity began to improve
sooner than expected after lockdowns were scaled back
in May and June, as well as indicators of a stronger
recovery in the third quarter. Global growth is projected at 5.2 percent in 2021, a little lower than in the
June 2020 WEO Update, reflecting the more moderate downturn projected for 2020 and consistent with
expectations of persistent social distancing. Following
the contraction in 2020 and recovery in 2021, the
level of global GDP in 2021 is expected to be a modest 0.6 percent above that of 2019. The growth projections imply wide negative output gaps and elevated
unemployment rates this year and in 2021 across both
advanced and emerging market economies.
Medium-term outlook. After the rebound in 2021,
global growth is expected to gradually slow to about
3.5 percent into the medium term. This implies only
limited progress toward catching up to the path of
economic activity for 2020–25 projected before the
pandemic for both advanced and emerging market
and developing economies. It is also a severe setback to
the projected improvement in average living standards
across all country groups. The pandemic will reverse
the progress made since the 1990s in reducing global
poverty and will increase inequality. People who rely on
daily wage labor and are outside the formal safety net

faced sudden income losses when mobility restrictions
were imposed. Among them, migrant workers who
live far from home had even less recourse to traditional
support networks. Close to 90 million people could
fall below the $1.90 a day income threshold of extreme
deprivation this year. In addition, school closures during the pandemic pose a significant new challenge that
could set back human capital accumulation severely.
The subdued outlook for medium-term growth
comes with a significant projected increase in the
stock of sovereign debt. Downward revisions to
potential output also imply a smaller tax base over the
medium term than previously envisaged, compounding difficulties in servicing debt obligations.
The baseline projection assumes that social distancing
will continue into 2021 but will subsequently fade over
time as vaccine coverage expands and therapies improve.
Local transmission is assumed to be brought to low levels everywhere by the end of 2022. The medium-term
projections also assume that economies will experience scarring from the depth of the recession and the
need for structural change, entailing persistent effects
on potential output. These effects include adjustment
costs and productivity impacts for surviving firms as
they upgrade workplace safety, the amplification of the
shock via firm bankruptcies, costly resource reallocation
across sectors, and discouraged workers’ exit from the
workforce. The scarring is expected to compound forces
that dragged productivity growth lower across many
economies in the years leading up to the pandemic—
relatively slow investment growth weighing on physical
capital accumulation, more modest improvements in
human capital, and slower efficiency gains in combining
technology with factors of production.
Risks. The uncertainty surrounding the baseline
projection is unusually large. The forecast rests on
public health and economic factors that are inherently
difficult to predict. A first layer relates to the path
of the pandemic, the needed public health response,
and the associated domestic activity disruptions, most
notably for contact-intensive sectors. Another source
of uncertainty is the extent of global spillovers from
soft demand, weaker tourism, and lower remittances.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

xv

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

A third set of factors comprises financial market sentiment and its implications for global capital flows.
Moreover, there is uncertainty surrounding the damage
to supply potential—which will depend on the persistence of the pandemic shock, the size and effectiveness of the policy response, and the extent of sectoral
resource mismatches.
Progress with vaccines and treatments, as well as
changes in the workplace and by consumers to reduce
transmission, may allow activity to return more rapidly to pre-pandemic levels than currently projected,
without triggering repeated waves of infection. And an
extension of fiscal countermeasures into 2021 could
also lift growth above the forecast, which factors in
only the measures implemented and announced so far.
However, the risk of worse growth outcomes than
projected remains sizable. If the virus resurges, progress
on treatments and vaccines is slower than anticipated,
or countries’ access to them remains unequal, economic activity could be lower than expected, with
renewed social distancing and tighter lockdowns. Considering the severity of the recession and the possible
withdrawal of emergency support in some countries,
rising bankruptcies could compound job and income
losses. Deteriorating financial sentiment could trigger
a sudden stop in new lending (or failure to roll over
existing debt) to vulnerable economies. And cross-­
border spillovers from weaker external demand could
amplify the impact of country-specific shocks.

Policy Priorities: Near-Term Imperatives,
Medium-Term Challenges
Besides combating the deep near-term recession,
policymakers have to address complex challenges to
place economies on a path of higher productivity
growth while ensuring that gains are shared evenly and
debt remains sustainable. Many countries already face
difficult trade-offs between implementing measures
to support near-term growth and avoiding a further
buildup of debt that will be hard to service down the
road, considering the crisis’s hit to potential output.
Policies to support the economy in the near term should
therefore be designed with an eye to guiding economies
to paths of stronger, equitable, and resilient growth.
Tax and spending measures should privilege initiatives
that can help lift potential output, ensure participatory
growth that benefits all, and protect the vulnerable. The
additional debt incurred to finance such endeavors is
more likely to pay for itself down the road by increasing
xvi

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

the size of the economy and future tax base than if the
borrowing were done to finance ill-targeted subsidies
or wasteful current spending. Investments in health,
education, and high-return infrastructure projects that
also help move the economy to lower carbon dependence can further those objectives. Research spending
can facilitate innovation and technology adoption—the
principal drivers of long-term productivity growth.
Moreover, safeguarding critical social spending can
ensure that the most vulnerable are protected while also
supporting near-term activity, given that the outlays will
go to groups with a higher propensity to spend their
disposable income than more affluent individuals. In
all instances, adhering to the highest standards of debt
transparency will be essential to avoid future rollover
difficulties and higher sovereign risk premiums that raise
borrowing costs across the economy.
Given the global nature of the shock and common
challenges across countries, strong multilateral efforts
are needed to fight the health and economic crisis. A
key priority is funding advance purchase commitments
at the global level for vaccines currently under trial to
incentivize rapid scaling up of production and worldwide distribution of affordable doses (for example, by
bolstering multilateral initiatives for vaccine development and manufacture, including the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and Gavi, the
Vaccine Alliance). This is particularly important given
the uncertainty and risk of failure in the search for
effective and safe vaccines. A related priority is to help
countries with limited health care capacity.
Beyond assistance with medical equipment and
know-how, several emerging market and developing
economies—in particular low-income countries—require
support from the international community through debt
relief, grants, and concessional financing. Where debt
restructuring is needed, creditors and low-income-country and emerging market borrowers should quickly agree
on mutually acceptable terms. The global financial safety
net can further help countries deal with external funding shortfalls. Since the onset of the crisis, the IMF has
expeditiously provided funding from its various lending
facilities to about 80 countries at unprecedented speed.
For many countries, sustaining economic activity
and helping individuals and firms most in need—while
ensuring that debt remains sustainable—is a daunting task, given high public debt, the spending needs
triggered by the crisis, and the hit to public revenues.
Governments should do all that they can to combat
the health crisis and mitigate the deep downturn while

Executive Summary

being ready to adjust policy strategy as the pandemic
and its impact on activity evolve. Where fiscal rules
may constrain action, their temporary suspension
would be warranted, combined with a commitment to a gradual consolidation path after the crisis
abates to restore compliance with the rules over the
medium term. Room for immediate spending needs
could be created by prioritizing crisis countermeasures
and reducing wasteful and poorly targeted subsidies.
Extending maturities on public debt and locking in low
interest rates to the extent possible would help reduce
debt service and free up resources to be redirected
toward crisis mitigation efforts. Although adopting
new revenue measures during the crisis will be difficult,
governments may need to consider raising progressive
taxes on more affluent individuals and those relatively
less affected by the crisis (including increasing tax rates
on higher income brackets, high-end property, capital
gains, and wealth) as well as changes to corporate taxation that ensure firms pay taxes commensurate with
profitability. Countries should also cooperate on the
design of international corporate taxation to respond to
the challenges of the digital economy.
With the pandemic continuing to spread, all
countries—­including those where infections appear
to have peaked—need to ensure that their health care
systems can cope with elevated demand. This means
securing adequate resources and prioritizing health care
spending as needed, including on testing; contact tracing;
personal protective equipment; life-­saving equipment,
such as ventilators; and facilities, such as emergency
rooms, intensive care units, and isolation wards.
Countries where infections continue to rise need
to contain the pandemic with mitigation measures
that slow transmission. As Chapter 2 shows, lockdowns are effective in bringing down infections.
Mitigation measures—a much-needed investment in
public health—set the stage for an eventual economic
recovery from the downturn brought on by mobility
constraints. Economic policy in such cases should limit
the damage by cushioning income losses for affected
people and firms while also supporting resource reallocation away from contact-intensive sectors that are
likely to be constrained for an extended period of
time. Retraining and reskilling should be pursued to
the extent feasible so that workers can look for jobs in
other sectors. Because the transition may take a while,
displaced workers will need extended income support
as they retrain and search for jobs. Complementing
such measures, broad-based accommodative monetary

and fiscal responses—where fiscal space exists—can
help prevent deeper and longer-­lasting downturns,
even if their ability to stimulate spending is initially
hampered by mobility restrictions.
As countries reopen, policies must support the
recovery by gradually removing targeted support,
facilitating the reallocation of workers and resources to
sectors less affected by social distancing, and providing
stimulus where needed to the extent possible. Some
fiscal resources freed from targeted support should
be redeployed to public investment—including in
renewable energy, improving the efficiency of power
transmission, and retrofitting buildings to reduce their
carbon footprint. Moreover, as lifelines are unwound,
social spending should be expanded to protect the
most vulnerable where gaps exist in the safety net.
In those cases, authorities could enhance paid family
and sick leave, expand eligibility for unemployment
insurance, and strengthen health care benefit coverage
as needed. Where inflation expectations are anchored,
accommodative monetary policy can help during the
transition by containing borrowing costs.
Beyond the pandemic, multilateral cooperation is
needed to defuse trade and technology tensions between
countries and address gaps—for instance in services
trade—in the rules-based multilateral trading system.
Countries must also act collectively to implement their
climate change mitigation commitments. As discussed in
Chapter 3, joint action—particularly by the largest emitters—that combines steadily rising carbon prices with
a green investment push is needed to reduce emissions
consistent with limiting increases in global temperature
to the targets of the 2015 Paris Agreement. A broadly
adopted, growth-friendly mitigation package could raise
global activity through investment in green infrastructure
over the near term, with modest output costs over the
medium term as economies transition away from fossil
fuels toward cleaner technologies. Relative to unchanged
policies, such a package would significantly boost
incomes in the second half of the century by avoiding
damages and catastrophic risks from climate change.
Moreover, health outcomes would begin to improve
immediately in many countries thanks to reduced local
air pollution. The global community should also take
urgent steps to strengthen its defenses against calamitous
health crises, for example by augmenting stockpiles of
protective equipment and essential medical supplies,
financing research, and ensuring adequate ongoing
assistance to countries with limited health care capacity,
including through support of international organizations.
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

xvii

CHAPTER

1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Global Economy Climbing Out of the Depths,
Prone to Setbacks
The months after the release of the June 2020
World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update have offered a
glimpse of how difficult rekindling economic activity
will be while the pandemic surges. During May and
June, as many economies tentatively reopened from the
Great Lockdown, the global economy started to climb
from the depths to which it had plunged in April.
But with the pandemic spreading and accelerating in
places, many countries slowed reopening, and some are
reinstating partial lockdowns. While the swift recovery in China has surprised on the upside, the global
economy’s long ascent back to pre-pandemic levels of
activity remains prone to setbacks.
•• Activity picked up in May and June as economies
reopened. The strengthening from the trough in
April was most evident, not surprisingly, in retail
sales, where discretionary consumer spending
rose with reopening (Figure 1.1). Firms, however,
remained cautious in responding to this revival:
industrial production in many countries is still well
below December levels.
•• Second quarter GDP outturns, on balance, delivered positive surprises. As economies reopened and
released constraints on spending, overall activity
normalized faster than anticipated in the June 2020
WEO Update. GDP outturns for the second quarter
surprised on the upside in China (where, after
lockdowns eased in early April, public investment
helped boost activity to return to positive growth
in the second quarter) and the United States and
euro area (where both economies contracted at a
historic pace in the second quarter, but less severely
than projected, with government transfers supporting household incomes). The news, however, was
not uniformly positive. Second quarter GDP was
weaker than projected, for instance, where domestic
demand plunged following a very sharp compression in consumption and a collapse in investment
(such as in India), where the pandemic continued
to spread (such as in Mexico), where soft external
demand weighed particularly heavily on exporting

sectors (for example, in Korea), and where significant weakening of remittance flows weighed on
domestic spending (for example, in the Philippines).
•• Global trade began recovering in June as lockdowns
were eased (Figure 1.2). China is an important
contributor. Its exports recovered from deep declines
earlier in the year, supported by an earlier restart of
activity and a strong pickup in external demand for
medical equipment and for equipment to support
the shift to remote working.
•• The pandemic continues to spread. By late September,
the number of confirmed infections worldwide
exceeded 33 million, with over a million deaths—
up from more than 7 million infections and
400,000 deaths at the time of the June 2020 WEO
Update. Confirmed cases rose dramatically in the
United States, Latin America, India, and South Africa.
Moreover, there were renewed upticks in places that
had previously flattened the infection curve: Australia,
Japan, Spain, and France.
•• Reopening has stalled. Confronting renewed upticks,
countries slowed their reopening during August
and reinstated partial lockdowns in some cases
(Figure 1.3).
The deep wounds to the global economy from the
pandemic recession are further evident in labor market
indicators and inflation outcomes.
•• Labor market. According to the International Labour
Organization, the global reduction in work hours
in the second quarter of 2020 compared with the
fourth quarter of 2019 was equivalent to the loss of
400 million full-time jobs, deepening from equivalent 155 million full-time jobs lost in the first
quarter. Women in the labor force, particularly those
informally employed, have been disproportionately
affected by the pandemic and lockdowns needed
to slow the spread of the virus: the International
Labour Organization estimates that 42 percent
of informally employed women work in severely
affected sectors of the economy, compared with
about 32 percent of men in informal employment.
Consistent with the pattern for global activity

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.1. Industrial Production and Retail Sales

Figure 1.2. Global Activity Indicators

(Index, December 2019 = 100; seasonally adjusted)

(Three-month moving average, annualized percent change; deviations
from 50 for manufacturing PMI, unless noted otherwise)

Retail sales have generally recovered stronger than industrial production.
Global trade and industrial production picked up as lockdowns were eased.
120 1. Industrial Production—Manufacturing
10

110

5

105

0

100

100
80
United States
Germany
China
Russia

60
40

–5

20
Dec.
2019
110

Japan
France
India
Brazil

Jan.
20

Feb.
20

Mar.
20

Apr.
20

May
20

Jun.
20

Jul.
20

Aug.
20

–10

2. Volume of Retail Sales
–15

100
90
80
70

95
Industrial production
Monthly world trade volumes (seasonally adjusted,
2017=100, right scale)
Manufacturing PMI: New orders

–20
United States
Germany
China
Brazil

60
Dec.
2019

Jan.
20

Feb.
20

Japan
France
Russia
Mar.
20

85

2017

18

19

80
Aug.
20

Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics;
Markit Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: PMI = purchasing managers’ index.
Apr.
20

May
20

Jun.
20

Jul.
20

Aug.
20

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.

and trade, employment and labor force indicators
have improved since May. For example, the unemployment rate fell substantially and job creation
increased in the United States, applications to
Germany’s Kurzarbeit reduced-hours work program
slowed sharply in May and continued declining
steadily throughout August, and female labor force
participation had partially recovered in Japan as of
July after close to 1 million women left the labor
force from January to April.
•• Inflation. While prices of such items as medical
supplies increased and commodity prices lifted from
their April trough (Commodities Special Feature;
Figure 1.4), the effects of weak aggregate demand
appear to have outweighed the impact of supply
interruptions.1 In sequential terms, inflation in
1The assessment is subject to an important caveat. The basket of
goods and services used to measure consumer price inflation may
not be representative of actual consumption patterns during the pandemic and may underestimate the true increase in the cost of living.

2

90

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

advanced economies remains below pre-pandemic
levels (Figure 1.5). In emerging market and developing economies inflation declined sharply in the initial
stages of the pandemic, although it has since picked
up in some countries (India, for example, reflecting
supply disruptions and a rise in food prices).
A unique recession. The downturn triggered by the
COVID-19 pandemic has been very different from
past recessions. In previous downturns, service-oriented
sectors have tended to suffer smaller growth declines
than manufacturing. In the current crisis, the public
health response needed to slow transmission, together
with behavioral changes, has meant that service sectors
reliant on face-to-face interactions—particularly
wholesale and retail trade, hospitality, and arts and
entertainment—have seen larger contractions than
manufacturing (Figure 1.6). The scale of disruption
indicates that, without a vaccine and effective therapies
to combat the virus, such sectors face a particularly
difficult path back to any semblance of normalcy.
A strong rebound in the third quarter, but slowing
momentum entering the fourth quarter. High-frequency
indicators suggest a strong, albeit partial, rebound in

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.3. Government Lockdowns and Economic
Responses to COVID-19: Global Index

Figure 1.5. Global Inﬂation

Reopening has slowed as new infections have increased.

Inﬂation generally remains below pre-pandemic levels.

Government Response Index
Containment and Health Index

(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change)

Stringency Index
Economic Support Index

Consumer price inﬂation

Core consumer price inﬂation

3 1. Advanced Economies1

90

2

80

1

70
60

0

50

–1

40

–2

2017

18

19

Aug.
20

30
7 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies2

20

6

10
0

5
Jan.
2020

Feb.
20

Mar.
20

Apr.
20

May
20

Jun.
20

Jul.
20

Aug.
20

Sep.
20

4
3
2

Source: Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.

1
0

Figure 1.4. Commodity Prices

–1

Commodity prices have lifted since April.

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Country lists use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1
Advanced economies are AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, FIN,
FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR, PRT,
SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA.
2
Emerging market and developing economies are BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN,
IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF.

(Deﬂated using US consumer price index; 2014 = 100)

Average petroleum spot price

Food

Metals

120
110

2017

18

19

Aug.
20

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20

2014

15

16

17

18

19

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.

Aug.
20

activity in the third quarter, after the trough in the second quarter. However, momentum going into the fourth
quarter appears to be slowing. Business surveys of purchasing managers show firms in the United States, euro
area, China, and Brazil, for example, expanded output
successively in July and August compared with the previous month, whereas the opposite was true elsewhere (for
instance, in India, Japan, and Korea)—(Figure 1.7). For
September, these indicators point to stronger activity in
manufacturing but some setback for services, most likely
reflecting the increase in infections. Other high-frequency
data suggest a leveling off in activity—as reflected, for
example, in daily consumer spending in the United States
(see the Opportunity Insights Economic Tracker 2020).
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

3

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.7. Purchasing Managers’ Indices, 2020

Figure 1.6. Sectoral Growth and the Business Cycle

(Index; 50+ = expansion)

In the COVID-19 recession, service sectors have seen larger contractions than has
manufacturing.
6 1. Average, Trend Value-Added Growth
(Percentage points)
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
Total A B C D&E F G H I J
economy

Business surveys of purchasing managers suggest a strong but only partial
rebound in activity after the trough in the second quarter.

April
70

K

L M&N O

P

Q R&S

20
10
0

70
60

–9

50
G

H

I

J

K

L M&N O

P

Q R&S

JPN USA DEU EA FRA
MEX IDN RUS COL BRA
KOR AUS ITA ESP GBR
IND THA CHN TUR
World

2. Services PMI: Business Activity

40
30
20

6 3. Average Value-Added Growth, 2020:H11
(Year-over-year percent change)
3

10

0

0

–3

JPN

ITA
USA

–6
–9

EA
ESP

GBR
DEU

AUS
FRA

BRA
IND

RUS
CHN

Sources: IHS Markit; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area; PMI = purchasing managers’ indices. Data labels use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

–12
–15
–18

1. Manufacturing PMI: Output

30

–6

C D&E F

August

40

–3

B

July

50

0

Total A
economy

June

60

6 2. Average, Detrended Value-Added Growth in Recessions
(Percentage points)
3

–12

May

Total A
economy

B,
D&E

C

F

G,
H, I

J

K

L

M&N

O, R&S,
P, Q T, U

Sources: EU KLEMS; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Underlying data in panels 1 and 2 are annual for 1995–2017. Sector
groupings in panel 3 are slightly different from those in panels 1 and 2 because of
reporting differences in the quarterly sectoral national data. Recessions are years of
negative total value-added growth. “Total economy” indicates value added for the
economy as a whole. Country sample comprises Austria, Belgium, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. Sectors are ISIC rev.4: A = agriculture, forestry, and ﬁshing;
B = mining and quarrying; C = manufacturing; D&E = utilities; F = construction;
G = wholesale and retail trade; H = transportation; I = accommodation and food
services; J = information and communication; K = ﬁnancial and insurance
activities; L = real estate; M&N = professional and administrative services;
O = public administration and defense; P = education; Q = human health and social
work; R&S = arts, entertainment, recreation, and other services; T = activities of
households as employers and undifferentiated goods-and-services-producing
activities of households for own use; U = activities of extraterritorial organizations
and bodies.
1
Excludes Japan due to lack of sectoral detail. 2020:Q1 year-over-year growth is
used for the United States in panel 3 calculations due to lack of data on 2020:Q2.

4

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Moreover, weekly initial jobless claims in the United
States continued close to 1 million into late September,
indicating sustained widespread layoffs and adverse
impacts on household income.
Massive policy support has prevented worse outcomes.
The bleak numbers that mark the COVID-19 recession would have constituted far worse signposts had
massive policy support not thwarted further slides
in activity. As discussed in the October 2020 Fiscal
Monitor, discretionary revenue and spending measures
announced so far in advanced economies amount to
more than 9 percent of GDP, with another 11 percent
in various forms of liquidity support, including equity
injections, asset purchases, loans, and credit guarantees. The response in emerging market and developing

World

CHAPTER 1

economies is smaller but still sizable: about 3.5 percent
of GDP in discretionary budget measures and more
than 2 percent in liquidity support.
New policy initiatives have also helped lift sentiment.
Beyond their sheer scale, the novelty of the policy
actions has also supported sentiment. Prominent
examples of new initiatives include the €750 billion
European Union pandemic recovery package–fund
(more than half of it grant-based) and a wide range of
temporary lifeline policies worldwide. The latter have
included cash and in-kind transfers to affected firms and
households; wage subsidies to maintain employment;
expanded unemployment insurance coverage; tax
deferrals; and regulatory initiatives to ease classification
rules and provisioning requirements for banks’ nonperforming loans, together with the release of buffers to
help absorb losses. Central bank actions in advanced
economies have involved more diverse, larger scales of
asset purchases and relending facilities, supporting credit
provision to a wide range of borrowers. The Federal
Reserve also announced changes in its monetary policy
strategy, moving to a flexible average inflation target of
2 percent over time. Emerging market central banks’
responses combined interest rate cuts, new relending
facilities, and, for the first time in many cases, asset
purchases (see Chapter 2 of the October 2020 Global
Financial Stability Report [GFSR]).
Financial conditions have generally continued to ease.
These aggressive policy countermeasures have played a
vital role in supporting sentiment and preventing further amplification of the COVID-19 shock through the
financial system. Financial conditions have eased since
June for advanced economies and for most emerging
market and developing economies, implying a continuing disconnect between financial markets and the real
economy that partly reflects the unprecedented policy
support (as discussed in the October 2020 GFSR).
•• Equity markets in advanced economies have mostly
regained (and in some cases exceeded) their levels
from the start of the year, sovereign bond yields are
broadly unchanged or have declined further since
June (as seen in Italy since the European Union’s
pandemic recovery package was established and
the European Central Bank’s pandemic emergency
purchase program was expanded), and corporate
spreads have dropped further, particularly for highyield credit (benefiting, in the United States, from
the Federal Reserve’s targeted lending facilities),
as shown in Figure 1.8. The decline in interest
rates reflects a combination of a lower return on

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.8. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial
Market Conditions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

Financial conditions imply a continuing disconnect between ﬁnancial markets and
the real economy.
2. Policy Rate Expectations1
(Dashed lines are
from the April 2020
WEO)
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom

3.5 1. US Policy Rate
Expectations1
3.0
2.5
2.0

Mar. 21, 2019
Sep. 30, 2019

1.5
1.0

Mar. 25, 2020
Sep. 23, 2020

0.5

2019

20

21

22

Sep.
23

2020

21

4. Credit Spreads2
(Basis points)

1,200
1,000

US high grade
US high yield
Euro high grade
Euro high yield

800
600
400

1

200

0
2017

18

19

Sep.
20

150 5. Equity Markets2
(Index, 2017 = 100)
140

2017

18

0
Sep.
20

19

6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios2
United States
Germany

S&P 500

Japan
Italy

110

60

30

20

100

70

35

25

120

90
80

0.5

–1.0
Sep.
23

22

2

130

1.0

–0.5

Government Bond
6 3. Ten-Year
Yields2
United States
5
Japan
United Kingdom
Germany
4
Italy
3

–1

1.5

0.0

0.0
–0.5

2.0

15

TOPIX
Euro Stoxx
MSCI Emerging Market
2017

18

19

10
Sep.
20

2017

18

5
Sep.
20

19

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s;
TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated September 23, 2020.
2
Data are through September 23, 2020.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

safe assets (consistent with expectations of central
bank policy rates remaining low into the foreseeable future) and compression of risk premiums—as
shown in panels 1 through 4 of Figure 1.8.
•• Sovereign yields in emerging markets have generally
declined in recent months. Spreads over US Treasury
securities, which had begun falling after the Federal Reserve’s aggressive actions in March to offset
tighter financial conditions and dollar liquidity
shortages, have continued to compress since June
in line with stronger risk appetite (Figure 1.9).
Equity markets in emerging market and developing
economies have also generally firmed up since June
(notably in China). Steps to support dollar liquidity
(such as central bank swap lines), together with the
recovery under way in China, have helped rekindle
portfolio flows to some emerging markets after the
sharp reversal in March (Figure 1.10). Nonetheless,
as noted in the October 2020 GFSR, the recovery
in portfolio flows is uneven, with some countries
continuing to experience large outflows.
•• Among major currencies, the dollar depreciated by
over 4 ½ percent in real effective terms between
April and late September, reflecting improving global
risk sentiment and concerns about the impact of rising COVID-19 cases on the speed of the US recovery. During the same period, the euro appreciated by
close to 4 percent on improving economic prospects
and slower increases in COVID-19 cases. The
currencies of commodity exporters among advanced
economies strengthened as commodity prices firmed.
Most emerging market currencies recovered between
April and June, after the severe pressures during the
market turmoil in March. Since then the Chinese
renminbi has strengthened and the currencies
of other Asian emerging market economies have
generally remained stable in real effective terms. In
contrast, the Russian ruble depreciated on geopolitical factors and the currencies of countries severely
affected by the pandemic or with a vulnerable external or fiscal position (such as Argentina, Brazil, and
Turkey) have also weakened (Figure 1.11).

Considerations for the Forecast
Fundamental uncertainty regarding the pandemic and
associated factors. The full extent of the contraction in
the second quarter of 2020 has become clearer since the
June 2020 WEO Update, providing a more informed
basis for the near-term forecast. But the persistence
6

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Monetary and
Financial Conditions
Emerging market sovereign spreads over US Treasury securities declined after the
Federal Reserve’s actions in March to offset tighter ﬁnancial conditions and dollar
liquidity shortages.
Brazil
Turkey
Argentina (right scale)

China
Mexico
25 1. Policy Rate
(Percent)

2. Ten-Year Government
Bond Yields1
(Percent)

80
70

20

26
22

60

15

50

10

40

18
14
10

30
5

6

20

0

17

18

10
Aug.
20

19

1
1,200 3. Change in EMBI Spreads
(Basis points)

800

ARG
(2,618)

2017

18

19

2
Sep.
20

March 23, 2020, versus January 1, 2020
Latest versus March 23, 2020

400
0
–400
–800

ARG
(–2,972)
ARG CHL COL HUN IND MYS PER POL RUS TUN
BRA CHN EGY IDN MAR MEX PHL ROU TUR ZAF

150 4. Equity Markets
(2017 = 100)
140
China
Emerging Asia
130
excluding China
120

5. Equity Markets
(2017 = 100)

140

Argentina

120
100
Brazil
Mexico
Russia
South Africa
Turkey

110
100
90
80

160

2017

18

19

Aug.
20

2017

18

80
60
40
19

20
Aug.
20

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial
Statistics; Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Data are through September 22, 2020.

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.10. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
The recovery in portfolio ﬂows to emerging markets has been uneven, with some
continuing to experience large outﬂows.
60 1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
(Billions of US dollars)
40
Bond

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.11. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes,
April–September 2020
(Percent)

Major currency movements have reﬂected shifts in risk sentiment.
Equity

Latest versus June 2020

June 2020 versus April 2020

20

8 1. Advanced Economies

0
–20

6

–40

4

–60

2017

10 2. Capital Inﬂows
(Percent of GDP)
8

18

19

Sep.
20

Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America

6

–2

Total

–4
–6

2

2017

18

19

10 3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
8
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
6
Latin America
4

20:
Q2

China
Saudi Arabia
Total

JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL

0
2017

18

10 4. Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
8
Emerging Europe
6
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
4

19

20:
Q2

Total

0
18

0
–3
–6
–9

ZAF

CHN

IND

IDN

MYS

PHL

THA

HUN

POL

RUS

TUR

ARG

BRA

CHL

COL

MEX

19

20:
Q2

Sources: EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. Capital
outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. Emerging Asia
excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and
Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Hungary, Poland, Romania, Russia, and
Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.

PER

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Latest data available are for September 25, 2020. Data
labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

China
Saudi Arabia

2

2017

6
3

–12
–15

2

–2

USA EA

12 2. Emerging Market Economies
9

0

–2

0

China
Saudi Arabia

4

–2

2

of the shock remains uncertain and relates to factors
inherently difficult to predict, including the path of
the pandemic, the adjustment costs it imposes on the
economy, the effectiveness of the economic policy
response, and the evolution of financial sentiment.
The baseline forecast rests on the following considerations and assumptions:
•• Stronger-than-anticipated GDP outturns in the second
quarter. The developments discussed in the previous
section suggest that the worst may be over for now,
but nothing is assured while the pandemic worsens
and stalls reopening. A slightly less severe hit to
activity than previously projected for the second
quarter implies an upward revision to the 2020 forecast. But other considerations weigh on the forecast
for 2021 and beyond.
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

7

PAK

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

•• Persistent social distancing and enhanced workplace
safety standards. The baseline projection assumes that
social distancing will continue into 2021 but will
then fade over time as vaccine coverage expands and
therapies improve, with local transmission brought
to low levels everywhere by the end of 2022. Vaccine trials have progressed at an unprecedented rate,
and some have reached the final testing phase prior
to approval or rejection. Nonetheless, even after
approval, vaccine coverage is likely to expand only
gradually as it will take time to scale up production
and distribute adequate doses worldwide at affordable prices. In countries where infection rates appear
to have gone past their peak, persistent behavioral
changes, together with enhanced workplace hygiene
and safety standards, are assumed to keep new
infections at a level that allows health care systems
to cope with the caseload and without requiring a
return to economy-wide lockdowns. For other countries where infections are still rising, the baseline
also assumes the possibility of renewed lockdowns
for particular zones, even if stringent nationwide
shutdowns are not repeated.
•• Scarring. As in the WEO forecasts in April and June,
the baseline also assumes that the deep downturn
this year will damage supply potential to varying
degrees across economies. The impact will depend
on various factors discussed in the section on the
medium-term growth outlook, including the extent
of firm closures, exit of discouraged workers from
the labor force, and resource mismatches (sectoral,
occupational, and geographic).
•• Policy support and financial conditions. Fiscal policy
settings in the baseline reflect the $6 trillion direct
tax and spending measures announced and implemented worldwide so far in response to the crisis
(see the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor). Major
central banks are assumed to maintain their current
settings throughout the forecast horizon to the end
of 2025. The baseline forecast is consistent with
financial conditions remaining broadly at current
levels.
•• Commodity prices. Average petroleum spot prices per
barrel are projected at $41 in 2020 and $43.8 in
2021, higher than in the April and June forecasts.
Oil futures curves indicate that prices are expected
to rise thereafter toward $48, some 25 percent
below the 2019 average. Nonfuel commodity prices
are expected to rise faster than assumed in April
and June.
8

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Partial Recovery from Deep Recession
Expected in 2021
Global growth is projected at –4.4 percent in 2020,
0.8 percentage point above the June 2020 WEO Update
forecast (Table 1.1). The stronger projection for 2020
compared with the June 2020 WEO Update reflects
the net effect of two competing factors: the upward
impetus from better-than-anticipated second quarter
GDP outturns (mostly in advanced economies) versus
the downdraft from persistent social distancing and
stalled reopenings in the second half of the year. As
explained in Box 1.1, the global growth forecast and
the forecast for regional aggregates in Table 1.1 use an
updated set of purchasing-power-parity weights for
individual economies following the release of the 2017
survey of the International Comparison Program.2
As discussed, a recovery has taken root in the third
quarter of 2020. It is expected to strengthen gradually
over 2021. The recovery is likely to be characterized
by persistent social distancing until health risks are
addressed (as discussed in Chapter 2)—and countries
may have to again tighten mitigation measures
depending on the spread of the virus (see also Online
Annex 1.2 of the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor). Global
growth is projected at 5.2 percent in 2021, 0.2 percentage point lower than in the June 2020 WEO
Update. The projected 2021 rebound following the
deep 2020 downturn implies a small expected increase
in global GDP over 2020–21 of 0.6 percentage
point relative to 2019.
Growth in the advanced economy group is projected
at –5.8 percent in 2020, 2.3 percentage points stronger
than in the June 2020 WEO Update. The upward
revision reflects, in particular, the better-than-­foreseen
US and euro area GDP outturns in the second quarter.
In 2021 the advanced economy growth rate is projected to strengthen to 3.9 percent, leaving 2021
GDP for the group some 2 percent below what it was
in 2019. The US economy is projected to contract
by 4.3 percent, before growing at 3.1 percent in 2021.
A deeper contraction of 8.3 percent is projected for
2The main shift in global weights compared with the previous
set is an increase of 3 percentage points in the relative weight of
advanced economies (from 40 percent to 43 percent for 2019),
offset by a reduction in the relative weight of emerging market and
developing economies, most notably China and India. Because the
new set increases the weight attached to slower-growing advanced
economies, the aggregation of the June 2020 WEO Update country
forecasts with the new purchasing-power-parity weights yields a
slightly lower projection for world growth in 2020 (–5.2 percent)
than the one shown in June (–4.9 percent).

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

2019
2.8

Projections
2020
2021
–4.4
5.2

Difference from June
2020 WEO Update1
2020
2021
0.8
–0.2

Difference from April
2020 WEO1
2020
2021
–1.1
–0.5

1.7
2.2
1.3
0.6
1.5
0.3
2.0
0.7
1.5
1.7
1.7

–5.8
–4.3
–8.3
–6.0
–9.8
–10.6
–12.8
–5.3
–9.8
–7.1
–3.8

3.9
3.1
5.2
4.2
6.0
5.2
7.2
2.3
5.9
5.2
3.6

2.3
3.7
1.9
1.8
2.7
2.2
0.0
0.5
0.4
1.3
1.1

–0.9
–1.4
–0.8
–1.2
–1.3
–1.1
0.9
–0.1
–0.4
0.3
–0.6

0.3
1.6
–0.8
1.0
–2.6
–1.5
–4.8
–0.1
–3.3
–0.9
0.8

–0.6
–1.6
0.5
–1.0
1.5
0.4
2.9
–0.7
1.9
1.0
–1.0

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

3.7
5.5
6.1
4.2
4.9
2.1
1.3
0.0
1.1
–0.3
1.4
0.3
3.2
2.2
0.2

–3.3
–1.7
1.9
–10.3
–3.4
–4.6
–4.1
–8.1
–5.8
–9.0
–4.1
–5.4
–3.0
–4.3
–8.0

6.0
8.0
8.2
8.8
6.2
3.9
2.8
3.6
2.8
3.5
3.0
3.1
3.1
1.7
3.0

–0.2
–0.9
0.9
–5.8
–1.4
1.2
2.5
1.3
3.3
1.5
0.4
1.4
0.2
1.1
0.0

0.2
0.6
0.0
2.8
0.0
–0.3
–1.3
–0.1
–0.8
0.2
–0.5
0.0
–0.3
–0.9
–0.5

–2.1
–2.7
0.7
–12.2
–2.8
0.6
1.4
–2.9
–0.5
–2.4
–1.3
–3.1
–1.4
–0.9
–2.2

–0.5
–0.5
–1.0
1.4
–1.5
–0.3
–0.7
0.2
–0.1
0.5
–1.0
0.2
–1.0
–0.7
–1.0

Memorandum
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates

5.3
0.8
2.4

–1.2
–5.0
–4.7

4.9
3.2
4.8

–0.2
0.7
1.4

–0.3
–0.5
–0.5

–1.6
–1.8
–0.5

–0.7
–1.0
–0.6

1.0

–10.4

8.3

1.5

0.3

0.6

–0.1

1.7
–0.6

–11.5
–9.4

7.3
11.0

1.7
0.0

0.1
1.6

0.0
–1.2

–0.2
1.9

1.3
0.9

–11.6
–7.7

7.0
9.5

2.0
1.6

–0.2
0.2

1.2
1.9

–0.4
–1.5

–10.2

–32.1

12.0

9.0

8.2

9.9

5.7

0.8

5.6

5.1

5.4

4.3

6.7

5.7

1.4
5.1

0.8
5.0

1.6
4.7

0.5
0.5

0.5
0.1

0.3
0.3

0.1
0.2

World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
2.3
0.7
0.4
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.4
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 24–August 21, 2020. Economies are listed
on the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, June 2020 WEO Update, and April 2020 WEO forecasts. Global and regional growth figures are
based on new purchasing-power-parity weights derived from the recently released 2017 International Comparison Program survey (see Box) and are
not comparable to the figures reported in the April 2020 WEO.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year
2011/12 as a base year.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

9

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Table 1.1 (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

World Output

2018
3.5

Year over Year
Projections
2019
2020
2021
2.8
–4.4
5.2

2018
3.1

Q4 over Q47
Projections
2019
2020
2021
2.7
–2.6
3.7

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

2.2
3.0
1.8
1.3
1.8
0.8
2.4
0.3
1.3
2.0
2.7

1.7
2.2
1.3
0.6
1.5
0.3
2.0
0.7
1.5
1.7
1.7

–5.8
–4.3
–8.3
–6.0
–9.8
–10.6
–12.8
–5.3
–9.8
–7.1
–3.8

3.9
3.1
5.2
4.2
6.0
5.2
7.2
2.3
5.9
5.2
3.6

1.7
2.5
1.1
0.3
1.4
0.1
2.1
–0.3
1.4
1.8
2.3

1.5
2.3
1.0
0.4
0.8
0.1
1.8
–0.7
1.1
1.5
2.1

–4.9
–4.1
–6.6
–5.2
–6.7
–8.0
–10.8
–2.3
–6.4
–5.9
–4.2

3.8
3.2
4.8
4.6
4.0
3.4
6.6
0.7
3.7
4.9
5.0

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

4.5
6.3
6.7
6.1
5.3
3.3
2.5
1.1
1.3
2.2
2.1
2.4
3.3
1.9
0.8

3.7
5.5
6.1
4.2
4.9
2.1
1.3
0.0
1.1
–0.3
1.4
0.3
3.2
2.2
0.2

–3.3
–1.7
1.9
–10.3
–3.4
–4.6
–4.1
–8.1
–5.8
–9.0
–4.1
–5.4
–3.0
–4.3
–8.0

6.0
8.0
8.2
8.8
6.2
3.9
2.8
3.6
2.8
3.5
3.0
3.1
3.1
1.7
3.0

4.3
6.1
6.6
5.5
5.3
...
2.9
–0.2
0.8
1.2
...
4.3
...
...
0.2

3.8
5.1
6.0
3.1
4.6
...
2.2
–0.3
1.6
–0.8
...
–0.3
...
...
–0.6

–0.5
2.2
5.8
–4.0
–2.1
...
–4.5
–6.5
–4.7
–7.0
...
–5.2
...
...
–5.5

3.6
3.6
3.9
1.4
5.2
...
2.8
2.1
1.7
2.7
...
6.6
...
...
1.0

Memorandum
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates

5.1
1.2
3.1

5.3
0.8
2.4

–1.2
–5.0
–4.7

4.9
3.2
4.8

...
...
2.6

...
...
2.3

...
...
–3.0

...
...
3.7

3.9

1.0

–10.4

8.3

...

...

...

...

3.6
5.0

1.7
–0.6

–11.5
–9.4

7.3
11.0

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

3.5
4.1

1.3
0.9

–11.6
–7.7

7.0
9.5

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

29.4
1.3

–10.2
0.8

–32.1
5.6

12.0
5.1

9.5
–2.3

–6.1
4.9

–26.1
10.3

6.2
–0.5

2.0
4.9

1.4
5.1

0.8
5.0

1.6
4.7

1.9
4.5

1.4
5.1

0.8
3.5

1.5
4.1

2.5
–0.3
0.0

2.3
–0.4
0.0

0.7
–0.4
0.0

0.4
–0.5
0.0

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
On Euro Deposits (three month)
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
4Indonesia,

Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $61.39 in 2019;
the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $41.69 in 2020 and $46.70 in 2021.
6Excludes Venezuela. See country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market and
developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
5Simple

10

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Prices
(Percent change)

World Output
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
Low-Income Developing Countries

2019
2.4

Projections
2020
2021
–4.7
4.8

Difference from June
2020 WEO Update1
2020
2021
1.4
–0.5

Difference from April
2020 WEO1
2020
2021
–0.5
–0.6

1.7

–5.8

3.8

2.3

–1.0

0.4

–0.7

3.6
5.7
2.1
–0.5
1.0
2.8

–3.0
–0.7
–4.5
–8.1
–5.7
–3.5

6.2
8.0
3.8
3.6
3.2
3.1

0.1
–0.4
1.3
1.3
0.3
0.2

0.1
0.4
–0.5
–0.1
–0.4
–0.3

–1.7
–1.7
0.7
–2.8
–2.1
–1.5

–0.6
–0.7
–0.3
0.2
–1.1
–0.9

5.1

–1.4

4.7

–0.1

–0.3

–1.6

–0.7

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, where a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years is
used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, June 2020 WEO Update, and April 2020 WEO forecasts.

the euro area in 2020, reflecting a sharper downturn
than in the United States in the first half of the year.
The growth bounce-back of 5.2 percent projected for
2021 is accordingly stronger from a lower base. Asian
advanced economies are projected to have somewhat
more moderate downturns than those of Europe, in
light of the more contained pandemic, also reflected in
smaller GDP declines during the first half of 2020.
Among emerging market and developing economies,
growth is forecast at –3.3 percent in 2020, 0.2 percentage point weaker than in the June 2020 WEO Update,
strengthening to 6 percent in 2021. Prospects for China
are much stronger than for most other countries in this
group, with the economy projected to grow by about
10 percent over 2020–21 (1.9 percent this year and
8.2 percent next year). Activity normalized faster than
expected after most of the country reopened in early April,
and second quarter GDP registered a positive surprise on
the back of strong policy support and resilient exports.
For many emerging market and developing economies
excluding China, prospects continue to remain precarious. This reflects a combination of factors: the continuing spread of the pandemic and overwhelmed health
care systems; the greater importance of severely affected
sectors, such as tourism; and the greater dependence on
external finance, including remittances. All emerging
market and developing economy regions are expected
to contract this year, including notably emerging Asia,
where large economies, such as India and Indonesia,
continue to try to bring the pandemic under control.
Revisions to the forecast are particularly large for India,
where GDP contracted much more severely than

expected in the second quarter. As a result, the economy is projected to contract by 10.3 percent in 2020,
before rebounding by 8.8 percent in 2021. Regional
differences remain stark, with many countries in Latin
America severely affected by the pandemic facing very
deep downturns, and large output declines expected for
many countries in the Middle East and Central Asia
region and oil-exporting countries in sub-Saharan Africa
affected by low oil prices, civil strife, or economic crises.
Growth for emerging market and developing economies
excluding China is projected at –5.7 percent for 2020
and 5 percent for 2021. The projected rebound in 2021
is not sufficient to regain the 2019 level of activity by
next year. Growth among low-income developing countries is projected at –1.2 percent in 2020, strengthening
to 4.9 percent in 2021. Higher population growth and
low starting levels of income imply that even this more
modest contraction compared with most emerging
market economies will take a very heavy toll on living
standards, especially for the poor (Box 1.2).
Table 1.2 provides alternative projections for global
and key group aggregate growth rates using GDP
at market exchange rates as weights.3 The market
exchange rate weights allocate significantly higher
global GDP shares to slower-growing advanced economies than the purchasing-power-parity weights used
in Table 1.1. Because of the difference in weights the
global growth projection (–4.7 percent for 2020 and
4.8 percent for 2021) is lower than in Table 1.1.
3Specifically, the projections use a three-year trailing moving
average of nominal US dollar GDP as weights.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

11

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Unemployment. The growth projections imply wide
negative output gaps this year and in 2021 as well as
elevated unemployment rates across both advanced and
emerging market economies (Annex Tables 1.1.1 to
1.1.5). Including those in reduced-hours work programs
and those counted in involuntary part-time employment, the share of workers underemployed in some
advanced economies is significantly higher than the fraction of headline unemployed. Labor market data are less
comprehensive for emerging market economies. Nonetheless, based on surveys and available official estimates,
unemployment rates in several emerging market economies are projected to increase significantly this year.

Medium-Term Growth Reflects Damage to
Supply Potential
After the rebound in 2021, the baseline forecast for
the global economy envisages growth to slow to about
3.5 percent into the medium term. This implies that
both advanced and emerging market and developing

Figure 1.13. Per Capita GDP: Cumulative Growth, 2019–25

Figure 1.12. GDP Losses: 2019–21 versus 2019–25

(Percent)

(Percent difference between January 2020 WEO Update and October
2020 WEO projections)

Subdued medium-term growth prospects imply a severe setback to the projected
pace of improvement in average living standards across all country groups.

Over the medium term, advanced and emerging market and developing
economies will only modestly progress toward the 2020–25 path of economic
activity projected before the COVID-19 pandemic.
14

January 2020 WEO Update
October 2020 WEO
Cumulative growth, 2013–18

PHL

12

25
IND
20

ARG

10
GDP losses, 2019–25

economies will only modestly progress toward the
2020–25 path of economic activity projected before
the COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 1.12), pointing
to a severe setback to the projected pace of improvement in average living standards across all country
groups (Figure 1.13).
Medium-term projections incorporate the expected
impact of the COVID-19 shock on supply potential. As
noted, the projections rely on economies adapting and
operating in ways compatible with social distancing
for the initial forecast years and being affected by scarring (including through bankruptcies, lower labor force
participation, and obstacles to resource reallocation).
This may entail large structural change, including
redeploying resources away from sectors where activity
will be constrained by distancing, workplace changes
to raise safety standards, and the adoption of new
technologies that support remote working. As firms
make the needed adjustments to modes of production
and distribution while consumers adapt to new modes
of consumption (such as increasingly shifting to

MEX
EGY

8
6

PAK

BRA

NGA
AUS
IDN
SAU

MYS
TUR GBR
RUS FRA
ITA
NLD
CAN
USA
VNM
DEU
CHN
IRN JPN POL
TWN
KOR

4
2
0
0

2

4

6
8
GDP losses, 2019–21

THA

15

10

ESP

5

10

12

14

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. Data labels use International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

12

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

0

AE

EMDE

LIC

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AE = advanced economy; EMDE = emerging market and developing
economy; LIC = low-income country; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

CHAPTER 1

online purchases), the changes are expected to have
persistent effects on potential output across economies.
Among the 10 largest advanced economies, potential
GDP in the medium term is expected, on average, to
remain 3.5 percent below what had been projected
in the January 2020 WEO (pre-pandemic) forecast.
Among the 10 largest emerging markets, the decline is
even larger, at 5.5 percent, on average.
In the advanced economy group, growth is expected
to slow to 1.7 percent over the medium term. Beyond
the impact of the pandemic on potential growth,
the macroeconomic effects of demographic change
(aging and slower population growth) weigh on the
medium-term forecast for the group.
Among emerging market and developing economies,
growth is projected to decline to 4.7 percent by 2025,
well below the 5.6 percent average of 2000–19. Key features shaping the medium-term outlook for the group
include the structural slowdown in China that preceded
the pandemic and is expected to continue following the
strong cyclical rebound in 2021; a subdued path for
commodity prices; weak prospects for external demand
related to the expected moderation in advanced economy growth; and, for tourism-­dependent economies,
persistently lower cross-border travel.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.14. Ratio of Public Debt Service Costs to
Government Tax Revenue
(Share of countries in group, percent)

The ratio of sovereign debt service to tax revenue is anticipated to increase for
several emerging markets and developing economies.
2019

2020

2021

80 1. Low-Income Developing Countries
60
40
20
0

Less than or equal to 30 percent
Greater than 30 percent
Ratio of public debt service costs to government tax revenue

80 2. Emerging Markets
60
40
20

Challenges to Debt Sustainability
The subdued outlook for medium-term growth
comes with a significant projected increase in the stock
of sovereign debt—which was high to begin with.
Downward revisions to potential output also imply a
smaller tax base over the medium term than previously
envisaged, compounding difficulties in servicing
debt obligations.
As discussed in the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor,
sovereign debt to GDP in advanced economies is
projected to rise by 20 percentage points to about
125 percent of GDP by the end of 2021. Over the
same period, sovereign debt to GDP in emerging
market and developing economies is projected to
rise by more than 10 percentage points to about
65 percent of GDP.
Although low interest rates are expected to contain
debt service, this is a mitigating factor mostly for
advanced economies with a large fraction of negative-­
yielding sovereign bonds. The ratio of sovereign debt
service to tax revenue is anticipated to increase for
several emerging markets and low-income countries
(Figure 1.14).

0

Less than or equal to 30 percent
Greater than 30 percent
Ratio of public debt service costs to government tax revenue

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Shares by country groups are calculated based on countries for which data
are available.

The high fraction of tax revenue absorbed by debt
service will necessarily mean that there is less revenue
left over for critical areas, including social spending
needs. These needs will be elevated after the crisis period
to address rising poverty, tackle growing inequality, and
correct setbacks to human capital accumulation.

Poverty, Inequality, and Setbacks to Human
Capital Accumulation
Poverty. The pandemic will reverse the progress made
since the 1990s in reducing global poverty. People who
rely on daily wage labor and are outside the formal
safety net faced sudden income losses when mobility restrictions were imposed. Among them, migrant
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

13

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

workers who live far from home had even less recourse
to traditional support networks. As a consequence,
close to 90 million people could fall below the $1.90
a day income threshold of extreme deprivation
this year (Box 1.2, October 2020 Fiscal Monitor,
and WB 2020a).
Inequality. As discussed in Chapter 2, the pandemic
is having particularly adverse effects on economically
more vulnerable people, including younger workers
and women. The burden of the crisis has fallen
unevenly across sectors. Differentiating jobs based
on attributes that make them amenable to telework,
workers most affected by the pandemic are employed
in accommodation and food services, transportation,
retail, and wholesale (Brussevich, Dabla-Norris, and
Khalid 2020). Moreover, younger workers, those in
less secure work arrangements, and those employed
in small and medium enterprises appear more vulnerable to layoffs. In general, low-wage earners are at an
appreciably higher risk of losing their jobs than those
in upper quintiles of the wage distribution (see, for
example, Shibata 2020 on the United States). Similar
outcomes are seen in emerging market and developing
economies, where informally employed workers are
more likely to become unemployed than those with
formal contracts (see, for example, Jain and others
2020 on South Africa).
Such developments will exacerbate preexisting
trends. Entering the crisis, income inequality had risen
significantly compared with the early 1990s in many
advanced economies and among some fast-growing
emerging market and developing economies
(Figure 1.15; also see Annex 1.1 of the October 2020
Fiscal Monitor). These developments reflect a combination of factors, including skill-biased technological
change that favored those with high educational
attainment, the decline of unions, the increase in firms’
monopsony power in the labor market because of
rising market concentration and the associated decrease
in the bargaining power of employees, and regressive
tax policy changes that have resulted in lower marginal
taxes on the highest earners as well as lower corporate
taxes over the past several years.
Human Capital Accumulation. An additional aspect,
with bearing on the current labor market outcomes of
parents and prospects for their children, follows from
the extensive school closures during the pandemic.
UNESCO (2020) estimates that more than 1.6 billion
learners worldwide have been affected by school and

14

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 1.15. Change in Income Inequality since 1990
(Change in Gini coefﬁcient for disposable income1)

Entering the COVID-19 pandemic, income inequality had risen signiﬁcantly
compared with the early 1990s in many advanced economies and among some
fast-growing emerging market and developing economies.
6 1. Advanced Economies
4
2
0
–2

FRA

GBR

JPN

ITA

AUS

USA

CAN

ESP

DEU

KOR

IDN

IND

CHN

12 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8
4
0
–4
–8
–12

THA

RUS

BRA

IRN

MEX

TUR

EGY

Sources: IMF Fiscal Affairs Department Gini database; Standardized World Income
Inequality database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1
Change is calculated as latest available minus Gini coefﬁcient in 1990.

university closures. Gaps in childcare limit parents’
ability to work, particularly that of mothers (see
Chapter 2). For children, schooling interruptions reduce
learning opportunities. This is particularly true for
underprivileged students, whose parents may not be as
well placed as affluent parents to provide supplementary instruction for their children. Evidence suggests
that the loss of learning increases with the duration of
interruption (Quinn and Polikoff 2017). Online and
distance learning can act as a temporary bridge, but are
not an effective substitute (Baytiyeh 2018).
School closures exacerbate fundamental divisions in
the access to nutrition and safe environments for children. Because many schools provide free or subsidized
meals to children from low-income households, closures may result in greater food insecurity and poorer

CHAPTER 1

nutrition for children from those homes (Anderson,
Gallagher, and Ramirez Ritchie 2017; Ralston and
others 2017). Children home from school are also
more likely to be exposed to violence and exploitation. In some countries, past evidence suggests school
closures are associated with earlier marriages, children
forced into militias, sexual exploitation, teen pregnancies, and child labor (Korkoyah and Wreh 2015;
UNDP 2015; UNESCO 2020).
The closures are likely to have long-lasting consequences for future social and economic outcomes
absent actions to try to regain the human capital accumulation lost. Lower lifetime schooling is associated
with lower lifetime income (Card 1999). Interrupted
schooling is also associated with lower earnings trajectories (Light 1995; Holmlund, Liu, and Skans 2008).
In short, the subdued medium-term growth outlook
for the global economy comes with the prospect of
elevated debt, more poverty, higher inequality, and
severe setbacks to human capital accumulation. Policymakers will also have to confront additional complexities related to the outlook for inflation and trade, the
subject of the next two sections.

Inflation Is Expected to Remain Low
As with the growth outlook, considerable uncertainty surrounds the inflation projections for the
projection horizon. Competing forces will shape price
developments in the years ahead (see Ebrahimy, Igan,
and Martinez Peria 2020).
•• Price pressures could increase, for example, due to
the release of pent-up demand as consumers increase
spending on items that they had been forced to
delay consuming because of lockdowns and restrictions on movement. They could also increase due to
higher production costs from persistent supply disruptions. The credibility of monetary policy frameworks can also affect price developments. Credibility
can suffer where central banks are regarded as
conducting monetary policy to keep government
borrowing costs low rather than to ensure price
stability (“fiscal dominance”). In those contexts,
inflation expectations can increase very quickly once
governments begin running large fiscal deficits.
•• Counterbalancing such forces are those that
will weigh on demand. These include a persistent
increase in consumers’ precautionary saving
prompted by higher perceived risk of joblessness

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

and falling sick; transfers of purchasing power to
lenders with lower propensities to spend as borrowers service the high debt incurred during the pandemic; and concerns about the limits of monetary
policy’s ability to stimulate demand (particularly in
advanced economies), which cause inflation expectations to slide and lead to disinflation.
A sectoral decomposition of inflation in the period
leading up to the pandemic and in the first six months
of the pandemic offers clues about what to expect.
Across a sample of advanced economies and large
emerging market economies, the decline in inflation
appears broad-based (Freitag and Lian, forthcoming).
It reflects weak price pressures in sectors where price
developments have historically responded to aggregate demand (furnishing, housing excluding energy,
recreation, restaurants, and hotels) as well as in
“noncyclical” sectors, where price movements typically
are less sensitive to demand fluctuations (clothing and
footwear, communications, education, health, transportation services, and miscellaneous goods and services),
as shown in Figure 1.16. With aggregate demand
expected to be relatively weak and economies projected
to operate with considerable slack into 2022, price
pressures in the cyclically sensitive sectors are expected
to stay muted. Moreover, inflation in the noncyclical
group has been on a long-standing downward trend.
The trend is expected to continue, given that these sectors are unlikely to experience supply constraints or rising unit labor costs on account of slowing innovation.
Market participants generally expect subdued
inflation in advanced economies (Figure 1.17). Among
emerging market economies, inflation expectations
remain relatively low compared with historical averages. Even as some emerging market central banks have
embarked on asset purchases, these actions have so far
not unanchored inflation expectations. Possible reasons
include more credible monetary policy frameworks and
communications explaining that the actions are also
intended to support market functioning, consistent
with price stability mandates.
In line with the subdued outlook for activity,
inflation is expected to remain relatively low over the
forecast horizon. Inflation in the advanced economy
group is projected at 0.8 percent in 2020, rising to
1.6 percent in 2021 as the recovery gains hold, and
broadly stabilizing thereafter at 1.9 percent. In the
emerging market and developing economy group,

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.16. Contribution to Headline Inﬂation

Figure 1.17. Five-Year, Five-Year Inﬂation Swaps

The decline in inﬂation appears broad based, encompassing sectors where price
developments have historically responded to aggregate demand as well as in
those in which price movements typically are less sensitive to demand
ﬂuctuations.

Inﬂation in advanced economies is generally expected to remain subdued.

(Percentage points)

0.8

(Percent; market-implied average inﬂation rate expected over the
ﬁve-year period starting ﬁve years from date shown)

1. Advanced Economies: Cyclical versus Noncyclical Components

United States
Euro area
Japan

2.5

Noncyclical
Cyclical

0.6

3.0

2.0
0.4

1.5

0.2
0.0

1.0
2005

07

09

11

13

15

17

19 Jul.
20

0.5
0.0

1.6 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Cyclical versus
Noncyclical Components
1.4
Noncyclical
1.2
Cyclical
1.0

–0.5
–1.0

0.8

Jan.
2020

Feb.
20

Mar.
20

Apr.
20

May
20

Jun.
20

Jul.
20

Aug.
20

0.6
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.

0.4
0.2
0.0

2005

07

09

11

13

15

17

19 Jul.
20

Sources: Eurostat; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure plots the time ﬁxed effects of regressions in which three-month
trailing averages of contributions to headline inﬂation are regressed on country
and time ﬁxed effects, with the weights being the GDP in purchasing-power-parity
terms. The contribution of a component is deﬁned as its year-on-year price
change multiplied by its weight in the headline consumer price index basket.
Country ﬁxed effects account for different timing of countries entering the sample,
and the time ﬁxed effects are normalized to equal the contribution in January
2005. Cyclical components include furnishing, household equipment and routine
household maintenance, housing (excluding utilities whenever the data permit),
recreation and culture, and restaurants and hotels. Noncyclical components
include clothing and footwear, communication, education, health, and miscellaneous goods and services. The deﬁnition of cyclical components follows the
results of Stock and Watson (2019), except that furnishing, household equipment,
and routine household maintenance are not included in their construction of
cyclically sensitive inﬂation. Food and energy components are excluded to better
reveal underlying trends. Transportation services are a noncyclical component in
Stock and Watson (2019) and excluded here, as it was volatile in 2020 for
advanced economies, and cannot be constructed without being combined with the
fuel component for many emerging market and developing economies. The
post–global ﬁnancial crisis downward trend of noncyclical components remains if
transportation services are included. Advanced economies comprise Austria,
Belgium, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Emerging market and
developing economies comprise Algeria, Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, Hungary,
India, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovak Republic, South Africa,
Thailand, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, and Vietnam.

16

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

inflation is projected at 5 percent this year, declining
to 4.7 percent next year, and moderating thereafter to
4 percent over the medium term, below the historical
average for the group.

Subdued Trade Flows, Smaller Deficits
and Surpluses
Global trade growth is projected to weaken significantly. Global trade is expected to contract by over
10 percent this year—a pace similar to during the
global financial crisis in 2009, despite the contraction
in activity being much more pronounced this year. The
current recession reflects a particularly sharp contraction in contact-intensive sectors with much smaller
trade intensity than manufacturing, which generally
contracts sharply in recessions as demand for capital
goods and consumer durables plummets. As noted in
the 2020 External Sector Report, the expected decline
in trade volumes largely reflects weak final demand
from consumers and firms in the synchronized global
downturn. Trade restrictions (for example on medical
supplies) and supply chain disruptions are expected to
play limited roles in accounting for the collapse.

Sep.
20

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.18. Global Trade Volume Growth, Global Outward
Foreign Direct Investment, and Travel-Related Trade Services
The contraction in global trade in 2020 reﬂects a sharp collapse in tourism and
travel. Countries where these sectors account for a larger share of GDP are
projected to suffer bigger declines in activity during 2020–21 compared with
pre-pandemic forecasts.
25 1. Global Trade Volume Growth and Global Outward FDI

10

Global trade volume growth (percent)
Global outward FDI (right scale, percent of world GDP)

20
15

8
6

10

4

5

2

0

0

–5

–2

–10

–4

–15
2005

10

15

–6
25

20

8 2. Services Balance: Travel and Passenger Transportation
(Percent of GDP)
7
2019:H1

6

2020:H1

5
4
3
2
1
0

GDP level revision, 2021 (percent)

Consistent with the projected recovery in global
activity, trade volumes are expected to grow by about
8 percent in 2021 and by slightly more than 4 percent,
on average, in subsequent years. Subdued trade volumes
also reflect, in part, possible shifts in supply chains as
firms reshore production to reduce perceived vulnerabilities from reliance on foreign producers. A reflection
of this anticipated development is that foreign direct
investment flows as a share of global GDP are expected
to remain well below their levels of the pre-pandemic
decade (Figure 1.18, panel 1).
While all countries are expected to suffer large
drops in exports and imports, the incidence is
uneven. The trade outlook is particularly bleak for
tourism-­dependent economies, where restrictions on
international travel, together with consumers’ fear
of contagion, are likely to weigh heavily on tourism
activity even in situations where the pandemic appears
contained for now (economies in the Caribbean, for
example). Balance of payments data for the first half of
the year show a collapse in net revenues from tourism
and travel for countries in which these sectors play an
important role (for instance, Greece, Iceland, Portugal,
and Turkey; Figure 1.18, panel 2). And as Figure 1.18,
panel 3 shows, countries where tourism and travel
account for a larger share of GDP are projected to
suffer larger declines in activity during 2020–21 compared with pre-COVID-19 forecasts. In addition, oil
exporters have suffered a severe terms-of-trade shock
with the decline in oil prices and face a more difficult
external outlook.
Remittances. Remittance flows contracted sharply
during the early lockdown period but have shown
signs of recovery. Nonetheless, the risk of a decline in
payments and transfers from migrant workers back to
their home countries is very significant, particularly
for such countries as Bangladesh, Egypt, Guatemala,
Pakistan, the Philippines, and those in sub-Saharan
Africa more broadly.
Global current account deficits and surpluses are
projected to shrink in 2020 to the lowest level in the
past two decades and to remain broadly stable thereafter (Figure 1.19). Among creditor countries, surpluses
are projected to decline in east Asia and to a lesser
extent in Germany and the Netherlands, reflecting the
weaker external environment, while the surplus in oil
exporters is projected to turn into a modest deficit.
These offset a modest increase in the projected surplus
for China. Among debtor countries, smaller deficits

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Greece

Iceland

Mexico

Portugal

Turkey

10 3. GDP level revisions, 2021 (October 2020 versus Jan 2020 WEO)
and Direct Share of Tourism and Transportation in GDP
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
0

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Direct share of tourism and transportation in 2019 (percent of GDP)

Sources: World Travel and Tourism Council; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: FDI = foreign direct investment; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

are projected for Latin America, despite negative
terms-of-trade shocks, mainly reflecting pronounced
weakness in domestic demand, as well as for India
and the United Kingdom on the back of lower oil
prices and weak domestic demand. Creditor and debtor
positions as a share of GDP are instead projected

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

17

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Significant Risks of More Severe
Growth Outcomes

Figure 1.19. Current Account and International Investment
Positions
(Percent of world GDP)

Global current account deﬁcits and surpluses are projected to shrink in 2020 to
the lowest level in the past two decades.

Afr. and ME
Eur. creditors
United States
Euro debtors

Japan
Adv. Asia
Other adv.
Lat. Am.

China
Oil exporters
Em. Asia
CEE

3 1. Global Current Account Balance
2
1
0
–1
–2

Discrepancy

–3
2005

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

30 2. Global International Investment Position
20

Fundamental uncertainty regarding the evolution
of the pandemic makes it difficult to provide a quantitative assessment of the balance of risks around the
baseline forecast described above.
On the upside:
•• The recession could turn out to be less severe than
projected if economic normalization proceeds faster
than currently expected in areas that have reopened,
without rekindling infections.
•• Extensions of fiscal countermeasures. The current forecast factors in only the measures implemented and
announced so far. As such, the overall fiscal policy
stance in advanced and emerging market economies
is expected to turn significantly less accommodative in 2021, in line with the projected handoff to
private-activity-led growth (Figure 1.20). Extensions
of fiscal countermeasures would lift global growth
above the projected baseline in 2021.
•• Faster productivity growth could be engendered by
changes in production, distribution, and payment

10

Figure 1.20. Fiscal Stance, 2019–21

0

(Change in structural primary ﬁscal balance, percent of potential GDP)

–10

Extensions of ﬁscal countermeasures represent an upside risk to global growth.

–20
–30
2005

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

2019
2020
2021
April 2020 World Economic Outlook

25

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic,
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria,
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland); Euro debtors = euro area debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada,
France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).

8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

to widen in 2020: the increase in the ratios follows
from the drop in the denominator, reflecting the
sharp decline in activity. The ratios are then projected
to gradually shrink over the projection horizon
as GDP recovers and current account imbalances
remain subdued.
18

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

–8
–10

Advanced
economies

Source: IMF staff estimates.

Emerging market and
developing economies

CHAPTER 1

systems—from new techniques in medicine to new
data‑enabled services and remote working across
broader sectors of the economy.
•• Advances in therapies may allow health care systems
to better manage infection loads, while changes in
the workplace and by consumers to reduce transmission may allow activity to return more quickly
to pre-pandemic levels without triggering repeated
waves of infection.
•• Production of a safe, effective vaccine would prevail
over all other upside risk factors. If produced at the
needed scale and distributed worldwide at affordable prices, such a vaccine would lift sentiment and
yield better growth outcomes than in the baseline,
including by allowing for a fuller recovery in
contact-intensive sectors and travel. Some of these
aspects are featured in Scenario Box 1, which presents growth projections under alternative scenarios.
Downside risks, however, remain significant. They
include the following:
•• Outbreaks could recur in places. If the virus resurges,
and progress on treatments and vaccines is slower
than anticipated or countries’ access to them
remains unequal, economic activity could be lower
than expected, with renewed social distancing and
tighter lockdowns. Cross-border spillovers from
weaker external demand could further magnify the
impact of country- or region-specific shocks on
global growth.
•• Premature withdrawal of policy support, or poor targeting of measures because of design and implementation challenges, could lead to the dissolution of
otherwise viable and productive economic relationships, exacerbating misallocation.
•• Financial conditions may again tighten, as in March,
exposing vulnerabilities. A sudden stop in new lending (or failure to roll over existing debt) would tip
some economies into debt crises and slow activity
further.
•• Liquidity shortfalls and insolvencies. Deep recessions
invariably entail widespread liquidity shortfalls as
firms suffer immediate revenue losses but still have
to meet payroll expenses, cover fixed costs, and
fulfill debt service obligations. Prolonged liquidity
shortfalls can readily translate into bankruptcies and
firm closures. This time around, there have been a
few prominent bankruptcies, for example in retail
and rental car sectors, and the rate of corporate
bond defaults more broadly is at its highest since

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

the global financial crisis (June 2020 GFSR Update).
However, the aggressive and swift policy countermeasures have so far likely prevented even more
widespread bankruptcies. But considering the severity of the recession and the possible withdrawal of
some of the emergency support in some countries,
the risk of a wider cross-section of firms experiencing deep liquidity shortfalls and bankruptcies is
tangible (Box 1.3). Such events would lead to large
job and income losses, further weakening demand.
At the same time, they would deplete bank capital
buffers and constrain credit supply, compounding
the downturn.
•• Intensifying social unrest. Instances of social unrest
increased globally in 2019 before declining during
the early part of the pandemic (Box 1.4). While
ultimate causes vary across countries, in many cases,
these include declining trust in established institutions and lack of representation in governance
structures, as well as a perceived disconnect between
leaders’ priorities and the problems faced by the
public. In June, social unrest increased in the United
States and quickly spread worldwide in protests
against institutional racism and racial inequality.
More widespread or longer-lived protests could hurt
sentiment and further weigh on activity. Intensifying social unrest may also complicate the political
economy of reform efforts, to the detriment of
medium-term growth or the sustainability of public
finances.
•• Geopolitical tensions. While seeming to de-escalate
during the pandemic (Figure 1.21), geopolitical
tensions could again flare up. Moreover, frayed
ties among the OPEC+ coalition of oil producers
(Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC oil
exporters) pose risks for global oil supply. A renewed
plunge in prices as seen in March would severely
hurt activity in oil exporters and lead to weaker
growth than projected.
•• Trade policy uncertainty and technology frictions.
Despite the recent reaffirmation of the Phase One
trade deal between the United States and China
signed at the start of the year, tensions between the
world’s two largest economies remain elevated on
numerous fronts. Moreover, the United Kingdom’s
transitional arrangement with the European Union
expires on December 31, 2020. If the two sides fail
to agree and ratify a trade deal before then, trade
barriers between them are set to rise significantly,
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

19

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.21. Geopolitical Risk Index

Figure 1.22. Share of World Imports Affected by Countries’
Own Import Restrictions

(Index)

(Percent)
Geopolitical tensions seemed to de-escalate during the pandemic but could again
ﬂare up.

The bulk of the distortionary tariff and nontariff barriers instituted over the past
two years remain in place.

400
350
300

Import tariffs
Nontariff import restrictions

Arab Spring:
Syrian and
Libyan wars

Russian ISIS
actions escalation
in Crimea

250

14
12

Syrian
civil war
escalation

200

10

150

8

100

6
Paris
attacks

50
0

Localization requirements
Trade defense

2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

4
17

18

19

Aug.
20

Source: Caldara and Iacoviello 2018.
Note: The Caldara and Iacoviello Geopolitical Risk index reﬂects automated textsearch results of the electronic archives of 11 national and international
newspapers. The index is calculated by counting the number of articles related to
geopolitical risk in each newspaper for each month (as a share of the total number
of news articles) and normalized to average a value of 100 over the 2000–09
decade. ISIS = Islamic State.

which would increase business costs and could
disrupt long-standing cross-border production
arrangements. In addition, the bulk of the distortionary tariff and nontariff barriers instituted over
the past two years remain in place (Figure 1.22).
The World Trade Organization Appellate Body
has ceased functioning because of the impasse over
appointments, casting doubt over the enforceability
of World Trade Organization legal commitments.
Moreover, with the spread of trade disputes to
the technology domain, global supply chains face
additional threats from a bifurcation of technology
standards and platforms. On the positive side,
the trade agreement between Canada, Mexico,
and the United States came into force on July 1,
helping to lower near-term trade policy uncertainty
(Figure 1.23). But lingering frictions (for example,
on aluminum, rules of origin in the auto sector, and
dairy trade) could hamper implementation. Trade
policy uncertainty could increase again in these
20

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

2
0
2010

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Source: Global Trade Alert.

contexts or in discussions involving other trading
partners, weighing on global growth.
•• Weather-related natural disasters. The increased
frequency and intensity of weather-related natural
disasters, such as tropical storms, floods, heat waves,
droughts, and wildfires has inflicted a devastating
humanitarian toll and widespread livelihood loss on
many regions in recent years (for example, Australia,
the Caribbean, eastern and southern Africa, south
Asia). Climate change, a principal driver of more
frequent and intense weather-related disasters,
already has had visible impacts—and not just in
regions where the disasters strike. The disasters
could also contribute to cross-border migration and
financial stress (for example, in the insurance sector)
or add to disease burdens. Moreover, they can
have persistent effects long after the event itself (as
seen, for example, in parts of eastern Africa, where
heavy rainfall in late 2019 and earlier this year have
contributed to an extreme locust infestation—the
worst in decades—that has imperiled food supplies
in the region).

19

20

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.23. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.24. Output Gap Projections, 2020–23

(Index)

(Percent)

Trade policy uncertainty has declined recently, but trade tensions remain elevated.

Economies are expected to operate well below capacity over 2020 and 2021.

Global economic policy uncertainty (PPP-adjusted)
US trade policy uncertainty (right scale)

Average, 2020–21

Average, 2022–23

0

500

2,000

450

1,750

400

1,500

350

1,250

300

1,000

250

750

–6

200

500

–7

150

250

–8

–1
–2
–3

100
Jan.
2016

Jul.
16

Jan.
17

Jul.
17

Jan.
18

Jul.
18

Jan.
19

Jul.
19

Jan.
20

0
Aug.
20

Source: Baker, Bloom, and Davis 2016.
Note: The Baker Bloom Davis Index of Global Economic Policy Uncertainty (GEPU)
is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU indices for 20 countries: Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and
the United States. Mean GEPU from 1997 to 2015 = 100; mean US trade policy
uncertainty index from 1985 to 2010 = 100. PPP = purchasing power parity.

Near-Term Policy Priorities: Ensure
Adequate Resources for Health Care, Limit
Economic Damage
The global economy is in the grip of the most
devastating public health crisis and its worst recession
in decades. All major economies are expected to
operate well below capacity over 2020 and 2021
(Figure 1.24). Moreover, downside risks are significant.
The immediate dual priority for policy is to ensure
adequate resources for health care systems and to
limit the economic damage.

Difficult Trade-Offs: Near-Term Imperatives,
Medium-Term Challenges
Besides combating the deep near-term recession,
policymakers will have to address complex challenges
to place economies on a path of higher productivity

–4
–5

–9

ESP

ITA

FRA

AUS
CAN
USA
GBR DEU
JPN

IND

ZAF

BRA
TUR
RUS
MEX
IDN
CHN
POL

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.

growth while ensuring that gains are shared evenly
and debt remains sustainable. Many countries already
face very difficult trade-offs between implementing
measures to support near-term growth and avoiding a
further buildup of debt that will be difficult to service
down the road, considering the crisis’s hit to potential
output. Policies to support the economy in the near
term should therefore be designed with an eye to furthering these broader objectives of guiding economies
to paths of stronger, equitable, and resilient growth.
Tax and spending measures should privilege
initiatives that can help lift potential output, ensure
participatory growth that benefits all, and protect the
vulnerable. The additional debt incurred to finance
such endeavors is more likely to pay for itself down
the road by increasing the overall size of the economy
and future tax base than if the borrowing were done to
finance ill-targeted subsidies or wasteful current spending. Investments in health, education, and high-return
infrastructure projects that also help move the economy to lower carbon dependence can further those
objectives. Research spending can facilitate innovation
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

and technology adoption, the principal drivers of
long-term productivity growth. Moreover, safeguarding
critical social spending can ensure the most vulnerable
are protected while also supporting near-term activity, since the outlays will go to groups with a higher
propensity to spend their disposable income than more
affluent individuals. In all instances, adhering to the
highest standards of debt transparency will be essential
to avoid future rollover difficulties and higher sovereign risk premiums that raise borrowing costs across
the economy.

is needed, all creditors and low-income country and
emerging market borrowers should quickly agree on
mutually acceptable terms. The global financial safety
net can further help countries facing external funding
shortfalls. As part of its response to the COVID-19
crisis, the IMF has expanded its lending toolkit to
include a renewable and replenishable credit line for
members with strong policy frameworks and fundamentals, provided new financing through other lending
facilities, temporarily increased access limits to its
emergency financing facilities, and improved its ability
to provide grant-based debt service relief.

Enhancing Multilateral Cooperation
The global nature of the shock, its cross-border spillovers, and the resulting shared challenges point to a
need for significant multilateral efforts toward fighting
the health and economic crisis.
Multilateral cooperation to support health care systems.
National efforts on health will have to be supplemented with extensive multilateral cooperation. A key
priority is to fund advance purchase commitments of
vaccines undergoing trials to encourage rapid scaling
up of the manufacture and distribution of affordable
doses worldwide (examples of such coordinated, multilateral initiatives include the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations and Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance). The uncertainty and risk of failure associated
with the search for effective and safe vaccines make
global funding particularly important. A related priority is to support countries with limited health care
capacity. Their ability to avoid a catastrophic human
toll depends critically on the international community
stepping up medical assistance to them. Countries
should also continue to remove trade restrictions
on essential medical supplies and share information
on the pandemic as well as on the search for vaccines
and therapies.
Financial support for constrained countries. Beyond
assistance with medical equipment and know-how,
several emerging market and developing economies—
low-income countries in particular—require support
from the international community through debt relief,
grants, and concessional financing. Building on the
Group of Twenty initiative for a temporary standstill on
official debt service payments by low-income countries,
private creditors should extend similar treatment as
well so that those countries can conserve international
liquidity and direct resources to priority health care
spending and relief measures. Where debt restructuring
22

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

National-Level Policies
Creating room to accommodate elevated spending on
crisis countermeasures. A sizable and aggressive economic policy response is already under way in several
countries, notably in advanced economies where
their status as issuers of reserve currencies provides
more latitude for countering the crisis compared with
emerging market and developing economies. The
longer this crisis persists, the greater will be the fiscal
demands on governments—including by way of health
care spending, unemployment benefits, cash transfers,
and countercyclical initiatives to revive activity. While
the crisis lasts, governments should do all that they can
to mitigate the deep downturn and be ready to adapt
strategy to respond to the evolution of the pandemic
and its impact on activity. Where fiscal rules may constrain action, temporary suspension of the rules would
be warranted, combined with a commitment to a gradual consolidation path after the crisis abates to restore
compliance with the rules over the medium term.
Room for immediate spending needs could be created
by prioritizing crisis countermeasures and reducing
wasteful and poorly targeted subsidies. Prudent debt
management—extending maturities on government
borrowing and locking in low interest rates to the
extent possible—can save debt service expenses and
free up resources within the fiscal envelope to redirect
toward crisis mitigation efforts (see also the recommendations in IMF 2020). Although instituting new
revenue measures during the crisis will be difficult,
governments may need to consider raising progressive
taxes on more affluent individuals and those relatively
less affected by the crisis (including increasing tax rates
on higher income brackets, high-end property, capital
gains, and wealth) as well as changes to corporate
taxation that ensure firms pay taxes commensurate

CHAPTER 1

with profitability (see also Chapter 1 of the October
2020 Fiscal Monitor). Countries should also cooperate on the design of international corporate taxation
to respond to the challenges of the digital economy.
While implementing such initiatives, fiscal authorities
should also clearly communicate their commitment to
ensuring that public finances remain on a sustainable
footing, drawing up credible consolidation plans that
can be implemented after the crisis recedes.
These policy objectives are shared across all countries confronting the health and economic crisis, with
particularly severe impacts on those heavily dependent
on tourism, oil exports, and external remittances. The
magnitude of the challenge is in general far greater in
countries that entered this crisis with large preexisting
vulnerabilities, limited policy space, and a high degree
of informality that limits the extent to which relief
measures can reach vulnerable people through existing tax registries and banking channels. Such features
typically correlate with tighter borrowing constraints.
Without strong external support, those economies—
particularly low-income countries with fragile health
care systems, food and medical supply shortages, and
volatile security situations—could be overwhelmed by
the health and economic crisis.
Resources for health care. With the pandemic continuing to spread, all countries—including those where
infections appear to have peaked—need to ensure that
their health care systems can cope with the elevated
demand for their services. This means securing adequate resources and prioritizing health care spending as
needed, including on testing; contact tracing; personal
protective equipment; life-saving equipment, such as
ventilators; and facilities such as emergency rooms,
intensive care units, and isolation wards.
Policies to limit economic damage where the pandemic
is accelerating. The foremost priority in countries where
infections continue to rise unabated is to slow transmission. As Chapter 2 shows, lockdowns are effective
in bringing down infections. A necessary investment in
public health, they pave the way for eventual economic
recovery from the severe downturn brought on by
mobility constraints.
•• Economic policy countermeasures in such cases
should limit the damage by cushioning income
losses for people and firms. Among particularly
effective measures in this regard are targeted temporary tax breaks for affected people and firms, wage
subsidies for furloughed workers, cash transfers,
allowances for postponements of financial payments,

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

and paid sick and family leave. Expanded eligibility
criteria for unemployment insurance and better
coverage of self-employed workers should also be
considered among efforts to strengthen the broader
safety net. Such measures have already supported
disposable income in many advanced economies
and, to an extent, across emerging market and
developing economies, preventing even further deep
declines in spending. Where needed, temporary
credit guarantees and loan restructuring can help
solvent-but-illiquid firms remain afloat and preserve
employment relationships likely to remain viable
after the pandemic fades.
•• At the same time, retraining and reskilling should
be pursued to the extent feasible so that workers can
look for jobs in other sectors, as needed. Because the
transition may take a while, displaced workers will
need extended income support as they retrain and
search for jobs.
•• Complementing the targeted measures, broad-based
monetary, financial regulatory, and fiscal responses
can help prevent deeper and longer-lasting downturns, even if mobility restrictions hamper their
ability to stimulate spending to the extent typical in
other recessions. These broader responses can boost
credit provision (for example, through central bank
liquidity support and targeted relending facilities for
affected firms or regulatory actions to temporarily
ease loan classification standards and provisioning
requirements). Increases in borrowing costs can be
contained through central bank policy rate cuts
where interest rates are not already at their effective
lower bound, or through asset purchases and forward guidance where interest rates are already at that
limit. Among emerging market central banks that
launch asset purchases, it is important to communicate clearly the objectives of the program and its
consistency with price stability objectives. Doing so
would mitigate the risks of perceived fiscal dominance, inflation, and capital flight. Fiscal stimulus
through public infrastructure investment or acrossthe-board tax cuts (where financing constraints
permit) can support confidence, protect corporate
cash flow, and limit bankruptcies.
As the pandemic evolves, its effects on different
sectors become more obvious, and policymakers learn
more about what is most effective, the economic policy
response for limiting the damage will have to adjust as
well. It will need to avoid locking people and inputs
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

23

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

into sectors unlikely to return to pre-pandemic vitality,
while at the same time supporting the vulnerable.
Supporting the recovery where reopening is under way.
As noted earlier, many economies that began reopening in May and June have since slowed or paused that
process. Workplace closures remain, but are not as
widespread as a few months ago. As countries reopen,
policies must support the recovery by gradually removing targeted support, continuing to facilitate reallocation to sectors less affected by social distancing, and
providing stimulus to the extent possible.
•• The unwinding of measures such as wage subsidies,
cash transfers, enhanced unemployment benefits, and
credit guarantees for small and medium enterprises
should be calibrated to the pace of the recovery and
start only after activity picks up durably. Premature
scaling back of such lifelines, especially while infections are surging and may require renewed containment measures, risks pushing the economy back into
recession. Moreover, the pace at which particular
measures are unwound depends on the structure of
the economy. For instance, in economies with a large
share of self-employed people and significant informality, cash and in-kind transfers to households may
need to continue for longer while other measures are
scaled back. In economies where medium and large
enterprises account for a large share of employment,
credit guarantees and liquidity support for firms and
wage subsidies for employed workers may need to be
maintained to avoid sudden increases in joblessness,
even as other lifelines are gradually withdrawn.
•• As fiscal resources are freed from targeted support,
some should be redeployed to public investment.
Examples include investments in renewable energy,
improvements in the efficiency of power transmission, and retrofitting buildings to reduce their
carbon footprint (see also Chapter 2 of the October
2020 Fiscal Monitor). Moreover, as lifelines are
unwound, social spending should be expanded to
protect the most vulnerable. For example, where
gaps exist and as needed, authorities could enhance
safety net measures, such as paid and family sick
leave, expanded eligibility for unemployment insurance, and strengthened health care benefit coverage.
•• Complementing these efforts, hiring subsidies and
additional spending on retraining, coupled with
income support for displaced workers, can help
smooth the transition. Measures to reduce labor
market rigidities that deter firms from hiring can
also help reallocate employment toward growing
24

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

sectors. Moreover, an important part of the reallocation will involve balance sheet repair (see details
in the section on policies to address medium- and
long-term challenges).
•• During the transition, where inflation expectations
are anchored, accommodative monetary policy
can help by ensuring that borrowing costs remain low
and credit conditions supportive. The prospects of
relatively low inflation over the medium term suggest
that central banks have room to allow the recovery to
take root firmly before they exit their current settings.
Limiting the damage in countries with large informal
sectors. Many of the measures discussed so far rely on
well-established tax registries and widespread access to
bank accounts to ensure that relief reaches those who
need it. But such infrastructure is often missing in
economies with a large share of informal employment.
In those countries, government relief can be delivered
through digital payment systems, for instance as was
done in Benin and Côte d’Ivoire (see also Díez and
others 2020). In some countries, centralized databases
with assigned identification numbers have been used
to provide targeted assistance to market traders, taxi
drivers, and others most affected during shutdowns
(for example, in Togo). Additional challenges arise
where individuals do not have mobile phones or identification numbers and may therefore not be covered
by digital payments. In such cases, workarounds to
deliver relief can include in-kind support of food,
medicine, and other essentials delivered through local
governments, community organizations, and specialized stores that stock subsidized goods (Prady 2020).
To counter further shocks, policymakers should also
strengthen mechanisms for automatic, timely, and temporary support in downturns. As discussed in the April
2020 WEO, rules-based fiscal stimulus triggered by
deteriorating macroeconomic conditions—such as temporary targeted cash transfers to liquidity-­constrained
low-income households that activate when unemployment or jobless claims rise above a certain threshold—
can help dampen downturns.

Policies to Address Medium- and
Long-Term Challenges
The COVID-19 pandemic is a transformational
event unlike any seen since World War II. The
damages to supply potential, the buildup of debt,

CHAPTER 1

and implications for inequality discussed above are
likely to exacerbate issues that predate the pandemic,
and the setback to human capital accumulation is a
new challenge. This section discusses policy priorities
to address these challenges.

Catalyzing Stronger, Environmentally
Sustainable Growth
Productivity growth had already slowed across
both advanced and emerging market and developing economies in the 15 years before the pandemic,
going back to before the global financial crisis (Adler
and others 2017; October 2018 WEO, Chapter 2).
The damage to supply potential in the medium-term
projections reflects in part a continuation of forces that
had dragged productivity growth lower in the years
leading up to the pandemic: relatively slow investment
growth weighing on physical capital accumulation,
more modest improvements in human capital, and
slower efficiency gains in combining technology with
available factors of production, partly reflecting sectoral mismatches.
Policy initiatives that can counteract these forces
include repairing balance sheets and disposing of
distressed debt so that investment can recover quickly.
Policymakers should also address labor market rigidities and reduce barriers to entry that may hamper
redeployment of resources to growing sectors. In this
regard, the corporate sector shake-up induced by the
pandemic—particularly the exit of smaller firms—
risks reinforcing the trend of broad-based increases in
concentration and market power across the economy
(Chapter 3 of the April 2019 WEO), posing a threat
to dynamism and innovation. Competition policy
frameworks and scrutiny of corporate mergers need to
ensure that such developments do not lead to abuses
of market power and that small start-ups can continue
competing on a level playing field with incumbents.
Facilitating new growth opportunities, including to
speed the transition to a low-carbon economy. In addition, as discussed in Chapter 3, a green investment
push to increase reliance on renewables, improve
efficiency of the grid, and retrofit buildings to increase
energy conservation could also spur capital spending
in such sectors as construction materials and energy-­
efficient heating systems, while speeding the transition
to a lower-carbon growth path. The European Union’s
agreement to target 30 percent of the Next Generation
recovery fund to climate-change-related spending is a

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

step in this direction. More broadly, efforts to promote
investment in new growth areas would also help with
the post-pandemic reorganization of the economy as
firms take advantage of new opportunities. An emerging cluster of growth opportunities during the pandemic relates to the accelerated shift to e-commerce,
increasing digitalization of the economy, and possible
innovation of new data-enabled services. Another
cluster relates to medicine and biotechnology.

Boosting Human Capital Accumulation
The global loss of learning as schools and universities stay closed for a large part of 2020 is likely to be
one of the most enduring legacies of the COVID-19
crisis. Virtual learning may not be an adequate substitute, even in locations with widespread high-speed
internet connectivity where consumers have adequate
access to online learning and supplementary instruction is available at home. Loss of learning can have
long-lasting consequences on individuals’ lifetime earning potential and economy-wide productivity growth.
Policymakers will have to devise makeup strategies for
use when the pandemic is under control and it is safe
to resume full-time schooling. Options could include
setting aside funding to accommodate adjustments
to the length of the school year, training teachers on
remedial approaches to correct learning losses, and
instituting or expanding supplementary after-school
tutoring programs (see WB 2020b). At the same time,
educational and vocational programs will need to
accommodate training needs in jobs that are likely to
be in high demand (emergency first responders, nurses,
and lab technicians and digital literacy more broadly,
so that more and more people can take advantage of
teleworking opportunities). Even with these adaptations in vocational programs, take-up may still fall
short if the training involves acquiring a substantively
different and challenging set of skills, raising the
possibility of a persistent increase in dropouts and large
numbers of people in neither education, employment,
nor training.

Making Gains More Equitable
The setback to human capital accumulation is one
dimension along which inequality is likely to increase as
a result of the pandemic, as already discussed. Among
the social spending measures beyond education to
counter the increase in inequality are strengthening
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

25

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

social assistance (for example, conditional cash
transfers, food stamps and in-kind nutrition, medical
payments for low-income households), expanding
social insurance (relaxing eligibility criteria for unemployment insurance, extending the coverage of paid
family and sick leave), and investments in retraining
and reskilling programs to boost reemployment prospects for displaced workers.

Resolving Debt Overhangs
The scope for actions to boost productivity growth,
accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy,
and reduce inequality is limited in many instances
because elevated debt levels entering the crisis are set to
rise further.
Sovereign debt overhang. Governments with large
debt stocks will need to consider options to raise
revenues and gradually decrease expenditures over
the medium term. These include measures to increase
progressivity in the tax code discussed earlier. Efforts
to expand the tax base can include reducing corporate
tax breaks, applying tighter caps on personal income
tax deductions, instituting value-added taxes where
not part of the code, and improving the coverage of
tax registries and electronic filing of returns. On the
spending side, scaling back such outlays as poorly
targeted and wasteful subsidies would help with consolidation. In some cases, restructuring of sovereign
debt may be needed to alleviate financing pressures
and restore debt sustainability, although this brings
its own challenges, including potentially long-lasting
impacts on a sovereign’s credibility. Where available,
collective action clauses may need to be activated to
speed up the process. Restructuring options could
include maturity extensions, interest rate reductions,
principal reductions (haircuts), and other debt swaps
(with renegotiated terms).
Corporate debt overhang. Resolving the likely large
corporate debt overhang coming out the crisis will
first require triaging business cases into those that
are considered ultimately viable and can be restructured versus those that are unviable. In the case of
systemically important firms, equity injections may
be considered. If a firm’s business model appears
viable over the medium term, restructuring its balance
sheet and providing liquidity support are appropriate.
Special out-of-court restructuring frameworks may
need to be strengthened (or established) to help deal

26

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

with the expected high number of cases. Standardized
restructuring solutions and incentives (deadlines for
agreements, fines for creditors, threat of liquidation
to debtors) will be needed to expedite restructuring
(Liu, Garrido, and DeLong 2020). To help deal with
a potential rise in nonperforming loans, supervisors
should enhance regulatory oversight (for example,
through more robust provisioning, write-offs, and
income recognition), whereas banks should strengthen
their internal nonperforming loan management capabilities. The development of distressed debt markets
can be supported by increasing access to debtor
information, removing regulatory barriers (for example,
enabling nonbanks to own and manage nonperforming loans) and improving the quality of collateral
valuations. Tax rules that inhibit debt restructurings or
write-offs should also be amended (Aiyar and others
2015; Awad and others 2020).
The scale of the COVID-19 shock and potential
for larger spillovers from bankruptcies than in normal
recessions argue for providing more ample solvency
support than usual, except for firms that were already
insolvent before the crisis began. Tax measures, such as
loss carrybacks, could help support previously viable
firms. For large firms, support can take the form of
direct equity injections or junior debt claims with
warrants that allow the public purse to benefit from
eventual return to profitability. For unlisted small and
medium enterprises, where direct equity injections are
not an option, support could involve grants today that
are partially recovered by a temporarily higher corporate tax rate in future.
Where long-lived or structural shifts in consumption and production chains are taking place and a
firm’s medium-term prospects are poor, liquidation
to enable reallocation of capital and labor to better
uses may be needed. For firms rendered unviable by
persistent structural changes, it is essential to have
an efficient and equitable corporate bankruptcy
framework that can apportion losses across investors,
banks, and owners.

Multilateral Policies to Ensure a Sustained
Global Recovery
Beyond the current pandemic, as noted in the
section on risks, intensifying trade and technology tensions between countries could drag global
growth starkly lower than the baseline projection.

CHAPTER 1

Effective multilateral cooperation to defuse these tensions and address gaps in the rules-based multilateral
trading system would go a long way toward preventing
such outcomes.
Countries must also act collectively to implement
their climate change mitigation commitments. As
discussed in Chapter 3, joint action—particularly by
the largest emitters—that combines a green investment
push, together with steadily rising carbon prices, is
needed to achieve emission reductions consistent with
limiting global temperature increases to the targets
of the 2015 Paris Agreement. A broadly adopted,
growth-friendly mitigation package could raise global
activity through investment in green infrastructure

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

over the near term, with modest output costs over
the medium term as economies transition away from
fossil fuels toward cleaner technologies. Relative to
unchanged policies, such a package would significantly
boost incomes in the second half of the century by
avoiding damages and catastrophic risks from climate
change. The global community should also take urgent
steps to strengthen its defenses against calamitous
health crises, for instance by augmenting stockpiles of
protective equipment and essential medical supplies,
financing research, and ensuring adequate ongoing assistance to countries with limited health care
capacity, including through support of international
organizations.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

27

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Scenario Box 1. Alternative Scenarios
Here, the G20 Model1 is used to estimate the
potential impact on activity of two alternative paths
for the evolution of the fight against COVID-19.
In the first alternative—the downside—containing
the virus proves to be a more difficult and protracted struggle until a vaccine is widely available.
In the second alternative—the upside—it is
assumed that all dimensions of the fight against
the virus go well.

Downside Scenario: Containment Proves Much
More Difficult
For the downside scenario (red line in Scenario
Figure 1), it is assumed that measures to contain
the spread—either mandated or voluntary—slightly
increase the direct drag on activity in the second
half of 2020 as the virus proves more difficult to
contain. Further, it is assumed that in 2021 progress
on all fronts in the fight against the virus proves to
be slower than assumed in the baseline, including
progress on vaccines, treatments, and adherence to
social distancing guidelines to contain the virus’s
spread. This leads to a deterioration in activity in
contact-intensive sectors, with the associated income
effects spilling over to other sectors. These domestic
demand effects are then amplified via trade. Financial conditions are also assumed to tighten, with
corporate spreads rising in advanced economies and
both corporate and sovereign spreads widening in
emerging market economies. The increase in 2020
is quite mild but grows to be more substantive in
2021 as the weakness in activity persists. Financial conditions gradually return to baseline beyond
2022. Fiscal authorities in advanced economies are
assumed to respond with an increase in transfers
beyond standard automatic stabilizers, while those
in emerging market economies are assumed to be
more constrained, with only automatic stabilizers
operating. Monetary authorities in advanced economies with constraints on conventional policy space
are assumed to use unconventional measures to
contain increases in long-term interest rates. The
more protracted weakness in activity is assumed to
create additional, persistent damage to economies’
The authors of this box are Ben Hunt and Susanna Mursula.
1The G20 Model is a global, structural model of the world
economy, capturing international spillovers and key economic
relationships among the household, corporate, and government
sectors, including monetary policy.

28

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Scenario Figure 1. Alternative Evolutions in
the Fight against the COVID-19 Virus
(Deviation from baseline)
Upside scenario
4 1. World Real GDP
(Percent)
2

Downside scenario
2. World Real GDP
Growth
(Percentage
points)

0

3
2
1
0
–1

–2
–4
2019

4

–2
21

23

4 3. AEs Real GDP
(Percent)
2

25 2019

21

23

4. EMs Real GDP
(Percent)

–3
25
4
2

0

0

–2

–2

–4

–4

–6
2019

21

23

24 5. AEs Government
Debt/GDP
18
(Percentage
points)
12

25 2019

21

23

6. EMs Government
Debt/GDP
(Percentage
points)

–6
25
24
18
12

6

6

0

0

–6
2019

21

23

25 2019

21

23

–6
25

Source: IMF, G20 Model simulations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market
economies.

supply capacity, with a loss in productive capital,
a persistent rise in the natural rate of unemployment,
and temporarily weaker productivity growth. These
scarring effects are assumed to be largely felt in 2022
and beyond. Panel 1 in Scenario Figure 2 contains a
decomposition of the impact on global GDP of the
four key layers of the downside scenario.
Relative to the baseline, global growth in 2020
is roughly ¾ percentage point weaker and almost
3 percentage points weaker in 2021 under the downside scenario. Emerging market economies are more

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Scenario Box 1 (continued)
Scenario Figure 2. Downside and Upside
Scenarios: Global Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)

1. Downside Scenario
Domestic social distancing plus trade spillovers
Net tightening in ﬁnancial conditions
4
Scarring
Discretionary ﬁscal
2
Total
6

0
–2
–4
–6

2020

21

22

23

24

25

6 2. Upside Scenario
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

Unwinding domestic social distancing plus trade
spillovers
Easing in ﬁnancial conditions
Unwinding scarring
Total
2020

21

22

23

24

25

Source: IMF G20 simulations.

negatively impacted than are advanced economies,
given that limited fiscal space constrains their ability
to support incomes. Consequently, even tighter
financial conditions for emerging market economies
exacerbate the difference, which is further reinforced
by more substantive scarring. After 2021 growth rises
above baseline for several years, but the level of global
GDP is still roughly 1.5 percent below baseline by
the end of the World Economic Outlook horizon in
2025. The negative impact on the level of GDP is
roughly twice as large for emerging market economies
as for advanced economies. The more protracted negative impact on activity, combined with the additional
fiscal expenditures to support incomes, leads to a
marked increase in public indebtedness. Debt-to-GDP
ratios rise by well above 10 percentage points, on
average, for advanced economies, but by a more
modest 5 percentage points for emerging market
economies by 2022.

Upside Scenario: All Dimensions of the Fight
against the Virus Go Well
Under the upside scenario, (blue line in Scenario
Figure 1) it is assumed that all things in the fight
against COVID-19 go much better than assumed in
the baseline. On the treatment front, advances quickly
start to reduce the fatality rate, reducing fear and
helping to restore confidence. An early and substantial
ramp-up in investment in vaccine production capabilities and cooperation agreements in the associated
global supply chain lead to earlier, widespread vaccine
availability. Complete openness and transparency
in the underlying science increase confidence in
vaccine efficacy and safety, leading to widespread
vaccinations. All these advances will allow activity in
the contact-intensive sectors, which have been most
adversely affected, to bounce back more quickly than
assumed in the baseline. In addition, the overall
improvement in confidence will lead to higher spending across other sectors as uncertainty about future
income prospects subsides. More buoyant activity will
in turn lead to improved prospects for firms and less
deterioration in fiscal positions, driving an easing in
risk premiums. Further, the faster bounce-back will
lead to fewer bankruptcies, less labor market dislocation, and a milder slowing in productivity growth than
assumed in the baseline. The improvements in these
supply side factors start in 2023 and grow. On the
policy front, with the improvement in activity, fiscal
withdrawal is assumed to be only in terms of automatic stabilizers, and monetary authorities everywhere
are assumed to be able to accommodate the faster
growth without imperiling their price stability objectives. Panel 2 in Scenario Figure 2 contains a decomposition of the impact on global GDP of the three key
layers under the upside scenario.
Global growth under the upside scenario gradually
accelerates relative to the baseline, with growth roughly
½ percentage point higher in 2021, rising to roughly
1 percentage point higher by 2023. In 2024 the pickup
moderates, with growth slightly below baseline by
2025. Although both advanced and emerging market
economies see marked improvements in activity, emerging market economies benefit more, as the baseline
assumes that the impact of limited progress in measures
to fight the virus falls more heavily on these economies. Further, the difference is magnified by the larger
relative easing in risk premiums and a larger unwinding
of the scarring embedded in the baseline.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

29

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Scenario Box 1 (continued)
By 2025 the level of global GDP is roughly
2 percent above the baseline, with the improvement
in emerging market economies almost double that in
advanced economies. The faster growth leads to an
improvement in fiscal positions, with both advanced
and emerging market economies seeing debt-to-GDP

30

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

ratios falling by roughly 5 percentage points by the
end of the World Economic Outlook horizon. Should
fiscal authorities also take advantage of the stronger
upside growth to unwind discretionary measures faster
than assumed in the baseline, debt-to-GDP positions
could improve even more.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.1. Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights
The International Comparison Program (ICP),
maintained and published by the World Bank in
coordination with the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development and other international organizations, released new purchasing
power parities (PPPs) for the reference year 2017 in
May 2020 for the 176 economies that participated.
Revised results for the preceding reference year,
2011, and estimates of annual PPPs for 2012–16
were also released.1 PPPs are used to convert different
currencies to a common currency and equalize
their purchasing power by eliminating differences
in price levels between economies. They show, with

reference to a base economy (the United States),
the relative price of a given basket of goods and
services across economies.
Estimates of regional and world output and growth,
along with forecasts, are key macroeconomic indicators
reported in many of the IMF’s flagship publications,
including the World Economic Outlook (WEO). The
revised PPPs used in the October 2020 WEO are based
on 2011–17 data from the ICP 2017 survey, which
are then extended forward and backward by using the
growth rates in relative GDP deflators (the GDP deflator
of a country divided by the GDP deflator of the United
States). These generate PPP-based GDP, which is used as
weights to compute regional and global real GDP growth
and other real sector aggregates, including inflation.2

The authors of this box are Jungjin Lee and Evgenia
Pugacheva, with contributions from Angela Espiritu and
Mahnaz Hemmati.
1See ICP 2017 Report for more information on the results
and methodology of the 2017 ICP exercise.

2See WEO FAQ for more information on the aggregation
method and use of PPPs in the WEO.

Table 1.1.1. Changes in World GDP Shares from Purchasing-Power-Parity Revisions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Old (ICP 2011)

Difference2

USD GDP
Share

World GDP Share
New (ICP 2017)
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3
Japan
Other Advanced Economies4

2011
45.3
16.3
13.2
4.8
7.0

2017
44.0
16.1
12.9
4.3
6.9

20191
43.1
15.9
12.5
4.1
6.8

2011
45.2
16.3
13.2
4.8
6.9

20171
41.3
15.2
11.5
4.2
6.6

20191
40.3
15.1
11.2
4.0
6.5

2019
2.8
0.9
1.3
0.0
0.3

2019
59.1
24.4
15.2
5.8
8.4

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

54.7
26.5
14.4
5.9
7.5
3.4
8.7
3.1
2.0
9.0
1.7
3.0
0.9
0.7

56.0
29.9
16.3
6.8
7.6
3.1
8.0
2.5
2.0
7.4
1.3
3.1
0.8
0.6

56.9
31.5
17.4
7.1
7.6
3.1
7.6
2.4
2.0
7.1
1.2
3.1
0.8
0.6

54.8
26.7
14.5
6.1
7.7
3.6
8.7
3.1
2.0
8.7
1.4
3.1
0.9
0.7

58.7
32.4
18.1
7.5
7.2
3.2
7.7
2.5
1.9
8.4
1.4
3.1
0.9
0.6

59.7
34.1
19.2
7.8
7.1
3.1
7.2
2.4
1.8
8.1
1.3
3.1
0.9
0.6

–2.8
–2.6
–1.8
–0.7
0.5
0.0
0.3
–0.1
0.1
–0.9
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0

40.9
24.1
16.8
3.5
4.5
1.9
5.9
2.1
1.4
4.5
0.9
2.0
0.5
0.4

Sources: June 2020 WEO Update; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: New shares are based on the June 2020 WEO Update revised with ICP 2017; old shares are from the June 2020 WEO Update; ICP =
International Comparison Program; USD = US dollar; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Extrapolations.
2Difference between column 3 and column 6; percentage points.
3Aggregate of member countries.
4Excludes the Group of Seven and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

31

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.1 (continued)
PPP Weight Changes for Regions and Economies
Table 1.1.1 shows that the share of emerging
market and developing economies in world GDP
rises, while that of advanced economies falls during
2011–19 based on ICP 2017 (columns 1–3), as was
the case based on ICP 2011 (columns 4–6). However, the focus here is on the weight revisions for a
given year, with the main change being a shift in the
relative weight of advanced economies, whose share
of the global economy for 2019 is now estimated at
43 percent—higher than the previous calculation of
40 percent. Looking at changes for different regions
and economies, euro area countries and the United
States are estimated to have higher shares in 2019
than before. Meanwhile, revisions for China and
India together mostly account for the smaller shares
of emerging Asia and emerging market and developing economies as a whole in new weights. Latin
America and the Caribbean and emerging Europe
have a slightly larger global weight, while the Middle
East and Central Asia region has a smaller global
weight. The weight of sub-Saharan Africa is virtually
unchanged.
The country shares in world GDP used as
weights to derive world output growth could differ,
depending on whether the GDP shares are valued at
PPP or market exchange rates.3 Revisions in PPPs
notwithstanding, emerging market and developing
economies represent a much smaller fraction of global
GDP at market exchange rates of 41 percent than
at PPP of 57 percent for 2019, reflecting their more
limited purchasing power in international markets.

numeraire country and changes in the same way over
time. In practice, however, structures and changes can
be very different. This is significant, particularly when
developing economies are compared with an advanced
economy. For example, the Chinese economy has been
developing rapidly in recent years, and its structure
has changed in a significantly different way from that
of the United States.
Although the ICP provides revised 2011 PPP
values with ICP 2017 results, 2011 revisions are
small, and the new 2017 estimates drive the changes
in PPP paths over 2011–17 compared with those
extrapolated from the 2011 ICP vintage. Figure 1.1.1
shows that China’s 2019 GDP share has been revised
down, with the PPP conversion rate depreciating
relative to previous estimates. This implies that the
increase in overall prices in China was underestimated
with extrapolation derived from ICP 2011. In ICP
2017, the relative price level in China in 2019 is
now higher, and GDP converted at the PPP rate is
therefore smaller. This in turn leads to a lower 2019
PPP share for China in the global economy using

Figure 1.1.1. Purchasing-Power-Parity
Revision for China

(Percent; local currency per US dollar on right scale)
25

7

Share in world PPP GDP: ICP 2017
Share in world PPP GDP: ICP 2011
PPP conversion rate: ICP 2017 (right scale)
PPP conversion rate: ICP 2011 (right scale)

6

20

Factors behind PPP Weight Revision
Sizable discrepancies can arise between PPPs from
a new cycle and extrapolated PPPs from a previous
cycle as the new cycle brings forth additional and
updated information on the world. The six-year gap
between ICP cycles resulted in notable differences for
some economies.4 One of the assumptions underlying PPP extrapolations for GDP is that the structure
of each country’s economy is similar to that of the
3Table

1.1 of the WEO report presents both measures of
world output.
4While the extrapolation methodology used is robust, the
estimates based on extrapolation—for example, the 2017 value
derived from ICP 2011—should not be expected to match the
corresponding year in the new ICP 2017 survey. See McCarthy
(2013) and Deaton and Aten (2017).

32

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

5
15
4
10

5
2005

3

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

2
21

Sources: June 2020 World Economic Outlook Update; IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Shaded area denotes the years of the new estimates
from the ICP 2017 survey. ICP = International Comparison
Program; PPP = purchasing power parity.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.1 (continued)
ICP 2017 (17.4 percent) compared with the share
estimated using ICP 2011 (19.2 percent). This implies
that increases in overall prices exceed differences in
GDP deflators.

Impact of PPP Revision on Aggregate Growth
As an illustration of how the change in weights
can affect the calculation of aggregate growth rates,
Table 1.1.2 compares the aggregation of the June 2020
WEO Update country forecasts based on ICP 2011
with those based on ICP 2017. The lower weight
of fast-growing emerging Asia and the larger weight
of advanced economies under ICP 2017 imply that
global growth calculated with the new weights is
slightly lower. Average global growth is estimated at
3.2 percent for 2018–19 and 3.6 percent for 2011–17,

some 0.1 percentage point lower than with the old
weights. For 2020 the aggregation of the June 2020
WEO Update country forecasts with the new weights
yields an aggregate global growth rate projection of
–5.2 percent for 2020 (compared with the projection
of –4.9 percent in the June 2020 WEO Update, which
used the old weights).5 The reduction in the relative
weight of its fastest-growing region also implies slightly
lower average growth for emerging market and developing economies using the ICP 2017 weights compared with the estimate using the ICP 2011 weights.

5GDP

share and aggregate growth calculations based on ICP
2017 presented here are based on the most recent data of the
June 2020 WEO Update and may differ from the final estimates
in the October 2020 WEO.

Table 1.1.2. Revisions to Real GDP Growth of World Economic Outlook Aggregates
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
June 2020 WEO Revised with ICP 2017
World
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
June 2020 WEO Based on ICP 2011
World
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Difference (percentage points)
World
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2011–17

2018

2019

2020

2021

3.6
1.9
5.0

3.5
2.2
4.5

2.8
1.7
3.6

–5.2
–8.1
–3.1

5.4
4.8
5.8

3.7
1.9
5.1

3.6
2.2
4.5

2.9
1.7
3.7

–4.9
–8.0
–3.0

5.4
4.8
5.9

–0.05
0.00
–0.04

–0.08
0.00
–0.03

–0.08
0.00
–0.05

–0.24
–0.07
–0.13

–0.04
0.04
–0.05

Sources: June 2020 WEO Update; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ICP = International Comparison Program; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

33

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.2. Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19
This box documents the possible implications of
the pandemic for poverty reduction, improvements in
life expectancy, and progress toward greater equality
in emerging market and developing economies. The
number of people in extreme poverty is likely to rise
substantially this year, for the first time in more than
20 years, and income inequality, on average, across
these economies could rise back to levels seen in 2008,
reversing gains since the global financial crisis. Life
expectancy is less likely to be affected, although there
are downside risks related to the fragile state of health
care systems and interruptions in treatments of other
life-threatening illnesses.
In the two decades prior to the COVID-19 crisis,
emerging market and developing economies grew by
4.1 percent on average—one percentage point higher
than during the preceding two decades (1980–99).
With slowing population growth, per capita growth
shows a sharper contrast: 2.4 percent in 2000–19
versus 1.0 percent in 1980–99. A key question is how
much progress has been made in the past 20 years
toward enhancing inclusiveness (in poverty reduction,
improvements in life expectancy, and greater equality)
within countries.1
With the pandemic, real GDP in emerging market
and developing economies is expected to decline by
3.3 percent in 2020. This crisis is disproportionately
affecting vulnerable workers, putting at risk much
of the progress achieved before the crisis and likely
exacerbating remaining gaps. Against this backdrop, a
second key question is how the pandemic will affect
inclusiveness in these economies.

Stocktaking: Progress on Inclusiveness
prior to the Pandemic
Remarkable progress was made on poverty
reduction since 2000 until the pandemic started.2
The authors of this box are Gabriela Cugat and Futoshi
Narita, with contributions from the authors of Brussevich,
Dabla-Norris, and Khalid (2020) and Bannister and Mourmouras (2017) as well as Albe Gjonbalaj. This box is part of a
research project on macroeconomic policy in low-income countries supported by the United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO). The views expressed
here do not necessarily represent the views of the FCDO.
1For further discussion focused on low-income developing
countries, see Fabrizio and others (2017); Chapter 1 of the April
2020 Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Economic Outlook discusses
progress made in sub-Saharan African countries.
2For further discussion, see WB (2018).

34

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

The share of people living on less than $1.90 a day
(in 2011 purchasing-power-parity terms) in the total
population declined from 25 percent in 2002 to
12 percent in 2018, on average, with stronger progress
in low-income developing countries (Figure 1.2.1,
panel 1).3 On top of improvements in the extensive
margin of poverty (headcount measure), the poverty
gap index (how far below the poverty line the poor
in a given country fall) points to improvements in
the intensive margin (average distance from $1.90 a
day among people living in poverty), indicating that
the average annual money transfer per person living
in poverty necessary to end extreme poverty declined
from $240 to $184 (for perfectly targeted transfers).
Health-related indicators also showed significant
progress before the crisis. Life expectancy exhibited
strong “convergence”—levels substantially increased for
almost all emerging market and developing economies,
and the increase was stronger for countries with lower
life expectancy, most of which are low-income developing countries (Figure 1.2.1, panel 2).4 The convergence can also be seen within countries: inequality in
life expectancy across people in a country was reduced,
though to a lesser extent. Other health indicators also
showed significant progress, including mortality under
age five, maternal mortality, and access to clean water.
Nevertheless, challenges remain in health care systems
in many of these economies and make them particularly vulnerable to the pandemic (see WB 2019).
Despite advances in poverty reduction and improvement in life expectancy, progress in reducing income
inequality has been slow over the past two decades.
The Gini coefficient (a measure of statistical dispersion
intended to represent income inequality) declined
only gradually, by 3 percentage points—from 44 to
41, on average—during this period (Figure 1.2.2,
panel 1). Wide gaps with respect to the average level
of advanced economies remain for many emerging
market and developing economies, while some others
in this country group have already reached that level.
Progress has been weaker for low-income developing
countries, with one-third of them seeing an increase
in income inequality. Similarly, the Palma ratio shows
that the total income of the top 10 percent is twice as
large as the total income of the bottom 40 percent in
3As the data examined in this box are mostly sparse, data
points for a given year are averaged over the year and the previous four years.
4For further discussion, see UNDP (2019).

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.2 (continued)
Figure 1.2.1. Positive Developments

Figure 1.2.2. Remaining Gaps

120 1. Poverty Reduction
(Percent; population share of people living on
$1.90 a day in 2011 purchasing-power-parity
100
terms; simple averages; 2002–18)
80

70 1. Income Inequality
(Percent; Gini index; simple averages; 2002–18)
60
50

60
40

40

30 Advanced economies
2018 average

20
0

Emerging market economies

Low-income
developing countries

90 2. Life Expectancy: A “Convergence”
(Years of life; simple averages; 2002–18)
80

Advanced economies; 2018 average

20

Low-income
developing countries

2. Gender Inequality in Labor Force Participation:
Female-to-Male Ratio
(Ratio; simple averages;
1.0
2002–18)
1.2

0.8

70

0.6

60

0.4
50
40

Emerging market economies

Advanced economies
2018 average

0.2
Emerging market economies

Low-income
developing countries

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators
database.
Note: Each arrow represents a country, beginning at the
level of the corresponding variable in 2002 and ending at the
level in 2018. Green (red) color indicates improvements
(deteriorations) larger than half a standard deviation. Data
points for a given year are averaged over the year and the
previous four years.

emerging market and developing economies, whereas
the difference is only 25 percent for advanced economies, on average.
Several other dimensions of inclusiveness, related to
inequality of opportunity, have also seen slow progress.
The share of inactive youth (that is, youth not in
education nor in employment) has hovered around
20 percent.5 Inequality in education (that is, inequality in the distribution of years of schooling within a
country) has only marginally declined, leaving wide
gaps in most of these economies compared with the
5For a discussion of youth labor markets in these economies,
see Ahn and others (2019). For a discussion of labor market
policies in these economies, see Duval and Loungani (2019).

0.0

Emerging market economies

Low-income
developing countries

Sources: International Labour Organization; World Bank,
World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Each arrow represents a country, beginning at the
level of the corresponding variable in 2002 and ending at the
level in 2018. Green (red) color indicates improvements
(deteriorations) larger than half a standard deviation. Data
points for a given year are averaged over the year and the
previous four years. The deﬁnition of the Gini index varies
depending on household surveys across countries (for
example, income or consumption).

average in advanced economies.6 Gender equality has
been promoted in recent years, but the gender gap
remains high in labor force participation (Figure 1.2.2,
panel 2).7 In some economies, lack of progress in
female labor force participation is related to higher
6The education inequality index is compiled by the United
Nations Human Development Report Office. For further discussion, see UNDP (2019).
7For a discussion of gender inequality in economic issues,
see Brussevich and others (2018), Ostry and others (2018), and
Sahay and Cihak (2018).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

35

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.2 (continued)
female enrollment in education. However, educational attainment of women also remains lower than
that of men in most of these economies, especially in
low-income countries.

Figure 1.2.3. Telework Ability and Income
Inequality

The Impact of the Pandemic on Inclusiveness
The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to both halt
the improving trends and widen existing gaps in inclusiveness. The World Bank estimates that, compared
with pre-pandemic projections, the COVID-19 pandemic will increase the global share of people living
on less than $1.90 a day by 1.14 percentage points,
which represents almost 90 million people newly
living in extreme poverty—the first increase since
1998.8 In terms of life expectancy, the COVID-19
impact is currently projected to be moderate.9 However, downside risk factors are related to more fragile
health care systems than in advanced economies and
interruptions in other health services to treat and
prevent HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis (see Hogan
and others 2020). Income inequality widened during
past pandemics, especially over the medium term (see
Furceri and others 2020). Furthermore, the impact
on inequality is expected to be much larger than in
the past because the COVID-19 crisis and associated
containment measures are disproportionately affecting
the most vulnerable (see Adams and others 2020 and
Shibata 2020). Gender equality is also being undermined and could experience a sharp setback under the
current circumstances (see Alon and others 2020 and
Georgieva and others 2020).
Although it is difficult to quantify distributional
impacts of the pandemic on many economies in a
comparable way, a parsimonious estimate based on
lower telework ability for lower-paying jobs indicates a strong setback in progress made on income
inequality since the global financial crisis. Brussevich,
Dabla-Norris, and Khalid 2020 estimate the degree
of telework ability across 35 economies and finds
that it is generally lower for low-income earners
than high-income earners (Figure 1.2.3, panel 1).
Other real-time survey data also show that more
tele-workable sectors saw a smaller loss of employment
8See WB (2020a). The estimate corresponds to the baseline
projection without change in inequality.
9With younger populations (of a median age of 27 years)
being less vulnerable to the disease so far, the mortality burden
is several times smaller than in advanced economies (Decerf and
others 2020).

36

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

0.5

1. Telework Ability, by Income Quintile
(Index ranging from zero to 1; simple
averages divided by the number of economies
in parentheses in x-axis labels; each bar
corresponds to the average divided by workers
in each income quintile in the sample)
Below 20%
60–80%

0.4

20–40%
above 80%

40–60%

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0.35

Emerging market and
developing economies (7)

2. Estimated Impact on Income Inequality
(Percent change in the Gini index;
estimated density using the Epanechnikov
kernel with Silverman’s bandwidth)
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
Low-income developing countries

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
–2

Advanced
economies (28)

Past pandemics
No
change
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Sources: Bick, Blandin, and Mertens 2020; Brussevich and
others 2020; World Bank, World Development Indicators
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 2, the impact on the Gini index is estimated by
distributing the aggregate income shock (based on the IMF’s
real GDP projections) to the income quintile shares, in
proportion to telework ability, whose magnitude is calibrated
using the estimated coefﬁcient of telework ability in the
regression of employment loss across sectors using the data
by Bick, Blandin, and Mertens (2020, Appendix Table C1).
Percent changes in the Gini index are obtained as the
changes in an approximated Gini index based only on the
income quintile shares. The (closest) economy group
average is used when the telework ability index is missing.
Data points for a given year are averaged over the year and
the previous four years. The vertical line for “past
pandemics” corresponds to 1¼ percent, based on the
ﬁndings of Furceri and others (2020) on the net Gini index.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.2 (continued)
from February to May 2020 in the United States
(see Bick, Blandin, and Mertens 2020). Extrapolating
these findings to emerging market and developing
economies, the aggregate decrease in income (taken
from the IMF’s latest real GDP projections) can be
distributed among the groups of people divided by
income quintiles for each economy, in proportion
to telework ability.10 The resultant impact (without
reflecting any redistribution policies or other factors)
on the income shares by income quintile are used to
estimate a percent change in the Gini coefficient in
2020. These show that the average Gini coefficient for
emerging market and developing economies would
increase by 2.6 percentage points to 42.7, broadly
comparable to the level in 2008, implying that gains
since the global financial crisis could be reversed
(Figure 1.2.3, panel 2).
A simple welfare measure that goes beyond GDP
indicates that there was good progress before the
pandemic and that a strong reversal due to this crisis
can be expected. The measure, proposed by Jones
and Klenow (2016), takes into account four factors:
(1) real consumption per capita, (2) life expectancy,
(3) leisure time, and (4) consumption inequality.11
Combining these factors, the average welfare improvement in 56 emerging market and developing economies with available data from 2002 to 2019 was
equivalent to a 6 percent increase in annual consumption levels in every year (Figure 1.2.4). This exceeded
per capita real GDP growth in the same period by
1.3 percentage points. The excess welfare growth stems
almost entirely from longer life expectancy. A setback
in welfare in 2020 could exceed 8 percent, driven in

10How the shock affects the income quintile shares depending
on telework ability is calibrated using the estimated coefficient
of telework ability in the regression of employment loss across
sectors using the data from Bick and others (2020, Appendix
Table C1). The (closest) economy group average is used when
the telework ability index is missing.
11See Jones and Klenow (2016), which proposes a welfare
measure in percent of annual consumption, based on the lifetime
expected utility of an imaginary person just before she or he is
born in a country in a given year, under many strong assumptions that are needed to compute this measure for a large set of
countries with only aggregate-level data. See the online appendix
of Jones and Klenow (2016) for a detailed discussion on caveats
regarding this measure. In addition, for an extension to reflect
net welfare losses from environmental issues, see Bannister and
Mourmouras (2017).

Figure 1.2.4. Beyond GDP Welfare Growth
(Percent; annualized per capita growth relative to
2002; simple averages across 45 economies)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4

No change in Gini
Gini increase in past pandemics

–6
–8
–10

Historical average
(2002–19)

Welfare growth in 2020
based on telework ability

Sources: Penn World Table (9.1); World Bank, World
Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The welfare measure is based on Jones and Klenow
(2016, equation 7). For different scenarios on inequality in
2020, the “no change in Gini” scenario uses the latest
observations; the “Gini increase in past pandemic” scenario
applies a 1¼ percent increase to all economies, based on the
ﬁndings of Furceri and others (2020) on the net Gini index;
and the “telework ability” scenario is based on parsimonious
estimates using various levels of telework ability across
income groups within countries (see Figure 1.2.3, panel 2).
Macroeconomic data are extrapolated from the IMF’s latest
projections. The impacts on life expectancy and employment
are estimated using a multigroup susceptible-infectedremoved model. Data points for a given year are averaged
over the year and the previous four years.

large part by the excess change in inequality, as indicated by parsimonious estimates.
Since 2000 emerging market and developing
economies have made appreciable progress in poverty
reduction and increasing life expectancy. COVID-19
threatens to set back such progress, particularly in
terms of poverty reduction, and to widen existing gaps
in terms of income inequality, access to education, and
gender equality. Redistribution policies and measures
to support affected people and firms are essential to
mitigate sizable adverse impacts on inequality and on
welfare more generally.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

37

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.3. Rising Small and Medium Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:
Assessment and Policy Options
The COVID-19 recession will affect small and
medium enterprises (SMEs) particularly hard. These
firms typically are more vulnerable than their larger
counterparts, reflecting, among other factors, their
limited buffers and access to credit. However, the
effects of the current crisis on SMEs are likely to be
even more severe than in previous crises because SMEs
are most prevalent among the hardest-hit sectors, such
as restaurants, hotels, and arts and entertainment.
Consequently, liquidity and solvency risks are bound
to increase, putting both SME jobs and debt at risk.
This box assesses jobs at risk and discusses policy
options to address rising bankruptcy risks among
SMEs. Using the same data and framework, Chapter 1
of the October 2020 Global Financial Stability Report
assesses implications for financial stability, with particular focus on SME debt at risk.
The analysis builds on the methodology proposed
by Gourinchas and others (2020) and uses Orbis data
for SMEs across 21 (mostly advanced) economies.1
To assess the liquidity risks, the analysis considers
whether a firm has enough cash available at the end
of 2020 to cover its operational and financial expenses,
under the assumption that it can roll over maturing
debt but cannot take on additional debt. Likewise,
for insolvency risks, the analysis focuses on whether
a firm’s net equity is projected to become negative
at the end of 2020. The analysis shows that firms in
distress account for 9 to 13 percent of total SME (in
sample) employment, depending on the stress measure
chosen—­insolvency or illiquidity. This represents
almost a doubling of SME jobs at risk due to liquidity risks (and a 50 percent increase due to insolvency
risks) vis-à-vis a scenario without COVID-19 (see
Figure 1.3.1, panel 1). Using illiquidity as a distress
measure, the share of jobs at risk climbs to 30 and
40 percent for the “arts and entertainment” and “food
and accommodation” sectors, respectively, reflecting
their comparatively larger drop in output and greater
job intensity (Figure 1.3.1, panel 2).2
The authors of this box are Federico Díez and Chiara Maggi.
1The countries included are Australia, Austria, Belgium,
the Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom.
2Accounting for the massive government support provided
by most countries dampens these projections. This support
is difficult to quantify because it has come in multiple forms

38

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 1.3.1. Small and Medium Enterprises’
Liquidity and Solvency Concerns under
COVID-19 in 2020
No COVID-19

COVID-19, WEO baseline

14 1. Share of SME Jobs at Risk, by Scenario
(Percent)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Liquidity gap

Negative equity

2. Share of SME Jobs at Risk Due to Illiquidity,
by Scenario and Sector
(Percent)
Wholesale and retail
Water and waste
Transport and storage
Real estate
Professional and scientiﬁc
Other service
Mining
Manufacturing
ITC
Human health & social work
Electricity and gas
Education
Construction
Arts and entertainment
Agriculture
Administration
Accommodation and food
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars measure the share of SME jobs at risk due to
ﬁrms facing a liquidity gap or negative equity under a
scenario without COVID-19 in 2020 (blue bars) and with
COVID-19 using the WEO baseline projections at the country
level (red bars). Data are aggregated from the ﬁrm to the
country level using sectoral weights, and across countries
using GDP weights. ITC = information technology and
communication; SME = small and medium enterprise;
WEO = World Economic Outlook.

with widely different take-up rates across firms and countries.
Bearing these limitations in mind, preliminary simulations
suggest that the announced government support could have
significantly dampened the rise in liquidity shortages and
insolvency rates in some European countries (Chapter 3 of
the October 2020 Regional Economic Outlook: Europe).

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.3 (continued)
The large projected increased risks call for further
government support. While standard advice involves
providing liquidity to illiquid but solvent firms,
and restructuring insolvent firms to facilitate swift
resource reallocation, this time is different. The
magnitude of the shock, the uncertainty about its
duration, and the macro-financial amplifiers associated with mass bankruptcies justify ampler-than-usual
recourse to solvency support. This comes over
and above the need to cut the legal and financial
costs of bankruptcy procedures to alleviate risks of
overwhelming bankruptcy courts.
The multiple ways governments provide solvency
support to firms can involve important trade-offs—
such as balancing the reach and cost-effectiveness
of support, minimizing unwarranted bankruptcies,
and containing fiscal costs, as well as promoting
firms (and jobs) preservation and resource reallocation. Figure 1.3.2 shows the impact on projected
insolvency rates of two illustrative options—giving
all SMEs 5 percent of their pre-pandemic annual
revenues (accounting for more than 4 percent
of GDP) in the form of either government loans
or equity(-like) injections. Only the equity(-like)
injections would reduce insolvency risks—and,
further, they would reduce the share of jobs at risk
by almost 3 percentage points relative to panel 1
of Figure 1.3.1.3 This benefit comes at the cost of
greater fiscal risks, particularly if firms still end up
defaulting, given that equity(-like) claims would
then be junior to debt claims.
Overall, rising risks and the associated drag on the
recovery make a case for extending support to firms
for longer and for equity(-like) interventions—at least
in countries with available fiscal space. For larger firms,
options include direct equity injections or junior debt
claims together with warrants, for example. For SMEs,
combining grants with a temporarily higher future
3Both types of policy imply a cash transfer of a similar amount
and thereby are equally effective at easing liquidity risks.

Figure 1.3.2. Change in Share of Small and
Medium Enterprises with Negative Equity, by
Policy Scenario and Region
(Percentage points)
9
8

COVID-19, WEO baseline 2020
Government loans
Equity-like injections

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Asia Paciﬁc

Euro area

Europe,
non-euro area

Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars measure the change in the share of SME
ﬁrms with negative equity under a scenario with no policy
intervention (blue bars), government loans (red bars), and
equity-like injections (yellow bars). The changes are
computed comparing the WEO baseline scenario with
COVID-19 to a counterfactual scenario for 2020 without
COVID-19. Data are aggregated from the ﬁrm to the country
level using sectoral weights, and across countries using GDP
weights. SME = small and medium enterprise; WEO = World
Economic Outlook.

corporate tax rate would act like an equity injection;
such an approach could raise tax administration challenges and would need to be carefully calibrated. All
these options would entail larger fiscal risks, however,
given that equity-like injections into SMEs may attract
not only viable firms but also those that are unviable
and gambling for resurrection.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

39

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.4. Social Unrest during COVID-19
Social unrest has decreased in recent months as
mobility has declined. This is consistent with past
experience immediately following epidemics. However,
unrest was high and rising before the COVID-19 crisis
started. As the crisis passes, unrest may yet reemerge
in countries where progress on underlying social and
political issues has stalled and where the crisis exposes
or exacerbates preexisting problems.
Social unrest has fallen markedly as lockdowns and
social distancing have been introduced. The Reported
Social Unrest Index (RSUI), which counts media
reports of social unrest, has fallen dramatically since
March 2020.1 The frequency of major unrest events—
defined by country-specific spikes in the RSUI—fell
to its lowest in almost five years. The decline in social
unrest corresponds closely with a generalized decline in
mobility driven by regulations, such as shelter-in-place
orders and voluntary social distancing, as shown in
Figure 1.4.1 (in line with the findings of Chapter 2).
Notable exceptions include the United States, where
protests against police violence grew rapidly at the
start of June (Figure 1.4.2), and Lebanon.2
Before the COVID-19 outbreak, unrest had been
rising for several years. Late 2019 and early 2020
saw major protests, most notably in the Middle East
and South America but also elsewhere, including in
Belarus, Bolivia, Chile, France, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, India, Iran, and Iraq. This was
the continuation of a longer trend since 2016 (Figure 1.4.1), which itself reversed a gradual decline in
unrest following a peak after the Arab Spring of 2011.
Historically, countries with more epidemics experience more frequent unrest. Table 1.4.1. presents
cross-sectional evidence on the number of social
unrest events and epidemics since 1990. Data on
epidemics are from EM-DAT, a database reporting
information on the timing and location of more than
1,200 country-year epidemic events since 1990. The
results show a positive and statistically significant
cross-country relationship between the two variables.
This result holds within regions and is robust for both
the frequency and severity of epidemics.
The authors of this box are Philip Barrett and Sophia Chen.
Luisa Calixto provided research assistance.
1The RSUI is a measure of social unrest constructed from
media reports. Details about the index and how it can be used to
identify major events are discussed in Barrett and others (2020).
2That media reports reacted strongly in the US case is also
evidence that this approach still captures protests despite other
newsworthy events.

40

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 1.4.1. Monthly Share of Countries
Experiencing Unrest Implied by the Reported
Social Unrest Index
(Percent; percent deviation from baseline on right
scale)
6

10

Major unrest event, two-sided
three-month average
Google Mobility Index, transit
stations (right scale)

5

0
–10

4

–20
3
–30
2

–40

1

0

–50

2016

17

18

19

20

–60

Sources: Factiva; Google Community Mobility Reports; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Google mobility index is a simple average of all
countries’ transit mobility deviation from baseline, expressed
monthly.

However, this cross-sectional relationship is likely
not causal. For example, common factors, such as
geography or income level, may lead to more unrest
and more or more serious epidemics. To explore this
possibility, Table 1.4.2. presents results from a dynamic
panel regression.3 This accounts for some of the
common drivers, including country- and time-specific
effects and recent protests. The results show very weak
the linear probability model: ​y​i,t​ = ​α​i​+ ​η​t​+
​ ​​β​j​​x ​i,tj ​+ ​γ´z​i,t​+ ​e​i,t​,​in which ​y​i,t​ is an indicator for a social
∑
j=1
unrest event in country i in year t, ​α​i​ and ​η​t​​ are country and
time fixed effects,​​x​i,tj ​ is an indicator variable that takes a value
of 1 if the latest disaster occurred j periods prior (in practice we
group past lags together to improve power), and ​z​i,t​ is a vector of
controls. Nonlinear models are avoided to admit a wide battery
of country and time fixed effects. Barrett and others (2020)
shows that recent social unrest both domestically and in neighboring countries is correlated with higher future social unrest,
so these are included as controls. This short-term analysis does
not preclude longer-term effects of epidemics on unrest, such as
those identified in the October 2020 Asia and Pacific Regional
Economic Outlook.
n

3Specifically,

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.4 (continued)
Figure 1.4.2. Daily Protest Articles for the
United States, April–June 2020
(Index, April 2020 = 100)
4,000

Curfews
imposed in
major US cities

3,500
Killing of George
Floyd

3,000
2,500
2,000

All sources
Non-US sources only

1,500
1,000
500
0

Apr.
2020

May
20

Jun.
20

Sources: Factiva; and IMF staff calculations.

statistical evidence of a higher likelihood of unrest
following epidemics. On the contrary, in any given
country, the likelihood of social unrest drops slightly
following epidemics (see especially specifications 2
and 3). The COVID-19 experience so far is consistent
with this historical pattern.
Recent history also includes few examples of
unrest obviously caused by epidemics. Concerns over
public health have rarely been a primary driver of
major episodes of social unrest in the past two decades,

despite numerous (often viral) epidemics during this
period. While specific demands vary, the purported
motives of protesters in events as diverse as the Arab
Spring of 2011, unrest in Latin America in late 2019,
anti-austerity protests in Europe following the Great
Recession, and a variety of episodes in Asia are all at
least superficially related to dissatisfaction about social
or political issues, not public health. At the same time,
several major public health crises have occurred, albeit
of smaller scale than the COVID-19 episode, including
SARS (2002–04), the H5N1 avian flu (2003–present),
the H1N1 swine flu (2009–10), MERS (2012–present),
and the West African Ebola epidemic (2013–16).
Several factors may explain the lack of a short-term
link from epidemics to unrest. Humanitarian crises
likely impede the communication and transportation
needed to organize major protests. Public opinion may
favor cohesion and solidary in times of duress. Or
incumbent regimes may take advantage of an emergency to consolidate power and suppress dissent.
Unrest is likely to reemerge as the pandemic eases.
This analysis shows that unrest was elevated before the
COVID-19 crisis began but has declined as the crisis
has continued. It is reasonable to expect that, as the
crisis fades, unrest may reemerge in locations where
it previously existed, not because of the COVID-19
crisis per se, but simply because underlying social and
political issues have not been tackled. The threats may
also be bigger where the crisis exposes or exacerbates
problems, such as a lack of trust in institutions, poor
governance, poverty, or inequality.4
4A large body of literature discusses how such factors can
lead to political instability (Alesina and Perotti 1996) and civil
conflicts (surveyed by Blattman and Miguel 2010).

Table 1.4.1. Cross-Sectional Regressions
(Cross-sectional relationship between social unrest and epidemics)
Dependent Variable: Number of Social Unrest Events, 1990–2019
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Number of Epidemics
0.056***
0.044**
(0.013)
(0.019)
Deaths from Epidemics
0.0002***
0.0001*
(0.00005)
(0.0001)
Region Fixed Effects
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
128
128
128
128
0.080
0.109
0.058
0.097
R2
0.072
0.072
0.050
0.060
Adjusted R 2
Sources: EM-DAT; Reported Social Unrest Index; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Robust standard errors shown in parenthesis.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

41

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.4 (continued)
Table 1.4.2. Dynamic Regressions: Epidemics
(Conditional probabilities of social unrest following epidemics)
(1)
Epidemic, Current Month
Epidemic, Last 2–3 Months
Epidemic, Last 4–6 Months
Months since Last Social
Unrest Event
Months since Last Social
Unrest Event, Neighboring
Country
Constant

Dependent Variable: Social Unrest Event
(3)
(4)
–0.006**
0.0003
(0.003)
(0.003)
–0.006*
–0.001
(0.003)
(0.003)
–0.009***
–0.003
(0.003)
(0.003)

(5)
0.002
(0.004)
–0.001
(0.005)
–0.003
(0.004)
0.00000
(0.00002)

(6)
0.003
(0.005)
–0.003
(0.005)
–0.003
(0.005)
–0.00000
(0.00003)
0.00002
(0.00003)

0.015***
(0.001)
Country Fixed Effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Time Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.014
0.015
0.019
0.036
0.044
0.049
R2
Observations
27,223
27,223
27,223
27,223
17,893
14,952
Sources: EM-DAT; Reported Social Unrest Index; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: All specifications also include further lags of epidemics with no robust statistical patterns. Double-clustered standard errors are shown
in parenthesis.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001.

42

0.014***
(0.001)

(2)
–0.003
(0.003)
–0.003
(0.003)
–0.005*
(0.003)

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
Despite heightened volatility, the IMF’s primary commodity price index remained broadly stable between
February and August 2020, the respective reference
periods for the April 2020 and October 2020 WEOs
(Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). This reflects two distinct
phases: between February and April the index fell by
24 percent as the COVID-19 pandemic intensified;
between April and August the index recovered by about
31 percent, as many countries eased lockdown measures and economic activity resumed. The rebound,
however, has varied across commodities, depending on
conditions in end-use sectors and regions affected by the
outbreak and on the storability and supply elasticity of
a commodity. Prices of energy and some agricultural
raw materials rebounded later than metals’ prices. Food
prices were less affected, even though changes were widely
dispersed across agricultural commodities. This special
feature also includes an in-depth analysis of coal.

Energy Prices Recovered after April
Oil prices declined by 60 percent between February
and April 2020 as the pandemic led to a collapse in
global oil demand and concerns about storage capacity
(see Figure 1.SF.2). In March OPEC+ (Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Russia
and other non-OPEC oil exporters) could not agree on
supply cuts to restore order to the market, but as the
oil price fall intensified, in mid-April the cartel decided
to curb production by 9.7 million barrels a day in May
and June (later extended until July) by 7.7 million
barrels a day until December 2020 and by 5.8 million
barrels a day until April 2022. US crude oil producers
were also hurt as the front-month futures price for the
West Texas Intermediate blend briefly went to –$37 in
April. Protracted low oil prices led to shut-ins, sharply
reduced drilling activity, and a surge in US shale producer bankruptcy filings. This resulted in an unprecedented 2 million barrel a day decrease in US crude oil
production in May 2020.
Thanks to supply reductions, from late April
onward, oil prices recovered from the mid-$10s to
more than $40 a barrel by early June, but into August
they remained about $25 below early January prices.
As a result, many oil firms have suffered large losses,

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
350
300

1. Commodity Price Indices
(Index; 2016 = 100)

All commodities
Food

250

Energy
Metals

200
150
100
50

2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

20

90 2. Brent Futures Curves1
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
80
70
60
April 2019 WEO
October 2019 WEO
April 2020 WEO
October 2020 WEO

50
40
30
20

Jul. 2018

Jul. 19

Jul. 20

200 3. Brent Price Prospects2
(US dollars a barrel)
160

Jul. 21

Jul. 22

Jul. 23

Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval

120
80
40
0

2013

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

300 4. Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 1, 2016 = 100)
250
200
150
100

Aluminum
Iron ore

50
0
Jan.
2016

Jan.
17

Jan.
18

Copper
Nickel

Jan.
19

Jan.
20

Jan.
21

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Reﬁnitiv
Datastream; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from
futures prices. October 2020 WEO prices are based on August 21, 2020, closing.
2
Derived from prices of futures options on August 27, 2020.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

43

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.SF.2. Oil Storage Capacity Utilization Rates

Figure 1.SF.3. Global Driving and Walking Mobility Indices

(Percent)

(Index; Jan. 13, 2020 = 100)
December 27, 2018

February 27, 2020

Walking median

August 20, 2020

Driving median

Driving interquartile range

180
China

160

World

140

Greater Asia

120

Europe
100
MENA
80
North America
60

South America

40

Greater Africa

20

Caribbean
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Sources: URSA Space Systems; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: MENA = Middle East and North Africa. Countries and regions as deﬁned by
URSA.

massive layoffs, and asset write-downs as they reassess
price outlooks and investments.
On the demand side, the COVID-19 outbreak
drove oil prices sharply down as travel restrictions
strongly reduced global demand for liquid fuels in
the first half of 2020. On one hand, road traffic has
recovered in many countries (see Figure 1.SF.3); on the
other hand, air traffic volume—especially international
flights—remains subdued. As a result, the International
Energy Agency expects oil demand for this year to be
down by 8.1 million barrels a day, to 91.9 million barrels a day, and to rebound by 5.2 million barrels a day
in 2021—a significant revision up from –9.3 million
barrels a day for 2020 in its April forecast.
In the natural gas market, spot prices have hovered around record lows in recent months amid large
inventories left in place after a mild winter, weak
demand, and subdued oil prices. This led oil producers
to burn off large amounts of unwanted natural gas
as a byproduct of oil extraction—equivalent to 400
metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) in 2019, the
most since 2009, according to the World Bank. In late
August natural gas prices increased due to an expected
rise in winter demand, supply uncertainty in Asia,
and technical trading patterns. Competing with natural
44

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

0
Jan.
2020

Feb.
20

Mar.
20

Apr.
20

May
20

Jun.
20

Sources: Apple; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data are the seven-day moving average of Apple Mobility Indices.

gas for electricity generation, coal has also experienced
significant downward price pressure, although supply
disruptions in South Africa and strong demand from
Indian industrial buyers supported South African coal
prices, while Australian prices have been depressed by
China’s apparent tightening of import restrictions and
by Japan’s intention to phase out inefficient coal-fired
power plants by 2030 (see the section on coal).
As of early September, oil futures contracts indicate that Brent prices will increase to $50 by the end
of 2023, highlighting near-term demand concerns
(Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). Baseline assumptions, also
based on futures prices, suggest average annual prices
of $41.7 a barrel in 2020—a decrease of 32 percent
from the 2019 average—and $46.7 a barrel in 2021
for the IMF’s average petroleum spot prices. Currently,
the oil market is characterized by elevated uncertainty
as the COVID-19 pandemic is not yet under control (Figure 1.SF.1, panels 2 and 3). Risks, however,
are broadly balanced. Upside risks to prices include
escalating geopolitical events in the Middle East and
faster containment of the pandemic as well as excessive
cuts in oil and gas upstream investments and further
bankruptcies in the energy sector. The biggest downside risk is a renewed slowdown in global economic

Jul.
20

Special Feature  Commodit y Market Developments and Forecasts

Figure 1.SF.4. Commodity Prices during the COVID-19
Pandemic
(Percent)
Coal, Australia
Rice, Thailand
Wheat
Corn
Arabica coffee
Coal, South Africa
Cocoa
Palladium
Oranges
Soybeans
Swine
Cotton
Cobalt
Vegetable oil index
Seafood index
Gold
Aluminum
S&P 500
Nickel
Platinum
NG, EU
Copper
NG, US HH
Iron ore
LNG, NE Asia
Silver
APSP
–80 –60 –40 –20

Energy
Base metals and raw
materials
Agriculture
Precious metals

0

20

40

60

80

100 120

Sources: Argus; Bloomberg L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Thomson
Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dark ﬁll sections represent the percent change in commodity prices for
February–April 2020, while light ﬁll sections represent the percent change for
April–August 2020. APSP = Average petroleum spot price; AU = Australia;
EU = Europe; HH = Henry Hub; LNG = liqueﬁed natural gas; NE = northeast;
SA = South Africa; US = United States.

activity as large inventories remain a concern. Other
downside risks for oil prices include stronger oil
production growth in several non-OPEC+ countries, a faster normalization of Libya’s oil production,
and a breakdown of the OPEC+ agreement. In the
medium and long term, global policy actions to lower
CO2 emissions present a further downside risk to oil
demand (see Box 1.SF.1).

Metal Prices Recovered amid an Uncertain
Economic Outlook
Base metal prices increased by 18.2 percent between
February and August 2020. Slow global industrial
activity weighed heavily on prices in the first quarter of
2020 (see Figure 1.SF.4). Since then, supply disruptions in mining related to COVID-19 and a resurgence
in industrial activity in China—which accounts for
half of base metal demand—have helped metal prices
return to pre-pandemic levels. Unprecedented stimulus measures and a stock market surge also boosted
sentiment toward metals. Precious metal prices

continued to rise due to increasing demand for
safe-haven assets amid concerns that a second wave of
COVID-19 infections would cause protracted monetary policy stimulus.
Among base metals, iron ore prices increased the
most between February and August, by 37.0 percent,
reaching a year high, while copper prices increased
by 14.4 percent amid growing optimism over China’s
economic recovery, falling inventories, and supply disruptions in key producing countries (Chile and Peru).
Aluminum (+3.0 percent), whose supply has been more
insulated from the pandemic as it is mostly sourced
domestically, did not rally as global automotive sales
slumped. The price of nickel and cobalt, key inputs for
stainless steel and batteries in electric vehicles, increased
by 14.6 percent and fell by 1.9 percent, respectively.
The IMF annual base metal price index is projected
to increase by 0.8 percent on an annual average basis
in 2020 and by a further 3.0 percent in 2021 on concerns surrounding the long-term impact of the pandemic. The possibility of a second wave of COVID-19,
the sustainability of strong China demand, and
tensions between China and the United States are
the major risks to metal prices falling. These more
than offset the risk of supply disruptions in major
metal-producing countries. The precious metals index
is expected to increase by 28.4 percent in 2020 and by
10.4 percent in 2021 due to the effects of heightened
global uncertainty and continued accommodative
monetary policies.

Food Prices Declined amid Ample
Global Supplies
The IMF’s food and beverage price index increased
by 0.7 percent, reflecting pandemic-induced changes in
demand and supply conditions, with different effects
on food prices depending on the region and the agricultural commodity. As COVID-19 slowed economic
activity, demand for agricultural raw materials and animal feed initially declined. Prices of most staple crops,
including wheat, maize, soybeans, and palm oil, have
been stable or have declined since the beginning of the
pandemic due to large global supplies and the initial
collapse of crude oil prices (see Figure 1.SF.4).
Led by pork, the meat price index fell by
7.1 percent from the April baseline. Amplified by large
seasonal farm supply, wholesale pork prices declined
by 4.5 percent as several meat processing facilities in
the United States closed after employees were infected
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

45

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

by the coronavirus. The resulting drop in processing
capacity reduced supply to retail channels and drove
a wedge between wholesale and retail prices, which
generally increased.1 The wholesale price decline spilled
over to other meats and seafood, which saw similar
downward trends.
Staple food prices, such as for wheat and rice rallied,
initially driven by consumer stockpiling, but, given
ample supply, as the initial surge in demand passed,
prices retrenched. Overall, though, the price of rice is
still up by 12.6 percent. Corn prices plummeted by
13.0 percent on ethanol demand destruction, with
prices reaching a 10-year low in May. Soybean prices
declined by 13.0 percent beginning in February on
account of ample global supplies, nothwithstanding
the fact that China ramped up buying in June as part
of the 2020 US-China trade deal.
Food prices are projected to increase slightly, by
0.4 percent year over year in 2020 and then increase
4.3 percent in the year thereafter on tighter supply
conditions (meats, for example), in part related to
expected delays in the supply chain. Further supply
chain disruptions and export restrictions in large
food exporters are a significant source of upside risk.
Renewed tensions between the United States and
China could disrupt food trade and lower US food
prices while increasing them in competing exporters.

Coal: Past, Present, and Future
Many countries are taking steps to reduce their
dependence on fossil fuels, especially coal, as they
seek to pursue a more sustainable future. Because of
its high carbon intensity, coal accounts for just under
half of global CO2 emissions and nearly three-quarters
of all power sector CO2 emissions. In the absence
of pollution mitigation systems, it contributes to
local air pollution, with potentially severe damaging
effects on human health (Smith, Mehta, and
Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004). The unprecedented drop
in electricity demand in 2020 favored renewables
over traditional fossil fuel sources, such as coal and
natural gas. In Europe, where electricity consumption
fell by more than 10 percent in April, the share of
coal (fossil fuels) in power generation declined to
1The harmonized consumer price subindex for food and nonalcoholic beverages, for instance, increased by 4.5 percent between
February and June in the United States and by 1.3 percent in the
euro area. In China, on the other hand, the food consumer price
subindex fell by 9.7 percent.

46

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

below 8 (30) percent—a historical low. As electricity
demand recovered, use of coal resumed globally.
So why is coal still popular if it has large negative
externalities? Which economies and economic sectors
are most dependent on coal? Some countries moved
away from coal in the past. How did they do it, and
is this replicable? Will the pandemic speed or slow
the demise of coal? These questions are explored by
looking at the use of coal throughout history, until
the recent pandemic, and its trends in production and
consumption across countries.

Coal Usage, Industrialization, and Energy Transition to
Fossil Fuels
The Heydays
The use of coal took off during the industrial revolution in 18th century England and then spread to continental Europe and the United States during the 19th
and 20th centuries. A series of technological innovations (including the steam engine and coal-fueled
furnaces for steel production) radically transformed
manufacturing, coal mining, and transportation (for
example, steam locomotives and steamships). This
spurred rapid economic growth, industrialization, and
urbanization, which drastically increased demand. The
transition to coal in Europe also helped reverse a pattern of excessive deforestation from centuries of intensive wood harvesting—a major energy transition that
saw industrial economies moving away from biomass
(that is, wood fuel).2,3 Hence, until the early interwar
period, coal consumption and its share in the energy
mix grew unabated in almost every country.
Decline and Renaissance
During the 1930s and especially after World War II
cleaner fossil fuel alternatives—such as oil and, later,
natural gas—increasingly displaced coal in the transportation, residential, and commercial sectors and even
in power generation (Figure 1.SF.5). Coal, especially
the low-grade sulfurous variety, was cheap but a major
2Indeed, forest cover in Europe today is higher than it has been
in a century (Fuchs and others 2015). Afforestation notwithstanding, primeval forests in western Europe are extremely rare. For a
vivid depiction of a preindustrial Italian forest, see “Hunting in the
Pontine Marshes” by Horace Vernet (1833).
3Similarly, the rise of the American oil industry in the
19th century helped save several whale species from extinction as
kerosene lamps quickly displaced whale oil lamps and candles
in the 19th century.

Special Feature  Commodit y Market Developments and Forecasts

Figure 1.SF.5. Coal, 1850–2017
Great Depression
Oil shocks (1973 and 1979)
China growth surge
Coal consumption per capita, high
income (right scale)

Figure 1.SF.6. Decomposition of Change in World Coal
Intensity
World Wars I and ll
Coal share in energy (left scale)
Coal consumption per capita,
upper middle income (right scale)

(Percent)
Country intensity
Change in world coal intensity

Composition effects
World coal intensity (right scale)
5.0

6
1.6

0.7

4.5

4
1.4

0.6

1.2

0.5

4.0
2

1.0

0

0.8

–2

0.6

–4

3.5
3.0

0.4

2.5
2.0

0.3
0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

0.0
1850

0.0

1.0
–6
–8

1900

50

2000

17

Sources: B.R. Mitchell; Maddison Project Database (2018); United Nations; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: China growth surge is deﬁned as the years between 2003 and 2011, when
annual GDP growth exceeded 12 percent, except in 2009. Income categories are
as deﬁned by the World Bank.

cause of air pollution and environmental damage.4
Hence, per capita coal consumption, and especially the
coal share in the energy mix, declined rapidly—and
was further pushed down by the expanding motor
vehicle industry’s thirst for gasoline.
That coal decline was surprisingly interrupted in the
1970s and then partially reversed by three significant
factors (Figure 1.SF.5): (1) energy security concerns
(because of the twin oil shocks of the 1970s), (2) the
growing electrification of energy end-uses, and (3) fast
economic growth in emerging markets. The combination of (1) and (2) contributed to increased demand for
coal for power generation in many advanced economies that wanted to reduce dependence on oil because
of energy security concerns.5 Later, at the turn of the
4During the Great Smog of London (December 5–9, 1952), due
to weather conditions, air pollutants from the combustion of coal
and diesel-powered buses for public transportation covered the city
in a blanket of smog. UK government medical reports estimate that
4,000 people died as a direct result of the smog and 100,000 more
were made ill.
5The share of coal in energy troughed in 1973, globally.

1.5

0.5
1991

95

2000

05

10

15

17

0.0

Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators;
and IMF staff calculations.

century, as economic growth shifted to markets with
higher coal intensity (that is, coal consumption per unit
of GDP) and income elasticity of coal demand (such
as China and India), coal demand in emerging markets
surged, more than offsetting declining coal usage in
advanced economies.6 As a result, global per capita coal
consumption, its energy share, and even coal intensity
increased again: the coal renaissance (Figure 1.SF.6).
Today, the top five coal-consuming countries
(China, India, United States, Russia, Japan) account for
76.7 percent of global coal consumption (Figure 1.SF.7).
China accounts for about half of global coal consumption after industrial and power generation coal demand
grew particularly fast in the mid-2000s following an
infrastructure boom. In fact, today, driven by China,
emerging markets, where industry coal demand is still
important, account for the lion’s share—76.8 percent—
of coal consumption. Globally, industry takes about
20 percent of total coal consumption (Table 1.SF.1).
In advanced economies, coal demand is predominantly
associated with power generation because of the decline of
6China and India increasingly relied on coal to satisfy their rising
energy needs as economic activity accelerated (Steckel, Edenhofer, and
Jakob 2015).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

47

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Table 1.SF.1. Coal Consumption, by Sector
(Percent)

Figure 1.SF.7. Coal Consumption, by Country
(Percent)
China

India

United States

Russia

Japan

Rest of the world

60

50

OECD
Non-OECD
Total
Power Generation
20.1
50.7
70.8
Industry
2.2
19.4
21.6
Others
0.9
6.7
7.6
Total
23.2
76.8
100.0
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Others” consist of residential and commercial and nonenergy use.
OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

40

30

20

10

0

1991–2000

2001–10

2011–17

2018

Sources: International Energy Agency, World Energy Balances; and IMF staff
calculations.

coal-intensive industries, such as steel and cement. Given
that the electrification of economic systems is ongoing,
energy demand from power generation is expected to
increase in advanced economies, where total energy
demand is flattening.7 Whereas no significant economical
alternatives to coking coal exist in the industrial sector (for
example, in making steel and cement), low-carbon alternatives compete with coal for investment in new power
plants. This is more relevant in emerging markets, where
power generation capacity is expected to grow the most.

Coal’s Negative Externalities: Health, Environment, and
Carbon Emissions
Coal-fired thermal power plants release several
substances—including sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
oxide, particulate matter, and mercury—into the air
and rivers, streams, and lakes. These emissions are
hazardous to human health (toxins) and degrade the
environment (pollutants).8 Air pollution from the
7There has been a steady increase in the role of electricity as energy
service provider. In 2017 power generation accounted for about
41 percent of total energy demand, up from 26 percent in 1971.
8Emissions from coal combustion can damage the respiratory, cardiovascular, and nervous systems of the human body (Smith, Mehta, and
Maeusezahl-Feuz 2004).

48

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

combustion of coal and other fossil fuels was long
considered the most serious environmental problem in advanced economies.9 In Europe and the
United States, for example, regulations were rolled
out beginning in the 1980s and 1990s to incentivize
the adoption of environmental pollution mitigation
technologies, such as scrubbers, thereby curtailing
emissions from coal plants.10 Other countries decided
to (slowly) steer away from the use of coal altogether,
with nuclear, hydropower, natural gas, and—more
recently—renewable energy slowly displacing coal.
Though steps have been taken to mitigate coal’s direct
environmental impact, the combustion of coal also
emits CO2. Coal is more carbon intense than any other
primary energy fuel. This means that replacing coal with
other energy sources decarbonizes the energy system,
and the degree to which that happens depends on the
substitute. To rank energy sources by carbon intensity,
their emission factors can be compared, expressed in tons
of CO2 per unit of electricity generated, which considers
both the intrinsic carbon intensity of the fuel per unit
of energy and the average efficiency of the generation
technology. When burned to generate both heat and electricity, coal is 2.2 times as carbon intense as natural gas—
the only realistic fossil fuel alternative in the power sector
(Figure 1.SF.8). With its high emission factor and large
share in world energy consumption, coal contributes
about 44 percent of all CO2 emissions and 72 percent of
all power sector emissions (Figure 1.SF.9).11
9According to Fouquet (2011), by 1880 the mining, transportation, and combustion of coal in the British economy had imposed
external damages close to 20 percent of GDP.
10An important milestone in this context has been the United
Nations Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution,
the first treaty to deal with air pollution on a regional basis, which
entered into force in 1983.
11According to the International Energy Agency, the share of
energy in total greenhouse gas emissions was 74.2 percent in 2015.
The remainder constitutes greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture,
deforestation, and land conversion more broadly.

Special Feature  Commodit y Market Developments and Forecasts

Figure 1.SF.8. Emission Factors

Figure 1.SF.9. Average Annual Carbon Dioxide Emissions

(Metric tons of carbon dioxide a megawatt-hour)

(Metric tons of carbon dioxide)

Electricity and heat

Electricity

1.0

Coal

Oil

Natural gas

35,000
30,000

0.8
25,000
0.6

20,000
15,000

0.4

10,000
0.2
5,000
0.0

Coal

Oil

Natural gas

Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.

How Fast and When Do Countries Lessen Their
Dependence on Coal?
With the introduction and rise of new energy
sources, especially after World War II, the energy
mix in many countries broadened and they became
less dependent on coal. Currently, per capita coal
consumption has already peaked in 73 out of the
84 countries whose share of coal in total energy
consumption at some point crossed 5 percent. Irrespective of their absolute dependence reached at peak
consumption, the average annual decline across these
countries was 2.3 percent between 1971 and 2017
(Figure 1.SF.10). This implies that it takes, on average,
43 years to phase out coal after the peak in coal consumption per capita has been reached.
Contrasting the energy mix of countries across
income groups reveals stark differences (Table 1.SF.2).
Poor countries rely primarily on biomass for their
energy needs, while middle-income countries have a
strong dependence on coal.12 At high incomes, the coal
share in energy decreases as nuclear and natural gas
options grow.
The quality ladder hypothesis may help explain
the observed relationship between income and the
12See the relationship between income level and biomass consumption in Chapter 1 of the October 2018 WEO.

0

1971–80

1981–90 1991–2000 2001–10

2011–16

2017

Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.

energy mix. The hypothesis states that as income rises,
energy sources are chosen not just for affordability
and availability but increasingly for their efficiency,
convenience, low environmental impact, and safety.13
Biofuels occupy the low rungs of that ladder; coal,
oil, and hydro the middle rungs; and capital-intensive
sources, such as nuclear, natural gas, and renewables,
the upper rungs. The low price of coal-fired power generation (Figure 1.SF.11) is consistent with the notion
that coal plays an important role in the energy mix
of lower-middle- and upper-middle-income countries
as an affordable and often abundant energy source
(Table 1.SF.2).14,15 Country-specific endowments
of competing energy sources, such as hydropower
potential, could also influence the attractiveness of coal
during different stages of development.
13See Stokey (1998) for a theory model on demand for environmental quality.
14Even today, the marginal cost of operating a coal-fired power
plant is one of the lowest. The cost of wind and solar has substantially declined at the plant level, but a full ramp-up of renewables in
the electricity grid faces decreasing returns due to their intermittency.
15A common way to compare alternative options for electrical
energy production is the levelized cost of electricity, which is defined
as the present value of the price of the produced electrical energy
(usually expressed in units of cents per kilowatt-hour), considering
the economic life of the plant and the costs incurred in the construction, operation and maintenance, and fuel costs.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

49

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.SF.10. Coal Phaseouts
United States
France
Reduction in 2017 since peak

Germany
United Kingdom

0
PRT

KAZ

Percent change after peak

–20

AUS

–40

ESP
GRC

–60

USA
ISR

–80

–100

UKR

DNK

0

10

20
30
Years after peak

GBR

40

50

Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For each country, coal peak is deﬁned as the year with the highest coal
consumption per capita. Blue square = coal consumption per capita reduction in
2017 since peak. Coal phaseout paths for selected countries are shown in the
ﬁgure. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.

Empirical Analysis
A panel regression is used to test for the relationship between income per capita and coal dependence,
which is defined as the share of coal in total primary
energy supply (relative coal dependence) or as coal consumption per capita (absolute coal dependence). The
analysis controls for country-specific factors, including
the share of manufacturing in nominal value added,
coal reserves per capita, and hydropower potential
(see Online Annex I, available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WEO, for a more detailed discussion).

Results strongly support the presence of an inverse
U-shaped relationship between income and the share of
coal in the energy mix, with coal attaining its maximum
share at an income level of $9,600 per capita—that is,
when a country reaches upper-middle-income status.
For example, our main specification predicts that,
between 1971 and 2017, income per capita contributed
to reductions in the coal share of 6.4 percentage points
in the United States and 5.2 percentage points in Japan
and to increases of 12.2 percentage points in India and
11.3 percentage points in China.
Results also show that energy endowments, such
as hydropower and coal reserves, play a quantitatively
important role—more so than manufacturing and
environmental regulation, for which modest effects are
found. Harsher winters are also associated with higher
use of coal.
Like the relationship between the coal share and
income, the relationship between coal consumption per capita and income is highly nonlinear. The
preferred specification shows an S-shape relationship
with income per capita: at low income levels, coal
consumption growth accelerates, reaches its maximum at the middle income level, and then levels
off. The turning point of absolute coal dependence,
after which coal consumption declines, ranges from
$35,000 to $39,000.
Contrasting the turning points of the two different
measures of coal dependence leads to the finding that
the “share (or relative) turning point” occurs before
the “per capita (or absolute) turning point.” At middle
and high income levels coal is indeed increasingly
succeeded by faster-growing and higher-quality fuels,
such as oil, nuclear, and natural gas, causing its share
in the energy mix to decline. However, coal consumption per capita continues to grow after that (albeit
at a slower pace than some other energy sources) to
satisfy fast-growing energy demand. Assuming income
per capita growth of 4 percent a year, it takes another
33 years to get from the share turning point to the

Table 1.SF.2. Energy Mix, by Income Groups, 2017
(Percent)
Primary Energy Share from:
Biomass
Coal
Crude Oil
Low-Income Countries
80.8
2.3
13.3
Lower-Middle-Income Countries
26.2
26.9
26.6
Upper-Middle-Income Countries
5.2
40.9
25.0
High-Income Countries
5.7
15.8
36.6
World
12.9
28.0
29.9
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Income groups as defined by the World Bank.

50

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Natural Gas
0.9
14.4
21.5
29.0
23.3

Hydropower
2.8
1.8
3.4
2.1
2.6

Renewables
1.6
2.3
1.4
1.6
1.6

Nuclear
0.0
1.8
2.5
9.2
1.6

Special Feature  Commodit y Market Developments and Forecasts

Table 1.SF.3. Selected Recent Fast Coal Phaseouts

Figure 1.SF.11. Levelized Cost of Electricity for New
Investment, 2019

Five-Year
Starting
Reduction
Share
Country
Year
(Percent)
(Percent)
United Kingdom
2018
–12.4
17.0
Israel
2018
–9.4
29.8
Greece
2018
–8.9
29.9
Kazakhstan
2016
–8.1
51.3
Spain
2010
–6.8
12.8
Australia
2014
–6.5
39.7
Portugal
2010
–6.3
13.5
China
2017
–6.2
69.7
Denmark
2018
–5.9
15.7
Ukraine
2017
–5.8
35.8
United States
2018
–5.3
19.6
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Mixed” is natural gas, nuclear, and renewables.

(US dollars a megawatt-hour)

Nuclear
Wind—offshore
Solar PV—
commercial and
industrial
Coal
Coal plant marginal
cost
Gas combined cycle
Solar PV—crystalline
utility scale
Wind—onshore
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Source: Lazard 2019.
Note: Based on lower range of Lazard Levelized Cost of Energy Comparison—
Unsubsidized Analysis estimates. Yellow bar represents the midpoint of the
marginal cost of operating an existing coal power plant. PV = photovoltaic.

per capita turning point. These findings are consistent with the idea that new energy fuels only slowly
displace old energy fuels.
Combining estimates of the average speed of
decline and the estimated time interval between the
peaks in relative and absolute coal dependence, it
takes, on average, 76 years to phase out coal once it
reaches its largest share in the energy mix. For the
United Kingdom, which is on the verge of eliminating coal, it took almost 100 years to accomplish that
feat (Figure 1.SF.10). For China, whose coal share
peaked in 2013, it implies at least another 38 years
of coal consumption under business-as-usual conditions. Still, the United Kingdom shows the relevance
of policy actions, stimulated by the introduction of
carbon pricing at the utility level; the United Kingdom
experienced one of the fastest declines in coal usage
between 2013 and 2018 as coal was replaced by natural gas (Table 1.SF.3).16 In the United States, instead,
16In 2013 the United Kingdom became the first country in the
European Union to introduce a carbon price support—a tax paid
by companies that generate electricity from fossil fuels that tops
Europe’s emissions trading system, through which energy companies
buy permits to emit carbon dioxide. The tax was initially set at £9 a
metric ton of CO2 and gradually doubled to £18.

Mostly
Replaced by
Natural Gas
Natural Gas
Natural Gas
Natural Gas
Mixed
Natural Gas
Natural Gas
Mixed
Biofuel
Nuclear
Natural Gas

a similar, but more modest, decline was driven by
market forces as the shale gas revolution pushed down
natural gas prices. The fastest recent transitions away
from coal have been driven by natural gas, at times
helped by renewables (Table 1.SF.3).
Unsurprisingly, the COVID-19 pandemic has led
to a sharp reduction in coal consumption in many
coal consumer countries (see Chapter 3). Given that
renewables’ marginal costs are extremely low, natural
gas and coal accounted for most of the decline in
electricity generation leading, in some regions, to
record-high renewables shares in electricity production
(Figure 1.SF.12). However, it is too early to declare
“mission accomplished.” First, the downward pressure on natural gas prices was even stronger than on
coal, in part because of lack of storage for natural gas
(Figure 1.SF.13). Second, where electricity demand
recovered, coal usage resumed.
These considerations and the previous examples and
econometric analysis suggest that a full coal phaseout
will occur long after low-carbon energy sources start to
gain importance in the energy mix. There are two main
reasons for this persistence. First, industrial use of coal
is hard to replace with other energy sources and still
represents 33 percent of coal consumption in emerging markets, where most industrial sector coal usage is
concentrated. Second, and most important, coal-fired
power plants are long-lived assets with a minimum
design lifespan of 30–40 years. This makes the obsolescence rate of a recently built coal-fired power plant
very low without either large changes in the levelized
cost of electricity for renewables or policy intervention.
The pandemic and its effects on economic activity
are changing the medium-term outlook for coal and
coal-fired power plants in various ways but, overall,
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

51

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 1.SF.12. Contribution to European Electricity
Generation Growth

Figure 1.SF.13. Coal and Natural Gas Prices in 2020
(January 2–15 = 100)

(Year over year, percent)
Coal index
Renewables
Gas
Total

Nuclear
Coal

Natural gas index

120
110
100

15

90
10

80
70

5

60
50

0

40
–5

30
20

–10

10
0
Jan. 15, Feb. 17, Mar. 16, Apr. 15,
2020
2020
2020
2020

–15
–20

Jan. 2020

Feb. 20

Mar. 20

Apr. 20

May 20

the impact is unclear. On one hand, if the reduction
in electricity demand turns out to be more permanent,
this would likely reduce the utilization of existing
coal-fired power plants, encouraging their closure,
especially in advanced economies. On the other hand,
in emerging markets, even if electricity demand does
not fully recover to trends before the pandemic, it is
still expected to grow strongly. A possible reduction
in coal prices, coupled with lower wholesale electricity
prices, may slow investment in renewables, to the benefit of coal, in the absence of policy intervention.
Finally, it is worth noting that, in contrast to studies
examining total energy consumption, a large part of
the variation in coal dependence is unexplained.17 In
part, this may reflect political economy factors leading
to cross-country differences in energy policies. In
some countries the value of coal reserves is multiples
of GDP, raising the risk of stranded coal assets. Strong
domestic mining interests in large coal consumer
and producer countries, especially in Asia, including
China and India, may further complicate and delay
17See the Commodity Special Feature of the October 2018 WEO
for an analysis of energy demand.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Jul. 15,
2020

Aug. 21,
2020

Jun. 20

Source: EMBER.
Note: Data represent the 27 member countries of the European Union.

52

May Jun. 15,
15,
2020
2020

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Coal index is the simple average of Australian and South African coal prices.
Natural gas index is the simple average of Netherlands Title Transfer Facility and
Asian liqueﬁed natural gas prices.

the phaseout of coal in major coal consumer-producer
countries (see Online Annex II for more detailed
discussion).

Conclusions
Reducing carbon emissions from coal would go a
long way toward fighting climate change. Furthermore,
decarbonization of the power generation sector would
amplify the benefits of a global transition to electric
vehicles and electric mobility more broadly—given that
electric vehicles would be charged with low-carbon
electricity.
Moving away from coal usually starts in
high-income nations and takes decades to complete.
The pandemic may have dented coal consumption but,
probably, only temporarily. Moreover, countries that
have recently, or not yet, seen per capita coal consumption peak (including China, India, and Indonesia)
account for the lion’s share of global coal consumption, which will therefore take years to decline in the
absence of significant policy actions. Further significant
reductions in prices of low-carbon alternatives such

Special Feature  Commodit y Market Developments and Forecasts

as solar and wind may help, but to avoid the intermittency problem associated with renewables, natural
gas (the closest substitute for coal) is probably needed
even if electricity demand does not fully recover to
its pre-pandemic trend.
Although carbon-capture and storage technology
may be a viable solution, in the absence of substantial
carbon pricing, it is currently expensive to retrofit
existing plants or build new coal plants with such
technology (see IMF 2019 for a detailed analysis of the
benefits of carbon pricing). Furthermore, some claim
that the CO2 emission opportunity costs of further
investment in carbon capture and storage may be large,
as proven technologies, such as wind and solar, can
already be used to lower carbon emissions (see, for
example, Jacobson 2020). It may be wise, however, to

diversify and invest in multiple mitigation strategies,
as the intermittency problem of renewables, especially
for a high degree of grid penetration, remains unsolved
and may still require coal for power generation in
some locations.
The decline in coal could be accelerated if governments were willing to compensate the losers from a
coal phaseout and see the COVID-19 pandemic as an
opportunity to accelerate it. In emerging markets, the
degree to which coal is locked in can be minimized if
capital constraints are reduced to favor investment in
renewables. The international community can provide
financial and technical assistance (on how to build
grids with the intermittent electricity generated by
renewables) and limit funding of new coal plants, at
least where alternatives are available.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

53

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 1.SF.1. What Happened with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?
This box updates the assessment of global carbon
emissions from the October 2019 World Economic
Outlook. Latest data for the end of 2019 show that
the growth in global carbon emissions fell to below
0.5 percent, after an alarming rebound in 2017 and
2018 of more than 2 percent (Figure 1.SF.1.1).
China remains a key driver of emission growth, and
its impact picked up again in 2019, after a period of
gradual regression. India and other emerging markets’
contribution in 2019 fell substantially, and emissions
decreased in all Group of Seven economies.
The decline in global emissions in 2019 can be
attributed mainly to a fall in energy intensity and

Figure 1.SF.1.2. Contribution to World
Emissions, by Source
(Percent change)
Emissions
Energy intensity
Population

Carbon intensity
GDP per capita

6

4

2

Figure 1.SF.1.1. Contribution to World
Emissions, by Country/Region

0

(Percent change)
–2
G7 excluding US
US
China
India

ROW
World
World IP growth (right scale)

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2
0

0

–2

–2

–4

–4

–6

–6
–8

2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

–8

Sources: British Petroleum; International Energy Agency; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: G7 = Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, United Kingdom, United States); IP = industrial
production; ROW = rest of the world; US = United States.

The authors of this box are Claire Li and Nico Valckx.

54

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

–4

2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

Sources: British Petroleum; International Energy Agency;
World Bank, World Development Indicators; and IMF staff
calculations.

lower income growth (Figure 1.SF.1.2).1 This is consistent with previous years and likely reflects the cyclical
slowdown in global industrial production in 2019.
Decarbonization remained an important mitigation
force in 2019 as wind, solar, and natural gas continued
to replace coal as the energy source of choice in the
power sectors of all major emitters.
In 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
lockdowns will likely lead emissions to fall, although
most of the reduction will likely be short-lived when
normal economic growth returns. Policymakers should
thus seize the crisis as an opportunity to invest in
greener growth that permanently lowers emissions
(Georgieva 2020).

1The October 2019 World Economic Outlook shows that total
emissions can be expressed as a product of carbon intensity
(carbon emissions per unit of energy), energy intensity (energy
per unit of GDP), GDP per capita, and human population.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Europe
Advanced Europe
Euro Area4,5
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

Real GDP
Projections
2019
2020
2021
1.6
–7.0
4.7

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2019
2020 2021
3.0
2.0
2.4

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2019
2020
2021
2.1
1.7
1.9

Unemployment3
Projections
2019 2020 2021
...
...
...

1.4
1.3
0.6
1.5
0.3
2.0

–8.1
–8.3
–6.0
–9.8
–10.6
–12.8

5.2
5.2
4.2
6.0
5.2
7.2

1.3
1.2
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.7

0.5
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.1
–0.2

1.0
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.8

2.3
2.7
7.1
–0.7
3.0
2.0

2.1
1.9
5.8
–1.9
3.2
0.5

2.3
2.4
6.8
–1.8
3.0
0.9

6.6
7.6
3.1
8.5
9.9
14.1

8.0
8.9
4.3
8.9
11.0
16.8

8.5
9.1
4.2
10.2
11.8
16.8

Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Ireland
Portugal

1.7
1.4
1.6
5.9
2.2

–5.4
–8.3
–6.7
–3.0
–10.0

4.0
5.4
4.6
4.9
6.5

2.7
1.2
1.5
0.9
0.3

1.2
0.6
1.2
–0.2
0.0

1.5
1.2
1.8
0.6
1.1

9.9
–1.2
2.6
–11.4
–0.1

7.6
0.0
2.4
5.0
–3.1

9.0
–0.8
2.5
5.5
–3.5

3.4
5.4
4.5
5.0
6.5

5.5
6.1
5.8
5.6
8.1

4.5
7.6
5.5
6.2
7.7

Greece
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia

1.9
1.1
2.4
3.9
2.4

–9.5
–4.0
–7.1
–1.8
–6.7

4.1
3.6
6.9
4.1
5.2

0.5
1.1
2.8
2.2
1.6

–0.6
0.7
1.5
1.3
0.5

0.7
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.8

–2.1
–0.5
–2.9
4.3
5.7

–7.7
–1.8
–3.1
7.2
4.5

–4.5
–0.7
–4.1
4.5
3.9

17.3
6.8
5.8
6.3
4.6

19.9
8.4
7.8
8.2
8.0

18.3
8.6
7.1
7.5
6.0

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

2.3
2.2
5.0
3.2
4.9

–5.8
–6.0
–5.2
–6.4
–7.9

5.9
5.2
4.5
4.7
4.8

1.7
2.7
2.3
0.6
1.5

0.4
0.6
0.2
–0.6
0.8

1.4
1.8
1.4
1.0
1.1

4.5
–0.5
2.6
–6.7
9.6

3.8
2.0
4.0
–10.6
7.6

4.3
–0.8
2.0
–9.1
8.3

5.4
6.3
4.4
7.1
3.6

6.5
9.0
7.8
8.0
4.2

7.0
8.0
6.1
7.0
4.2

United Kingdom
Switzerland
Sweden
Czech Republic
Norway

1.5
1.2
1.3
2.3
1.2

–9.8
–5.3
–4.7
–6.5
–2.8

5.9
3.6
3.5
5.1
3.6

1.8
0.4
1.6
2.9
2.2

0.8
–0.8
0.8
3.3
1.4

1.2
0.0
1.4
2.4
3.3

–4.0
11.5
4.2
–0.4
4.1

–2.0
8.5
3.2
–0.7
2.8

–3.8
9.0
4.2
–0.5
4.4

3.8
2.3
6.8
2.0
3.7

5.4
3.2
8.7
3.1
4.5

7.4
3.6
9.3
3.4
4.3

Denmark
Iceland
San Marino

2.3
1.9
1.1

–4.5
–7.2
–11.0

3.5
4.1
5.7

0.7
3.0
1.0

0.4
2.7
0.5

0.9
2.8
0.8

7.8
6.2
0.7

6.4
0.0
–4.5

6.6
0.2
–1.2

5.0
3.6
7.7

6.2
7.2
10.1

6.0
7.0
8.4

2.1
1.3
0.9
4.1
4.1
3.2

–4.6
–4.1
–5.0
–3.6
–4.8
–7.2

3.9
2.8
5.0
4.6
4.6
3.0

6.6
4.5
15.2
2.3
3.8
7.9

5.2
3.2
11.9
3.3
2.9
3.2

5.2
3.2
11.9
2.3
2.5
6.0

1.4
3.8
1.2
0.4
–4.6
–2.7

–0.3
1.2
–3.7
3.0
–5.3
4.3

0.1
1.8
–0.9
1.8
–4.5
–3.0

...
4.6
13.7
3.3
3.9
8.5

...
5.6
14.6
3.8
7.9
11.0

...
5.2
12.4
5.1
6.0
9.6

Emerging and Developing Europe6
Russia
Turkey
Poland
Romania
Ukraine7

Hungary
4.9
–6.1
3.9
3.4
3.6
3.4
–0.8
–1.6
–0.9
3.4
6.1
4.7
Belarus7
1.2
–3.0
2.2
5.6
5.1
5.1
–1.8
–3.3
–2.2
0.3
1.4
1.1
Bulgaria5
3.4
–4.0
4.1
2.5
1.2
1.7
4.0
1.9
2.3
4.2
5.6
4.5
Serbia
4.2
–2.5
5.5
1.9
1.5
1.9
–6.9
–6.4
–6.5
10.9
13.4
13.0
Croatia
2.9
–9.0
6.0
0.8
0.3
0.8
2.8
–3.2
–3.1
7.8
9.3
10.3
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting
periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia.
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
7See country-specific notes for Belarus and Ukraine in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

55

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2019
2020
2021
4.6
–2.2
6.9

Asia
Advanced Asia
Japan
Korea
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2019
2020 2021
2.7
2.5
2.5

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2019
2020
2021
1.8
1.8
1.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2019 2020 2021
...
...
...

1.2
0.7
2.0
1.8
2.7
0.7

–4.2
–5.3
–1.9
–4.2
0.0
–6.0

2.9
2.3
2.9
3.0
3.2
5.0

0.7
0.5
0.4
1.6
0.5
0.6

0.2
–0.1
0.5
0.7
–0.1
–0.4

0.7
0.3
0.9
1.3
1.0
0.3

4.3
3.6
3.6
0.6
10.7
17.0

3.6
2.9
3.3
1.8
9.6
15.0

3.5
3.2
3.4
–0.1
9.8
14.5

3.1
2.4
3.8
5.2
3.8
2.3

4.0
3.3
4.1
6.9
3.9
3.0

3.8
2.8
4.1
7.7
3.8
2.6

–1.2
2.2
–4.7

–7.5
–6.1
–52.3

3.7
4.4
23.9

2.9
1.6
2.8

0.3
1.7
1.7

2.4
0.6
1.8

6.2
–3.4
34.8

4.4
–2.0
–23.5

4.7
–2.4
–6.7

3.0
4.1
1.7

5.2
6.0
2.3

4.4
7.0
2.0

5.5
6.1
4.2

–1.7
1.9
–10.3

8.0
8.2
8.8

3.3
2.9
4.8

3.2
2.9
4.9

2.9
2.7
3.7

0.6
1.0
–0.9

1.0
1.3
0.3

0.3
0.7
–0.9

...
3.6
...

...
3.8
...

...
3.6
...

ASEAN-5
Indonesia
Thailand

4.9
5.0
2.4

–3.4
–1.5
–7.1

6.2
6.1
4.0

2.1
2.8
0.7

1.5
2.1
–0.4

2.3
1.6
1.8

1.1
–2.7
7.1

0.8
–1.3
4.2

0.1
–2.4
4.6

...
5.3
1.0

...
8.0
1.0

...
6.8
1.0

Malaysia
Philippines
Vietnam

4.3
6.0
7.0

–6.0
–8.3
1.6

7.8
7.4
6.7

0.7
2.5
2.8

–1.1
2.4
3.8

2.4
3.0
4.0

3.4
–0.1
3.4

0.9
1.6
1.2

1.8
–1.5
1.7

3.3
5.1
2.2

4.9
10.4
3.3

3.4
7.4
2.7

Other Emerging and Developing Asia5

6.6

–1.7

7.8

5.3

5.3

5.4

–2.5

–3.4

–3.7

...

...

...

Hong Kong SAR
New Zealand
Macao SAR
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4

Memorandum
5.4
–1.7
8.0
3.2
3.1
2.8
0.7
1.1
0.4
...
...
...
Emerging Asia6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.

56

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2020
2021
–4.9
3.3
–4.3
3.1
–7.1
5.2
–9.0
3.5
–7.5
1.5

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2019
2020
2021
2.0
1.6
2.7
1.8
1.5
2.8
1.9
0.6
1.3
3.6
3.4
3.3
0.1
–1.6
0.6

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2019
2020
2021
–2.1
–2.0
–2.0
–2.2
–2.1
–2.1
–2.0
–2.0
–2.4
–0.3
1.2
–0.1
...
...
...

Unemployment3
Projections
2019 2020 2021
...
...
...
3.7
8.9
7.3
5.7
9.7
7.9
3.5
5.2
5.8
8.3
12.0
11.5

North America
United States
Canada
Mexico
Puerto Rico4

2019
1.9
2.2
1.7
–0.3
2.0

South America5
Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
Chile
Peru

–0.2
1.1
–2.1
3.3
1.1
2.2

–8.1
–5.8
–11.8
–8.2
–6.0
–13.9

3.6
2.8
4.9
4.0
4.5
7.3

10.1
3.7
53.5
3.5
2.3
2.1

7.9
2.7
...
2.4
2.9
1.8

8.6
2.9
...
2.1
2.7
1.9

–2.3
–2.8
–0.9
–4.2
–3.8
–1.4

–0.6
0.3
0.7
–4.0
–1.6
–1.1

–0.7
0.0
1.2
–3.9
–2.9
–0.3

...
11.9
9.8
10.5
7.2
6.6

...
13.4
11.0
17.3
11.4
12.5

...
14.1
10.1
15.8
10.2
8.8

–35.0
0.1
0.0
2.2
0.2

–25.0
–11.0
–4.0
–7.9
–4.5

–10.0
4.8
5.5
5.6
4.3

19,906
0.3
2.8
1.8
7.9

6,500
0.0
2.9
1.7
10.0

6,500
1.0
3.2
4.1
8.2

8.4
–0.1
–1.0
–3.3
0.6

–4.1
–2.0
–0.7
–2.6
–1.7

–4.1
–0.1
0.0
–3.5
–3.3

47.6
3.8
6.1
4.0
8.9

54.4
8.1
7.0
8.0
9.7

57.3
5.6
6.1
4.0
9.0

Central America6

3.2

–5.9

3.6

2.0

1.8

2.2

–1.2

–3.1

–2.9

...

...

...

Caribbean7

0.7

–5.4

3.9

4.2

7.1

7.8

–2.4

–9.9

–7.5

...

...

...

Venezuela
Ecuador
Paraguay
Bolivia
Uruguay

Memorandum
0.0
–8.1
3.6
7.7
6.2
6.7
–1.7
–0.5
–0.8
...
...
...
Latin America and the Caribbean8
2.8
–15.1
5.8
0.8
0.6
1.5
–7.7 –21.0 –20.5
...
...
...
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Aggregates exclude Venezuela. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the
Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia,
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See country-specific notes for Argentina
and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

57

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle Eastern and Central Asian Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2019
2020
2021
1.4
–4.1
3.0

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2019
2020
2021
7.8
9.3
9.3

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2019
2020
2021
0.7
–3.7
–2.7

Unemployment3
Projections
2019 2020 2021
...
...
...

Oil Exporters4
Saudi Arabia
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Iraq
Algeria

0.3
0.3
–6.5
1.7
4.4
0.8

–6.0
–5.4
–5.0
–6.6
–12.1
–5.5

3.3
3.1
3.2
1.3
2.5
3.2

6.3
–2.1
41.0
–1.9
–0.2
2.0

7.3
3.6
30.5
–1.5
0.8
3.5

8.0
3.7
30.0
1.5
1.0
3.8

2.9
5.9
1.1
8.4
1.1
–10.1

–3.3
–2.5
–0.5
3.6
–12.6
–10.8

–2.0
–1.6
0.3
7.5
–12.1
–16.6

...
5.6
10.7
...
...
11.4

...
...
12.2
...
...
14.1

...
...
12.4
...
...
14.3

Kazakhstan
Qatar
Kuwait
Oman
Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan

4.5
0.8
0.4
–0.8
2.2
6.3

–2.7
–4.5
–8.1
–10.0
–4.0
1.8

3.0
2.5
0.6
–0.5
2.0
4.6

5.2
–0.6
1.1
0.1
2.7
5.1

6.9
–2.2
1.0
1.0
3.0
8.0

6.2
1.8
2.3
3.4
3.1
6.0

–3.6
2.4
9.4
–4.6
9.1
5.1

–3.3
–0.6
–6.8
–14.6
–3.6
1.0

–2.8
2.6
–2.8
–12.9
–4.4
1.8

4.8
...
...
...
4.8
...

7.8
...
...
...
6.5
...

5.8
...
...
...
5.8
...

Oil Importers5
Egypt
Pakistan
Morocco
Uzbekistan
Sudan

3.2
5.6
1.9
2.2
5.6
–2.5

–1.1
3.5
–0.4
–7.0
0.7
–8.4

2.5
2.8
1.0
4.9
5.0
0.8

10.3
13.9
6.7
0.2
14.5
51.0

12.4
5.7
10.7
0.2
13.0
141.6

11.3
6.2
8.8
0.8
10.7
129.7

–5.8
–3.6
–4.9
–4.1
–5.6
–15.1

–4.5
–3.2
–1.1
–7.3
–6.4
–12.7

–4.7
–4.2
–2.5
–5.2
–7.4
–10.7

...
8.6
4.1
9.2
...
22.1

...
8.3
4.5
12.5
...
25.0

...
9.7
5.1
10.5
...
22.0

Tunisia
Jordan
Lebanon
Afghanistan
Georgia

1.0
2.0
–6.9
3.9
5.1

–7.0
–5.0
–25.0
–5.0
–5.0

4.0
3.4
...
4.0
5.0

6.7
0.7
2.9
2.3
4.9

5.8
–0.3
85.5
5.4
5.3

5.3
1.4
...
4.8
2.5

–8.5
–2.3
–27.4
11.7
–5.1

–8.3
–6.8
–16.3
9.5
–10.8

–8.7
–5.7
...
7.8
–8.5

14.9
19.1
...
...
11.6

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

7.5
7.6
4.5

1.0
–4.5
–12.0

6.0
3.5
9.8

7.8
1.4
1.1

8.1
0.9
8.0

7.0
2.0
5.5

–2.3
–8.2
–5.6

–7.1
–8.8
–13.4

–4.5
–7.3
–12.8

...
18.9
6.6

...
22.3
6.6

...
21.1
6.6

Middle East and Central Asia

Tajikistan
Armenia
Kyrgyz Republic

Memorandum
...
...
...
Caucasus and Central Asia
4.8
–2.1
3.9
6.6
7.6
6.4
–1.5
–4.1
–3.8
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
0.9
–4.4
2.9
8.0
9.5
9.7
0.9
–3.6
–2.6
...
...
...
and Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
0.8
–5.0
3.2
8.2
9.4
9.9
1.3
–3.9
–2.7
...
...
...
3.4
–5.9
4.9
0.8
–0.5
0.2
3.4
3.5
3.5
3.8
6.0
5.6
Israel6
2.1
–8.1
7.8
2.3
3.4
3.7
–7.0 –12.7 –12.3
...
...
...
Maghreb7
4.3
1.2
2.4
11.8
8.3
8.3
–6.8
–4.4
–4.7
...
...
...
Mashreq8
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, and Yemen.
5Includes Djibouti, Mauritania, Somalia, and West Bank and Gaza. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See country-specific note for Lebanon in
the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia.
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and West Bank and Gaza. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.

58

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Oil Exporters4
Nigeria
Angola
Gabon
Republic of Congo
Chad
Middle-Income Countries5
South Africa
Ghana
Côte d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Zambia
Senegal

Real GDP
Projections
2019
2020
2021
3.2
–3.0
3.1

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2019
2020
2021
8.5
10.6
7.9

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2019
2020
2021
–3.6
–4.8
–4.1

Unemployment3
Projections
2019 2020 2021
...
...
...

1.6
2.2
–0.9
3.8
–0.6
3.0

–4.1
–4.3
–4.0
–2.7
–7.0
–0.7

2.0
1.7
3.2
2.1
–0.8
6.1

11.7
11.4
17.1
2.0
2.2
–1.0

13.4
12.9
21.0
3.0
2.5
2.8

13.3
12.7
20.6
3.0
2.6
3.0

–2.1
–3.8
5.7
–0.3
3.5
–4.9

–3.7
–3.6
–1.3
–9.1
–5.7
–13.3

–2.2
–2.0
0.1
–6.0
–1.9
–9.7

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

2.2
0.2
6.5
6.5
3.9
1.4
5.3

–5.1
–8.0
0.9
1.8
–2.8
–4.8
–0.7

3.8
3.0
4.2
6.2
3.4
0.6
5.2

4.0
4.1
7.2
0.8
2.5
9.8
1.0

4.3
3.3
10.6
1.2
2.8
14.5
2.0

4.4
3.9
8.7
1.4
2.2
13.3
2.0

–3.2
–3.0
–2.7
–2.7
–4.4
0.6
–7.7

–3.1
–1.6
–3.4
–3.7
–5.4
–1.0
–9.2

–2.9
–1.8
–2.9
–2.9
–4.5
0.0
–9.9

...
28.7
...
...
...
...
...

...
37.0
...
...
...
...
...

...
36.5
...
...
...
...
...

5.9
0.1
3.4
10.1
14.4
6.3
–5.9
–7.7
–7.6
...
...
...
Low-Income Countries6
Ethiopia
9.0
1.9
0.0
15.8
20.2
11.5
–5.3
–4.5
–4.6
...
...
...
Kenya
5.4
1.0
4.7
5.2
5.3
5.0
–5.8
–4.9
–5.4
...
...
...
Tanzania
7.0
1.9
3.6
3.4
3.6
3.7
–2.3
–3.2
–4.4
...
...
...
Uganda
6.7
–0.3
4.9
2.9
4.2
4.8
–6.5
–8.0
–5.9
...
...
...
Democratic Republic of the Congo
4.4
–2.2
3.6
4.7
11.5
12.1
–3.8
–4.8
–4.0
...
...
...
Mali
5.1
–2.0
4.0
–2.9
0.5
1.5
–4.2
–2.0
–1.2
...
...
...
Madagascar
4.8
–3.2
3.2
5.6
4.3
5.5
–2.3
–4.2
–2.9
...
...
...
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger,
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

59

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
(Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
2002–11
2.4

2012
1.9

2013
2.0

2014
2.1

2015
2.1

2016
2.0

2017
2.6

2018
2.4

2019
1.6

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

1.1
0.9
0.7
1.2
0.6
–0.3
0.3
0.5
0.8
1.0
2.8

0.6
1.5
–1.2
0.2
–0.2
–3.3
–3.0
1.7
0.8
0.7
1.3

0.9
1.2
–0.5
0.2
0.1
–2.4
–1.1
2.2
1.5
1.3
1.8

1.6
1.8
1.1
1.8
0.4
–0.5
1.7
0.5
1.8
1.8
2.2

1.8
2.3
1.7
0.6
0.7
0.8
3.9
1.3
1.5
–0.1
1.5

1.2
1.0
1.6
1.4
0.8
1.5
3.1
0.5
1.1
0.0
1.7

2.1
1.7
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
2.9
2.3
1.3
1.9
2.4

1.8
2.4
1.7
1.0
1.6
1.0
2.3
0.5
0.7
0.6
2.0

1.3
1.7
1.2
0.3
1.4
0.5
1.9
0.9
0.9
0.2
1.1

–6.2
–4.7
–8.5
–6.0
–10.0
–10.5
–12.8
–4.9
–10.4
–8.4
–4.6

3.6
2.6
5.1
4.2
5.7
5.3
7.1
2.7
5.4
4.1
3.1

Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

4.7
7.3
10.1
6.1
3.9
4.7
5.0
2.2
2.8
0.4
2.3
1.4
2.8
5.9
2.2

3.7
6.0
7.4
4.2
4.9
2.8
3.8
1.7
1.0
2.2
1.3
2.5
1.9
1.5
0.7

3.5
5.9
7.3
5.1
3.7
2.8
1.5
1.7
2.1
0.0
0.4
0.0
2.3
2.6
0.9

3.1
5.8
6.7
6.2
3.4
1.5
–1.1
0.1
–0.3
1.5
0.3
2.5
2.5
3.5
0.3

2.8
5.8
6.4
6.8
3.7
0.5
–2.2
–0.8
–4.4
2.0
0.5
1.7
0.5
0.0
–0.3

3.0
5.8
6.2
7.1
3.9
1.6
0.0
–1.9
–4.1
1.4
2.3
–0.6
–1.2
–4.2
–1.1

3.4
5.7
6.4
5.9
4.3
3.9
1.8
0.2
0.5
0.9
0.0
–3.3
0.4
–1.8
–0.1

3.2
5.5
6.3
5.0
4.2
3.2
2.6
0.1
0.5
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.6
–0.7
–0.7

2.3
4.6
5.8
3.0
3.8
1.9
1.4
–1.3
0.3
–1.4
–0.6
–1.6
0.4
–0.4
–1.3

–4.7
–2.7
1.5
–11.2
–4.5
–4.7
–4.2
–9.1
–6.4
–9.9
–6.4
–7.3
–5.6
–6.7
–9.4

4.8
7.2
7.9
7.7
5.2
3.7
2.8
2.7
2.2
2.5
1.0
1.1
0.5
–0.8
1.5

World

Projections
2020 2021
–5.6
4.0

Memorandum
European Union
1.2
–0.9
–0.2
1.5
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.1
1.6
–7.8
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
2.0
3.5
3.9
2.2
1.6
2.6
2.8
2.9
–3.3
Middle East and North Africa
2.0
0.7
–0.5
–0.4
0.2
2.5
–0.9
–0.9
–1.3
–7.5
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional
reporting periods.
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.

60

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

5.0
2.7
1.0

CHAPTER 1

References
Adams, Abi, Teodora Boneva, Marta Golin, and Christopher
Rauh. 2020. “Inequality in the Impact of the Coronavirus
Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys.” CEPR Discussion
Paper 14665, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain A. Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro.
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Ahn, JaeBin, Zidong An, John C. Bluedorn, Gabriele Ciminelli,
Zsoka Kóczán, Davide Malacrino, Daniela Muhaj, and
Patricia Neidlinger. 2019. “Work in Progress: Improving
Youth Labor Market Outcomes in Emerging Market and
Developing Economies.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 19/02,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Wolfgang Bergthaler, Jose M. Garrido, Anna
Ilyina, Andreas Jobst, Kenneth Kang, Dmitriy Kovtun,
Yan Liu, Dermot Monaghan, and Marina Moretti. 2015.
“A Strategy for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 15/19, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti. 1996. “Income Distribution, Political Instability, and Investment.” European Economic
Review 40 (6): 1203–28.
Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey,
and Michèle Tertilt. 2020. “This Time It’s Different: The
Role of Women’s Employment in a Pandemic Recession.”
Unpublished.
Anderson, Michael L., Justin Gallagher, and Elizabeth Ramirez
Ritchie. 2017. “School Lunch Quality and Academic Performance.” NBER Working Paper 23218, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Awad, Rachid, Caio Ferreira, Ellen Gaston, and Luc Riedweg.
2020. “Banking Sector Regulatory and Supervisory Response to
Deal with Coronavirus Impact (with Q and A).” Special Series
on COVID-19, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bannister, Geoffrey J., and Alexandros Mourmouras. 2017.
“Welfare vs. Income Convergence and Environmental
Externalities.” IMF Working Paper 17/271, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016.
“Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 131 (4): 1593–636.
Barrett, Philip, Maximilian Appendino, Kate Nguyen, and Jorge
de Leon Miranda. 2020. “Measuring Social Unrest Using
Media Reports.” IMF Working Paper 20/129, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Baytiyeh, Hoda. 2018. “Online Learning during
Post-Earthquake School Closures.” Disaster Prevention and
Management 27 (2): 215–27.
Bick, Alexander, Adam Blandin, and Karel Mertens. 2020.
“Work from Home after the COVID-19 Outbreak.” Working
Paper 2017, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, TX.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.”
Journal of Economic Literature 48 (1): 3–57.
Brussevich, Mariya, Era Dabla-Norris, Christine Kamunge, Pooja
Karnane, Salma Khalid, and Kalpana Kochhar. 2018. “Gender,
Technology, and the Future of Work.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 18/07, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Brussevich, Mariya, Era Dabla-Norris, and Salma Khalid.
2020. “Who Will Bear the Brunt of Lockdown Policies?
Evidence from Tele-Workability Measures across Countries.”
IMF Working Paper 20/88, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2018. “Measuring
Geopolitical Risk.” International Finance Discussion
Papers 1222.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on
Earnings.” Chapter 30 in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.
3a, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science.
Deaton, Angus, and Bettina Aten. 2017. “Trying to Understand
the PPPs in ICP2011: Why Are the Results So Different?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (1): 243–64.
Decerf, Benoit, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Daniel Gerszon
Mahler, and Olivier Sterck. 2020. “Lives and Livelihoods:
Estimates of the Global Mortality and Poverty Effects of the
COVID-19 Pandemic.” Policy Research Working Paper 9277,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Díez, Federico, Romain Duval, Chiara Maggi, Yi Ji, Ippei
Shibata, and Marina Medes Tavares. 2020. “Options
to Support the Incomes of Informal Workers during
COVID-19.” Special Series on COVID-19, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Duval, Romain A., and Prakash Loungani. 2019. “Designing
Labor Market Institutions in Emerging and Developing Economies: Evidence and Policy Options.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 19/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ebrahimy, Ehsan, Deniz Igan, and Sole Martinez Peria. 2020.
“The Impact of COVID-19 on Inflation: Potential Drivers
and Dynamics.” Special Series on COVID-19, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Fabrizio, Stefania, Davide Furceri, Rodrigo Garcia-Verdu,
Bin Grace Li, Sandra V. Lizarazo, Marina Mendes Tavares, Futoshi Narita, and Adrian Peralta-Alva. 2017.
“Macroeconomic Structural Policies and Income Inequality
in Low-Income Developing Countries.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 17/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Fouquet, Roger. 2011. “Long Run Trends in Energy-Related
External Costs.” Ecological Economics 70 (12): 2380–89.
Freitag, Andreas, and Weicheng Lian. Forthcoming. “Global
Disinflation: Cyclical or Downward Trend?” IMF Working
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Fuchs, Richard, Martin Herold, Peter H. Verburg, Jan G. P. W.
Clevers, and Jonas Eberle. 2015. “Gross Changes in Reconstructions of Historic Land Cover/Use for Europe between
1900 and 2010.” Global Change Biology 21 (1): 299–313.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

61

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Furceri, Davide, Prakash Loungani, Jonathan D. Ostry, and
Pietro Pizzuto. 2020. “Will COVID-19 Affect Inequality?
Evidence from Past Pandemics.” COVID Economics 12,
May 1, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Georgieva, Kristalina. 2020. “Beyond the Crisis.” Finance &
Development 57 (2).
Georgieva, Kristalina, Stefania Fabrizio, Cheng Hoon Lim, and
Marina M. Tavares. “The COVID-19 Gender Gap.” IMFBlog,
July 21, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Google LLC. 2020. “Google COVID-19 Community Mobility
Reports.” https://​www​.google​.com/​covid19/​mobility.
Global Economic Uncertainty. 2020. https://​www.
policyuncertainty​.com/​global​_monthly​.html.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika
Penciakova, and Nick Sander. 2020. “COVID-19 and
Business Failures.” IMF Working Paper 20/207, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Hogan, Alexandra B., Britta L. Jewell, Ellie Sherrard-Smith, Juan
F. Vesga, Oliver J. Watson, Charles Whittaker, and others.
2020. “Potential Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on HIV,
Tuberculosis, and Malaria in Low-Income and Middle-Income
Countries: A Modelling Study.” The Lancet Global Health, July.
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​S2214​-109X(20)30288​-6.
Holmlund, Bertil, Qian Liu, and Oskar Nordström Skans. 2008.
“Mind the Gap? Estimating the Effects of Postponing Higher
Education.” Oxford Economic Papers 60 (4): 683–710.
Inklaar, Robert, Harmen de Jong, Jutta Bolt, and Jan van Zanden.
2018. “Rebasing ‘Maddison’: New Income Comparisons and
the Shape of Long-Run Economic Development.” GGDC
Research Memorandum GD-174, Groningen Growth and
Development Centre, University of Groningen, Netherlands.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2018. World Energy Outlook
2018, Paris. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energyoutlook-2018.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2020. ILO Monitor:
COVID-19 and the World of Work, 5th ed. Geneva.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020. “Debt Management
Responses to the Pandemic.” Special Series on COVID-19,
Washington, DC.
Jacobson, Mark Z. 2020. “Evaluation of Coal and Natural
Gas with Carbon Capture as Proposed Solutions to Global
Warming, Air Pollution, and Energy Security.” Stanford
University, Stanford, CA.
Jain, Ronak, Joshua Budlender, Rocco Zizzamia, and Ihsaan
Bassier. 2020. “The Labor Market and Poverty Impacts
of COVID-19 in South Africa.” CSAE Working Paper
WPS/202014, Center for the Study of African Economies,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Jones, Charles I., and Peter J. Klenow. 2016. “Beyond GDP?
Welfare across Countries and Time.” American Economic
Review 106 (9): 2426–57.
Korkoyah, Dala T., and Francis F. Wreh. 2015. Ebola Impact
Revealed: An Assessment of the Differing Impact of the Outbreak
on the Women and Men in Liberia. Nairobi: Oxfam.

62

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Lakner, Christoph, Daniel Gerszon Mahler, Mario Negre,
and Espen Beer Prydz. 2020. “How Much Does
Reducing Inequality Matter for Global Poverty?” Global
Poverty Monitoring Technical Note 13, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Lazard. 2019. Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis—Version
13.0, 20. New York
Light, Audrey. 1995. “The Effects of Interrupted Schooling on
Wages.” Journal of Human Resources 30 (3): 472–502.
Liu, Yan, José Garrido, and Chanda DeLong. 2020. “Private
Debt Resolution Measures in the Wake of the Pandemic.”
Special Series on COVID-19, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
McCarthy, Paul. 2013. “Extrapolating PPPs and Comparing
ICP Benchmark Results.” Chapter 18 in Measuring the Real
Size of the World Economy: The Framework, Methodology and
Results of the International Comparison Program. World Bank:
Washington, DC.
Opportunity Insights Economic Tracker. 2020. https://​
tracktherecovery​.org.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Jorge Alvarez, Raphael A. Espinoza, and
Chris Papageorgiou. 2018. “Economic Gains from Gender
Inclusion: New Mechanisms, New Evidence.” IMF Staff
Discussion Note 18/06, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Prady, Delphine. 2020. “Reaching Households in Emerging
and Developing Economies: Citizen ID, Socioeconomic
Data, and Digital Delivery.” Special Series on Fiscal Policies
to Respond to COVID-19, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Quinn, David M., and Morgan Polikoff. 2017. “Summer
Learning Loss: What Is It, and What Can We Do about It?”
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Ralston, Katherine, Katie Treen, Alisha Coleman-Jensen, and
Joanne Guthrie. 2017. “Children’s Food Security and USDA
Child Nutrition Programs.” Economic Information Bulletin
174, United States Department of Agriculture, Economic
Research Service, Washington, DC.
Sahay, Ratna, and Martin Cihak. 2018. “Women in Finance:
A Case for Closing Gaps.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 18/05,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Shibata, Ippei. 2020. “The Distributional Impact of Recessions:
The Global Financial Crisis and the Pandemic Recession.”
IMF Working Paper 20/96, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Smith, Kirk R., Sumi Mehta, and Mirjam Maeusezahl-Feuz.
2004. “Indoor Air Pollution from Household Use of Solid
Fuels.” In Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global
and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major
Risk Factors, edited by Majid Ezzati and others, 1435–493.
Geneva: World Health Organization.
Steckel, Jan Christoph, Ottmar Edenhofer, and Michael Jakob.
2015. “Drivers for the Renaissance of Coal.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 112 (29): E3775–81.

CHAPTER 1

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2019. “Slack and
Cyclically Sensitive Inflation.” NBER Working Paper 25987,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Stokey, Nancy L. 1998. “Are There Limits to Growth? International Economic Review 39 (1): 1–31.
Tongia, Rahul, and Samantha Gross. 2018. “Working to Turn
Ambition into Reality: The Politics and Economics of India’s
Turn to Renewable Power.” Cross-Brookings Initiative on
Energy and Climate Paper Series, Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC.
Tongia, Rahul, and Samantha Gross. 2019. “Coal in India.”
Cross-Brookings Initiative on Energy and Climate Paper
Series, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2015.
“Assessing Sexual and Gender Based Violence during
the Ebola Crisis in Sierra Leone.” New York. https://​
www​.sl​.undp.org/content/sierraleone/en/home/library/
crisis_prevention_and_recovery/assessing-sexual-and-genderbased-violence-during-the-ebola-cris.html.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2019.
“Human Development Report 2019: Beyond Income,
Beyond Averages, Beyond Today: Inequalities in Human
Development in the 21st Century.” New York.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). 2020. “Education: From Disruption to Recovery.”
New York. https://​en​.unesco​.org/​covid19/​educationresponse.
US Trade Policy Uncertainties. 2020. https://​www.
policyuncertainty​.com/​categorical​_epu​.html.
World Bank (WB). 2018. Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2018:
Piecing Together the Poverty Puzzle. Washington, DC.
World Bank (WB). 2019. World Bank Annual Report 2019: Ending Poverty, Investing in Opportunity. Washington, DC.
World Bank (WB). 2020a. “Projected Poverty Impacts of
COVID-19 (Coronavirus).” World Bank Brief, June 8,
Washington, DC.
World Bank (WB). 2020b. “The COVID-19 Pandemic: Shocks
to Education and Policy Responses.” World Bank Report
148198, Washington, DC.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

63

CHAPTER

2

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

To contain the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and
protect susceptible populations, most countries imposed
stringent lockdown measures in the first half of 2020.
Meanwhile, economic activity contracted dramatically
on a global scale. This chapter aims to dissect the nature
of the economic crisis in the first seven months of the
pandemic. It finds that the adoption of lockdowns was
an important factor in the recession, but voluntary social
distancing in response to rising infections also contributed
very substantially to the economic contraction. Therefore,
although easing lockdowns can lead to a partial recovery,
economic activity is likely to remain subdued until
health risks abate. Meanwhile, countries should protect
the most vulnerable and find ways to support economic
activity compatible with social distancing, for example, by
reducing contact intensity in the workplace and enhancing
work from home where possible. This chapter also provides
new evidence of the uneven effects of lockdowns, which are
found to have a larger impact on the mobility of women
and younger cohorts. This calls for targeted policy action
to prevent a widening of inequality. Finally, the analysis
shows that lockdowns can substantially reduce COVID-19
infections, especially if they are introduced early in a
country’s epidemic and are sufficiently tight. Thus, despite
involving short-term economic costs, lockdowns may pave
the way to a faster recovery by containing the spread
of the virus and reducing the need for voluntary social
distancing over time, possibly having positive overall
effects on the economy. This remains an important area
for future research as new data become available.

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has raised unprecedented health challenges on a global scale. To contain
the spread of the virus, most countries have resorted
to stringent lockdown measures, closing schools and
business activities and sometimes even preventing
The authors of this chapter are Francesca Caselli, Francesco
Grigoli (co-lead), Weicheng Lian, and Damiano Sandri (co-lead),
with support from Jungjin Lee and Xiaohui Sun. The chapter
benefited from insightful comments by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and
internal seminar participants.

people from leaving their homes, except for essential
reasons. Meanwhile, economic activity has contracted
dramatically, as discussed in Chapter 1. No country
was spared, with GDP declining sharply in advanced,
emerging market, and developing economies.
This chapter’s first goal is to shed light on the
extent to which the economic contraction was driven
by the adoption of government lockdowns instead of
by people voluntarily reducing social interactions for
fear of contracting or spreading the virus. This issue is
important to understand retrospectively the nature of
the recession and to provide insights into the strength
of the upcoming recovery. If lockdowns were largely
responsible for the economic contraction, it would be
reasonable to expect a quick economic rebound when
they are lifted. But if voluntary social distancing played
a predominant role, then economic activity would
likely remain subdued until health risks recede.
The analysis starts by examining the cross-country
association between lockdowns and economic activity across a broad sample of countries. It finds that
countries that endured more stringent lockdowns
experienced larger growth declines relative to pre–
COVID-19 forecasts, even after controlling for the
severity of the local epidemic. The chapter then
assesses the impact of lockdowns using high-frequency
proxies for economic activity, namely mobility indicators provided by Google and job postings provided by
the website Indeed.1 Regression results show that lockdowns have a considerable negative effect on economic
activity. Nonetheless, voluntary social distancing in
response to rising COVID-19 infections can also have
strong detrimental effects on the economy. In fact,
the analysis suggests that lockdowns and voluntary
social distancing played a near comparable role in
1Google Community Mobility Reports provide information on
daily attendance rates at various locations relative to precrisis levels.
Data are available at a national level for a large set of advanced,
emerging market, and developing economies. For various countries,
mobility information is also available at a subnational level. Data
can be downloaded at https://​www​.google​.com/​covid19/​mobility/​.
The job site Indeed provided the IMF with anonymized information about daily job postings in 22 countries, disaggregated by job
categories.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

65

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

driving the economic recession. The contribution of
voluntary distancing in reducing mobility was stronger
in advanced economies, where people can work from
home more easily and sustain periods of temporary
unemployment because of personal savings and government benefits.
When looking at the recovery path ahead, the
importance of voluntary social distancing as a contributing factor to the downturn suggests that lifting
lockdowns is unlikely to rapidly bring economic
activity back to potential if health risks remain. This
is true especially if lockdowns are lifted when infections are still relatively high because, in those cases,
the impact on mobility appears more modest. Further
tempering the expectations of a quick economic
rebound, the analysis documents that easing lockdowns tends to have a positive effect on mobility, but
the impact is weaker than that of tightening lockdowns. These findings suggest that economies will
continue to operate below potential while health risks
persist, even if lockdowns are lifted. Therefore, policymakers should be wary of removing policy support
too quickly and consider ways to protect the most
vulnerable and support economic activity consistent
with social distancing. These may include measures
to reduce contact intensity and make the workplace
safer, for example by promoting contactless payments;
facilitating a gradual reallocation of resources toward
less-contact-intensive sectors; and enhancing work
from home, for example, by improving internet connectivity and supporting investment in information
technology.
The chapter also contributes to the growing
empirical evidence on the uneven effects of the crisis,
with particularly acute impacts on more economically vulnerable people. Using novel anonymized and
aggregated mobility indicators provided by Vodafone
for some European countries, the analysis shows that
lockdowns tend to have a larger effect on women’s
mobility than on men’s, especially at the time of
school closures.2 This suggests that women carry a
disproportionate burden in caring for children, which
2These indicators were prepared by Vodafone’s Big Data and
Artificial Intelligence team and were provided for the analysis in an
anomymized format through a confidential agreement. To protect
the privacy of individuals and minority groups, mobility indices were
aggregated at the provincial level, including at least 50 customers.
The data sharing protocol was subject to technical and organizational
controls, including an ethical assessment of the analysis prior to its
implementation.

66

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

may jeopardize their employment opportunities.
Vodafone data also show that lockdowns tend to have
a stronger impact on the mobility of younger cohorts,
who are economically more vulnerable because they
generally rely on labor income and have less stable
jobs. Thus, targeted policy intervention is needed
to protect the employment prospects of women
and younger cohorts and prevent a widening of
income inequality.
Finally, the chapter finds that lockdowns can
reduce infections substantially. The effects of lockdowns on confirmed COVID-19 cases tend to
materialize after a few weeks of delay, given the
incubation period of the virus and testing times. This
underscores the importance of early intervention,
also because lockdowns are more effective in curbing
infections if they are introduced early in the stage of
a country’s epidemic. The analysis also suggests that
lockdowns must be sufficiently stringent to reduce
infections significantly.
The effectiveness of lockdowns in reducing infections suggests that lockdowns may pave the way to a
faster economic recovery if they succeed in containing
the epidemic and thus limit the extent of voluntary
social distancing. Therefore, the short-term economic
costs of lockdowns could be compensated by stronger
medium-term growth, possibly leading to positive
overall effects on the economy. This is an important
area for future research. Meanwhile, policymakers
should also pursue alternative ways to contain infections that may involve lower short-term economic
costs than lockdowns, such as expanding testing and
contact tracing, promoting the use of face masks, and
encouraging work from home. As the understanding
of the virus transmission improves, countries may
also be able to deploy targeted measures rather than
blunt lockdowns, for example by focusing on protecting vulnerable people and restricting large indoor
gatherings.
The analysis contributes to a rapidly growing literature on the pandemic and the effects of lockdowns,
which is reviewed in Box 2.1. The understanding of
the crisis is still evolving—some papers detect considerable effects of lockdowns while others emphasize the
role of voluntary social distancing. The literature also
documents the pandemic’s uneven effect on vulnerable segments of the population and provides evidence
of the effectiveness of lockdowns and face masks in
containing infections.

CHAPTER 2

Cross-Country Evidence on Lockdowns and
Economic Activity
The analysis starts by presenting cross-country
evidence on the association between lockdowns
and economic activity over a sample of up to
52 advanced, emerging market, and developing
economies. Panel 1 of Figure 2.1 shows the correlation between the stringency of lockdowns during the
first half of 2020 and the decline in GDP relative to
Figure 2.1. Lockdowns and Economic Activity

Normalized coefﬁcients

2020:H1 GDP forecast error (percent)

More stringent lockdowns are correlated with sharper economic contractions.

0 1. GDP Forecast Errors in 2020:H1 and Lockdown Stringency
TWN
KOR LTU IRL
–2
FIN
NOR
–4
RUS
SWE
CHN
–6
ISR
EST
–8
UKR
JPN
CZE
COL
–10
SVN
–12
ITA
MYS
GBR
–14
PHL
FRA
–16
ESP
Data
Linear ﬁt
IND PER
–18
–20
–22
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Lockdown stringency (index, average in 2020:H1)

70

0.8 2. Lockdowns and Economic Activity through a Broad Range of
Indicators
0.6
Without controlling for COVID-19 cases
0.4
Controlling for COVID-19 cases
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
PMI UnemployGDP Consump- Invest- Industrial Retail
PMI
tion
ment production sales manu- services ment
rate
facturing

Sources: Haver Analytics; Oxford Coronavirus Government Response Tracker;
World Economic Outlook (WEO) database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1: The GDP forecast errors are deﬁned as the deviations from January
2020 WEO projections for the ﬁrst half of 2020 (2020:H1). Online Annex Table 2.1.2
provides the full list of countries. Panel 2: For GDP, consumption, and investment,
the analysis uses data for 2020:H1. For the other indicators that are available at
monthly frequency, the analysis considers the ﬁrst three months after COVID-19
cases reach 100 in a country. The regressions control for the logarithm of the
COVID-19 cases normalized by population in 2019. Normalized coefﬁcients
reported on the vertical axis show the impact of a one-standard-deviation increase
in the lockdown index on each economic variable, normalized by its own standard
deviation. Standard deviations are based on the cross-country variation in the
sample. The vertical lines refer to 90 percent conﬁdence bands. See Online
Annex 2.2 for additional details. PMI = purchasing managers’ index. Data labels
use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

pre-pandemic forecasts.3 The figure illustrates that
countries that implemented more stringent lockdowns experienced sharper GDP contractions.
Panel 2 of Figure 2.1 shows that the negative
association between lockdowns and economic activity is robust to using other indicators besides GDP.
For example, more stringent lockdowns are associated with lower consumption, investment, industrial production, retail sales, purchasing managers’
indices for the manufacturing and service sectors,
and higher unemployment rates.4 These correlations persist with and without controlling for the
strength of each country’s epidemic based on the
total number of confirmed COVID-19 cases scaled
by population.
Figure 2.1 thus provides suggestive evidence
that lockdowns tend to have a negative short-term
economic impact. Nonetheless, these findings
should be interpreted with caution given omitted
variable concerns that affect cross-country analyses
and endogeneity concerns about lockdowns. The
decision to deploy lockdowns is indeed not random;
rather, it may reflect time-invariant country characteristics that also affect economic outcomes. For
example, countries with higher social capital may
not require stringent lockdowns—as people take
greater precautions against infecting others—and
could also better withstand the economic impact
of the crisis. This may generate a spurious negative
correlation between the stringency of lockdowns and
economic activity. To strengthen identification by
controlling for such time-invariant country characteristics, the next section reexamines the economic
impact of lockdowns using time-series variation in
high-frequency data.

3The analysis uses a lockdown stringency index that averages
several subindicators—school closures, workplace closures,
cancellations of public events, restrictions on gatherings, public
transportation closures, stay-at-home requirements, restrictions
on internal movement, and controls on international travel—
provided by the University of Oxford’s Coronavirus Government
Response Tracker.
4Data for GDP, consumption, and investment refer to the first
half of 2020. For the other indicators that are available at monthly
frequency, the analysis considers the first three months after the
first 100 confirmed COVID-19 cases in each country to compare
economic outcomes during the same phase of a country’s epidemic.
See Online Annex 2.2 for additional details. All annexes are available
at www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WEO.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

67

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Assessing the Impact of Lockdowns Using
High-Frequency Data
Two types of daily data are used to proxy for economic activity at high frequency. First, the analysis uses
mobility data provided by Google, which reports the
attendance rate at various locations relative to precrisis
levels.5 These data have the key advantages of covering
a large set of countries and being available also at the
subnational level. The findings based on mobility data
are corroborated using job posting data reported by
Indeed, an online job search engine. Indeed data are
available for fewer countries but capture labor market
conditions more directly.

Lockdowns and Mobility
To assess the impact of lockdowns on mobility, the
analysis uses local projections that include country fixed
effects and time dummies to control for time-invariant
country characteristics and global shocks, respectively.
It is important to note that lockdowns are endogenous
policy choices that depend on the stage of the epidemic
and the degree of mobility. For example, governments
are more likely to impose lockdowns when health risks
become more acute. At the same time, people tend to
reduce mobility because they fear contracting the virus,
independent of lockdowns. This may lead to a spurious
negative correlation between lockdowns and mobility.
To alleviate these endogeneity concerns, the regression
framework controls for the number of COVID-19
cases and includes lags of the mobility indicator. In
other words, the empirical analysis tries to measure
the impact on mobility from a lockdown tightening
at a given stage of the country’s epidemic. Online
Annex 2.3 provides additional details.
The regression is estimated using national-level data
for 128 countries. Panel 1 of Figure 2.2 shows that
lockdowns tend to have a statistically significant negative effect on mobility. A full lockdown that includes all
measures that governments have used during the pandemic—for example, school closures, travel restrictions,
business closures, and stay-at-home requirements—
tends to generate a reduction in mobility of about
5Data are based on cell phone locations for people who own
smartphones and agree to share location data with Google. Because
this category of people may have characteristics that differ from
those of the broader population—for example, income level, age, or
access to the internet—the mobility indices may not be fully representative of the entire country, especially in poorer countries, where
fewer people have smartphones.

68

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 2.2. The Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social
Distancing on Mobility
(Percent)
Lockdowns and voluntary social distancing have a substantial negative impact on
mobility.
10 1. Impact of a Full Lockdown on Mobility
0
–10
–20
–30
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

1 2. Impact of a Doubling in Daily COVID-19 Cases on Mobility
0
–1
–2
–3
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

15 3. Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social Distancing on
Mobility during the First 90 Days of Each Country’s Epidemic
10
5

Lockdown stringency

Voluntary social distancing

0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25

All

AEs

EMs

LICs

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The shaded areas in panels 1 and 2 correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence
intervals computed with standard errors clustered at the country level. In panel 3,
the ﬁrst 90 days of the epidemic vary across countries as they are counted since
the ﬁrst COVID-19 case in each country. See Online Annex 2.1 for data sources
and country coverage. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets;
LICs = low-income countries.

CHAPTER 2

25 percent within a week. Mobility starts to resume
gradually after that as the lockdown tightening shock
dissipates, as illustrated in Online Annex 2.3.6
To address endogeneity concerns further, the impact
of lockdowns is also estimated using subnational data.
The analysis considers 15 Group of Twenty countries that imposed national lockdowns in response to
severe localized outbreaks and examines the impact on
mobility in regions with a relatively low number of
COVID-19 cases. This approach strengthens the identification because the adoption of the national lockdown was largely exogenous for regions less affected
by the epidemic. As reported in Online Annex 2.3,
the results confirm that lockdowns tend to have a
strong negative impact on mobility. These findings are
robust to controlling for COVID-19 cases at both the
regional and national levels.
However, lockdowns are not the only contributing
factor to the decline in mobility. During a pandemic,
people also voluntarily reduce exposure to one another
as infections increase and they fear becoming sick.
Several papers document this aspect by showing that
mobility has been tightly correlated with the spread
of COVID-19, even after controlling for government
lockdowns, especially in advanced economies (Aum,
Lee, and Shin 2020; Goolsbee and Syverson 2020;
Maloney and Taskin 2020). In line with this literature,
the regression framework used in the analysis can shed
light on the strength of voluntary social distancing by
capturing the response of mobility to rising COVID-19
infections for a given lockdown stringency.7 Panel 2 of
Figure 2.2 shows that an increase in COVID-19 cases
tends to have a considerable negative effect on mobility. A doubling of daily cases leads to a contraction in
mobility by about 2 percent.

6Online Annex 2.3 also shows that the results are robust to controlling for COVID-19 deaths instead of cases; using subindicators
of mobility provided by Google; controlling for testing, contact tracing, and public information campaigns; and accounting for possible
cross-country heterogeneity in the mobility response depending on
population density and indicators of governance and social capital.
7Besides reacting to the spread of COVID-19, people may
voluntarily opt for social distancing also in response to other factors,
such as announcements by public health officials, news about
celebrities being infected, or even the adoption of government
lockdowns. Therefore, the analysis may underestimate the extent
of voluntary social distancing. The results are robust to controlling
for COVID-19 deaths instead of cases. Normalizing COVID-19
cases or deaths by population is irrelevant, given that the regressions
include country fixed effects and population does not vary during
the period of analysis.

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

To gain further insights into the relative importance of lockdowns and voluntary social distancing
tied to rising COVID-19 cases, panel 3 of Figure 2.2
shows their contribution in reducing mobility during
the first three months of each country’s epidemic.
Both lockdowns and voluntary social distancing had
a large impact on mobility, playing a roughly similar role in emerging markets. The contribution of
voluntary social distancing was smaller in low-income
countries and larger in advanced economies. These
differences likely reflect that people in more economically developed countries can work from home
more easily and can even afford to stop working
temporarily by relying on personal savings or social
security benefits. Conversely, people in low-income
countries are often unable to opt for voluntary social
distancing as they do not have the financial means to
cope with a temporary income loss. This underscores
the importance of international support to ensure
that low-income countries have budgetary room for
expanding safety nets.
The large contribution of voluntary social distancing in reducing mobility suggests that lifting
lockdowns can lead to only a partial rebound in
economic activity if health risks persist. In line with
this implication, panel 1 in Figure 2.3 shows that
the impact of lockdowns on mobility is smaller
when infections are relatively high. A likely reason
is that people feel uncomfortable with resuming mobility when lockdowns are lifted if they
still perceive a considerable risk of contracting or
spreading the virus. This insight warns against lifting
lockdowns prematurely in hope of jump-starting
economic activity. Panel 2 of Figure 2.3 provides
additional evidence against expecting a sharp economic recovery just from easing lockdowns. It shows
that easing lockdowns tends to have a positive effect
on mobility but the magnitude is weaker compared
with the impact from a lockdown tightening. As
documented in Online Annex 2.3, this difference is
statistically significant.
The importance of voluntary social distancing
coupled with the modest boost to mobility from easing
lockdowns suggest that economies will likely operate
below potential as long as health concerns persist.8
A first implication is that policymakers should be
8Given the severity of the downturn, the crisis may have also
reduced the level of potential output, thus leading to permanent
losses even after the pandemic is over. This is an important issue for
future research.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

69

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 2.3. Further Insights into the Impact of Lockdowns on
Mobility
(Percent)
The impact of lockdowns on mobility is weaker when COVID-19 cases are higher.
Furthermore, a lockdown easing tends to have a smaller impact on mobility
relative to a lockdown tightening.
5 1. Impact of a Full Lockdown on Mobility under Low and High
COVID-19 Cases
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25

High cases
Low cases

–30
–35
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

30 2. Impact of a Full Lockdown on Mobility, Tightening versus
Loosening
20
10
0
–10
–20

Tightening
Loosening

–30
–40
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for data sources and country coverage. High and low
cases in panel 1 correspond to the 75th and 25th percentile of the cross-country
distribution of log of daily COVID-19 cases, respectively. The shaded areas in
panels 1 and 2 correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed with
standard errors clustered at the country level.

wary of removing policy support too hastily to avoid
precipitating a further downturn and should continue
to protect the most vulnerable through social safety net
spending. Second, it is important to find ways to support economic activity consistent with persistent social
distancing. These may include measures to reduce
contact intensity and make the workplace safer—for
example by promoting contactless payments—
and facilitate the reallocation of resources toward
less-contact-intensive sectors. Policymakers should also
enhance working from home, for example by improving internet access and supporting firm investment in
information technology, which, as shown in Box 2.2,
can protect employment during the pandemic.

70

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Lockdowns and Job Postings
The importance of lockdowns and voluntary social
distancing in the ongoing crisis can also be examined
using the daily number of job postings provided by
Indeed for 22 countries. The analysis uses a local
projection framework that mimics the one used for
the analysis of mobility. Panels 1 and 2 of Figure 2.4
show that a lockdown tightening and an increase in
COVID-19 cases both lead to a statistically significant
negative effect on job postings, corroborating the findings based on mobility. Both lockdowns and voluntary social distancing in response to higher infections
appear to have played an important role in driving the
reduction in job postings during the first three months
of each country’s epidemic (panel 3). Consistent with
the analysis of mobility, the contribution of voluntary
social distancing is relatively higher because the country sample includes mostly advanced economies.
Data from Indeed can also be disaggregated by job
categories, providing additional insights consistent
with the results presented so far. First, panel 1 of
Figure 2.5 suggests that both lockdowns and voluntary
social distancing contributed to the reduction in job
postings. Contact-intensive jobs—such as those in the
hospitality, personal care, and food sectors—declined
before stay-at-home orders, likely because of voluntary
social distancing as customers grew wary of infection
risks. Job postings in the manufacturing sector—that
do not involve personal contacts with customers—
instead started to decline closer to the adoption of
stay-at-home orders, reflecting the impact of lockdown
measures. The figure also shows that job postings in
contact-intensive sectors declined more than in the
manufacturing sector, likely reflecting a larger drop in
aggregate demand because of voluntary social distancing. Second, panel 2 provides evidence consistent
with the notion that easing lockdowns is unlikely to
generate a sharp rebound in economic activity. The
removal of stay-at-home orders has coincided with
only a marginal increase in job postings, even in the
less-contact-intensive manufacturing sector.

The Unequal Effects of Lockdowns across
Gender and Age Groups
The pandemic is having disproportional effects on
the most economically vulnerable segments of the
population. As reviewed in Box 2.1, the literature
documents strong negative effects on lower-income

CHAPTER 2

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Figure 2.4. The Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social
Distancing on Job Postings

Figure 2.5. Job Postings, by Sector, around Stay-at-Home
Orders

(Percent)

(Normalized to 100, 40 days before stay-at-home orders)

Lockdowns and voluntary social distancing have a substantial negative impact on
job postings.

Analysis of sectoral job postings conﬁrms the importance of both lockdowns and
voluntary social distancing. Jobs in contact-intensive sectors declined before
lockdowns, while manufacturing jobs declined around the adoption of
stay-at-home orders. Job postings have remained subdued, even after national
stay-at-home orders were lifted.

5 1. Impact of a Full Lockdown on Job Postings
0

120 1. Job Postings, by Sector, around the Adoption of Stay-at-Home
Orders

–5
–10

100

–15

80

–20

60

–25
–30
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

40
20
–40

1 2. Impact of a Doubling in Daily COVID-19 Cases on Job Postings
0

Food
Hospitality
Manufacturing
Personal

–30

–20
–10
0
10
20
Days since the adoption of stay-at-home orders

30

40

120 2. Job Postings, by Sector, around the Removal of Stay-at-Home
Orders

–1

100

–2

80

–3

60

–4
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

6 3. Impact of Lockdowns and Voluntary Social Distancing on Job
Postings during the First 90 Days of the Epidemic
4
2

Voluntary social distancing

Lockdown stringency

0
–2
–4
–6
–8

40
20
–120

Food
Hospitality
Manufacturing
Personal

–100

–80
–60
–40
–20
0
Days since the removal of stay-at-home orders

20

Sources: Indeed; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: This ﬁgure reports binned scatter plots showing the evolution over time of
the seven-day moving average of job postings in different categories. The x-axis
variable is divided into 20 equally sized bins. The sample includes countries that
introduced national stay-at-home orders according to the Oxford Coronavirus
Government Response Tracker. The countries included are ARE, AUT, BEL, ESP,
FRA, GBR, IND, IRL, ITA, MEX, NLD, NZL, POL, and SGP. Country list uses
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

–10
Sources: Indeed; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for data sources and country coverage. The shaded
areas in panels 1 and 2 correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed
with standard errors clustered at the country level.

households, workers with lower educational attainment,
minorities, immigrants, and women. For example,
unlike during previous recessions, women’s employment
has generally declined more than men’s has. This section
provides additional insights on the uneven impact on
women using novel mobility data provided by Vodafone

40

for Italy, Portugal, and Spain. By analyzing connections
across cell towers, Vodafone can create mobility indices
by gender based on the information customers provide
when subscribing to a phone plan. Data are aggregated
at the provincial level to protect customers’ privacy.
Vodafone data also differentiate mobility indices by age
groups, thus providing novel important perspectives on
the mobility patterns during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Panel 1 of Figure 2.6 shows mobility levels for men
and women 30 days before and after the adoption of

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

71

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 2.6. Differentiating the Mobility Impact of Lockdowns
by Gender and Age Group
(Percent)
Women and younger workers are disproportionately affected by lockdowns.
0.9 1. Fraction of People Moving around the Time of Adoption of
Stay-at-Home Orders, Ages 25–44
0.8
Male
Female

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
–30

0.9
0.8
0.7

–20

–10
0
10
20
Days since the adoption of stay-at-home orders

2. Fraction of People Moving around the Time of School Closures
in Italy, Ages 25–44
National stay-athome orders,
March 10

0.6

Male
Female

0.5

Local school
closures,
February 23

0.4
0.3
0.2
–30

1.0

30

–20

–10

0
10
20
30
Days since local school closures

40

50

3. Fraction of People Moving around the Time of Adoption of
Stay-at-Home Orders, by Age Groups
Ages 18–24
Ages 25–44
Ages 45–64
Ages 65+

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
–30

–24

–18 –12
–6
0
6
12
18
Days since the adoption of stay-at-home orders

24

30

Sources: Vodafone; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: All panels present binned scatter plots around the time of stay-at-home
orders’ introduction. In panels 1 and 2, the series are residualized with respect to
province and day-of-the-week ﬁxed effects. In panel 2, the sample is restricted to
ﬁve northern Italian regions where school closures were introduced before
stay-at-home orders. The x-axis is divided into 20 equally sized bins.

stay-at-home orders for people aged 25 to 44. These
orders coincided with a large drop in mobility for both
men and women, leading to a drop of about 20 percent in the number of people who leave their homes
on a given day. However, the effect on women was
stronger by about 2 percent, a modest but statistically
significant difference. Because stay-at-home orders
in Italy, Portugal, and Spain coincided with school
closures for almost all regions, the higher reduction in
women’s mobility may reflect that women are more
likely to care for children when schools are closed.
Consistent with this hypothesis, data show a smaller
difference between men and women for people aged
45 to 64, who are less likely to have young children
who require supervision at home.
Panel 2 provides additional evidence on women’s
role in caring for children. Focusing on a few regions
in northern Italy that closed schools two weeks before
the national lockdown, mobility data show that the
gender gap already widened at the time of school
closures. The national stay-at-home order increased
the gap further, possibly reflecting higher female
employment in contact-intensive sectors (such as retail,
tourism, and hospitality) that were closed during the
national lockdown. The evidence provided in panels 1
and 2 thus points to a disproportionate effect of lockdown measures on women, calling for targeted policy
intervention to support women (by offering parental
leave, for example) and to avoid long-lasting effects on
their employment opportunities.9
Vodafone data also reveal uneven effects of lockdowns across age groups. Panel 3 shows that the
adoption of stay-at-home orders led to a considerable reduction in mobility across all age categories.
Nonetheless, the effects were considerably stronger
for younger cohorts. Starting from a higher level of
mobility consistent with the need to go to work,
working-age people experienced a sharp contraction in
mobility around the adoption of stay-at-home orders.
The drop was particularly large for people aged 18 to
24 (some of whom, however, are students) and for
people aged 25 to 44. The impact was substantially
weaker for people aged 65 and above, who generally no
longer work and whose level of mobility was already
lower before the stay-at-home orders. These findings
9The analysis faces several limitations. For example, the sample is restricted to a few European countries, data do not provide
information on the employment status before and after lockdowns,
and various other factors can amplify or attenuate gender inequality
during the pandemic. These are important areas for future research.

72

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

CHAPTER 2

highlight that lockdowns tend to have a disproportionate impact on relatively younger workers and could
thus widen intergenerational inequality.10 While older
people can rely on retirement income, especially in
advanced economies, younger workers depend on labor
income and often have temporary job contracts that
are more likely to be terminated during a crisis.

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Figure 2.7. The Impact of Lockdowns on COVID-19 Infections
Lockdowns are an effective tool to reduce infections, especially when they are
implemented early in the epidemic.
1. Response of Infections to a Full Lockdown
(Percent)

30
15
0
–15

Lockdowns and COVID-19 Infections
Lockdowns engender sizable short-term economic
costs, but they are also an investment in public health
to protect susceptible populations from the highly
transmissible virus. The analysis now examines the
effectiveness of lockdowns in curbing infections.
Growth rates of confirmed COVID-19 cases are
regressed using local projections over the stringency
of lockdowns while controlling for country and time
fixed effects as well as other variables that can affect
infections, such as outside temperature and humidity,
public information campaigns, testing, and contact
tracing. Online Annex 2.5 provides additional details.
Panel 1 of Figure 2.7 shows that lockdowns tend
to have a negative impact on infections. A stringent
lockdown leads to a reduction in cumulated infections
of about 40 percent after 30 days. Note that the effects
of lockdowns on confirmed COVID-19 cases tend to
materialize after at least two weeks, consistent with the
COVID-19 incubation period and the time required
for testing. Acknowledging this aspect is important to
properly guide people’s expectations about the effectiveness of lockdowns. Furthermore, the lagged impact
on infections points to the need to adopt lockdowns
before infection rates increase too rapidly.
Panels 2 and 3 of Figure 2.7 provide additional
evidence of the benefits of adopting lockdowns early
in a country’s epidemic. Panel 2 shows the evolution
of infections since the first COVID-19 case, differentiating countries by the number of days between
the first case and the day when lockdown measures
reached maximum stringency. Countries that imposed
lockdowns faster experienced better epidemiological
outcomes. The differences are even more striking if
countries are divided with respect to the number of
COVID-19 cases at the time of lockdowns (panel 3).

–30
–45
–60
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

2.0 2. Infections since the Start of the Countries’ Epidemics for Fast
and Slow Tighteners
(Per thousand people, split based on days needed to reach
1.5
maximum stringency)
1.0

Fast tighteners
Slow tighteners

0.5
0.0
0

15

30
45
60
Days since the ﬁrst COVID-19 case

75

90

2.5 3. Infections since the Start of the Countries’ Epidemics for
Tighteners with Few and Many Cases
(Per thousand people, split based on weekly cases at
2.0
maximum stringency)
1.5

Tighteners with few cases
Tighteners with many cases

1.0
0.5
0.0

0

15

30
45
60
Days since the ﬁrst COVID-19 case

75

90

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for data sources and country coverage. Panel 1 shows
the response of infections to a full lockdown; panels 2 and 3 show the number of
infections since the ﬁrst COVID-19 case. The shaded area in panel 1 corresponds
to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors;
the shaded areas in panels 2 and 3 correspond to the interquartile range.

10Even though lockdowns had a stronger impact on the mobility
of younger people, older people have suffered disproportionately
from the health consequences of COVID-19 whose case-fatality rate
is much higher in people aged 65 and above.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

73

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Countries that adopted lockdowns when COVID-19
cases were still low witnessed considerably fewer infections during the first three months of the epidemic
compared with countries that introduced lockdowns
when cases were already high.
The observation that lockdowns can reduce infections but involve short-term economic costs is often
used to argue that lockdowns involve a trade-off
between saving lives and protecting livelihoods. This
narrative should be reconsidered in light of the earlier
findings showing that rising infections can also have
severe detrimental effects on economic activity. By
bringing infections under control, lockdowns may thus
pave the way to a faster economic recovery as people
feel more comfortable about resuming normal activities. In other words, the short-term economic costs
of lockdowns could be compensated through higher
future economic activity, possibly even leading to positive net effects on the economy. This remains a crucial
area for future research as more data become available.

Individual Lockdown Measures and
Nonlinear Effects
So far, the analysis has used a lockdown stringency
index that combines a broad range of underlying
measures. These include, for example, travel restrictions, school and workplace closures, and stay-at-home
orders. Disentangling the effects of these measures is
an arduous task because they are highly correlated, as
countries often introduced them in rapid succession
to contain infections. Furthermore, countries have
generally followed a similar sequence, from restrictions
on international travel to stay-at-home orders, as illustrated in panel 1 of Figure 2.8. Therefore, the empirical analysis tends to capture the marginal impact of a
given measure conditional on those that are already in
place. As discussed in Online Annex 2.6, this underestimates the importance of measures that are adopted
at a later stage. For example, stay-at-home orders are
found to have a modest impact on mobility because
various other measures are already in place.
An analytically sounder approach is to examine
whether further tightening of lockdown measures
continues to have similar economic and epidemiological effects. This can inform policymakers on whether
it is best to rely on protracted mild lockdowns or to
opt for more stringent measures. To shed light on
this issue, the analysis uses quadratic terms of the
lockdown index in the regression framework. Panel
74

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 2.8. Individual Lockdown Measures and Nonlinear
Effects
Countries tend to introduce different lockdown measures following a similar
sequence. More stringent lockdowns have a marginally weaker impact on mobility
but stronger effects on infections.
1. Sequencing of Lockdown Measures
International travel controls
School closures
Public event cancellations
Gathering restrictions
Workplace closures
Internal movement restrictions
Public transport closures
Stay-at-home orders
0

5
10
15
20
25
Days since the ﬁrst COVID-19 case

30

20 2. Impact of a Lockdown Tightening on Mobility
(Percent)
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
Low lockdown stringency
–50
High lockdown stringency
–60
–70
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Days since the shock
3. Impact of a Lockdown Tightening on Infections
(Percent)
200
100
50
0
–20
–40
Low lockdown stringency
High lockdown stringency

–60
–80
0

5

10

15
20
Days since the shock

25

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for data sources and country coverage. The blue bars
in panel 1 represent the median number of days and the horizontal lines the
interquartile range. Low and high stringency in panels 2 and 3 refer to the 25th
and 75th percentile of lockdown stringency. The shaded areas in panels 2 and 3
correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed with standard errors
clustered at the country level. A lockdown tightening corresponds to an increase in
the index by 100 units.

CHAPTER 2

2 of Figure 2.8 shows that the introduction of additional lockdown measures has a weaker marginal
impact on mobility once other measures are already in
place—that is, when the lockdown stringency index is
already relatively high. This suggests that lockdowns
have marginally weaker negative economic effects as
they become more and more stringent. For example,
stay-at-home orders may have only a modest negative
impact on economic activity if governments have
already mandated workplace closures.
Conversely, panel 3 shows that lockdowns become
progressively more effective in reducing COVID-19
cases when they become sufficiently stringent. Mild
lockdowns appear instead ineffective in curbing
infections. A possible interpretation is that preventing
only a few instances of personal contacts, such as by
closing schools alone, is not enough to reduce community spread significantly. Additional measures, such as
workplace closures or stay-at-home orders, are needed
to effectively bring the virus under control.
These results suggest that to achieve a given reduction in infections, policymakers may want to opt for
stringent lockdowns over a shorter period rather than
prolonged mild lockdowns. Based on past experience, tighter lockdowns appear indeed to entail only
modest additional economic costs while leading to a
considerably stronger decline in infections. It will be
important to reexamine these results as the pandemic
progresses because the relative benefits between mild
and tight lockdowns may change. For example, if an
expansion of contact tracing and broader use of face
masks succeed in limiting infections, mild lockdowns
could be sufficient to contain new localized flare-ups of
the virus.

Conclusions
This chapter has documented the crucial role that
both lockdowns and voluntary social distancing in
response to rising infections have played in reducing
economic activity during the pandemic. Consistent
evidence on the impact of lockdowns is provided by
examining cross-country economic indicators and
high-frequency proxies for economic activity, such
as mobility and job posting data from Google and
Indeed. Furthermore, the negative impact of lockdowns on mobility is robust to using subnational data
to strengthen identification.
Despite lockdowns having negative short-term economic effects, letting infections grow uncontrolled can

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

also have dire economic consequences. This is because
voluntary social distancing in response to rising
COVID-19 infections has severe detrimental effects
on the economy. The contribution of voluntary social
distancing in reducing mobility is particularly high in
advanced economies, where people can more easily stay
at home thanks to teleworking arrangements, higher
personal savings, and more generous social security
benefits.
The important contribution of voluntary social
distancing to the recession should caution against
expecting a quick economic rebound once lockdowns
are lifted. This is especially relevant for countries that
lift lockdowns prematurely, when infections are still
relatively high. In this case, lockdowns tend to have
a weaker impact on mobility, likely because people’s decisions are driven by fear of contracting the
virus. Further tempering the expectations of a sharp
economic rebound, the analysis shows that lifting
lockdowns tends to have a more modest impact on
mobility compared with the impact of a lockdown
tightening.
These findings suggest that, as long as significant
health risks persist, economic activity is likely to
remain subdued. Therefore, policymakers should
refrain from withdrawing policy support too quickly
and preserve spending on social safety nets. Furthermore, it is important to support economic activity
consistent with persistent social distancing, for example
by encouraging work from home, facilitating a reallocation of resources toward less-contact-intensive sectors, and promoting the adoption of new technologies
to limit the contact intensity within given sectors.
The chapter also provides novel evidence about
the unequal effects of lockdowns that severely affect
economically vulnerable segments of the population. Mobility data provided by Vodafone for some
European countries show that lockdown measures—
especially school closures—tend to generate a larger
drop in women’s mobility. This likely reflects women’s disproportionate role in childcare, which could
jeopardize their employment opportunities during
the crisis. Lockdowns tend to also generate a sharper
reduction in the mobility of younger cohorts, a worrisome outcome because younger workers rely on labor
income and often have temporary job contracts that
are at greater risk of being terminated. Targeted policy
intervention, such as strengthening unemployment
benefits for vulnerable categories and supporting paid
leave for parents, is needed to ensure that the crisis
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

75

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

does not contribute to widening gender and intergenerational inequality.
The analysis also finds that lockdowns are powerful
instruments to reduce infections, especially when they
are introduced early in a country’s epidemic and when
they are sufficiently stringent. Considering also that
lockdowns appear to impose decreasing marginal costs
on economic activity as they become more stringent,
policymakers may want to lean toward rapidly adopting tight lockdowns when infections increase rather
than rely on delayed mild measures. Nonetheless, these
recommendations will need to be reassessed as the
understanding of the virus and means to counteract it
improve. A crucial area of research is to examine the
effectiveness of more-targeted instruments compared
with blunt lockdowns, for example restrictions on
dense indoor gatherings or measures to isolate people
who are more vulnerable to the virus.
The effectiveness of lockdowns in reducing infections, coupled with the finding that infections can considerably harm economic activity because of voluntary
social distancing, provides an important new perspective on the costs of lockdowns. The prevailing narrative often portrays lockdowns as involving a trade-off
between saving lives and supporting the economy.
This characterization neglects the point that, despite
imposing short-term economic costs, lockdowns may
lead to a faster economic recovery by containing
the virus and reducing voluntary social distancing.

76

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

These medium-term gains may offset the short-term
costs of lockdowns, possibly even leading to positive overall effects on the economy. More research is
warranted on this important aspect as the crisis evolves
and more data become available. Meanwhile, policymakers should also look for alternative ways to contain
infections that may have even lower economic costs.
In line with the advice of public health experts, these
may include expanding testing and contact tracing,
promoting the use of face masks, and encouraging
working from home.
The analytical results and policy implications
presented in this chapter are subject to several caveats.
First, the analysis tries to alleviate concerns about the
endogeneity of lockdowns by showing that the results
hold using cross-sectional and time-series identification
and by relying on national and subnational data when
available. However, identification concerns cannot be
fully dismissed, including regarding the measurement
of voluntary social distancing. Second, the analysis
relies on short-term indicators, such as mobility and
job postings, which provide an imperfect measure of
economic activity. The chapter’s findings will need to
be reexamined as more conventional economic indicators become available. Third, the analysis focuses on
the economic consequences of lockdowns, neglecting
important side effects, for example, on educational
attainment and mental health issues. These are crucial
areas for future research.

CHAPTER 2

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Box 2.1. An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns
The literature on the economic crisis triggered by
the coronavirus pandemic has been expanding at
a very rapid pace. This box offers an inexhaustive
overview of some of this literature that focuses on the
impact of lockdown measures.1

Economic Impact of Lockdowns and
Inequality Aspects
Several authors point to a substantial role of lockdowns in the United States leading to employment
losses, substantial decline in spending, and deterioration
in local economic conditions (Baek and others 2020;
Baker and others 2020; Béland, Brodeur, and Wright
2020; Chernozhukov, Kasahara, and Schrimpf 2020;
Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber 2020; Gupta and
others 2020). Similar effects have been documented
across different countries (Carvalho and others 2020;
Chronopoulos, Lukas, and Wilson 2020; Deb and
others 2020a; Demirgüç-Kunt, Lokshin, and Torre 2020).
Other papers argue that voluntary social distancing has had a more important role than lockdowns
(Allcott and others 2020; Bartik and others 2020;
Kahn, Lange, and Wiczer 2020; Maloney and Taskin
2020). This literature notes that people’s mobility
and economic activity in the United States contracted
before lockdowns (Chetty and others 2020), and that
lifting lockdowns led to a limited rebound in mobility
(Dave and others 2020b) and economic activity (however, Cajner and others 2020 and Glaeser and others
2020 are exceptions). Goolsbee and Syverson (2020)
finds small differences in people’s visits to nearby retail
establishments that faced different regulatory restrictions because they were located in different jurisdictions. Chen and others (2020b) documents similar
results; it expands the analysis to Europe and finds no
robust evidence of the impact of lockdowns. Sweden’s
case also highlights the importance of voluntary social
distancing—despite avoiding strict lockdown measures, the country has experienced similar declines
in mobility and economic activities compared with
comparable countries (Andersen and others 2020a;
Born, Dietrich, and Müller 2020; Bricco and others
2020; Chen and others 2020b). Aum, Lee, and Shin
(2020) draws relatively similar conclusions analyzing
the South Korean experience.
The author of this box is Nicola Pierri.
1At the time of writing, most of the cited papers had not yet
undergone a peer-review process; thus, their conclusions must be
interpreted with caution.

The literature also documents that the early phases
of the pandemic have had a harsher effect on more
economically vulnerable individuals, both in the
United States and other countries (Alstadsæter and
others 2020; Béland, Brodeur, and Wright 2020).
These individuals include those with lower income
and educational attainment (Cajner and others 2020;
Chetty and others 2020; Shibata 2020), minorities
(Fairlie, Couch, and Xu 2020), immigrants (Borjas
and Cassidy 2020), and women (Alon and others
2020a; Del Boca and others 2020; Papanikolaou and
Schmidt 2020). One reason is that lower-paid workers
are often unable to perform their jobs from home
(Barrero, Bloom, and Davis 2020; Dingel and Neiman
2020; Gottlieb and others 2020). This warns of a
potential widening of inequality (Mongey, Pilossoph,
and Weinberg 2020; Palomino, Rodríguez, and
Sebastian 2020).
Some papers use rich structural models of production
to predict the damage of lockdowns, mostly finding
very large effects on economic activities (Barrot, Grassi,
and Sauvagnat 2020; Baqaee and Farhi 2020a; Bonadio
and others 2020; Cakmaklı and others 2020; Fadinger
and Schymik 2020; Inoue and Todo 2020) and on
firms’ liquidity and solvency (Carletti and others 2020;
Gourinchas and others 2020; Schivardi and Romano
2020). Chen and others (2020a) looks at stock market
reactions instead and presents evidence consistent with
market beliefs that mitigation policies are good for
businesses in the long term. Furthermore, some papers
study how supply shocks may cause demand shortage
(Guerrieri and others 2020) and interact with nominal
rigidities (Baqaee and Farhi 2020b).

Impact of Lockdowns and Social Distancing
on Infections
Some empirical analyses also document a significant
role of social distancing and lockdowns in slowing the
spread of the coronavirus (Chernozhukov, Kasahara,
and Schrimpf 2020; Ciminelli and Garcia-Mandico
2020; Dave and others 2020a; Deb and others 2020b;
Demirgüç-Kunt, Lokshin, and Torre 2020; di Porto,
Naticchioni, and Scrutinio 2020; Fang, Wang, and
Yang 2020; Friedson and others 2020; Glaeser, Gorback, and Redding 2020; Imai and others 2020; Jinjarak and others 2020; Yilmazkuday 2020). However,
several factors have affected effectiveness and compliance, such as social capital (Barrios and others 2020;
Ding and others 2020), availability of high-speed

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

77

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 2.1 (continued)
internet connections (Chiou and Tucker 2020),
electoral concerns (Pulejo and Querubín 2020), labor
precariousness (Levy Yeyati and Sartorio 2020), or sick
leave policies (Andersen and others 2020b). Some of
these papers also argue that less restrictive mitigation
policies, such as wearing face masks and mass testing,
can play an important role in slowing the spread of
infection (Chernozhukov, Kasahara, and Schrimpf
2020; Gapen and others 2020).

Optimal Mitigation Policy and
Historical Perspectives
Some studies use theoretical (mostly quantitative)
models to characterize optimal mitigation policies
while considering the detrimental impact on the economy. For instance, see Acemoglu and others (2020);
Akbarpour and others (2020); Alvarez, Argente, and
Lippi (2020); Bodenstein, Corsetti, and Guerrieri
(2020); Cakmaklı and others (2020); Checo, Grigoli,
and Mota (2020); Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt

78

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

(2020); Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020); Favero,
Ichino, and Rustichini (2020); and Jones, Philippon,
and Venkateswaran (2020). The higher risk faced by
the elderly, the role of voluntary social distancing, and
hospital capacity constraints are among several issues
these models study. Many of these papers document
an important role for targeted lockdown policies and
early interventions. Others focus on how optimal
policies may differ in developing economies (Alon and
others 2020b; von Carnap and others 2020).
A few papers offer a historical perspective on the
economic impact of lockdowns. Correia, Luck, and
Verner (2020) finds that lockdowns imposed in US
cities to contain the Spanish flu had a positive impact
on their subsequent growth, although Lilley, Lilley,
and Rinaldi (2020) revisits this evidence and argues
that it is inconclusive. Bodenhorn (2020) studies the
Spanish flu’s impact in the US South and finds no
evidence that mandated business closures led to more
business failures.

CHAPTER 2

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Box 2.2. The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Evidence from
the United States

The authors of this box are Nicola Pierri and Yannick Timmer.
The analysis largely draws from Pierri and Timmer (2020), which
includes technical details.
1A metropolitan statistical area is defined by the United States
Census Bureau as a geographical region with a relatively high
population density at its core and close economic ties throughout the area.

Figure 2.2.1. The Dampening Effects of
Information Technology Adoption on US
Unemployment

Unemployment rate increase

(Percent)

Unemployment rate increase

This box analyzes how firms’ adoption of information technology alters the impact of lockdowns and
voluntary social distancing on the labor market in the
United States. Information technology can dampen
the economic effect of the pandemic in several ways:
by facilitating teleworking, promoting online sales,
or organizing contactless delivery. The analysis finds
that employment has been more resilient in US states
where firms use information technology more intensively. Panel 1 of Figure 2.2.1 shows the increase in
the unemployment rate between February and April
for each US state over the stringency of lockdowns
during the same period. Similarly, panel 2 illustrates
the association between the increase in unemployment
and the drop in mobility. In states with low levels of
information technology adoption, there is a strong
correlation between the intensity of the lockdown, the
drop in mobility, and the rise in the unemployment
rate. Conversely, lockdowns and mobility are not associated with rising unemployment rates in states with
higher levels of information technology adoption. This
suggests that information technology may significantly
shield local economies during the pandemic.
This pattern is confirmed using individual-level
data from the Current Population Survey, a joint
survey by the US Census Bureau and US Bureau of
Labor Statistics. The probability of being unemployed in April is higher for respondents living in
metropolitan statistical areas that experienced larger
mobility declines, but companies’ information
technology adoption mitigates this impact.1 The
increase in the probability of being unemployed
associated with a large drop in mobility (one
standard deviation, equal to 10 percentage points)
is 25 percent larger in metropolitan statistical areas
with low levels of information technology adoption
than in those with high levels (5 percentage points
versus 4 percentage points).
The analysis also explores the impact of information technology adoption across different categories
of workers (panel 3 of Figure 2.2.1). Information
technology cushions the unemployment impact of
mobility for both male and female and for both
white and nonwhite workers. However, it does not

35 1. Unemployment and Lockdowns in the
United States
30
High IT
25
Low IT
Linear ﬁt: High IT
20
Linear ﬁt: Low IT
15
10
5
0
0.2

0.4

0.6
0.8
Lockdown stringency

1.0

35 2. Unemployment and Mobility in the
United States
30
High IT
25
Low IT
Linear ﬁt: High IT
20
Linear ﬁt: Low IT
15
10
5
0
0.2

0.3

0.4
Mobility drop

0.5

0.6

0.2 3. Dampening Effects of IT on
Unemployment, by Worker Type
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
Overall Male Female White

High Low
Nonedu- eduwhite
cation cation

Sources: Google Community Mobility Report; Keystone; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The y-axis in panels 1 and 2 is the increase in the
state-level unemployment rate between February and April
2020 in percent. The x-axis in panel 1 is the average
lockdown stringency between February and April 2020; the
x-axis in panel 2 is the average drop in mobility. Panel 3
illustrates the results of a regression using data from the
Current Population Survey in which the dependent variable
is a dummy indicating if the respondent is unemployed in
April 2020, and the independent variables are the IT
adoption and the drop in mobility in the metropolitan
statistical area where the respondent lives, together with
their interaction. The y-axis of panel 3 reports the magnitude
of the coefﬁcient of the interaction term for each subsample.
Low education refers to respondents who did not graduate
from high school. See Pierri and Timmer (2020) for more
details. IT = information technology.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

79

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 2.2 (continued)
mitigate the impact for individuals who have a low
level of education. Therefore, even though information technology adoption may, in the aggregate,
significantly shield labor markets against the effects

80

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

of the coronavirus pandemic, it may also contribute
to widening inequality between individuals with
high and low levels of educational attainment.

CHAPTER 2

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and
Michael D. Whinston. 2020. “A Multi-Risk SIR Model
with Optimally Targeted Lockdown.” NBER Working
Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Akbarpour, Mohammad, Cody Cook, Aude Marzuoli, Simon
Mongey, Abhishek Nagaraj, Matteo Saccarola, Pietro Tebaldi,
Shoshana Vasserman, and Hanbin Yang. 2020. “Socioeconomic Network Heterogeneity and Pandemic Policy
Response.” Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working
Paper 2020–75, University of Chicago, IL.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Billy Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Benjamin Goldman. 2020. “Economic
and Health Impacts of Social Distancing Policies during the
Coronavirus Pandemic.” https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​3610422.
Alon, Titan M., Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey,
and Michèle Tertilt. 2020a. “The Impact of COVID-19 on
Gender Equality.” NBER Working Paper 26947, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Alon, Titan M., Minki Kim, David Lagakos, and Mitchell
VanVuren. 2020b. “How Should Policy Responses to the
COVID-19 Pandemic Differ in the Developing World?”
NBER Working Paper 27273, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Alstadsæter, Annette, Bernt Bratsberg, Gaute Eielsen, Wojciech
Kopczuk, Simen Markussen, Oddbjorn Raaum, and Knut
Røed. 2020. “The First Weeks of the Coronavirus Crisis:
Who Got Hit, When, and Why? Evidence from Norway.”
NBER Working Paper 27131, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Alvarez, Fernando, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi. 2020.
“A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19 Lockdown.”
NBER Working Paper 26981, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Andersen, Asger L., Emil T. Hansen, Niels Johannesen, and
Adam Sheridan. 2020a. “Pandemic, Shutdown and Consumer Spending: Lessons from Scandinavian Policy Responses
to COVID-19.” arXiv preprint arXiv:​2005​.04630.
Andersen, Martin, Johanna Catherine Maclean, Michael F.
Pesko, and Kosali I. Simon. 2020b. “Effect of a Federal Paid
Sick Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home:
Evidence from Cellular Device Data.” NBER Working
Paper 27138, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Anderson, Michael L. 2014. “Subways, Strikes, and Slowdowns:
The Impacts of Public Transit on Traffic Congestion.” American Economic Review 104 (9): 2763–96.
Aum, Sangmin, Sang Yoon (Tim) Lee, and Yongseok Shin.
2020. “COVID-19 Doesn’t Need Lockdowns to Destroy
Jobs: The Effect of Local Outbreaks in Korea.” NBER Working Paper 27264, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Baek, Chaewon, Peter B. McCrory, Todd Messer, and Preston
Mui. 2020. “Unemployment Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders:
Evidence from High Frequency Claims Data.” Institute for
Research on Labor and Employment Working Paper 101–20.
http://​irle​.berkeley​.edu/​files/​2020/​07/​Unemployment​-Effects​
-of​-Stay​-at​-Home​-Orders​.pdf.
Baker, Scott R., R. A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel,
and Constantine Yannelis. 2020. “How Does Household
Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption during the
2020 COVID-19 Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper 26949,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020a. “Supply and Demand
in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to
the COVID-19 Crisis.” NBER Working Paper 27152, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020b. “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the COVID-19 Crisis.”
NBER Working Paper 27281, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2020.
“The Future of Working from Home.” Unpublished.
Barrios, John M., Efraim Benmelech, Yael V. Hochberg, Paola
Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2020. “Civic Capital and
Social Distancing during the COVID-19 Pandemic.” NBER
Working Paper 27320, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Barrot, Jean-Noël, Basile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat. 2020.
“Sectoral Effects of Social Distancing.” CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time Papers 3, Centre for Economic
Policy Research, London.
Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Feng Lin, Jesse
Rothstein, and Matthew Unrath. 2020. “Measuring the
Labor Market at the Onset of the COVID-19 Crisis.”
NBER Working Paper 27613, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Béland, Louis-Philippe, Abel Brodeur, and Taylor Wright. 2020.
“COVID-19, Stay-At-Home Orders, and Employment:
Evidence from CPS Data.” IZA Discussion Paper 13282,
Institute of Labor Economics, Bonn.
Bodenhorn, Howard. 2020. “Business at the Time of the
Spanish Influenza.” NBER Working Paper 27495, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bodenstein, Martin, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Luca Guerrieri.
2020. “Social Distancing and Supply Disruptions in a Pandemic.” CEPR Discussion Paper 14629, Centre for Economic
Policy Research, London.
Bonadio, Barthélémy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and
Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2020. “Global Supply Chains in the
Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper 27224, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Borjas, George J., and Hugh Cassidy. 2020. “The Adverse
Effect of the COVID-19 Labor Market Shock on Immigrant Employment.” NBER Working Paper 27243, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

81

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Born, Benjamin, Alexander M. Dietrich, and Gernot J. Müller.
2020. “Do Lockdowns Work? A Counterfactual for Sweden.”
CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time Papers 16,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Bricco, Jana, Florian Misch, Khaled Sakr, and Alexandra
Solovyeva. 2020. “What are the Economic Effects of
Pandemic Containment Policies? Evidence from Sweden.”
IMF Working Paper 20/191, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, John Grigsby,
Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, Erik Hurst, Christopher Kurz,
and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2020. “The US Labor Market during
the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession.” NBER Working Paper 27159, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Cakmaklı, Cam, Selva Demiralp, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Sevcan Yesiltas, and Muhammed A. Yildirim. 2020. “COVID-19
and Emerging Markets: An Epidemiological Model with
International Production Networks and Capital Flows.”
NBER Working Paper 27191, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Carletti, Elena, Tommaso Oliviero, Marco Pagano, Loriana
Pelizzon, and Marti G. Subrahmanyam. 2020. “The COVID-19
Shock and Equity Shortfall: Firm-Level Evidence from Italy.”
CEPR Discussion Paper 14831, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.
Carvalho, Vasco M., Stephen Hansen, Álvaro Ortiz, Juan Ramón
García, Tomasa Rodrigo, Sevi Rodriguez Mora, and José Ruiz.
2020. “Tracking the COVID-19 Crisis with High-Resolution
Transaction Data.” CEPR Discussion Paper 14642, Centre
for Economic Policy Research, London.
Checo, Ariadne, Francesco Grigoli, Jose M. Mota. 2020.
“Assessing Heterogeneous Containment Policies to Fight
COVID-19.” Unpublished.
Chen, Chen, Sudipto Dasgupta, Thanh D. Huynh, and Ying
Xia. 2020a. “Were Stay-at-Home Orders during COVID-19
Harmful for Business?–The Market’s View.” CEPR COVID
Economics Vetted and Real-Time Papers 32, Centre for
Economic Policy Research, London.
Chen, Sophia, Deniz Igan, Nicola Pierri, and Andrea Presbitero.
2020b. “Tracking the Economic Impact of COVID-19
and Mitigation Policies in Europe and the United States.”
IMF Working Paper 20/125, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Hiroyuki Kasahara, and Paul Schrimpf.
2020. “Causal Impact of Masks, Policies, Behavior on Early
COVID-19 Pandemic in the US.” CEPR COVID Economics
Vetted and Real-Time Papers 35, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael
Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team. 2020. “How
Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending
and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker

82

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Based on Private Sector Data.” NBER Working Paper 27431,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Chiou, Lesley, and Catherine Tucker. 2020. “Social Distancing,
Internet Access and Inequality.” NBER Working Paper 26982,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Chronopoulos, Dimitris K., Marcel Lukas, and John O. S.
Wilson. 2020. “Consumer Spending Responses to the
COVID-19 Pandemic: An Assessment of Great Britain.”
https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​3586723.
Ciminelli, Gabriele, and Silvia Garcia-Mandico. 2020. “Business
Shutdowns and COVID-19 Mortality.” Unpublished.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber.
2020. “The Cost of the COVID-19 Crisis: Lockdowns,
Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending.”
NBER Working Paper 27141, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Correia, Sergio, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner. 2020. “Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health Interventions
Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu.” https://​ssrn​.com/​
abstract​=​3561560.
Dave, Dhaval M., Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa,
Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2020a. “Did the
Wisconsin Supreme Court Restart a COVID-19 Epidemic?
Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” NBER Working
Paper 27322, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Dave, Dhaval M., Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and
Joseph J. Sabia. 2020b. “When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders
Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity across States
and Adoption Time.” NBER Working Paper 27091, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Davis, Lucas W. 2008. “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on
Air Quality in Mexico City.” Journal of Political Economy
116 (1): 38–81.
Deb, Pragyan, Davide Furceri, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Nour
Tawk. 2020a. “The Effect of Containment Measures on the
COVID-19 Pandemic.” CEPR Discussion Paper 15086,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Deb, Pragyan, Davide Furceri, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Nour Tawk.
2020b. “The Economic Effects of COVID-19 Containment
Measures.” CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time
Papers 24, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Del Boca, Daniela, Noemi Oggero, Paola Profeta, and Maria
Cristina Rossi. 2020. “Women’s Work, Housework and
Childcare, before and during COVID-19.” IZA Discussion
Paper 13409, Institute of Labor Economics, Bonn.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Michael Lokshin, and Iván Torre. 2020.
“The Sooner, the Better: The Early Economic Impact of
Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions during the COVID-19
Pandemic” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 9257.
di Porto, Edoardo, Paolo Naticchioni, Vincenzo Scrutinio. 2020.
“Partial lockdown and the spread of COVID-19: Lessons
from the Italian case” Unpublished.

CHAPTER 2

Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. 2020.
“Social Distancing and Social Capital: Why US Counties
Respond Differently to COVID-19.” https://​ssrn​.com/​
abstract​=​3624495.
Dingel, Jonathan, and Brent Neiman. 2020. “How Many Jobs
Can Be Done at Home?” NBER Working Paper 26948,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt.
2020. “The Macroeconomics of Epidemics.” NBER Working
Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Fadinger, Harald, and Jan Schymik. 2020. “The Costs and
Benefits of Home Office during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Evidence from Infections and an Input-Output
Model for Germany.” CEPR COVID Economics Vetted
and Real-Time Papers 9, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.
Fairlie, Robert W., Kenneth Couch, and Huanan Xu. 2020.
“The Impacts of COVID-19 on Minority Unemployment:
First Evidence from April 2020 CPS Microdata.” NBER
Working Paper 27246, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fang, Hanming, Long Wang, and Yang. 2020. “Human Mobility Restrictions and the Spread of the Novel Coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) in China.” NBER Working Paper 26906,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. 2020.
“Internal and External Effects of Social Distancing in a
Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper 27059, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Favero, Carlo A., Andrea Ichino, and Aldo Rustichini.
2020. “Restarting the Economy while Saving Lives under
COVID-19.” CEPR Discussion Paper 14664, Centre for
Economic Policy Research, London.
Friedson, Andrew I., Drew McNichols, Joseph J. Sabia, and
Dhaval Dave. 2020. “Did California’s Shelter-in-Place Order
Work? Early Coronavirus-Related Public Health Effects.”
NBER Working Paper 26992, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gapen, Michael, Jonathan Millar, Blerina Uruçi, and Pooja
Sriram. 2020. “Assessing the Effectiveness of Alternative Measures to Slow the Spread of COVID-19 in the United States.”
CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time Papers 40,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Glaeser, Edward L., Caitlin S. Gorback, and Stephen J. Redding.
2020. “How Much Does COVID-19 Increase with Mobility? Evidence From New York and Four Other US Cities.”
NBER Working Paper 27519, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Glaeser, Edward L., Ginger Zhe Jin, Benjamin T. Leyden,
and Michael Luca. 2020. “Learning from Deregulation:
The Asymmetric Impact of Lockdown and Reopening
on Risky Behavior During COVID-19.” NBER Working

THE GREAT LOCKDOWN: DISSECTING THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS

Paper 27650, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Chad Syverson. 2020. “Fear, Lockdown,
and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of Pandemic Economic
Decline 2020.” NBER Working Paper 27432, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gottlieb, Charles, Jan Grobovšek, Markus Poschke, and Fernando Saltiel. 2020. “Lockdown Accounting.” IZA Discussion Paper 13397, Institute of Labor ­Economics, Bonn.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Veronika
Penciakova, and Nick Sander. 2020. “COVID-19 and SME
Failures.” IMF Working Paper 20/207, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and
Iván Werning. 2020. “Macroeconomic Implications of
COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand
Shortages?” NBER Working Paper 26918, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gupta, Sumedha, Laura Montenovo, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe
Lozano Rojas, Ian M. Schmutte, Kosali I. Simon, Bruce A.
­Weinberg, and Coady Wing. 2020. “Effects of Social Distancing Policy on Labor Market Outcomes.” NBER Working
Paper 27280, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Hausman, Catherine, and David S. Rapson. 2018. “Regression Discontinuity in Time: Considerations for Empirical
Applications.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 10 (1):
533–52.
Imai, Natsuko, Katy A. M. Gaythorpe, Sam Abbott, Sangeeta
Bhatia, Sabine van Elsland, Kiesha Prem, Yang Liu,
and Neil M. Ferguson. 2020. “Adoption and Impact
of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions for COVID-19.”
Wellcome Open Research 5:59. https://​doi​.org/​10​.12688/​
wellcomeopenres​.15808​.1.
Inoue, Hiroyasu, and Yasuyuki Todo. 2020. “The Propagation of
the Economic Impact through Supply Chains: The Case of a
Mega-City Lockdown to Contain the Spread of COVID-19.”
CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time Papers 2,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Jinjarak, Yothin, Rashad Ahmed, Sameer Nair-Desai, Weining
Xin, and Joshua Aizenman. 2020. “Accounting for Global
COVID-19 Diffusion Patterns, January-April 2020.” NBER
Working Paper 27185, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Jones, Callum J., Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran.
2020. “Optimal Mitigation Policies in a Pandemic: Social
Distancing and Working from Home.” NBER Working
Paper 26984, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Kahn, Lisa, Fabian Lange, and David Wiczer. 2020. “Labor
Demand in the Time of COVID-19: Evidence from Vacancy
Postings and UI Claims.” NBER Working Paper 27061,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

83

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Luca Sartorio. 2020. “Take Me
Out: De Facto Limits on Strict Lockdowns in Developing
Countries.” CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and
Real-Time Papers 39, Centre for Economic Policy
Research, London.
Lilley, Andrew, Matthew Lilley, and Gianluca Rinaldi. 2020.
“Public Health Interventions and Economic Growth: Revisiting the Spanish Flu Evidence.” https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​
3590008Documentos de Trabajo Gobierno Nro 8.
Maloney, William, and Temel Taskin. 2020. “Determinants of
Social Distancing and Economic Activity during COVID-19:
A Global View.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
9242, Washington, DC.
Mongey, Simon, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg. 2020.
“Which Workers Bear the Burden of Social Distancing
Policies?” NBER Working Paper 27085, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Palomino, Juan C., Juan G. Rodríguez, and Raquel Sebastian.
2020. “Wage Inequality and Poverty Effects of Lockdown
and Social Distancing in Europe.” SSRN. https://​ssrn​.com/​
abstract​=​3615615.
Papanikolaou, Dimitris, and Lawrence D. W. Schmidt.
2020. “Working Remotely and the Supply-Side Impact of
COVID-19.” NBER Working Paper 27330, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

84

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Pierri, Nicola, and Yannick Timmer. 2020. “IT Shields:
Technology Adoption and Economic Resilience during
the COVID-19 Pandemic.” IMF Working Paper 20/208,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Pulejo, Massimo, and Pablo Querubín. 2020. “Electoral Concerns Reduce Restrictive Measures during the COVID-19
Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper 27498, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Schivardi, Fabiano, and Guido Romano. 2020. “A Simple
Method to Estimate Firms Liquidity Needs during the
COVID-19 Crisis with an Application to Italy.” CEPR
COVID Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers 35, Centre
for Economic Policy Research, London.
Shibata, Ippei. 2020. “The Distributional Impact of Recessions:
The Global Financial Crisis and the Pandemic Recession.”
IMF Working Paper 20/96, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
von Carnap, Tillmann, Ingvild Almås, Tessa Bold, Selene
Ghisolfi, and Justin Sandefur. 2020. “The Macroeconomics
of Pandemics in Developing Countries: An Application to
Uganda.” CEPR COVID Economics Vetted and Real-Time
Papers 27, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Yilmazkuday, Hakan. 2020. “Stay-at-Home Works to Fight
against COVID-19: International Evidence from Google
Mobility Data.” https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​3571708.

CHAPTER

3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND
DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Without further action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the planet is on course to reach temperatures not
seen in millions of years, with potentially catastrophic
implications. The analysis in this chapter suggests that
an initial green investment push combined with steadily
rising carbon prices would deliver the needed emission
reductions at reasonable transitional global output
effects, putting the global economy on a stronger and
more sustainable footing over the medium term. Carbon
pricing is critical to mitigation because higher carbon
prices incentivize energy efficiency besides reallocating resources from high- to low-carbon activities. A
green investment push up front would strengthen the
macroeconomy in the short term and help lower the
costs of adjusting to higher carbon prices. The transitional costs of carbon pricing consistent with net zero
emissions by mid-century appear manageable and
could be reduced further as new technological innovations develop in response to carbon pricing and green
research and development subsidies. Governments can
protect those most affected by mitigation by providing
targeted cash transfers financed by carbon revenues.

Introduction
Global warming continues apace. The increase in the
average temperature over the surface of the planet since
the industrial revolution is estimated at about 1°C and
is believed to be accelerating. Each successive decade
since the 1980s has been warmer than the previous
one, the past five years (2015–19) were the warmest
ever reported, and 2019 was likely the second-warmest
year on record. Rising pressure on Earth systems is
already evident from more frequent weather-related

The authors of this chapter are Philip Barrett, Christian Bogmans,
Benjamin Carton, Johannes Eugster, Florence Jaumotte (lead), Adil
Mohommad, Evgenia Pugacheva, Marina M. Tavares, and Simon
Voigts, in collaboration with external consultants Warwick McKibbin
and Weifeng Liu for modeling simulations, and with contributions
from Thomas Brand. Srijoni Banerjee, Eric Bang, and Jaden Kim
provided research support, and Daniela Rojas Fernandez provided
editorial assistance.

natural disasters.1 Global sea levels are rising, and
evidence is mounting that the world is closer to abrupt
and irreversible changes—so-called tipping points—
than previously thought (Lenton and others 2019).
Scientific studies attribute most of global warming to emissions of greenhouse gases associated with
human activity, especially from the carbon released by
burning fossil fuels (IPCC 2014, 2018a) (see Box 3.1
for a glossary).2 Scientists have warned that temperature increases relative to preindustrial levels need to
be kept well below 2°C—and ideally 1.5°C—to avoid
reaching climate tipping points and imposing severe
stress on natural and socioeconomic systems (IPCC
2014, 2018a). The objective of limiting temperature
increases by 2100 to 1.5°C–2°C was endorsed worldwide by policymakers in the 2015 Paris Agreement.
Sizable and rapid reductions in carbon emissions are
needed for this goal to be met; specifically, net carbon
emissions need to decline to zero by mid-century
(IPCC 2014, 2018a). This means that carbon emissions must be eliminated or that any remaining carbon
emissions must be removed from the atmosphere by
natural (for example, forests and oceans) or artificial
(for example, carbon capture and storage) sinks. Even
with such drastic reductions, temperatures may temporarily overshoot the target until the stock of accumulated carbon in the atmosphere is sufficiently reduced
by absorption by carbon sinks.
1See

also Chapter 2 of the April 2020 Sub-Saharan Africa Regional
Economic Outlook, Chapter 3 of the October 2017 World Economic
Outlook, and Kahn and others (2019). Adaptation policies are
another critical element of the strategy to reduce losses from climate
change and, in some cases, can overlap with mitigation policies (such
as for the preservation of rain forests). However, these are beyond the
scope of this chapter.
2Greenhouse gas is any gas that contributes to the greenhouse
effect by absorbing infrared radiation (net heat energy) emitted from
Earth’s surface and radiating it back to Earth’s surface. These gases
include carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated
gases. The chapter focuses on carbon emissions from the consumption of fossil fuels, which is a main driver of human-made
greenhouse gas emissions. IMF (2019) discusses policies to reduce
other important sources of greenhouse gas emissions beyond domestic fossil fuel CO2 emissions (forestry, agriculture, methane leaks,
industrial process emissions, F-gases, international aviation/maritime
emissions).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

85

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Tangible policy responses to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions have been grossly insufficient to date.3 While
the COVID-19 crisis has reduced emissions, it is already
evident that this decline will be only temporary. Under
unchanged policies, emissions will continue to rise
relentlessly, and global temperatures could increase by
an additional 2–5°C by the end of this century, reaching
levels not seen in millions of years, imposing growing
physical and economic damage, and increasing the risk
of catastrophic outcomes across the planet (Figure 3.1).4
Damages from climate change include (but are not
limited to) lower productivity due to changes in the
yield of agricultural crops and fish farming and hotter
temperatures for people working outside; more frequent
disruption of economic activity and greater physical
destruction of productive capital, infrastructure, and
buildings as a result of more frequent and severe natural
disasters and (for coastal areas) the rise in sea levels;
deterioration of health and possible loss of life due to
natural disasters and increased prevalence of infectious
diseases; and diversion of resources toward adaptation
and reconstruction (see, for example, Batten 2018).5
The response of temperatures to the accumulated
stock of carbon emissions in the atmosphere (“climate
sensitivity”) and the damages that can be expected for
given temperature increases are subject to uncertainty;
many of the damages—including damages to the natural
world and catastrophic risk—are also insufficiently
captured by existing estimates, which are based on small
historical variations in temperatures. Nevertheless, by all
estimates, damages are expected to be substantial, and
more recent studies that take account of the possibility
3For most countries, the Nationally Determined Contributions
pledged under the Paris Agreement are deemed insufficient to meet
either the 1.5°C or the 2°C target, and, judging by current policies,
unlikely to be met in the first place (see Climate Action Tracker
Warming Projections Global Update—December 2019). Views about
the shortfalls of stated policies have been echoed by others, such as
the International Energy Agency, which points out that significantly
more ambitious policies are needed to reach the targets (IEA 2019).
4Absent climate change mitigation policies or massive migration,
one-third of the global population could experience mean annual
temperatures above 29°C by 2070. Such temperatures are currently
found in only 0.8 percent of Earth’s land surface, mostly in Africa,
and are projected to cover 19 percent of land by 2070 (Xu and
others 2020).
5Climate change will also complicate the management of macroeconomic stability, as climatic changes and natural disasters increase
output and price volatility and, with the costs of natural disasters—
from reconstruction to investment in adaptation—put pressure on
fiscal sustainability. Last but not least, it will increase poverty and
inequality because lower-income countries and lower-income people
in any given country tend to be not only more exposed to but also
less able to handle shocks or adapt to climate change.

86

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 3.1. Risks from Unmitigated Climate Change
Under the current trajectory of emissions, the probability of keeping global
warming below 1.5°C would drop to 50 percent in about 15 years. Global
temperatures under business-as-usual would increase to levels not seen in
millions of years, triggering substantial income losses and raising the risk of
catastrophic outcomes.

1,600 1. Cumulative Emissions
(Gigatons of CO2)
1,400
Baseline
1,200
IPCC AR5: 66 percent chance of <1.5°C
IPCC AR5: 50 percent chance of <1.5°C
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
2020

30

40

50

7 2. Temperature under “Business-as-Usual”
(Degrees Celsius above preindustrial average)
6
Medium climate sensitivity
Range from low to high climate sensitivity
5
1.5°C
4
3
2
1
0
2010

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

2100

70

80

90

2100

10 3. Output Losses of Climate Change
(Percent)
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
2010

Burke-Hsiang-Miguel costs,
baseline climate sensitivity
Low to high climate sensitivity
Nordhaus economic costs,
baseline climate sensitivity
Low to high climate sensitivity

20

30

40

50

60

Sources: Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015; IPCC 2014, 2018a; Nordhaus 2010; and
IMF staff estimates.
Note: Baseline in panel 1 represents cumulative emissions under the unmitigated
climate change scenario based on the G-Cubed model; dashed lines correspond to
the emission ceilings needed to limit global warming. AR5 = the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Panel 2 shows
global average temperature under business-as-usual. Solid line assumes a climate
sensitivity (the long-term increase in temperature caused by a long-term doubling
of the atmospheric carbon stock) of 3; the shaded area assumes a range of
climate sensitivity from 1.5 to 4.5 (see Heal 2017; Hassler, Krusell, and Olovsson
2018). Panel 3 shows economic losses from climate change relative to holding
temperatures ﬁxed at current levels. Solid lines assume a climate sensitivity of 3;
the shaded area assumes a range from 1.5 to 4.5 (see Heal 2017; Hassler, Krusell,
and Olovsson 2018). Economic costs of given temperature rises are based on
either Nordhaus (2010) or Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015).

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

of nonlinear effects and long-lasting reductions in economic growth (for example, Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel
2015) point to much higher damages than previously
projected. Various changes that global warming is setting
in motion, such as the melting of the ice caps and rise
in sea levels, and the acidification of oceans could themselves reinforce global warming and would be very hard
to reverse over human timescales (IPCC 2014, 2018a).
The COVID-19 crisis creates both challenges
and opportunities for the climate change mitigation
agenda. Though mitigation is likely to boost incomes
in the long term by limiting damages and severe
physical risks, the economic transformation it requires
may lower growth during the transition, especially in
countries heavily reliant on fossil fuel exports and in
those with rapid economic and population growth.
The current global recession makes it more challenging
to enact the policies needed for mitigation and raises
the urgency of understanding how mitigation can be
achieved in an employment- and growth-friendly way
and with protection for the poor. However, there are
also opportunities in the current context to put the
economy on a greener path (see also the October 2020
Fiscal Monitor).6 The crisis has led to a major retrenchment in investment and policies can seek to ensure
that the composition of the recovery in capital spending is consistent with decarbonization by providing
correct price signals and other financial incentives. In
addition, fiscal stimulus—which will likely be needed
in the aftermath of the pandemic—can be an opportunity to boost green and resilient public infrastructure.
This chapter takes the goal of reducing net carbon emissions to zero by 2050 as given and looks at
possible ways of designing mitigation policies, being
mindful of constraints related to political feasibility.7
Specifically, the chapter asks the following two
questions:
•• Which combination of policy tools—carbon pricing,
a public and private investment push, research and
development subsidies—would allow the world
6For discussions on this, see Batini and others (2020), Bhattacharya
and Rydge (2020), Black and Parry (2020), Hepburn and others (2020)
and Chapter 5 of the October 2020 Global Financial Stability Report.
7Almost all countries are revising their climate strategies under
the Paris Agreement (Nationally Determined Contributions) ahead
of the 2021 UN Climate Change Conference (COP 26) meeting.
About 70 countries have committed to net zero emissions by 2050.
Under net zero emissions, positive emissions would need to be offset
by negative emissions (such as co-firing biofuels in power generation
with carbon capture and storage, expanding forest carbon storage,
and direct air capture technologies).

to reach net zero carbon emissions by 2050 in
a growth-, employment-, and distribution-friendly
way?
•• Can well-designed and sequenced mitigation
policies help with the economic repair from the
COVID-19 crisis?
While issues of international coordination are
important, the depth of emission reductions targeted in this chapter (reaching net zero emissions)
limits the room for differentiation of mitigation
efforts across countries, especially across the large
ones. Each country/region is thus assumed to reduce
emissions to the same extent (with the exception of a
group of selected oil-exporting and other economies
where emissions are assumed to remain at current
levels).
A deep decarbonization of human activity will
require both energy efficiency and the share of
low-carbon sources in energy supply to increase radically more than in recent decades. Incentivizing these
changes will require carbon-intensive energy to become
much more expensive relative to both low-carbon
energy and other goods and services than it is today.
Fossil fuels are now massively underpriced, reflecting
undercharging for production and environmental
costs—including for air pollution and global warming. Coady and others (2019) estimate global energy
subsidies—the gap between existing and efficient prices
(that is, prices warranted by supply costs, environmental costs, and revenue considerations)—at a striking
$4.7 trillion in 2015, or about 6.3 percent of global
GDP. A narrower subsidy measure, reflecting only
differences between the amount consumers actually pay
for fuel use and the corresponding opportunity cost of
supplying the fuel, was estimated by Coady and others
(2019) at $305 billion globally in 2015.
Governments can use various measures to raise the
relative price of carbon-intensive activities. The first
set of policies consists of raising the price of carbon
through either carbon taxes or carbon emission trading
programs to price the emission externality. Correctly
pricing carbon would reduce its use while boosting the
supply of low-carbon alternatives. While the chapter
focuses on a carbon tax as a way to raise carbon prices,
introducing feebates or imposing direct mandates and
regulations on emissions are alternative or complementary tools that are less efficient but raise the implicit
price of carbon and may face less political resistance
(see the October 2019 Fiscal Monitor for a discussion
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

87

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

of efficiency/feasibility trade-offs).8 The second set of
policies directly aims at making low-carbon energy
sources more abundant and cheaper and tackles
broader market failures (such as knowledge spillovers,
network externalities, and scale economies) in their
provision. The toolkit for this approach includes
subsidies and price guarantees to increase demand,
investment, and supply in the low-carbon energy
sector; direct public investment in low-carbon technologies and infrastructure; and research and development
subsidies to spur innovation.9
Other policy options include the further development and adoption of negative emission technologies,
such as carbon capture and storage, which are assumed
to play a role in the modeling of emission reduction
strategies in the chapter, and solar radiation modification measures, which can be effective in theory but in
practice involve large uncertainties, risks, and knowledge gaps.10
The optimal mix and sequencing of mitigation
policy tools, along with their macroeconomic
implications, are still matters of much debate. Some
commentators argue that reining in climate change
through carbon pricing, while boosting output and
welfare in the long term, could weaken growth in
the short to medium term, as higher energy prices
raise living costs (especially for the poor), displace
workers, and reduce profits in carbon-intensive
activities. However, some of these effects can be
reduced if carbon pricing revenues are used to
boost growth (for example, through funding productive investment or reducing distortionary taxes).
Others stress the possibility of “green growth,”
8Feebates are sectoral measures (for example, on transport, industry, or power) that impose a sliding scale of fees on firms/goods with
emission rates (for example, CO2 per kilowatt-hour) above a “pivot
point” level and corresponding subsidies for firms/goods with emission rates below the pivot point. They are a hybrid between carbon
pricing and green supply policies and may be more politically acceptable as they avoid an increase in the price of energy. Feebates can be
used on their own or play a reinforcing role by complementing other
instruments (see the October 2019 Fiscal Monitor).
9A broad package of measures is likely ideal, as the two types of
policies can be expected to work in synergy. For instance, higher
carbon prices would be more acceptable to the public—and so more
sustainable—if low-carbon energy sources were available at a reasonable cost. Conversely, subsidies may not encourage strong private
investment in low-carbon technologies if they are not coupled with
expectations of a sufficiently high carbon price in the future.
10Solar radiation modification attempts to offset the warming
from emissions accumulated in the atmosphere, while carbon capture
and storage directly limits atmospheric greenhouse gas accumulation.

88

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

arguing that government support for sustainable
investment and technologies—together with higher
expected carbon prices—can stimulate activity in the
short to medium term through higher net investment, especially when the economy is operating
below potential.11 Another argument is that decarbonization policies focused on innovation policy
(such as research subsidies) could trigger waves of
technological change that would boost productivity
and growth in the medium to long term.
This chapter approaches these questions in three
ways. The first takes stock of the mitigation policies
implemented in a large sample of countries over the
past 25 years or so, and examines their roles in the
shift from high- to low-carbon activities and what
impact that had on overall activity. The analysis focuses
on the power sector, which was the target of many of
these policies. The second uses three macroeconomic
models to examine mitigation policies needed to get to
net zero emissions by 2050 and how to design them
to be as growth friendly as possible. The third part
of the approach examines the distributional effects of
mitigation policies by modeling their impact on both
consumption and labor income of households. It also
looks at different ways of using carbon revenues to
mitigate the adverse effects on those whose livelihoods
would be the most affected.
The chapter finds that climate change mitigation policies have made important contributions to
reallocating innovation, electricity generation, and
employment toward low-carbon activities, broadly
without harming overall activity. Supported by these
empirical results, the chapter’s model simulations
suggest that getting to net zero emissions by 2050
is still within reach, though the window to keep
temperature increases to safe levels is closing rapidly.
This would put the global economy on a sustainable
growth path in the second half of the century and
11While the terms “low” and “high” carbon refer to a specific
metric (CO2), the term “green” originates in the environment
literature and generally refers to activities that have a (very) small
impact on the environment. While “green” is commonly used to
refer to low-carbon activities, these may not be strictly green, but
just greener. For instance, wind and solar are low-carbon energy
sources, but they are land and resource/material intensive. The
same holds for other low-carbon sources of energy, such as hydro
or nuclear power, which points to the issue of problem-shifting
in a world characterized by multiple environmental problems.
“Renewable energy” refers to wind and solar energy and to the
fact that these technologies do not require fossil fuels, which are
nonrenewable on human timescales.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

beyond and immediately yield substantial domestic
co-benefits from mitigation policies—mainly
thanks to reduced mortality and morbidity from less
environmental pollution.12 An initial green investment
push combined with initially moderate and gradually
rising carbon prices would deliver the needed emission
reductions at reasonable output effects. A green fiscal
stimulus would support global GDP and employment
during the recovery from the COVID-19 crisis and
lay the ground for higher carbon prices by boosting
productivity in low-carbon sectors. As the recovery
takes hold, preannounced and gradually rising carbon
prices become a powerful tool to deliver the quick and
substantial reductions in carbon emissions required to
reach net zero emissions by 2050.
Along the transition, higher carbon prices would
entail global output losses, but these losses would
be moderate relative to the expected income gains
from avoided climate damage in the second half of
the century and beyond. Growth in the medium and
long term will be harmed considerably unless climate
change is addressed, making the benefits from mitigation much higher than the temporary benefits from
inaction.13 The transitional economic costs would be
reduced further if new low-carbon technologies were
developed, and a strong case can be made to complement early on the innovation incentives sparked by
carbon pricing with green research and development
subsidies that help remove obstacles to developing new
technologies.
The economic costs of the low-carbon transition differ across the world. Countries with fast economic and
population growth (such as India and, to a lesser extent,
China), those with heavy reliance on high-carbon
energy (such as China), and most oil producers are
likely to bear larger transition costs. However, for
fast-growing countries, these costs remain small given
their projected growth over the next 30 years (even
under mitigation) and need to be weighed against
substantial avoided damage from climate change and
co-benefits from climate change mitigation, such as
reduced local pollution and mortality rates. If advanced
economies were to enact mitigation policies on their
own, they would not be able to keep global emissions
and temperature increases to safe levels; joint action
12See Parry, Veung, and Heine (2015) and the October 2019
Fiscal Monitor for details on the unilateral costs and domestic net
benefits of a $50/ton carbon tax in the Group of Twenty countries.
13See also Stern (2007) and Hassler, Krusell, and Olovsson (2018).

by the largest economies is critical to avoid the worst
outcomes of climate change. For fossil fuel producers,
the required diversification of their economies will be
difficult, but many of them also stand to benefit from
global climate change mitigation.
Finally, whereas carbon pricing would disproportionately affect poorer households, recycling one-sixth
to one-quarter of carbon revenues as targeted transfers
could fully compensate the poorest 20 percent of
households. Fully compensating the poorest 40 percent
of households would require recycling between 40
and 55 percent of the carbon revenues. In addition,
some limited government spending on low-carbon
sectors would support job transitions from high-carbon
to low-carbon sectors. Conscious and determined
action by governments to build inclusion will be key
to enhance the social and political acceptability of
the transition.

The Mitigation Toolkit: How Have Policies
Worked So Far?
Global innovation and investment in clean energy
technologies have increased dramatically over the past
two decades or so amid tightening environmental
policies (Figure 3.2, panel 1).14 Environmental policies
cover a range of instruments used to varying degrees.
Emission limits, notably for power (electricity) plants,
and research and development subsidies (“nonmarket
instruments”) have been widely used since the 1990s
and have become more stringent over time. The use of
“market instruments,” such as trading programs and
feed-in tariffs, has picked up since the early 2000s,
whereas carbon taxes have yet to become binding constraints in most countries (Figure 3.2, panel 2).15

14This chapter uses the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development’s Environmental Policy Stringency Index, as
published in OECD (2018). For more details, see Botta and
Koźluk (2014).
15Under feed-in tariffs, producers of renewable electricity are
offered long-term contracts that guarantee a fixed price for every unit
of electricity delivered to the grid. Trading programs include green
and white certificates and those covering emissions of various pollutants. Green and white certificates are titles, respectively, for reaching
renewable energy targets (portfolio standards) or energy-saving
targets. In an emission trading program, a fixed number of emission
permits is allocated or sold by a central institution, and the price
adjusts to supply and demand. In contrast, a tax on carbon (or other
pollutants) defines a price, or more precisely a markup, and lets the
quantity of emissions adjust.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

89

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 3.2. Environmental Policies and Share of Clean
Innovation and Electricity Generation
Clean innovation and electricity generation increased largely in line with tightening
environmental policies. The use of carbon taxes has been very limited historically.

3.0 1. Clean Innovation, Electricity Generation, and Policies
(Index; percent on right scale)
2.5
EPS, average
CCM innovation, share of total (right scale)
2.0
Share of renewable investment in electricity
generation (right scale)
1.5

6

1.0

2

0.5

1

0.0
1990

95

2000

05

10

5
4
3

0
15

5 2. Average Policy Stringency for Selected Environmental Policies
(Index)
CO2 taxes
Trading
4
Limits
Feed-in tariffs
R&D subsidies
3
2
1
0
1990

95

2000

05

10

15

Sources: International Energy Agency; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; Worldwide Patent Statistical Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CCM innovation = patents in climate change mitigating technologies;
EPS = environmental policy stringency index.

Over the same period, clean energy innovation
(measured by patent applications)16 doubled in share of
total energy innovation; and clean electricity innovation
now accounts for half of total electricity innovation in
the top five innovating countries (up from 15 percent
in 1990). The global share of solar and wind power in
electricity generation has also increased substantially,
from virtually zero in 2000 to 6 ½ percent in 2020, with
much higher shares in some European Union countries.
Furthermore, the transition in electricity generation
16The analysis focuses on clean innovation in the energy sector,
given the sector’s important contribution to total emissions and
innovation in clean technologies and its direct exposure to most
of the environmental policies analyzed. Clean energy innovation is
defined here as the number of patent applications in climate change
mitigation technologies related to energy generation, transmission, or
distribution, as classified by Haščič and Migotto (2015).

90

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

is accelerating: whereas the global renewable share was
increasing at a pace of ½ percentage point a year by
2010, that number reached 1 percentage point by 2016.
Econometric analysis suggests that the tightening of
environmental policies in many countries has played an
important role in the changing composition of energy
sector innovation and investment toward low-carbon
activities (Figure 3.3; Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.2).17
Specifically, more stringent environmental policies are
estimated to have contributed to the following:
•• Thirty percent of the increase in global clean energy
innovation, equivalent to the effect of a permanent rise in oil prices of $66 a barrel. Higher oil
prices explain the rest of the increase up to 2010,
though this reversed after 2010. In the electricity
sector, environmental policies increased the share of
innovation in clean and “gray” electricity technologies (gray innovations reduce the pollution of dirty
technologies) at the expense of dirty technologies.18
Environmental policies contributed to more electricity innovation overall (Figure 3.3, panel 1).
•• Fifty-five percent of the increase in the share of
renewables in electricity generation. Tighter environmental policies were associated with declines in the
share of coal and an ambiguous effect on the share
of natural gas—often a complement to renewable
energy (Figure 3.3, panel 2). The intermittent nature
of renewables requires backup power in the form of
batteries or generators that can dispatch electricity to
the grid quickly, such as from hydroelectric or natural
gas power plants. By and large, environmental policies do not appear to be associated with a discernible
negative impact on total electricity generation.
Various policy instruments are found to be effective in spurring both innovation and investment
in renewables.
•• Both market and nonmarket policies—in particular
research and development subsidies, trading programs, emission limits, and feed-in tariffs—were
effective in spurring clean innovation. Oil prices
17The analyses cover about 30 advanced economies and emerging
market economies during 1990–2015. While the specifications
differ somewhat, they generally control for constant country-specific
factors and global dynamics (through country and year fixed effects),
changes in energy prices, oil and gas reserves, and regulatory changes.
All annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WEO.
18Examples of gray technologies include those that allow the
use of heat from fuel or waste incineration or fuels from nonfossil
sources. See Dechezleprêtre, Martin, and Mohnen (2017) for details
on the classification.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Figure 3.3. Effect of Policy Tightening on Electricity
Innovation, Electricity Generation, and Employment, by Type
of Technology
More stringent environmental policies stimulated innovation in climatechange-mitigating energy technologies and raised the share of renewable
electricity generation. They also raised employment in the “green” sectors and
lowered it in the “brown” sectors.

30 1. Effect on Shares of Technology in Electricity
Innovation and Total Innovation
25
(Percent)
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
Clean share
Gray share
Dirty share

Total

0.6 2. Effect on Shares of Primary Energy Source in
Electricity Generation and Total Electricity Generation
0.4
(Percentage points; megawatt hour per capita for
electricity total)
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4

Feed-in tariffs

Trading scheme

Solar/wind/bio Natural gas Solar/wind/bio Natural gas
Coal
Electricity total
Coal
Electricity total

Market

Overall EPS

Nonmarket

Market

Overall EPS

Transport

Construction

Services

High-emission
industries
Low-emission
industries

Fossil fuels

15 3. Effect on Employment, by Sector and Emission Intensity
(Percent change)
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
HighLow–20
emission
emission
Sectors
–25
ﬁrms
ﬁrms
–30

Nonmarket

–0.6

Sources: Dechezleprêtre, Martin, and Mohnen 2017; International Energy Agency;
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Penn World Tables;
Worldscope database; Worldwide Patent Statistical Database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: All panels show point estimate and 90 percent conﬁdence bands. Panel 1
shows the effect of a one-unit tightening in the environmental policy index on
innovation in the respective types and total electricity innovation. Panel 2 shows
the effect of a one-unit tightening in the policy indicator on the electricity share of
the respective primary energy sources and on total electricity generation per
capita. Panel 3 shows the effect of tightening policies by one standard deviation
on employment. The six bars on the left show the impact of tightening
market-based policies on employment among ﬁrms in select sectors. The six bars
on the right show the impact of tightening aggregate, market-based, and
non-market-based policies, respectively, on employment in ﬁrms with high (low)
CO2 emissions intensity (based on a smaller sample of ﬁrms that report CO2
emissions). EPS = environmental policy stringency.

were also found to be important determinants
of clean energy innovation.19 Whereas both the
tightening in environmental policies and rising oil
prices contributed to boosting clean energy innovation up to 2010, the expansion of clean innovation has stalled since then. This has coincided
with the partial reversal of regulatory tightening
and the shale oil and gas boom in the United
States, which capped oil price increases.20 Popp
and others (2020) also point to the possible role
of an earlier clean-tech bubble and falling returns
on clean innovation. Though the estimated effect
of higher carbon prices was far from statistically
significant—likely reflecting limited take-up of
this instrument and limited statistical power—the
significant impact of oil prices on clean innovation suggests that policies that increase the cost
of dirty energy may be a strong incentive for
clean innovation.
•• Instruments that seem to have a clear positive
impact on investment in renewable electricity
generation are feed-in tariffs and trading programs (which include green certificates to achieve
renewable portfolio standards and carbon emission trading programs).21 Green certificate programs are being phased out in several countries,
and carbon tax and carbon trading programs are
expected to become more important. As the share
of renewables in electricity generation increases,
addressing their intermittency will become increasingly relevant, likely requiring significant public
investment in grids and innovation (such as storage
technologies).
Finally, the analysis examined the impact of tighter
environmental policies on employment in high- and
low-carbon sectors (see Online Annex 3.3). A concern
with decarbonization policies is that they will lead to
job losses in carbon-intensive activities, such as coal
mining, shale oil and gas production, carbon-intensive

19The estimation of the effect of oil prices relies on a separate
regression, with identical controls but without year fixed effects.
20Acemoglu and others (2019) discusses how the shale gas revolution has set back clean innovation.
21Under feed-in tariffs, producers of renewable electricity are
offered long-term contracts that guarantee a fixed price for every unit
of electricity delivered to the grid. Green certificates are a means to
implement government-mandated renewable portfolio standards,
measured as the percentage of electricity that utilities need to source
from renewables.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

91

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

manufacturing, or transportation.22 But the net effect of
decarbonization policies on jobs also depends on how
many new jobs are created in low-carbon activities, in
the energy sector (such as solar and wind power generation), and in the economy more broadly. Production in
renewable energy is more job intensive than electricity
generation based on fossil fuels (see below).23 But the
substitution may not be full (given that mitigation
policies curb emissions in part through reduced energy
demand and intensity), and the net effect can be
insignificant or negative. Evidence from firms suggests that job losses in some high-emission sectors (for
example, high-emission manufacturing, transportation)
in response to tighter environmental policies can be
offset by job creation in some low-emission sectors (for
example, low-emission manufacturing and services).24
The net effect on aggregate jobs is typically small and
indeterminate, depending on the extent of substitution
between high- and low-emission activities (Figure 3.3,
panel 3).25 In general, the job effects seem larger and
net negative in response to changes in nonmarket policies, whereas market policies, such as feed-in tariffs and
trading programs, have a more muted and net positive
effect. The impact on fossil fuel industry employment
is not significant and reflects the opposing effects of
tax-based policies (negative) and trading-based policies
(positive). All in all, the evidence indicates that environmental policies have succeeded in reallocating jobs from
high- to low-carbon sectors. However, job transitions
can involve costs for the workers affected, and it will
be important to examine distributional consequences
arising from the labor market effects of climate policies
(see the “How to Build Inclusion” section).
22The literature suggests that tighter climate change mitigation
policies, such as carbon taxation, have led to job losses among
the low-skilled and workers in high-emission industries, though
effects on overall employment are less clear. See Kahn (1997) and
Yamazaki (2017) for employment effects across different sectors, Yip
(2018) and Marin and Vona (2019) for effects across skill types, and
Metcalf and Stock (2020) for aggregate employment effects. Notably,
Yamazaki (2017) shows that a revenue-neutral carbon tax can have a
small positive and significant employment effect.
23Renewables production and installation tends to be more labor
intensive than fossil fuel technologies, as capacity investments in
renewable electricity generation tend to be more modular and come
in relatively small increments.
24High-emission manufacturing sectors include chemicals, metals
and minerals, paper and packaging, and food.
25Policy tightening would increase costs for high-emission firms
and, depending on elasticity of demand, reduce output (and employment). Conversely, labor demand could increase in sectors/firms
where energy is substitutable with labor, for example among services
(see Yamazaki 2017).

92

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

How to Reach Net Zero Emissions by 2050
This part of the chapter examines the combinations
of climate change mitigation policies needed to bring
net carbon emissions to zero by 2050 and how they
may impact the macroeconomy. General equilibrium
model analysis is required to simulate the effects of
ambitious mitigation policies, given that these affect
the economy through various channels and come with
both negative and positive effects on output as some
sectors contract and others expand. Their net effects
cannot be predicted with certainty and depend on the
relative strength of various channels.

Mechanisms
At a broad level, mitigation policies affect carbon
emissions and the macroeconomy through the difference between the prices of fossil fuel and clean energy
and the overall energy price.
Relative Price of Fossil Fuel and Low-Carbon Energy
Both carbon pricing and green supply policies
increase the price of fossil fuel energy relative to
low-carbon energy by raising the price of carbon
and/or lowering the price of renewables and other
low-carbon energy. The increase in the price of fossil
fuel energy relative to clean energy raises demand for
renewable energy and, more generally, activities with
low carbon intensity and hence leads to a reallocation
of investment, innovation, and employment in that
direction. The net effect on economic activity will
depend on the relative speed at which high-carbon
sectors contract and low-carbon sectors can be scaled
up (costs of adjusting capital can hinder a rapid scaling
up). The net effect on investment and employment
also depends on the relative capital- and labor intensity
of the sectors. High-carbon sectors (such as fossil
fuel energy and heavy manufacturing) are typically
more capital intensive, whereas low-carbon sectors
(such as renewable energy and many services) are
more labor intensive. All else equal, the net effect of
the reallocation of activity from high- to low-carbon
sectors could therefore be more positive (less negative)
for employment than investment. Finally, widening
differences between the price of fossil fuel energy and
clean energy can lead to wealth effects and stranded
assets. Carbon-intensive activities have large footprints
on financial portfolios in advanced economies and the
net worth of fuel exporters. In an aggressive decarbonization scenario, early obsolescence of carbon-intensive

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

capital would lead to wealth losses and drag down
aggregate demand in some economies. At the same
time, countries with comparative advantage in renewable energy and low-carbon technologies could experience positive wealth effects.
Overall Energy Price
Carbon pricing and green supply policies affect
the overall energy price differently. While a carbon tax increases the overall energy price and can
hurt economic activity, it also encourages energy
efficiency and discourages energy usage. That said,
revenues from carbon pricing could be used to offset
these costs, for instance by directly incentivizing
the supply of clean energy or financing green public
infrastructure that helps reduce the energy intensity of economic activity or raises the efficiency of
renewable power.26 Revenues can also be used to
provide transfers to households to avoid hurting
the poor and increase political acceptability (October 2019 Fiscal Monitor). In contrast, green supply
policies lower the overall price of energy and could
potentially boost GDP, depending on how the
policy support is financed (taxes versus borrowing).
But green supply policies do not incentivize energy
efficiency and can be accompanied by greater energy
consumption, including of carbon-intensive sources
(given the intermittency of renewable power). These
differences explain both the greater efficacy of carbon
taxes at reducing emissions and their greater output
cost.27 When combined, green supply policies and
carbon pricing can, in principle, prompt declines in
emissions consistent with substantial climate change
mitigation, without major shrinkage of output and
consumption during the transition.
In addition to providing price signals through
carbon pricing and green supply policies, governments can directly stimulate green technologies by
providing incentives for research. Innovation is driven
by market size; as such, higher carbon prices (which
expand markets for low-carbon activities and shrink
those for carbon-intensive ones) would incentivize a
shift toward greener research and development, lowering the prices of green technologies over time and
26Another option for recycling revenue from carbon taxes is to cut
distortionary taxes on labor and capital (for example, Goulder 1995
and Goulder and Parry 2008).
27Carbon taxes are a very effective way of reducing emissions
also because they automatically impose the highest penalties on the
most-polluting fuels.

amplifying decarbonization. Importantly, the presence
of this amplifying mechanism would mean that a
given decline in emissions could be delivered with
lower carbon prices. The use of green research and
development subsidies alongside carbon taxes is justified on economic grounds to resolve multiple market
failures (for example, Acemoglu and others 2012,
2016; Stiglitz and others 2014). These may include
knowledge spillovers from innovation that are not
taken into account by private firms; path dependency
of research, which gives the established technologies
an advantage and creates entry barriers (through
economies of scale, sunk costs, and network effects);
and difficulty accessing financing due to high uncertainty/risk, a long lag until innovation pays off, and
lack of knowledge and information among investors.
As with other green supply policies, green research
and development subsidies would lower the energy
price overall, boosting output but also partly offsetting the reduction in emissions through higher energy
consumption. Historically, government research programs have had key roles in the development of large
technological breakthroughs (for example, landing
on the moon, or the prototype of the internet). More
active government involvement—including through
international cooperation—may be needed to assist in
the development of technologies that can support the
low-carbon transition.

A Comprehensive Mitigation Package
The goal of bringing net carbon emissions to zero
by 2050 in each country can be achieved through a
comprehensive policy package that is growth friendly
(especially in the short term) and involves compensatory transfers to households to ensure inclusion. The
2050 objective is operationalized as a reduction in gross
emissions by 80 percent, assuming that the expansion
of natural emission sinks (such as forests) and some
deployment of negative emission technologies (for
example, carbon capture and storage technologies) will
help absorb the remaining carbon emissions (IPCC
2018a, b). To implement such deep reductions in emissions at the global level, each country/region needs to
reduce its own emissions by 80 percent, and there is little room for differentiation of mitigation efforts across
countries. However, one exception is made for the
group of selected oil-exporting and other economies,
which are assumed to keep emissions at current levels
because economic activity shrinks substantially due to
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

93

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

the fall in global oil demand. The policy package is
designed with macroeconomic policy goals and political
feasibility in mind and includes (1) a green fiscal stimulus that boosts demand and supply in the economy,
supporting the recovery from the COVID-19 crisis,
and helps reduce the level of carbon prices required
to reach the emission target; (2) gradually phased-in
carbon price increases; and (3) compensatory transfers
to households. Specifically, it includes the following:
•• Green supply policies: These consist of an 80 percent
subsidy rate on renewables production and a 10-year
green public investment program (starting at 1 percent of GDP and linearly declining to zero over
10 years; after that, additional public investment
maintains the green capital stock created). Public
investment is assumed to take place in the renewable and other low-carbon energy sectors, transport
infrastructure, and services—the latter to capture
the higher energy efficiency of buildings (see Online
Annex 3.4 for more details).28
•• Carbon pricing: Carbon prices are calibrated to achieve
the 80 percent reduction in emissions by 2050, after
accounting for emission reductions from the green
fiscal stimulus. A high annual growth rate of carbon
prices (7 percent) is assumed to ensure low initial levels
of the carbon price and a gradual phase-in of carbon
prices.29 The needed carbon prices start at between
$6 and $20 a ton of CO2 (depending on the country),
reach between $10 and $40 a ton of CO2 in 2030, and
are between $40 and $150 a ton of CO2 in 2050.30,31
•• Compensatory transfers: Households receive compensation equal to one-fourth of carbon tax revenues,
which should protect the purchasing power of poor
28IEA (2020a) discusses green investment opportunities in the
energy and transportation sectors and in energy efficiency (for example,
retrofitting of buildings). See also McCollum and others (2018) for an
estimate of energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris Agreement
and achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
29Gollier (2018a, b) finds that, contrary to the Hotelling rule
(according to which greatest efficiency is achieved when the carbon
tax grows at a rate equal to the interest rate), most scenarios from
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change involve a rate of
growth in the carbon tax higher than the interest rate, to reflect
political constraints on the initial level of carbon taxes.
30The range of estimates of carbon prices needed to reach a certain
level of emission reduction is large (see, for instance, IPCC 2014,
Figure 6.21.a, or Stiglitz and others 2014). The relatively low levels
of carbon prices in this chapter’s simulations reflect (1) the combination of carbon prices with other instruments (green infrastructure
investment and green subsidies), which achieve part of the emission
reduction; (2) the high assumed growth rate of carbon prices, which
back-loads their increases; and (3) the fact that the G-Cubed model
embeds more substitutability between high- and low-carbon energy
(based on econometric evidence) than engineering-based models.
31The real price of carbon continues to grow until 2080.

94

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

households through targeted cash transfers (see the
“How to Build Inclusion” section).
•• Supportive macroeconomic policies: The policy
package outlined above implies a fiscal easing that
requires debt financing for the first decade and
occurs amid low-for-long interest rates, given the
current context of low inflation.

Model Simulations
Policy simulations are run using the G-Cubed global
macroeconomic model (McKibbin and Wilcoxen 1999,
2013; Liu and others 2020; see Online Annex 3.4). The
model features 10 countries/regions, detailed energy sectors, forward-looking agents, real and nominal rigidities,
and fiscal and monetary policies. It is suited to examining the effect of mitigation policies on carbon emissions related to the burning of fossil fuels and on the
macroeconomic dynamics in the short, medium, and
long term. The long-term dynamics of temperatures and
estimates of the avoided damages from climate change
are simulated using the integrated assessment model of
Hassler and others (2020) and different climate change
damage functions. The goal of the simulations presented
in the chapter is to illustrate the main mechanisms at
work and provide some order of quantification. The
exact magnitudes in these long-term projections are
unavoidably subject to substantial uncertainty.
In the absence of new climate change mitigation policies, global carbon emissions are projected to continue
to rise at an average annual pace of 1.7 percent and
reach 57.5 gigatons by 2050 (Figure 3.4).32 Improvements in energy efficiency and some penetration of
renewables—reflecting a continuation of current
policies and some autonomous increases (for example,
reflecting consumer preferences)—cannot offset the
forces of population and economic growth that are
driving emissions. Whereas advanced economies have
historically contributed the lion’s share of emissions,
China and India, as large and fast-growing emerging
market economies, are significant emitters and are
expected to continue to account for growing shares of
carbon emissions. Their per capita emissions, however,
32Black and Parry (2020) finds that the required emission
reductions for meeting temperature stabilization goals are essentially
unchanged by the current economic crisis. But the COVID-19 crisis
could lead to long-term behavioral changes that would raise or lower
emissions—such as reduced use of public transportation and greater
reliance on individual vehicles or greater use of digital communication, leading to reduced commuting and less travel. The baseline
assumes (somewhat above) trend increases in energy efficiency.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Figure 3.4. G-Cubed Model Simulations, Baseline

Figure 3.5. Global Temperature and CO2 Emissions

Under unchanged policies, global carbon emissions would keep rising due to
economic and population growth. Continued declines in energy intensity
would not be sufﬁcient to offset these forces.

The policy package, combined with some deployment of carbon capture and
storage, brings carbon emissions to net zero by mid-century and helps keep
temperature increases to 2°C in the long term.

80 1. Business-as-Usual Baseline CO2 Emissions
(Gigatons of CO2)
70
CHN
EUW
IND
JPN
60
OEC
OPC
RUS
USA
ROW
50

16 1. Temperature
(Degrees Celsius above preindustrial average)
14
BAU, medium climate sensitivity
12
Mitigation policies, medium climate sensitivity
Mitigation policies and CCS, medium climate sensitivity
10
BAU, low to high climate sensitivity
8
Mitigation policies, low to high climate
sensitivity
6

40
30
20

4

10

2

0

2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

20
10
0
–10
2020–30

8 3. Baseline Real GDP Growth
(Percent change)
6

30–40

CHN
OEC
ROW

40–50

EUW
OPC
WLD

IND
RUS

30

50

70

80 2. Annual Global Emissions of CO2
(Gigatons of CO2)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
50
70
2010
30

60 2. Decomposition of the Change in Global CO2 Emissions
(Percent change)
50
Energy intensity
Carbon intensity
Population
40
Real GDP per capita
CO2 emissions
30

–20

0
2010

JPN
USA

4

90

2110

30

BAU
Mitigation policies
Mitigation policies and CCS

90

2110

30

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The baseline simulations are run using the G-Cubed global macroeconomic
model of McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1999, 2013) and Liu and others (2020). See
Online Annex 3.4 for a description of the baseline assumptions. EUW = EU,
Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom; OEC = Australia, Canada, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, and New Zealand; OPC = selected oil-exporting countries and other
economies; ROW = rest of the world; WLD = world. Data labels use International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

still remain relatively small when compared with those
of advanced economies. Global growth is assumed
to progressively decline from 3.7 percent in 2021 to
2.1 percent in 2050, reflecting a tapering off of growth
in emerging market economies as they catch up toward
the income levels of advanced economies. Projections

50

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The calculations use an integrated assessment model with exogenous
technical change. Panel 1 shows global average temperature under three policy
scenarios: business-as-usual, a mitigation policy package, and a mitigation policy
package plus carbon capture and storage (CCS). Solid lines assume a climate
sensitivity (the long-term increase in temperature caused by a long-term doubling
of the atmospheric carbon stock) of 3; the shaded areas are a range from 1.5 to 4.5
(see Heal 2017; Hassler, Krusell, and Olovsson 2018). BAU = business-as-usual.

2
0
2020

50

of economic growth over the next 30 years determine
the expected growth of future emissions and therefore
the scale of effort needed to keep temperature increases
to 1.5–2°C. However, most existing scenarios (IPCC
2014, 2018a) indicate that, under unchanged policies,
carbon emissions will continue growing strongly, leading to temperature increases well above the safe levels
agreed to in the Paris Agreement and raising the risk of
catastrophic damage for the planet.
As the simulations show, however, an initial green
investment push combined with steadily rising carbon
prices would deliver the needed emission reductions at
reasonable output effects.
Under the policy package, global carbon emissions are
reduced by about 75 percent from current levels, reaching about 9 gigatons by mid-century (Figure 3.5). This
brings net emissions to zero around mid-century and to
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

95

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

negative levels thereafter with the deployment of carbon
capture and storage. Over the long term, temperature
increases are kept down to 2°C after some modest initial
overshooting. Thus, the policy package allows avoiding
much of the severe damage from climate change and
especially the risk of catastrophic outcomes, putting the
global economy on a higher and sustainable income
path from the second half of the century (see below).
A closer look over the next 30 years shows that the
costs of the transition are moderate and that both a
green fiscal stimulus and carbon pricing play key roles
(Figure 3.6). The policy package delivers a net positive
effect on global growth in the initial years, suggesting
that it can support the recovery from the COVID-19
crisis. After 15 years, GDP is lower by up to about
1 percent relative to its baseline level under unchanged
policies. The estimated transitional GDP costs in this
chapter’s simulation are within the range of other studies (1–6 percent of GDP by 2050), albeit on the lower
side of estimates—reflecting the support to activity from
green infrastructure investment and higher substitutability between high- and low-carbon energy in G-Cubed
than in engineering-based models (see Chapter 6 of
IPCC 2014). These are moderate output losses in the
context of the expected 120 percent cumulative global
GDP growth over the next 30 years (Figure 3.6, panels
2 and 3). From mid-century on, the benefits of climate
mitigation in the form of avoided damage grow larger,
and the policy package boosts GDP and growth substantially above their baseline levels (Figure 3.7).
Closer examination of the effects of different tools
employed in the policy package shows their complementary roles:
•• Emission reductions: While the green fiscal stimulus
helps reduce emissions meaningfully, its effect is
much smaller than that of carbon pricing. The latter
is a powerful tool to generate rapid and substantial
emission reductions because it is effective at increasing energy efficiency, while green supply policies
lower the overall energy price and boost energy
consumption (Figure 3.6, panel 1).
•• Economic costs: Whereas carbon pricing lowers real
GDP by increasing the cost of energy, the green
fiscal stimulus boosts it, both directly and indirectly
(Figure 3.6, panel 2). First, the green fiscal stimulus
directly adds to GDP through higher investment
spending. Second, it indirectly reduces the output
costs of the transition to a low-carbon economy by
lowering future carbon emissions and the level of
carbon taxes needed to meet the emission reduction
targets. The green stimulus first boosts economic
96

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

activity by increasing aggregate demand; thereafter the
green infrastructure investment boosts the productivity of the low-carbon sectors, incentivizing more
private investment in these sectors and increasing the
potential output of the economy. Its effects are large
enough to comfortably offset the economic cost of
the carbon tax in the initial years. As a result, the policy package raises output in the first 15 years by about
0.7 percent of global GDP each year (on average over
that period). After 15 years the drag from the carbon
tax is larger, resulting in small net output losses. The
net drag of the policy package on global output—of
about 0.7 percent, on average, between 2036–50,
and slightly more than 1 percent by 2050—appears
manageable in the context of an expected cumulative
increase in real GDP of 120 percent over the next
30 years. Average annual growth, after being higher
in the 2020s thanks to the green fiscal stimulus, is
lower by only one-tenth of a percentage point in the
2030s and by less than one-tenth of a percentage
point in the 2040s (Figure 3.6, panel 3). Over time,
the economy benefits from avoiding damages from
climate change—such as lower productivity due
to higher temperatures and more frequent natural
disasters—meaning that output would be higher
relative to what it would have been under unchanged
policies. Estimates of damages from climate change
vary with the assumed response of temperatures to
the accumulated carbon stock and with methodologies used to relate economic damages to temperatures. The more recent studies (for example, Burke,
Hsiang, and Miguel 2015) point to much larger
damages than previously estimated and are more in
line with the substantial risks scientists have warned
about.33 Based on these estimates, the projected
net output gains from mitigating climate change
increase rapidly after 2050, reaching up to 13 percent of global GDP by 2100 (Figure 3.7). However,
even these estimates are likely to understate benefits
from mitigating climate change as they imperfectly
take account of—or do not incorporate—some of
the damages related to temperature increases, such as
33The large difference between the various measures comes from
uncertainty over two aspects of the costs of climate change: first,
whether temperature increases affect the level of output (as in
Nordhaus 2010) or its growth rate (as in Dell, Jones, and Olken
2012; and Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015); second, whether the
relationships observed in historical data between temperature and
output can be relied upon in the future (especially when these are
nonlinear). Over long forecast horizons, different stances on these
two aspects can lead to very big differences in the costs of climate
change and the gains from climate mitigation.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Figure 3.6. G-Cubed Model Simulations of Comprehensive Policy Package, Global Results
(Deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise)

An initial green investment push, combined with steadily rising carbon prices, would deliver the needed emissions reductions at reasonable output effects. The package
would initially boost global GDP, supporting the recovery from the COVID-19 crisis, but then weigh on global activity for a period, as the impact of the investment push
wanes and carbon prices continue to rise. In the second half of the century, the reduction in emissions would place the global economy on a stronger and more
sustainable path.

60 1. Global CO2 Emissions
(Gigatons of CO2)
50

2. Global Real GDP
(Percent deviation)

40

Avoid damage
Green subsidy
Simulation total

(1) Baseline
(2) 1 + Deviation of infrastructure
(3) 2 + Deviation of green subsidy

30
20
10

(4) 3 + Deviation of transfer
(5) 4 + Deviation of carbon tax
(6) 5 + Deviation of avoid damage

0
2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

4.0 3. Average Annual Real GDP and Employment Growth, by Decade
(Percent change)
Simulation total
3.5
Baseline (real GDP)
Baseline (employment)
3.0

2020

25

30

35

40

45

4. Ratio of the Global Fiscal Balance to Real GDP
(Percentage point deviation)

2.5
2.0

Avoid damage
Green subsidy
Simulation total

1.5
1.0

2021–30

31–40

41–50

2021–30

31–40

Gas
Oil and petroleum
Coal
Manufacturing
Transportation

41–50

2020

25

30

35

Carbon tax
Infrastructure
Transfer

40

5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
50 52

Carbon tax
Infrastructure
Transfer

45

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
50 52

Construction
Agriculture, forestry, and other mining
Services
Renewables
Other low-carbon
Net effect

3 5. Global Employment, by Sector
(Contribution to deviation of total employment from
2
baseline, percent)

6. Global Private Investment, by Sector
(Contribution to deviation of total private investment
from baseline, percent)

1
0
–1
–2
–3
2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

20
16
12
8
4
0
–4
–8
–12
–16

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The simulations are run using the G-Cubed global macroeconomic model of McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1999, 2013) and Liu and others (2020). The climate change
mitigation policy package is calibrated to reduce gross emissions by 80 percent in every country/region by 2050 and comprises (1) gradually rising carbon taxes,
(2) a green ﬁscal stimulus consisting of green infrastructure investment and a subsidy for renewables production, and (3) compensatory transfers to households. The
ﬁgure also shows the effects of avoided damages from climate change resulting from the implementation of the package. See Online Annex 3.4 for more details on the
implementation of the simulation.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

97

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 3.7. Medium- to Long-Term Output Gains from
Climate Change Mitigation

Figure 3.8. Job Multipliers

(Job-years per gigawatt hour; levelized over lifetime of utility)

(Percent of baseline GDP)

Climate change mitigation results in substantial output gains in the second half of
the century.

Renewable-based electricity generation and energy-efﬁciency-enhancing
investment are more job-intensive than the generation of electricity from fossil
fuels.

15

1.6
1.4
Energy efﬁciency
Fossil fuel
Low-carbon
Renewables

1.2

Nordhaus 2010
Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015

10

1.0
0.8

5

0.6
0.4

0

a higher frequency and severity of natural disasters,
a rise in sea levels, and the risk of more catastrophic
climate change.
•• Fiscal costs: On the fiscal front, the policy package
initially deteriorates the fiscal balance and requires
debt financing, given that the carbon revenues are
smaller than the initial spending on infrastructure,
subsidies, and compensatory transfers to households.
Carbon tax revenues are thereafter broadly sufficient
to finance the additional green infrastructure and
transfers to poor households (Figure 3.6, panel 4).
The effects of the climate change mitigation policy
package on global employment follow largely those on
output (Figure 3.6, panel 5). Employment is boosted
initially. Global employment would be higher by a total
of 12 million people, on average, each year between
2021 and 2027, followed by a small decline relative to
the baseline employment path during the transition until
the economy reaches a higher output and growth path.
Despite the decline relative to baseline, employment
98

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Storage

Municipal waste

Wind

Biomass

Solar thermal

Geothermal

Solar PV

Hydro (small)

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the variation over output gains from climate change
mitigation due to uncertainty from two sources: local costs of higher temperatures,
from either Nordhaus (2010) or Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015); and climate
sensitivity, measured as the increase in long-term temperature with respect to a
doubling in CO2 concentration, with a range of 1.5–4.5 and a midpoint of 3 (see
text for discussion).

Nuclear

2100

Hydro (large)

2070

Natural gas

0.0
2050

Coal

–5

Energy efﬁciency

0.2

Sources: Wei, Patadia, and Kammen 2010; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each bar shows the total number of job-years generated per gigawatt hour
of capacity. This includes both direct and indirect jobs, and barring energy
efﬁciency, excludes induced job effects (for example, induced by changing relative
prices). The jobs created, both in the initial phase of asset creation and in the
subsequent operation and maintenance of new capacities, are averaged (levelized)
over a typical lifespan of a utility. PV = photovoltaic.

continues to grow strongly throughout the period
(Figure 3.6, panel 3). Expanding low-carbon sectors, such
as renewable energy, retrofitting of buildings, electric car
production, and the services sector, are typically more
labor intensive than the shrinking high-carbon sectors
(such as fossil fuel energy, transportation, heavy manufacturing)—both in the short and long term—and
can create many jobs (Figure 3.8). However, the policy
package scenario entails a substantial reallocation of about
2 percent of jobs from high- to low-carbon sectors, which
could cause difficult transitions for some workers and
require reskilling and government support (see below).
Turning to private investment, the policy package
leads to a sharp global contraction because the carbon
tax acts as a negative wealth shock and reduces the
long-term desired capital stock (Figure 3.6, panel 6).
The expanding low-carbon sectors (renewables, services) are also less capital intensive than the contracting

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

sectors (fossil fuel energy, manufacturing), further
reducing demand for capital investment. Finally, the
renewable energy sector is smaller than the fossil fuel
sector and takes time to expand due to capital adjustment costs, although green infrastructure investment
and subsidies help incentivize private investment in
renewables and other low-carbon energy sectors.34
Some variation is seen across countries and regions:
reductions in private investment are especially large
in countries with larger fossil fuel sectors, whereas the
policy package elicits more positive responses from
private investment where low-carbon energy sectors
are already large and the cost of ramping up physical
capital relatively low (for example, Europe and Japan;
see below). In the current context of depressed private
investment and very low interest rates, green support
policies could also have a more positive effect on private investment in the near term than modeled here.
To sum up, a mix of carbon pricing and an initial
green stimulus would help with economic recovery
from the COVID-19 crisis in the near term while
putting the global economy on a sustainable growth
path at moderate transitional growth costs. The green
fiscal easing would help boost growth and employment
in the first few years, when the economy is depressed,
despite the introduction of the carbon tax. From a
macroeconomic and public finance perspective, the
next decade is the best time for governments to invest
and borrow, given that interest rates for many large
emitters are likely to stay low for long, suggesting that
an aggressive investment policy would be affordable
and desirable. As the recovery takes hold, further
increases in carbon taxes would be essential to generate
the needed substantial declines in emissions and would
imply only moderate growth costs. Over the longer
term, the economy would be on a higher growth and
output path because substantial damages from climate
change would be avoided.

Cross-Country Differences
While the transitional output costs associated
with the policy package are relatively moderate in
global terms, they are very different across countries
(Figure 3.9, panel 1).
Some of the advanced economies may experience
smaller economic costs throughout the transition—or
34In the G-Cubed model, investors are forward looking, and
substitutability is high relative to other models (McKibbin and
Wilcoxen 1999, 2013; Liu and others 2020).

even gain, as does Europe. The more renewables there
are already in the economy, the higher the initial capital
stocks, so the more they can be ramped up without
incurring large adjustment costs.35 Europe starts with a
large renewable sector, implying that the adjustment costs
per unit of additional investment are much lower than
for other countries.36 In contrast, the United States and
China have a large amount of fossil fuel capital relative
to non-fossil-fuel capital, and the investment reductions
from these industries offset the investment in renewables,
which face larger adjustment costs to ramp up.
Countries with fast economic or population growth
(India, especially; China, to a lesser extent) and most oil
producers are bound to experience larger economic costs
by forgoing cheap forms of energy, such as coal or oil.
These output costs nevertheless remain modest relative
to baseline growth for most. For example, with the policy package, India’s GDP would be 277 percent higher
in 2050 than today, only moderately below what it
would have been with unchanged policies (287 percent).
But more important, these economic costs also need to
be weighed against avoided damage from climate change
and co-benefits from climate change mitigation.
The countries for which economic costs are larger
are also the ones that would enjoy immediate substantial co-benefits from acting to curb carbon emissions
(Figure 3.9, panel 2). These are reductions in mortality risks and improved health from less air pollution
(thanks to lower use of coal and natural gas) and
reduced road congestion, traffic accident risk, and
road damage (associated with taxation of gasoline and
road diesel). While the value of saving lives goes well
beyond economic gains and quantifying the economic
value of human life and health is difficult, existing
valuations (see, for example, the October 2019 Fiscal
Monitor; and Parry, Veung, and Heine 2015) indicate
that many countries would experience substantial economic gains from co-benefits—on the order of 0.7 percent of GDP immediately and 3.5 percent of GDP
by 2050 for China, and 0.3 percent immediately and
1.4 percent by 2050 for India.37 Combining real GDP
35This is because adjustment costs are quadratic in the rate
of investment.
36IMF (2020a) examines climate mitigation scenarios for
the European Union using the Envisage CGE model. It concludes that a higher carbon price is needed for Europe’s climate
mitigation objectives and that a subsidy for renewables production would allow the needed carbon price to be reduced. The
new European Union recovery fund explicitly aims to address
climate change.
37Parry, Veung, and Heine (2015) estimates a price on CO
2
that would internalize domestic non-climate-related external costs

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

99

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 3.9. G-Cubed Model Simulations of Comprehensive Policy Package, Cross-Country Differences
There are large cross-country differences in output effects, with most oil producers and countries with fast economic and population growth bearing larger costs in the
medium term. However, these countries also stand to beneﬁt more from avoided damages from climate change and co-beneﬁts.
CHN

EUW

IND

JPN

OEC

OPC

RUS

USA

ROW

WLD

2. Regional Co-Beneﬁts
(Percent of GDP deviation from baseline)

10 1. Regional Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
5

7
6
5

0

4
3

–5

2

–10

1

–15

0
30

35

40

45

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

21–23
36–38
50–52

8 3. Real GDP and Co-Beneﬁts, Three-Year Average
(Percent deviation from baseline)
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
Avoid damage
–6
Total
Transfer
Infrastructure
–8
Co-beneﬁt
Carbon tax
Green subsidy
–10
CHN

EUW

IND

JPN

OEC

ROW

USA

WLD

50 52

21–23
36–38
50–52

25

21–23
36–38
50–52

–20
2020

16
12
8
4
0
–4
–8
–12
–16
–20

OPC RUS
(right scale)

2020

25

30

35

40

45

–1
50 52

60 4. Long-Term Output Gains from Climate Change Mitigation
(Percent deviation from 2100 real GDP)
50
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
Nordhaus 2010
–30
Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015
–40
IND
RUS ROW
CHN EUW JPN OEC USA WLD
(right scale)

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Panels 1, 2, and 3 are based on simulations run using the G-Cubed global macroeconomic model of McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1999, 2013) and Liu and others
(2020). The climate change mitigation policy package is calibrated to reduce gross emissions by 80 percent in every country/region by 2050 and comprises
(1) gradually rising carbon taxes, (2) a green ﬁscal stimulus consisting of green infrastructure investment and a subsidy for renewables production, and (3) compensatory
transfers to households. The ﬁgure also shows the effects of avoided damages from climate change resulting from the implementation of the package. See Online
Annex 3.4 for more details on the simulation. Panel 4 shows the variation over output gains from climate change mitigation by 2100 due to uncertainty from two
sources: local costs of higher temperatures, from either Nordhaus (2010) or Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015); and climate sensitivity, measured as the increase in
long-term temperature with respect to a doubling in CO2 concentration, with a range of 1.5–4.5 and a midpoint of 3 (see text for discussion). EUW = European Union,
Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom; OEC = Australia, Canada, Iceland, Liechtenstein, New Zealand; OPC = selected oil-exporting countries and other economies;
ROW = rest of the world; WLD = world. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

associated with fossil fuels around the world. The nationally efficient
CO2 price level is, on average, $57.5 a ton (in 2010)—and ranges
between $11 and $85 for the countries/regions in the G-Cubed
model. These reflect primarily health co-benefits from reduced air
pollution at coal plants and, in some cases, reductions in automobile externalities. The co-benefits differ across countries per unit
of abatement and are largest for Russia and China. See Karlsson,
Alfredsson, and Westling (2020) for a review of available monetary
estimates of air quality co-benefits. Based on quasi-experimental
evidence from China, Ebenstein and others (2017) finds that an
increase of 10 micrograms a cubic meter in PM10 (particulate
matter under 10 micrometers in size) reduces life expectancy by

100

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

0.64 year and, consequently, bringing all of China into compliance
with its Class I standard for PM10 would save 3.7 billion life-years.
In addition to the benefit of reduced mortality, studies also show
significant benefits from reduced morbidity (that is, lower health
care spending) in response to environmental policies. For example,
reducing PM2.5 (particulate matter under 2.5 micrometers in size)
concentration in China from the prevailing average to the World
Health Organization–recommended level (which is about one-sixth
the current average level) would reduce health care spending by
$42 billion relative to 2015 spending levels, or about 7 percent of
national annual health care spending (see, for example, Barwick and
others 2018).

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

effects and co-benefits yields net benefits throughout
the transition for China and smaller transitional costs
for India, Russia, and others (Figure 3.9, panel 3).38
Without global policy action, damages from climate
change increase sharply after 2050. Therefore, all countries would experience substantial benefits from avoided
climate damages in the second half of the century
under the policy package. The benefits from mitigating
climate change are expected to be particularly large for
some of the countries with higher transitional costs.
India is among those likely to suffer the greatest damage from global warming, reflecting its initially high
temperatures. For India, the net gains from climate
change mitigation—relative to inaction—would be up
to 60–80 percent of GDP by 2100 (Figure 3.9, panel
4). While estimates of losses from climate change are
somewhat smaller for colder regions (for example,
Europe, North America, and east Asia), these are likely
underestimations as they do not include a number of
damages (for example, rise in sea levels, natural disasters, damage to infrastructure from thawing of permafrost in Russia) and negative global spillovers from large
economic disruptions in other parts of the world.
It is sometimes argued that countries that have
contributed the bulk of the stock of global carbon
emissions—advanced economies—should shoulder a
greater part of the mitigation burden. Advanced economies cannot keep global temperatures to safe levels on
their own, as their share in global emissions is set to
drop to 23 percent in 2050 from 32 percent of global
emissions under unchanged policies. And in a scenario
in which only advanced economies enact mitigation
policies, the decline in their emissions would be partially offset by an increase in other countries’ emissions
relative to the baseline. This reflects two types of
“leakages”: first, lower demand from advanced economies for fossil fuels depresses global fossil fuel prices
and so increases their consumption by other countries;
and second, some carbon-intensive activities previously
carried out in advanced economies are likely to relocate
to countries where carbon is not taxed.
In a scenario in which advanced economies are the only
ones that reduce their gross carbon emissions by 80 percent by 2050, global emissions still increase to 48 gigatons
38Bento, Jacobsen, and Liu (2018) also points out that the costs of
implementing a carbon tax are substantially lower with a large informal sector as the carbon tax lowers the relative distortion between
the formal and informal sectors—given that even the informal sector
must buy energy from the formal sector, these mechanisms can lead
to welfare-enhancing expansion of the formal sector.

Figure 3.10. G-Cubed Simulations, Partial Participation in
Mitigation
Advanced economies mitigating alone cannot keep temperature increases to safe
levels. But joint action by the ﬁve largest countries (economic region) would make a
signiﬁcant dent in global emissions.
Baseline
Top ﬁve countries

Advanced economies
All countries

60 1. Global CO2 Emissions
(Gigatons of CO2)
50
40
30
20
10
0
2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

40

45

50 52

1.5 2. Global Output
(Percent deviation from baseline)
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
2020

25

30

35

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: This ﬁgure is based on simulations run using the G-Cubed global
macroeconomic model of McKibbin and Wilcoxen (1999, 2013), and Liu and
others (2020). The climate change mitigating policy package is calibrated to
reduce gross emissions by 80 percent in every country/region except OPEC (the
“All countries” scenario) by 2050 and comprises (1) gradually rising carbon taxes,
(2) a green ﬁscal stimulus consisting of green infrastructure investment and a
subsidy for renewables production, and (3) compensatory transfers to households.
The ﬁgure also shows the effects of avoided damages from climate change
resulting from the implementation of the package. See Online Annex 3.4 for more
details on the simulation. Scenarios “Advanced economies” and “Top ﬁve
countries” assume that only advanced economies and ﬁve countries/regions with
the largest GDP (China, European Union, India, Japan, United States) act to mitigate.

by 2050, well above current levels (Figure 3.10). If the
United States, Europe, China, Japan, and India—as the
five largest countries (economic region)—act together,
they can make a significant dent in global emissions
over the next three decades. Global emissions would be
reduced by about 55 percent from baseline levels and
25 percent from current levels by mid-century, with a
very similar effect on each participating country’s GDP,
as in the scenario of global action. The October 2019
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

101

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Fiscal Monitor discusses how a carbon price floor among
the largest emitters—possibly with a lower price floor
or transfers for lower-income countries—would be an
effective arrangement to scale up Paris Agreement commitments. It would provide a transparent target based
on a common measure and help reassure against potential losses in international competitiveness from higher
energy costs.
Fossil fuel exporters are bound to experience the
largest economic losses from the transition of the global
economy to a low-carbon path (see Mirzoev and others
2020 for a discussion of carbon transition risks in Gulf
Cooperation Council countries). Even without a domestic carbon tax, the fall in global demand for fossil fuels
would significantly lower these economies’ fiscal revenues
and economic activity. Moreover, the industrial structure in many fuel exporters is reliant on cheap energy,
making the required restructuring and diversification of
these economies more difficult and painful. Imposing an
export tax (royalty) on oil sales—if this could be agreed
upon among oil producers—could maximize the revenue
extracted from oil reserves (while demand lasts) and at
the same time contribute to the decarbonization of other
economies (see the October 2019 Fiscal Monitor). Many
oil exporters, however, also stand to gain from global
climate change mitigation measures. For example, rising
temperatures will make oil-exporting countries in the
Middle East, where water scarcity is already a growing
concern, even hotter. Many oil-exporting countries have
recognized the challenges that are being created by the
energy transition and are actively seeking to diversify
their economies away from the reliance on oil. Policies that seek to strengthen the non-oil sector through
better business regulation, greater credit availability, and
reforms to the labor market, and increase sources of nonoil revenue for the government, are being implemented.

The Returns to Supporting Technological Innovation
The response of technology (“endogenous technical
change”) to carbon taxes or research and development
subsidies is important in amplifying the effects of carbon
pricing and facilitating the low-carbon transition. Given
that this mechanism is difficult to integrate into the
G-Cubed model, this chapter uses the more stylized
representation of Hassler and others (2020) to illustrate the impact of supporting technological innovation
(Figure 3.11; see Online Annex 3.5). Assuming a plausible
response of technological change to the price of carbon—
and combining it with a subsidy (of 70 percent) for
green research and development—would allow a similar
102

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 3.11. Role of Green Technological Progress
Policies that contract markets for dirty fuels and expand markets for clean fuels
induce a green technological response so that similar emission reductions can be
achieved with a lower carbon tax and at a lower cost to output.
High carbon tax and green ﬁscal stimulus
Plus research and development subsidies and endogenous technical
change and lower carbon tax

40 1. Annual Gross Global Emissions
(Gigatons of CO2)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
2020

25

30

35

40

45

50 52

40

45

50 52

2 2. Global Output Relative to Baseline
(Percent deviation)
1
0
–1
–2
2020

25

30

35

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The panels compare the G-Cubed simulation of the comprehensive policy
package with a simulation run using an extension of the Hassler and others (2020)
integrated assessment model with endogenous technological change. The second
simulation features a lower carbon tax and a green research and development
subsidy and includes the endogenous response of technology to policies. See
Online Annex 3.5 for more details.

emission target to be achieved with a carbon price path at
about half the prices required in the G-Cubed scenario. In
the presence of endogenous technical change and research
and development subsidies, the transitional costs of mitigation policies are therefore significantly lower, and global
GDP rises toward baseline earlier (around the mid-2040s)
than in the absence of innovation.
The beneficial impact of this policy is felt mostly in
the medium to longer term (after 2030), as the innovation response and the diffusion of new knowledge
through the global economy take time to materialize.39
39The immediate effects of this policy are limited by the modest
initial size of the green energy sector.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Figure 3.12. Potential for Emission Reductions in the
Electricity Sector
The electricity sector offers substantial scope for emission reductions and better
emission-output trade-offs due to the availability of substitute low-carbon
technologies.
Electricity and heat production
Agriculture/forestry/ﬁshing
Other energy industry own use
Residential

Transport
Manufacturing industries and construction
Commercial and public services
Other

55 1. Greenhouse Gas Emissions, by Sector
(Gigaton CO2 equivalent)
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1990

2015

10 2. Carbon Tax in the United States: Sectoral Contributions
to Emission Reductions and GDP Impact in 2030
5
(Percent deviation from baseline)
0

0.4

–5

–0.2

–10
–15

0.2

How to Build Inclusion

0.0

Underlying the moderate macroeconomic effects of
mitigation policies discussed in the previous section
are differentiated impacts on low- and high-income
households and on workers in shrinking versus
expanding sectors (such as fossil fuel extraction and
manufacturing versus clean-energy and services sectors). For instance, in the absence of compensatory
measures, low-income households are more likely
than high-income households to be hurt by carbon
pricing; in many countries the poor spend a relatively larger share of their income on energy-intensive
goods, such as electricity and heating (Figure 3.13,
panel 1). Low-income households are also more
likely to experience losses in labor income, given that
they tend to be employed in low-skill occupations in
carbon-intensive sectors (manufacturing, transportation, energy; Figure 3.13, panel 2). Opinion surveys
suggest that low-skilled workers are less likely than
high-skilled workers to favor protecting the environment over boosting economic growth. Support
for protection of the environment is lowest among
lower-skilled workers employed in carbon-intensive
sectors (Figure 3.14).41
The distributional impacts of carbon pricing are
likely to vary by country. Carbon pricing is not
always regressive, especially in emerging market and

–0.4

Electricity
Other

–0.6

–20

–0.8

–25

–1.0

–30

Carbon emissions

GDP impact (right scale)

global carbon emissions (Figure 3.12). Three-quarters
of these emissions are from coal-based electricity generation. Raising the share of renewables in the electricity
sector is considered the first step toward decarbonization because substitute low-carbon technologies are
already available and are economically competitive
as a result of a dramatic decline in prices in the past
decade—for example, the cost of electricity from wind
has declined by 70 percent (Lazard 2019). This makes
near-term emission-output trade-offs particularly
favorable in this sector, which is also reflected in the
G-Cubed simulation, in which about two-thirds of
emission reductions in the first 10 years are achieved in
electricity generation. Moreover, low-carbon electricity production would generate additional benefits for
decarbonization as other end-uses of energy (automobiles, heating, and so on) are electrified. Box 3.2
investigates in more detail how emissions in the electricity sector can be reduced with existing technologies
(see also Online Annex 3.6).

–1.2

Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Panel 2 is based on the carbon tax effect in the G-Cubed simulations of the
comprehensive policy package.

Overall, the analysis suggests that a lower carbon price,
if combined with early use of green research and
development subsidies, may be able to achieve the
same lower-emission benefits as a higher tax, at a
lower overall transitional cost to output. Research and
development subsidies on their own, however, could
not generate the quick and substantial reductions in
emissions needed to keep temperature increases to
safe levels.40
A good example of the role of technology in reducing emissions is the electricity sector, which, together
with heating, generates roughly 40 percent of total
40See also, for example, Bosetti and others (2011), Newell (2015),
and Dechezleprêtre and Popp (2017).

41See

also IMF (forthcoming).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

103

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 3.13. Distribution of Consumption, Employment, and
Impact of Carbon Taxes

Figure 3.14. Public Opinion in Support of Environmental
Protection
(Percent)

Households at the bottom quintile of the income distribution spend slightly more
on energy than their richer counterparts and they are more likely to be employed
in high-energy-intensive sectors. Carbon taxes, when accompanied by transfers to
households, can reduce poverty and inequality; when accompanied by government
spending on low-energy sectors, they can support job transitions to low-energyintensive sectors.
Energy

High energy intensive

140 1. Household Consumption
(Percent of household total
120
consumption expenditure)
100

Low energy intensive

2. Sectoral Employment
(Percent of total
employment)

80
60
40
20
0

Bottom Top Bottom Top
quintile quintile quintile quintile
United States
China

Unskilled Skilled Unskilled Skilled
China
United States

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

8 3. Consumption of Bottom Two Quintiles under Different Recycling
Options for Carbon Tax Revenues
6
(Percent deviation from baseline)
4
2
0
–2
Universal transfers
–4
Low-energy government spending
–6
Targeted transfers to bottom two quintiles
–8
Second-bottom
Second-bottom
Bottom quintile
Bottom quintile
quintile
quintile
China
United States
5
4
3
2
1

4. Selected Hours Worked under Different Recycling Options for
Carbon Tax Revenues
(Contribution to percent deviation of total hours worked
from baseline)
Dirty energy
High-energy-intensive sector
Clean energy
Low-energy-intensive sector

0
–1
–2

Low-energy
Targeted
government spending
transfers
United States

Low-energy
Targeted
government spending
transfers
China

Sources: American Community Survey; China Family Panel Survey; Consumption
Expenditure Survey; National Bureau of Statistics of China; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 2 are based on survey data. In panel 1, energy goods are
electricity, heating, gas, and oil. High-energy-intensive goods are mostly industrial
goods and transportation, while low-energy-intensive goods are basically services
less transportation. In panel 2, unskilled workers are workers with a high-school
education or less, while skilled workers have more than a high-school education.
Panels 3 and 4 use a multisector heterogeneous agent model calibrated to
generate sectoral output shares to simulate $50 tax per ton of CO2, where the
revenue is used to ﬁnance government spending on (1) low-energy-intensive
goods, (2) universal cash transfers, and (3) targeted cash transfers to the bottom
two quintiles of the income distribution. In panel 3, each bar shows the quintile
percentage change in consumption with respect to the baseline. In panel 4, each
bar shows the percentage change in workers’ hours weighted by sector
employment in the baseline with respect to the baseline.

104

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Support for the environment tends to be higher among high-skilled individuals,
particularly those working in clean industries. Low-skilled individuals working in
high-carbon industries, who represent the group most adversely affected by the
changes needed for a transition to a green economy, show the lowest levels of
support for environmental policies.
90 1. By Educational Attainment
80
70
60
50
40
30

Skilled

Unskilled

60 2. By Occupation Type, across Education Levels
58

Low-carbon occupation
High-carbon occupation

56
54
52
50

Skilled

Unskilled

Sources: European Values Study (2017); World Values Survey, wave 7 (2017–20);
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the percent of respondents who believe that protecting the
environment should be given priority, even if it causes slower economic growth
and some loss of jobs. Panel 1 shows the range of values across 77 countries,
where the box represents the 25th and 75th percentiles, the whiskers represent
the 10th and 90th percentiles, and the horizontal line stands for the median.
Educational attainment is used as a proxy for skill level: skilled is post-secondary;
unskilled is upper-secondary and below. Panel 2 shows the average across
individuals from 47 countries. High-carbon occupations correspond to skilled
industry, unskilled, semi-skilled, and farm occupations.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

developing economies, where lower access to electricity
and ownership of durable goods results in lower direct
consumption of energy by poorer households (see the
October 2019 Fiscal Monitor for additional discussion).
Similarly, the distributional impact through the labor
income channel can vary across countries. But where
carbon pricing is likely to adversely affect vulnerable
households and workers, building fairness and inclusion will be crucial to the political acceptability and
sustainability of mitigation strategies.
Various policies can limit the adverse effects of
higher carbon prices on households. These include
fully or partially rebating the carbon pricing revenues
through universal or targeted cash transfers—or using
some of the revenue to finance higher public spending in low-carbon sectors, which will create jobs and
offset employment losses in carbon-intensive sectors.
Among the different options for cash transfers, targeted compensation for low-income households is a
cost-effective option. Figure 3.13, panel 3, shows the
consumption impact of a tax of $50/ton of CO2 under
various revenue recycling options, based on a general
equilibrium model with heterogenous agents calibrated
to the United States and China that incorporates the
carbon tax’s impact on consumption and employment
(see Online Annex 3.7 and Tavares, forthcoming).
Simulations suggest that fully recycling carbon tax revenues in cash transfers targeted to low-income groups
(bottom two quintiles) can raise their consumption
(see Figure 3.13, panel 3, and Online Annex 3.7 for
the impact on the entire consumption distribution).
The consumption of households in the lowest quintile could be protected (consumption kept broadly
constant) by redistributing about one-quarter and
one-sixth of the carbon revenues, respectively, to this
group of households in the United States and China.
By contrast, it would take, respectively, 55 percent and
40 percent of revenues to protect consumption levels
of households in the lowest two quintiles in the United
States and China. Fully rebating the carbon revenues
through universal transfers would also broadly avert a
decline in the consumption of households in the bottom two quintiles, but at a much higher fiscal cost.42
While they both protect private consumption,
neither universal nor targeted cash transfers help
42Iran’s

2010 fuel subsidy reform and the introduction of carbon
pricing in British Columbia are examples of successful reforms
that included compensatory transfers to households (among other
measures). See Guillaume, Zytek, and Farzin (2011) and Carl and
Fedor (2016).

materially ease job transitions. By contrast, increasing government spending on low-carbon goods and
services—similar in spirit to the green supply policies
studied in the previous section—would fail to protect
the consumption of poorer households but would
prevent a decline in aggregate employment and spur
further reallocation of workers toward low-carbon
sectors (Figure 3.13, panel 4).
In practice, governments seeking to introduce carbon pricing will likely face calls to protect low-income
households from higher prices and compensate for job
losses in carbon-intensive industries. The simulations
here show that carbon pricing can produce enough
revenue to spend on both goals if income support is
well targeted.
Feebates are an essential complement to other mitigation policies. They are systems of fees and rebates
on products or activities with above- or below-average
emission intensity, or regulations (such as emission
rates or energy efficiency standards) that can be used
when carbon pricing is not feasible or cannot be
imposed on the necessary scale (October 2019 Fiscal
Monitor). Feebates can be tailored to specific markets,
and their impact on emissions depends on the size
and energy intensity of the target market. Feebates are
modeled broadly here as consisting of a tax of $50/ton
of CO2 imposed on the dirty energy consumption of
firms and households, with the revenue used to finance
a subsidy to promote the consumption of clean energy.
The only way in which this experiment differs from the
previous one is that the revenue is spent on subsidies
to promote the consumption of clean energy. The
revenue-raising component (carbon tax) is similar.
Simulations show that the effects of the feebates on
the consumption of the bottom quintile and inequality are smaller than when carbon taxes are imposed,
if no action is taken to mitigate the impact on the
distribution (Figure 3.15). The effects are smaller
because the impact on energy prices is minimal (taxes
and subsidies are levied on different varieties of the
same good) and because feebates stimulate employment for low-skilled workers, on net (given that the
renewable sector is more labor intensive than the dirty
energy sector).
Finally, mitigation policies are likely to affect some
communities more than others, adding a geographic
dimension to inequality. A just transition is needed
also for the most hard-hit communities and regions
and may require—beyond reskilling of workers—
effective government support for those communities.
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

105

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Figure 3.15. Distributional Impact of Feebates

(Consumption, percent deviation from baseline, and Gini index change)
Feebates can reduce carbon emissions, but they also need to be accompanied by
transfers.

0.0

–0.1

–0.2

–0.3
Consumption
Gini coefﬁcient

–0.4

United States

China

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the results of the multisector heterogeneous agent model
simulation of a $50 tax per ton of CO2 levied on dirty energy consumption by
households and ﬁrms. The revenue is used to ﬁnance a subsidy to clean energy.
The ﬁrst bar shows the bottom quintile percentage change in consumption with
respect to the baseline, and the second bar shows the change in the Gini
coefﬁcient with respect to the baseline. The Gini coefﬁcient is measured on a
scale from 0 (perfect equality) to 100 (perfect inequality).

Conclusion
The window for attaining net zero emissions by
2050 and holding temperature increases to safe levels
is rapidly closing. The analysis in this chapter suggests
that an initial green investment push combined with
steadily rising carbon prices would deliver the needed
emission reductions at reasonable transitional global
output effects. A green fiscal stimulus would strengthen
the macroeconomy in the short term and help lower
the costs of adjusting to higher carbon prices. Carbon
pricing is critical to mitigation because higher carbon
prices incentivize energy efficiency in addition to reallocating resources from high- to low-carbon activities.
The transitional costs of carbon pricing consistent
with net zero emissions by mid-century would be
manageable in the context of the projected growth of

106

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

the global economy over the next three decades and
could be reduced further as technological innovations develop in response to carbon pricing and green
research and development subsidies. In the medium
term, such a strategy would place the global economy
on a stronger and more sustainable growth path by
avoiding serious damages from climate change and the
risk of catastrophic outcomes.
Keeping global temperatures to safe levels requires a
global effort. Advanced economies cannot successfully
mitigate climate change by themselves, as they account
for a declining share of global emissions. But the five
largest countries/economic union—the United States,
China, the European Union, Japan, and India—acting
jointly can make a significant dent in global emissions. While the economic costs of mitigation vary
across countries, all stand to gain greatly from avoided
damages from climate change and co-benefits from
mitigation, such as reduced pollution and mortality.
Building sustainably now, rather than having to rebuild
infrastructure later, would lower the transitional costs
of mitigation. For fossil fuel exporters, smoothing the
transition will require accelerating the diversification
of their economies. This chapter set out to examine the
macroeconomic impacts of climate change mitigation
policies. Another important issue is international coordination, which could offer scope for different burden
sharing of mitigation costs. International policy coordination on climate change deserves further study—given
how elusive it has been for countries to come together
and take meaningful action to reduce emissions (see,
for example, Barrett 2005, 2013, 2016; Lessmann and
others 2015; Nordhaus 2015). Analysis on how to
achieve such cooperation is, however, outside the scope
of this chapter.
Last but not least, decarbonization involves a
structural transformation of economies, with unequal
impacts across population subgroups. To build inclusion and ensure the broadest possible support for
mitigation policies, governments can use part of their
carbon tax revenues to support job transitions and
provide targeted cash transfers to protect poorer households against losses in purchasing power. Place-based
policies to compensate areas or regions likely to experience more labor shedding due to a retrenchment in
high-carbon sectors may also be needed.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Box 3.1. Glossary
Avoided damages. The value of avoided
climate-change-induced events, such as crop loss, rises
in sea level, and extreme weather.
Carbon dioxide (CO2). The main greenhouse gas,
produced from burning fossil fuels, manufacturing
cement, and forestry practices. CO2 emissions remain
in the atmosphere for an average of 100 years.
Carbon tax. A tax imposed on CO2 emissions released
largely through the combustion of carbon-based fossil
fuels. Administratively, implementation is easiest by
taxing the supply of fossil fuels—coal, oil, and natural
gas—in proportion to their carbon content.
Clean energy innovation. The number of patent
applications in climate change mitigation technologies related to energy generation, transmission, and
distribution.
Co-benefits. Reductions in mortality risks and
improved health from less air pollution (as a result of
lower use of coal and natural gas) and reduced road
congestion, traffic accident risk, and road damage.
Distribution-friendly policy. A policy that attempts
to mitigate the policy’s negative effects on low-income
groups’ consumption (or some other measure of
household well-being).
Economies of scale. Cost advantages for businesses as
a result of their scale of operation, with unit costs of
output decreasing with increasing scale.
Emission trading system. A market-based policy
to reduce emissions (sometimes referred to as “cap
and trade”). Covered sources are required to hold
allowances for each ton of their emissions or (in an
upstream program) the embodied emission content
in fuels. The total quantity of allowances is fixed, and
market trading of allowances establishes a market price
for emissions. Auctioning the allowances is a valuable
source of government revenue.
Externality. A cost imposed by the actions of individuals or firms on other individuals or firms (possibly in
the future, as in the case of climate change) that the
former does not take into account.
Feebate. A sliding scale of fees on firms with emission
rates (for example, CO2 per kilowatt-hour) above
a “pivot point” level and corresponding subsidies
for firms with emission rates below the pivot point.
Alternatively, a feebate can be applied to energy
consumption rates (for example, gasoline per mile
driven) rather than emission rates. Feebates can exploit

many (but not all) of the mitigation opportunities
promoted by carbon taxes but without a large increase
in energy prices.
Feed-in tariffs. Long-term contracts that guarantee
producers of renewable electricity a fixed price for
every unit of electricity delivered to the grid.
Gray technologies. Technologies that tend to improve
the pollution effect of “dirty” technologies. Examples
include technologies that use the heat from fuel or
waste incineration or fuels from nonfossil sources.
Green supply policies. Policies aimed at boosting
the supply of renewable energy and energy efficiency,
including subsidies and investment programs.
Green/white certificates. Titles, respectively, for
reaching renewable energy/energy saving targets.
Greenhouse gas. A gas in the atmosphere that allows
incoming solar radiation to pass through but traps and
absorbs heat radiated from Earth. CO2 is easily the
most predominant greenhouse gas.
High-carbon activities. Activities that either involve
generation of carbon-based energy or emit relatively
high amounts of CO2.
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC).
Climate strategies, including mitigation commitments,
submitted by 190 parties to the Paris Agreement.
Countries are required to report progress on implementing NDCs every two years and (from 2020
onward) to submit revised NDCs (which are expected
to contain progressively more stringent mitigation
pledges) every five years.
Paris Agreement. An international accord (ratified in
2016) on climate mitigation, adaptation, and financing. The agreement’s central objective is to contain
global average temperature increases to 1.5–2°C above
preindustrial levels.
Renewable energy. Typically includes energy generated from solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, wind,
geothermal, biomass, and hydroelectric sources.
Hydroelectric is often subdivided into “large” and
“small” because of the major environmental impact
of the former.
Research and development. Innovative activities by
corporations and governments with the goal of developing new products and technologies.
Revenue recycling. Use of (carbon) tax revenues for
purposes such as lowering other taxes on households
and firms or funding public investment.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

107

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Box 3.2. Zooming In on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization
This box investigates in more detail how emissions
in the electricity sector—which, together with heating,
accounts for roughly 40 percent of global emissions—
can be reduced with existing technologies. To this end,
the analysis modifies the Global Integrated Monetary
and Fiscal model (Laxton and others 2010) to include
an electricity sector where power is generated from
coal, natural gas, renewables or by nuclear or hydroelectric processes. The constraints that intermittency
of renewables (the undesired output variation from
the varying availability of sun and wind) pose for their
market penetration are captured by pairing renewable
electricity generation with a flexible backup capacity
that covers output shortfalls (see Online Annex 3.6; all
annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​
WEO). Studying the same illustrative $50 carbon
price in the United States, Europe, and China allows
for highlighting how a country’s current electricity mix
and economic structure affect the impact of introducing a carbon price.
Simulations for the United States show that even a
moderate policy of gradually introducing a $50 carbon
price over 10 years in the electricity sector, flanked by
a front-loaded subsidy for investment in renewables,
would unlock substantial decarbonization of the electricity sector at very small output costs (Figure 3.2.1,
panels 1–3). The policy mix is budget neutral when
the carbon price is fully in place after 10 years, and
its revenues (roughly 0.2 percent of GDP) are enough
to finance the subsidy. However, before revenues
fully emerge, the subsidy is financed through debt,
leading to a total increase in the debt-to-output
ratio of roughly 1 percent of GDP. The carbon price
discriminates according to the carbon intensity of
the different technologies, thereby disadvantaging
electricity production using coal (and to a lesser extent
gas). Accentuated by a decline in renewable prices
due to the subsidy, the change in relative prices leads
to a rebalancing of the electricity mix away from coal
toward renewables technologies, and electricity sector
emissions decline by 35 percent relative to baseline by
2030 as a result. The decline of gas is dampened by its
role as a backup capacity for renewable electricity.
While investment and employment decline in the
coal sector, the subsidy triggers a surge in investment in renewables, offsetting a large portion of
The authors of this box are Benjamin Carton and
Simon Voigts.

108

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Figure 3.2.1. Decarbonization of the
Electricity Sector
United States
$50 carbon tax only

China
European Union
$50 carbon tax with policy package

70 1. Share in Electricity Generation
(Percent)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2020 30 35 2020 30 35 2020 30 35 2020 30 35
Coal
Natural gas Renewables
Other
20 2. Carbon Emissions from the Electricity Sector
(Percent deviation from baseline)
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
–70
2020
25
30
35
1

3. Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)

0
–1
–2
–3
–4
2020

25

30

35

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure is based on the CarMMa (Carbon Mitigation
Macro Model). Simulation of a $50 tax per ton of carbon
dioxide, phased in over 10 years, alone and together with a
policy package. The policy package includes, in each of the
three regions, frontloaded renewables investment subsidies
and, in the short term, an accommodative monetary policy.
For China, the policy package also includes a doubling of
nuclear and hydro capacities over 20 years.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Box 3.2 (continued)
the losses in coal sector investment. Therefore, the
policy mix greatly reduces emissions, while economic
damage is mitigated (output declines below baseline
by ½ percent over 10 years) as the economy adjusts
by reallocating labor and investment from coal
toward renewables.
The European Union is comparably advanced in its
electricity transition (coal and renewables both have
a share of about 20 percent). At the same time, the
share of natural gas is considerably smaller than in the
United States, which constrains further expansion of
renewables by making the grid comparably less flexible
to accommodate a rise in intermittent electricity generation. With less room to cut coal output and more limited means for renewables to expand, the carbon price
achieves a somewhat milder reduction in emissions.
The high share of coal-generated electricity in
China—almost 70 percent—amplifies the increase in
electricity costs caused by the carbon price, in turn
leading to a more pronounced decline in output.
The carbon price increases the share of renewables
by about 20 percentage points, which alone is not
enough to reduce the share of coal to a sustainable
level. With limited availability of natural gas, renewables must be backed up by coal itself (assuming the

possibility of flexibility retrofits, as discussed in IEA
2019), reducing the scope for reductions. In addition
to renewables subsidies, the macroeconomic package
assumes an expansion in nuclear power (accounting
for the time it takes to build plants), which crowds out
coal-based generation. While the percentage decline
in emissions is of the same order as in other regions,
in absolute terms, it is about three times greater
than in the United States owing to China’s greater
initial emissions.
Overall, the policy is highly effective at curbing
electricity-related emissions at modest macroeconomic
costs, especially if labor reallocation can be facilitated. Storage technology for renewable electricity,
which could become feasible in the near term, would
amplify the penetration of renewables resulting from
the carbon price. Given that the macroeconomic costs
of a low-carbon electricity transition are modest, it
is striking that current policy action and plans for
the phasing out of coal generally fall short of what is
needed to avoid irreversible climate damage. According
to the International Energy Agency, under current
and proposed investment plans and policies, power
generation from coal alone would use up most of the
remaining carbon budget (IEA 2019).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

109

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and
David Hémous. 2012. “The Environment and Directed Technical Change.” American Economic Review 102 (1): 131–66.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Douglas Hanley, and William
Kerr. 2016. “Transition to Clean Technology.” Journal of
Political Economy 124 (1): 52–104.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks, and
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics 4: 1043–171. North
Holland: Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Hemous, Lint Barrage, and Philippe
Aghion. 2019. “Climate Change, Directed Innovation, and
Energy Transition: The Long-Run Consequences of the Shale
Gas Revolution.” In 2019 Meeting Papers 1302. New York:
Society for Economic Dynamics.
Barrett, Scott. 2005. “The Theory of International Environmental Agreements.” In Handbook of Environmental Economics 3:
1457–516. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Barrett, Scott. 2013. “Climate Treaties and Approaching
Catastrophes.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 66 (2): 235–50.
Barrett, Scott. 2016. “Coordination vs. Voluntarism and
Enforcement in Sustaining International Environmental
Cooperation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
113 (5): 14515–22.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Shanjun Li, Deyu Rao, and Nahim Bin
Zahur. 2018. “The Morbidity Cost of Air Pollution: Evidence
from Consumer Spending in China.” NBER Working
Paper 24688, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Batini, Nicoletta, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi, Pierpaolo Grippa,
Andy Jobst, and William Oman. 2020. “Earth Day—The
Impact of COVID-19 on Climate Change Policies.” SPARK
Seminar Presentation, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC, April 22. http://​www​-intranet​.imf​.org/​
departments/​ILU/​Documents/​SPARK​_Earth​%20Day​.pptx.
Batten, Sandra. 2018. “Climate Change and the Macro-­
Economy: A Critical Review.” Bank of England Working
Paper 706, London.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Stefanie Kleimeier, and Michael Viehs. 2018.
“Exporting Pollution: Where Do Multinational Firms Emit
CO2?” NBER Working Paper 25063, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bento, Antonio M., Mark R. Jacobsen, and Antung A. Liu.
2018. “Environmental Policy in the Presence of an Informal
Sector.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 90: 61–77.
Bhattacharya, Amar, and James Rydge, under the guidance
of Nicholas Stern. 2020. “Better Recovery, Better World:
Resetting Climate Action in the Aftermath of the COVID
Pandemic.” Informal Note for Members of the Coalition of
Finance Ministers for Climate Action.

110

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Black, Simon, and Ian Parry. 2020. “Implications of the
Global Economic Crisis for Carbon Pricing: A Quantitative
Assessment for Coalition Member Countries.” Informal
Note for Members of the Coalition of Finance Ministers for
Climate Action. https://​www​.cape4financeministry​.org/​sites/​
cape/​files/​inline​-files/​IMF​-WB​%20Coalition​%20Note​%20​
-%20Implications​%20of​%20the​%20Global​%20Economic​
%20Crisis​%20for​%20Carbon​%20Pricing​.pdf.
Bolt, Jutta, Robert Inklaar, Herman J. de Jong, and Jan Luiten
van Zanden. 2018. “Rebasing ‘Maddison’: New Income
Comparisons and the Shape of Long-Run Economic Development.” GGDC Research Memorandum 174, Groningen
Growth and Development Centre, University of Groningen,
Netherlands.
Bosetti, Valentina, Carlo Carraro, Romain Duval, and Massimo
Tavoni. 2011. “What Should We Expect from Innovation?
A Model-Based Assessment of the Environmental and Mitigation Cost Implications of Climate-Related R&D.” Energy
Economics 33 (6): 1313–20.
Botta, Enrico, and Tomasz Koźluk. 2014. “Measuring Environmental Policy Stringency in OECD Countries.” OECD
Economics Department Working Papers 1177, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Bourcet, Clémence. 2020. “Empirical Determinants of Renewable Energy Deployment: A Systematic Literature Review.”
Energy Economics 85 (104563).
British Petroleum (BP). 2019. BP Statistical Review of World
Energy. http://​www​.bp​.com/​statisticalreview.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel.
2015. “Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on Economic Production.” Nature 527 (7577): 235–39.
Burke, Paul J. 2010. “Income, Resources, and Electricity
Mix.” Energy Economics 32 (3): 616–26.
Calderón, César, Enrique Moral-Benito, and Luis Servén. 2015. “Is
Infrastructure Capital Productive? A Dynamic Heterogeneous
Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 30 (2): 177–98.
Carl, Jeremy, and David Fedor. 2016. “Tracking Global Carbon
Revenues: A Survey of Carbon Taxes versus Cap-and-Trade in
the Real World.” Energy Policy 96: 50–77.
Chateau, Jean, Ruben Bibas, and Elisa Lanzi. 2018. “Impacts of
Green Growth Policies on Labour Markets and Wage Income
Distribution: A General Equilibrium Application to Climate
and Energy Policies.” OECD Environment Working Papers
137, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Coady, David, Ian Parry, Nghia-Piotr Le, and Baoping Shang.
2019. “Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies Remain Large: An
Update Based on Country-Level Estimates.” IMF Working
Paper 19/89, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, Ralf Martin, and Myra Mohnen. 2017.
“Knowledge Spillovers from Clean and Dirty Technologies:
A Patent Citation Analysis.” Grantham Research Institute on
Climate Change and the Environment Working Paper 135,
London School of Economics.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, and David Popp. 2017. “Fiscal and
Regulatory Instruments for Clean Technology Development
in the European Union.” In Energy Tax and Regulatory Policy
in Europe: Reform Priorities, edited by Ian Parry, Karen Pittel,
and Herman Vollebergh. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012.
“Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from
the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3): 66–95.
Deschenes, Olivier. 2018. “Environmental Regulations and
Labor Markets.” IZA World of Labor, Institute of Labor
Economics, Bonn.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone,
Guojun He, and Maigeng Zhou. 2017. “New Evidence on
the Impact of Sustained Exposure to Air Pollution on Life
Expectancy from China’s Huai River Policy. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 114 (39): 10384–89.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2012. “Was the New Deal Contractionary?” American Economic Review 102 (1): 524–55.
European Values Survey. 2020. European Values Study 2017:
Integrated Dataset (EVS 2017). GESIS Data Archive, Cologne.
ZA7500 Data file Version 3.0.0, doi:​10​.4232/​1​.13511.
Fremstad, Anders, and Mark Paul. 2019. “The Impact of a
Carbon Tax on Inequality.” Ecological Economics 163: 88–97.
Fried, Stephie, Kevin Novan, and William Peterman.
2018. “The Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax on
Current and Future Generations.” Review of Economic
Dynamics 30: 30–46.
Fuss, Sabine, William F. Lamb, Max W. Callaghan, Jérôme
Hilaire, Felix Creutzig, Thorben Amann, Tim Beringer, and
others. 2018. “Negative Emissions—Part 2: Costs, Potentials,
and Side Effects.” Environmental Research Letters 13 (6).
Garín, Julio, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims. 2019. “Are Supply Shocks Contractionary at the ZLB? Evidence from
Utilization-Adjusted TFP Data.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 101 (1): 160–75.
Gillingham, Kenneth, and James H. Stock. 2018. “The Cost of
Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 32 (4): 53–72.
Gollier, Christian. 2018a. “On the Efficient Growth Rate of
Carbon Price under a Carbon Budget.” Toulouse School of
Economics, University of Toulouse-Capitole.
Gollier, Christian. 2018b. “The Cost-Efficiency Carbon Pricing
Puzzle.” Toulouse School of Economics, University of
Toulouse-Capitole.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the
Double Dividend: A Reader’s Guide.” International Tax and
Public Finance 2: 157–83.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Ian W. H. Parry. 2008. “Instrument
Choice in Environmental Policy.” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 2: 152–74.
Grainger, Corbett A., and Charles D. Kolstad. 2010. “Who Pays
a Price on Carbon?” Environmental and Resource Economics 46
(3): 359–76.

Greenstone, Michael. 2002. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity: Evidence from the 1970 and
1977 Clean Air Act Amendments and the Census of Manufactures.” Journal of Political Economy 110 (6): 1175–219.
Guillaume, Dominique, Roman Zytek, and Mohammad Reza
Farzin. 2011. “Iran: The Chronicles of the Subsidy Reform.”
IMF Working Paper 11/167, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Haerpfer, C., R. Inglehart, A. Moreno, C. Welzel, K. Kizilova, J.
Diez-Medrano, M. Lagos, and others, eds. 2020. World Values
Survey: Round Seven–Country-Pooled Datafile. Madrid and
Vienna: JD Systems Institute and WVSA Secretariat. http://​
www​.worldvaluessurvey​.org/​WVSDocumentationWV7​.jsp.
Haščič, Ivan, and Mauro Migotto. 2015. “Measuring Environmental Innovation Using Patent Data.” OECD Environment
Working Paper 89, Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, Paris.
Hassler, John, Per Krusell, and Conny Olovsson. 2018. “The
Consequences of Uncertainty: Climate Sensitivity and
Economic Sensitivity to the Climate.” Annual Review of
Economics 10: 189–205.
Hassler, John, Per Krusell, Conny Olovsson, and Michael Reiter.
2020. “On the Effectiveness of Climate Policies.” https://​www​
.bde​.es/​f/​webpi/​SES/​seminars/​2020/​Fich/​sie20200226​.pdf.
Heal, Geoffrey. 2017. “The Economics of the Climate.” Journal
of Economic Literature 55 (3): 1046–63.
Hepburn, Cameron, Brian O’Callaghan, Nicholas Stern, Joseph
Stiglitz, and Dimitri Zenghelis. 2020. “Will COVID-19
Fiscal Recovery Packages Accelerate or Retard Progress
on Climate Change?” Oxford Review of Economic Policy.
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​oxrep/​graa015.
High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices. 2017. Report of the
High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices. Washington, DC: World
Bank. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2014.
“Summary for Policymakers.” In Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Work­ing Group III
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, edited by O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga,
Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, and
others. New York.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2018a.
“Summary for Policymakers. In Global Warming of 1.5°C.
An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of
1.5°C above Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse
Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the
Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable
Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty, edited by V.
Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, and others. In press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2018b. Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (SR15). Chapter 4
in Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response. Geneva:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

111

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

International Energy Agency (IEA). 2019. World Energy Outlook.
Paris. https://​www​.iea​.org/​reports/​world​-energy​-outlook​-2019.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2020a. Sustainable Recovery.
Paris. https://​www​.iea​.org/​reports/​sustainable​-recovery.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2020b. World Energy Investment 2020. Paris. https://​www​.iea​.org/​reports/​world​-energy​
-investment​-2020.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2020c. Green Stimulus
after the 2008 Crisis. Paris. https://​www​.iea​.org/​articles/​green​
-stimulus​-after​-the​-2008​-crisis.
International Hydropower Association (IHA). 2020. Hydropower
Status Report. London.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “Fiscal Policies for
Paris Climate Strategies—From Principle to Practice.” IMF
Policy Paper 19/010, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020a. “EU Climate Mitigation Policy.” IMF Policy Paper, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020b. Primary Commodity Price Tables, Washington, DC. www​.imf​.org/​external/​np/​
res/​commod/​index​.asp.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020c. “Sectoral Policies
for Climate Change Mitigation in the EU.” IMF Policy
Paper, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Forthcoming. “Fiscal Policies to Address Climate Change in Asia and the
Pacific: Opportunities and Challenges.” IMF Policy Paper,
Washington, DC.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 2020. Renewable Capacity and Energy Statistics. Abu Dhabi.
Johnstone, Nick, Ivan Haščič, and David Popp. 2010. “Renewable Energy Policies and Technological Innovation: Evidence
Based on Patent Counts.” Environmental and Resource
Economics 45 (1): 133–55.
Kahn, Matthew E. 1997. “Particulate Pollution Trends in the
United States.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 27: 87–107.
Kahn, Matthew E., Kamiar Mohaddes, N. Ryan, C. Ng, M.
Hashem Pesaran, Mehdi Raissi, and Jui-Chung Yang. 2019.
“Long-Term Macroeconomic Effects of Climate Change:
A Cross-Country Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 26167,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Karlsson, Mikael, Eva Alfredsson, and Nils Westling. 2020.
“Climate Policy Co-Benefits: A Review.” Climate Policy 20
(3): 292–316.
Koske, Isabell, Isabelle Wanner, Rosamaria Bitetti, and Omar
Barbiero. 2015. “The 2013 Update of the OECD’s Database
on Product Market Regulation.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers 1200, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Laxton, Douglas, Susanna Mursula, Michael Kumhof, and Dirk
Muir. 2010. The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model
(GIMF): Theoretical Structure. Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund.
Lazard. 2019. “Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis.” https://​www​
.lazard​.com/​perspective/​lcoe2019.

112

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Lenton, Timothy M., Johan Rockström, Owen Gaffney, Stefan
Rahmstorf, Katherine Richardson, Will Steffen, and Hans
Joachim Schellnhuber. 2019. “Climate Tipping Points—Too
Risky to Bet Against.” https://​www​.nature​.com/​articles/​
d41586​-019​-03595​-0.
Lessmann, Kai, Ulrike Kornek, Valentina Bosetti, Rob Dellink,
Johannes Emmerling, Johan Eyckmans, Miyuki Nagashima,
and others. 2015. “The Stability and Effectiveness of Climate
Coalitions.” Environmental and Resource Economics 62
(4): 811–36.
Liu, Mengdi, Ronald Shadbegian, and Bing Zhang. 2017.
“Does Environmental Regulation Affect Labor Demand
in China? Evidence from the Textile Printing and Dyeing
Industry.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 86: 277–94.
Liu, Weifeng, Warwick J. McKibbin, Adele Morris, and Peter J.
Wilcoxen. 2020. “Global Economic and Environmental Outcomes of the Paris Agreement.” Energy Economics 90: 1–17.
Marin, Giovanni, and Francesco Vona. 2019. “Climate Policies
and Skill-Biased Employment Dynamics: Evidence from
EU Countries.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 98 (102253).
McCollum, David L., Wenji Zhou, Christoph Bertram,
Harmen-Sytze De Boer, Valentina Bosetti, Sebastian Busch,
Jacques Després, and others. 2018. “Energy Investment Needs
for Fulfilling the Paris Agreement and Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.” Nature Energy 3 (7): 589–99.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1999. “The
Theoretical and Empirical Structure of the G-Cubed Model.”
Economic Modelling 16 (1): 123–48.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 2013. “A Global
Approach to Energy and the Environment: The G-Cubed
Model.” Chapter 17 in Handbook of Computable General
Equilibrium Modelling, 995–1068. North Holland: Elsevier.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2019. “The Distributional Impacts of US
Energy Policy.” Energy Policy 129: 926–29.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James H. Stock. 2020, “Measuring
the Macroeconomic Impact of Carbon Taxes.” AEA Papers
and Proceedings 110, American Economic Association,
Nashville, TN.
Mirzoev, Tokhir N., Ling Zhu, Yang Takhar, Tian Zhang, Erik
Roos, Andrea Pescatori, and Akito Matsumoto. 2020. “The
Future of Oil and Fiscal Sustainability in the GCC Region.”
IMF Departmental Paper 20/01, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Morris, Jennifer S., John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev. 2010.
“Combining a Renewable Portfolio Standard with a
Cap-and-Trade Policy: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” MIT
Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.
http://​globalchange​.mit​.edu/​publication/​13783.
Newell, Richard G. 2015. “The Role of Energy Technology
Policy alongside Carbon Pricing.” In Implementing a US Carbon Tax: Challenges and Debates, edited by Ian Parry, Adele
Morris, and Roberton C. Williams III. New York: Routledge.

CHAPTER 3

MITIGATING CLIMATE CHANGE—GROWTH- AND DISTRIBUTION-FRIENDLY STRATEGIES

Nordhaus, William D. 2010. Excel file for RICE model as
of April 26, 2010. Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
2010-11-17. https://​doi​.org/​10​.3886/​ICPSR28461​.v1.
Nordhaus, William D. 2015. “Climate Clubs: Overcoming
Free-Riding in International Climate Policy.” American Economic Review 105 (4): 1339–70.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2018. “Environmental Policy Stringency index
(Edition 2017),” OECD Environment Statistics (database).
Papageorgiou, Chris, Marianne Saam, and Patrick Schulte. 2017.
“Substitution between Clean and Dirty Energy Inputs: A
Macroeconomic Perspective.” Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (2): 281–90.
Parry, Ian, Chandara Veung, and Dirk Heine. 2015. “How
Much Carbon Pricing Is in Countries’ Own Interests? The
Critical Role of Co-Benefits.” Climate Change Economics 6
(0) 4: 1550019.
Popp, David, Ivan Haščič, and Neelaskshi Medhi. 2011.
“Technology and the Diffusion of Renewable Energy.” Energy
Economics 33 (4): 648–62.
Popp, David, Jacquelyn Pless, Ivan Haščič, and Nick Johnstone.
2020. “Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the Energy
Sector.” NBER Working Paper 27145, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Rodríguez, Miguel Cárdenas, Ivan Haščič, Nick Johnstone, Jérôme
Silva, and Antoine Ferey. 2015. “Renewable Energy Policies
and Private Sector Investment: Evidence from Financial Microdata.” Environmental and Resource Economics 62 (1): 163–88.
Smith, Michael G., and Johannes Urpelainen. 2014. “The Effect
of Feed-in Tariffs on Renewable Electricity Generation:
An Instrumental Variables Approach.” Environmental and
Resource Economics 57 (3): 367–92.
Stavropoulos, Spyridon, and Martijn J. Burger. 2020. “Modelling Strategy and Net Employment Effects of Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency: A Meta-Regression.” Energy
Policy 136 (111047).
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The
Stern Review. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Bruce C. Greenwald, with commentary
and contributions from Philippe Aghion, Kenneth J. Arrow,
Robert M. Solow, and Michael Wood Ford. 2014. Creating
a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth, Development,
and Social Progress. New York: Columbia University Press.
Tavares, Marina M. Forthcoming. “Carbon Pricing Winners and
Losers: Workers, Consumers, and Policy Options.”
United Nations (UN). 2019. World Population Prospects 2019:
Highlights. New York: United National Department for Economic Social Affairs.
United States Department of Energy. 2017. US Energy and
Employment Report. Washington, DC.
Van der Werf, Edwin. 2008. “Production Functions for Climate
Policy Modeling: An Empirical Analysis.” Energy Economics 30 (6): 2964–79.
Van Reenen, John. 1997. “Employment and Technological Innovation: Evidence from UK Manufacturing Firms.” Journal of
Labor Economics 15 (2): 255–84.
Verdolini, Elena, Francesco Vona, and David Popp. 2018.
“Bridging the Gap: Do Fast-Reacting Fossil Technologies
Facilitate Renewable Energy Diffusion?” Energy Policy
116: 242–56.
Wei, Max, Shana Patadia, and Daniel M. Kammen. 2010. “Putting Renewables and Energy Efficiency to Work: How Many
Jobs Can the Clean Energy Industry Generate in the US?”
Energy Policy 38 (2): 919–31.
Wieland, Johannes F. 2019. “Are Negative Supply Shocks
Expansionary at the Zero Lower Bound?” Journal of Political
Economy 127 (3): 973–1007.
Xu, Chi, Timothy A. Kohler, Timothy M. Lenton,
Jens-Christian Svenning, and Marten Scheffer. 2020. “Future
of the Human Climate Niche.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 117 (21): 11350–55.
Yamazaki, Akio. 2017. “Jobs and Climate Policy: Evidence from
British Columbia’s Revenue-Neutral Carbon Tax.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 83: 197–216.
Yip, Chi Man. 2018. “On the Labor Market Consequences of
Environmental Taxes.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 89: 136–52.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

113

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

T

he Statistical Appendix presents historical
data as well as projections. It comprises
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New,
Data and Conventions, Country Notes,
General Features and Composition of Groups in the
World Economic Outlook Classification, Key Data
Documentation, and Statistical Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions
underlying the estimates and projections for 2020–21.
The second section briefly describes the changes to the
database and statistical tables since the April 2020
World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section
offers a general description of the data and the conventions used for calculating country group composites.
The fourth section presents selected key information
for each country. The fifth section summarizes the classification of countries in the various groups presented
in the WEO. The sixth section provides information
on methods and reporting standards for the member
countries’ national account and government finance
indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here;
Statistical Appendix B is available online at www.imf​
.org/en/Publications/WEO.)
Data in these tables have been compiled on the basis
of information available through September 28, 2020.
The figures for 2020–21 are shown with the same
degree of precision as the historical figures solely for
convenience; because they are projections, the same
degree of accuracy is not to be inferred.

Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average
levels measured during July 24–August 21, 2020. For
2020 and 2021 these assumptions imply average US
dollar–special drawing right (SDR) conversion rates of
1.391 and 1.430, US dollar–euro conversion rates of
1.143 and 1.230, and yen–US dollar conversion rates
of 107.2 and 105.9, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $41.69
a barrel in 2020 and $46.70 a barrel in 2021.

National authorities’ established policies are assumed
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific
policy assumptions underlying the projections for
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month
US dollar deposits will average 0.7 percent in 2020
and 0.4 percent in 2021, the LIBOR on three-month
euro deposits will average –0.4 percent in 2020 and
–0.5 percent in 2021, and the LIBOR on six-month yen
deposits will average 0.0 percent in 2020 and 2021.
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the
irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and
currencies of the member countries adopting the euro
are as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO.
See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO as well for
details on how the conversion rates were established.
1 euro

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

13.7603
40.3399
0.585274
1.95583
15.6466
5.94573
6.55957
340.750
0.787564
1,936.27
0.702804
3.45280
40.3399
0.42930
2.20371
200.482
30.1260
239.640
166.386

Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Cyprus pound1
Deutsche marks
Estonian krooni2
Finnish markkaa
French francs
Greek drachmas3
Irish pound
Italian lire
Latvian lat4
Lithuanian litas5
Luxembourg francs
Maltese lira1
Netherlands guilders
Portuguese escudos
Slovak koruna6
Slovenian tolars7
Spanish pesetas

1Established

on January 1, 2008.
on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
2Established

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

115

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

What’s New
• Following the recent release of the 2017 International Comparison Program (ICP) survey for new
purchasing-power-parity benchmarks, the WEO’s
estimates of purchasing-power-parity weights and
GDP valued at purchasing power parity have been
updated. For more details, see Box 1.1 of the
October 2020 WEO.
• Starting with the October 2020 WEO, data and
forecasts for Bangladesh and Tonga are presented on
a fiscal year basis.
• Data for West Bank and Gaza are now included
in the WEO. West Bank and Gaza is added to the
Middle East and Central Asia regional group.

Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 195 economies form the
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department
and regional departments, with the latter regularly
updating country projections based on consistent
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions,
international organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compilation of national statistics,
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions,
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the
production of economic statistics. The WEO database
reflects information from both national source agencies
and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version
of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of
the Balance of Payments and International Investment
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial
Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide (MFSMCG),
and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014
(GFSM 2014)—have been aligned with the SNA
2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special interest
in countries’ external positions, financial sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process of
adapting country data to the new standards begins in
earnest when the manuals are released. However, full
concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent
on the provision by national statistical compilers of

116

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are
only partly adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for
many countries, conversion to the updated standards
will have only a small impact on major balances and
aggregates. Many other countries have partly adopted
the latest standards and will continue implementation
over a number of years.1
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align gross
and net debt data with the definitions in the GFSM, as
a result of data limitations or specific country circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from the
formal definitions. Although every effort is made to
ensure the WEO data are relevant and internationally
comparable, differences in both sectoral and instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally
comparable. As more information becomes available,
changes in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions that can sometimes
be substantial. For clarification on the deviations in
sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the
metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates
of change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used
for all data for the emerging market and developing
economies group—except data on inflation and
money growth, for which geometric averages are used.
The following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three
years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few countries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar
adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please
refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards each country
adheres to.
2 Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and
commodity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate
of change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is
based on the simple arithmetic average.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

of total world or group GDP.3 Annual inflation rates
are simple percentage changes from the previous years,
except in the case of emerging market and developing
economies, for which the rates are based on logarithmic differences.
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing
power parity terms are sums of individual country data
after conversion to the international dollar in the years
indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP
data are used for the euro area and for the majority
of individual countries, except for Cyprus, Ireland,
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual
country data after conversion to US dollars at the
average market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are
sums of individual country data after conversion to
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the
years indicated for balance of payments data.
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent changes
for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value
of exports or imports as a share of total world or group
exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a
few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national
accounts and government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2019 and earlier
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns;
Table G lists the latest actual outturns for the
3 See Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO for a summary of the
revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights as well as “Revised
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update,
Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO,
and Annex IV of the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde
and Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based
Weights for the World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the
World Economic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund, December 1993), 106–23.

indicators in the national accounts, prices, government
finance, and balance of payments indicators for each
country.

Country Notes
For Albania, projections were prepared prior to the
first Post-Program Monitoring mission that ended on
September 28 and therefore do not reflect updates
made during the mission.
For Argentina, fiscal and inflation variables are
excluded from publication for 2021–25 and 2020–25,
respectively, as these are to a large extent linked to stillpending program negotiations. The official national
consumer price index (CPI) for Argentina starts in
December 2016. For earlier periods, CPI data for
Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI
(prior to December 2013), the national CPI (IPCNu,
December 2013 to October 2015), the City of Buenos
Aires CPI (November 2015 to April 2016), and the
Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 2016 to December 2016). Given limited comparability of these series
on account of differences in geographical coverage,
weights, sampling, and methodology, the average CPI
inflation for 2014–16 and end-of-period inflation for
2015–16 are not reported in the October 2020 WEO.
Also, Argentina discontinued the publication of labor
market data in December 2015 and new series became
available starting in the second quarter of 2016.
For Australia, projections do not reflect the October
6 Commonwealth budget, which was released after
the cutoff date (September 28) for the October 2020
WEO.
Data and forecasts for Bangladesh are presented on a
fiscal year basis starting with the October 2020 WEO.
However, the real GDP and purchasing-power-parity
GDP aggregates that include Bangladesh are based on
calendar year data.
For Belarus, projections were prepared before the
presidential elections of August 9, 2020.
The fiscal series for the Dominican Republic have
the following coverage: public debt, debt service, and
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the
consolidated public sector (which includes central
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector,
and the central bank); and the remaining fiscal series
are for the central government.
The fiscal data for Ecuador reflect net lending/
borrowing for the nonfinancial public sector.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

117

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Ecuadorian authorities, with technical support from
the IMF, are undertaking revisions of the historical
fiscal data for the net lending/borrowing of the
nonfinancial public sector over 2012–17, with the
view of correcting recently identified statistical errors
in data compilation at the subnational level and the
consistency between above-the-line and financing data
by subsectors.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per
national accounts: for 1998 to 2011, with base year
2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
For Lebanon, projections for 2021–25 are omitted
due to an unusually high degree of uncertainty.
Against the backdrop of a civil war and weak capacity, the reliability of Libya’s data, especially regarding
national accounts and medium-term projections, is low.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward
because of the uncertain political situation.
Ukraine’s revised national accounts data are available
beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol
from 2010.
Starting from October 2018 Uruguay’s public pension system has been receiving transfers in the context
of a new law that compensates persons affected by the
creation of the mixed pension system. These funds are
recorded as revenues, consistent with the IMF’s methodology. Therefore, data and projections for 2018–21
are affected by these transfers, which amounted to
1.3 percent of GDP in 2018 and 1.2 percent of
GDP in 2019, and are projected to be 0.8 percent of
GDP in 2020, 0.2 percent of GDP in 2021, and zero
percent thereafter. See IMF Country Report 19/64
for further details.4 The disclaimer about the public
pension system applies only to the revenues and net
lending/borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was
changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinancial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. In
Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage includes
central government, local government, social security
funds, nonfinancial public corporations, and Banco de
Seguros del Estado. Historical data were also revised
accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal perimeter—
which excludes the central bank—assets and liabilities
held by the nonfinancial public sector where the counterpart is the central bank are not netted out in debt
4 Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Country Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund,
February 2019).

118

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

figures. In this context, capitalization bonds issued in
the past by the government to the central bank are
now part of the nonfinancial public sector debt. Gross
and net debt estimates for 2008–11 are preliminary.
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela,
including assessing past and current economic developments as the basis for the projections, is complicated by the lack of discussions with the authorities
(the last Article IV consultation took place in 2004),
incomplete understanding of the reported data, and
difficulties in interpreting certain reported economic
indicators given economic developments. The fiscal
accounts include the budgetary central government;
social security; FOGADE (insurance deposit institution); and a sample of public enterprises, including
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA); and data
for 2018–19 are IMF staff estimates. The effects of
hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data mean
that the IMF staff’s projected macroeconomic indicators need to be interpreted with caution. For example,
nominal GDP is estimated assuming the GDP deflator
rises in line with the IMF staff’s projection of average
inflation. Public external debt in relation to GDP is
projected using the IMF staff’s estimate of the average
exchange rate for the year. Wide uncertainty surrounds
these projections. Venezuela’s consumer prices are
excluded from all WEO group composites.
In 2019 Zimbabwe authorities introduced the Real
Time Gross Settlement dollar, later renamed the
­Zimbabwe dollar, and are in the process of redenominating their national accounts statistics. Current data
are subject to revision. The Zimbabwe dollar previously ceased circulating in 2009 and, between 2009
and 2019, Zimbabwe operated under a multi-currency
regime with the US dollar as the unit of account.

Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the
world into two major groups: advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies.5 This
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objective is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably
5 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate
and independent basis.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

meaningful method of organizing data. Table A provides an overview of the country classification, showing
the number of countries in each group by region and
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports
of goods and services, and population).
Some countries remain outside the country classification and therefore are not included in the analysis.
Cuba and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and
the IMF therefore does not monitor their economies.

General Features and Composition of Groups in
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 39 advanced economies. The seven
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France,
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover
the current members for all years, even though the
membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced
economies in the WEO.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing economies (156) includes all those that are not classified as
advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and
developing economies are emerging and developing
Asia; emerging and developing Europe (sometimes
also referred to as “central and eastern Europe”); Latin
America and the Caribbean; Middle East and Central
Asia (which comprises the regional subgroups Caucasus
and Central Asia; and Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan); and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect

the composition of export earnings and a distinction between net creditor and net debtor economies.
Tables D and E show the detailed composition of
emerging market and developing economies in the
regional and analytical groups.
The analytical criterion source of export
earnings distinguishes between the categories fuel
(Standard International Trade Classification [SITC] 3)
and nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary
products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are
categorized into one of these groups if their main
source of export earnings exceeded 50 percent of total
exports on average between 2015 and 2019.
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies,
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs).
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their
latest net international investment position, where
available, was less than zero or their current account
balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available
data) to 2019 were negative. Net debtor economies are
further differentiated on the basis of experience with
debt servicing.6
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are
or have been considered by the IMF and the World
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known
as the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the
external debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to
a “sustainable” level in a reasonably short period of
time.7 Many of these countries have already benefited
from debt relief and have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita
income levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700
in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas
method), structural features consistent with limited
development and structural transformation, and
external financial linkages insufficiently close for them
to be widely seen as emerging market economies.
6 During 2015–19, 27 economies incurred external payments
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or
rescheduling during 2015–19.
7 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi,
and Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries:
The Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

119

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A. Classification, by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods
and Services, and Population, 20191
(Percent of total for group or world)

Number of
Economies
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies

39

16

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

7

19

GDP
Advanced
Economies

43.1
15.9
12.5
3.5
2.4
2.0
1.5
4.1
2.4
1.4
6.8

73.5
Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-5
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by Debt-­
Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Low-Income Developing Countries

World

100.0
37.0
29.0
8.1
5.6
4.6
3.5
9.4
5.6
3.3
15.7

Exports of Goods
and Services
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
16.3
41.7
11.7
5.8
4.1
3.1
5.8
5.8
3.5
26.9

63.0
10.3
26.3
7.4
3.6
2.6
2.0
3.7
3.6
2.2
16.9

31.7

53.0

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

Population
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
30.7
31.7
7.8
6.1
5.6
4.3
11.8
6.2
3.5
16.1

14.1
4.3
4.5
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.6
1.7
0.9
0.5
2.3

33.4

71.6

10.1

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

156

100.0

56.9

100.0

37.0

100.0

85.9

30

55.4
30.5
12.5
10.0
13.4
5.4
13.3
4.2
3.4
12.6
2.2
5.4
1.4
1.0

31.5
17.4
7.1
5.7
7.6
3.1
7.6
2.4
2.0
7.2
1.2
3.1
0.8
0.6

49.1
29.1
5.9
12.5
16.8
5.3
13.7
2.9
5.4
15.9
3.1
4.5
0.8
1.2

18.2
10.8
2.2
4.6
6.2
2.0
5.1
1.1
2.0
5.9
1.2
1.7
0.3
0.4

56.1
21.5
21.0
8.8
5.8
2.3
9.7
3.2
2.0
12.5
0.5
15.9
3.1
0.9

48.2
18.5
18.1
7.6
5.0
1.9
8.3
2.8
1.7
10.7
0.4
13.6
2.7
0.8

27
128
36

15.7
84.3
5.6

8.9
48.0
3.2

20.7
79.3
5.2

7.7
29.3
1.9

11.7
88.3
9.2

10.0
75.8
7.9

123

53.7

30.6

50.5

18.7

68.5

58.8

27

3.8

2.2

2.9

1.1

7.6

6.6

39
59

2.8
8.2

1.6
4.6

2.0
7.4

0.7
2.8

11.9
23.2

10.2
19.9

  5
16
33
32
45

1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings, and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of
insufficient data.

120

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table B. Advanced Economies, by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
France
Germany
Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hong Kong SAR1
Iceland
Israel

Greece
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta

Netherlands
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain

Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

United States

Korea
Macao SAR2
New Zealand
Norway
Puerto Rico
San Marino

Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan Province of China

1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a
Special Administrative Region of China.

Table C. European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland

France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg

Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

121

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel

Nonfuel Primary Products

Brunei Darussalam
Timor-Leste

Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Marshall Islands
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu

Emerging and Developing Asia

Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela

Argentina
Bolivia
Chile
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay

Algeria
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Afghanistan
Mauritania
Somalia
Sudan
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan

Angola
Chad
Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Nigeria
South Sudan

Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Middle East and Central Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

122

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries
Net External
Position1
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
Bhutan
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
Cambodia
*
China
•
Fiji
*
India
*
Indonesia
*
Kiribati
•
Lao P.D.R.
*
Malaysia
*
Maldives
*
Marshall Islands
*
Micronesia
•
Mongolia
*
Myanmar
*
Nauru
*
Nepal
•
Palau
*
Papua New Guinea
*
Philippines
*
Samoa
*
Solomon Islands
*
Sri Lanka
*
Thailand
*
Timor-Leste
•
Tonga
*
Tuvalu
*
Vanuatu
*
Vietnam
*
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
Belarus
*
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
Bulgaria
*
Croatia
*
Hungary
*
Kosovo
*
Moldova
*
Montenegro
*

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries
*
*
*

*
*

*
*
*

*

*

*

*

Net External
Position1
North Macedonia
*
Poland
*
Romania
*
Russia
•
Serbia
*
Turkey
*
Ukraine
*
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
Argentina
•
Aruba
*
The Bahamas
*
Barbados
*
Belize
*
Bolivia
*
Brazil
*
Chile
*
Colombia
*
Costa Rica
*
Dominica
•
Dominican Republic
*
Ecuador
*
El Salvador
*
Grenada
*
Guatemala
*
Guyana
*
Haiti
*
Honduras
*
Jamaica
*
Mexico
*
Nicaragua
*
Panama
*
Paraguay
*
Peru
*
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
St. Lucia
*
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
*
Suriname
*
Trinidad and Tobago
•
Uruguay
*
Venezuela
•

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

•

•
•
•

*
*

•

*

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

123

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
Net External
Position1
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria3
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde

•
•
*
•
•
*
*
*
•
•
*
*
•
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
•
•
*
*
...
*
*
•
•
•
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

•

*

*

*

•

*
*

*

*
*
*

*
*

•

*

•
•

*
*

1Dot

Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan3
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

*
*
*
*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*

*
*
*
•
•
•
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
...
*
*
*
*
*

•
•
•

*
*
*

*

*

•

*

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

•

*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*

•

*

•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*
*
*

(star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.
2Dot

124

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
The Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Bhutan
Botswana
Dominica
Egypt
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Haiti
Hong Kong SAR
India
Iran
Jamaica
Lesotho
Malawi
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Micronesia
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Pakistan
Palau
Puerto Rico
Rwanda
St. Lucia
Samoa
Singapore
Thailand
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
1Unless

Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun

Government Finance
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep

noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

125

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

126

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019

Base Year2
2002/03
1996
2001
2002
20066

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993

2019
2019
2017
2019
2019
2018
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19

2004
2005
2000
2017/18
2015
2005
2012
2010
2005/06
2010
2014
2015
2000
2015
2000/016

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2019
2018

1990
2015

SNA 2008
ESA 2010

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2015
2018

2006
1995
2010
2015
2015
2005
2007

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2019
2019
2017

2000
2005
2012
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Chilean peso
Chinese yuan
Colombian peso
Comorian franc
Congolese franc

CB
CB
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO

2017
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019

2005
20136
2015
2015
2007
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
...
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Costa Rican colón

NSO
CB

2018
2019

2005
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Currency
Afghan afghani
Albanian lek
Algerian dinar
Angolan kwanza
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Argentine peso
Armenian dram
Aruban Florin
Australian dollar
Euro
Azerbaijan manat
Bahamian dollar
Bahrain dinar
Bangladesh taka
Barbados dollar
Belarusian ruble
Euro
Belize dollar
CFA franc
Bhutanese
ngultrum
Bolivian boliviano
Bosnian convertible
marka
Botswana pula
Brazilian real
Brunei dollar
Bulgarian lev
CFA franc
Burundi franc
Cabo Verdean
escudo
Cambodian riel
CFA franc
Canadian dollar
CFA franc

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
IMF staff
NSO
NSO and MEP
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and CB
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1996
From 2005

From 2000
From 1980
From 1995
From 1994

From 2005
From 1995

From 2000

From 1996

From 2011

From 1980

From 2003
From 2005
From 2007

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018/19

NSO
NSO

2019
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2019
2019
2018

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019

NSO
CB

2019
2019

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2018

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6

CB
CB
CB

2019
2018
2018

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

C
C
Mixed
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
C

NSO
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2019

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

Mixed

CB

2019

BPM 6

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG,BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,NFPC,NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
CG

C
C
C
C
CB
A
A
Mixed
Mixed
A
C

CB
CB
NSO, MEP, and GAD
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
MoF
NSO
CB

2019
2019
2018
2019
2018
2016
2018
2018
2018
2019
2017

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

1986
2001
...
2001
1986
2001

CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG

C
A
C
...
Mixed
A

CB
CB
GAD
CB and NSO
CB and IMF staff
CB

2013
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

2001
1986

CG
CG

A
C

CB
CB

2017
2019

BPM 6
BPM 6

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2018

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986

MoF
MoF
MoF

2019
2018
2019

1986
2001
2001

MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2019
2018
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2019/20
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2019

1986
2001
2001
2014
2014
...
2014
2001
...
1986
2001
ESA 2010
1986
1986
1986
2001

MoF

2019

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
IMF staff

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5
C
...

Historical Data
Source1
NSO, MoF, and CB
CB

C
...
C

2014

CG,SG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,TG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,MPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS

2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2015
2018
2018
2019
2019
2018

1986
2001
...
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019

MoF
MoF and CB

2018
2019

CG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG
CG,LG
CG

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

127

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

128

Currency
CFA franc
Croatian kuna
Euro
Czech koruna
Danish krone
Djibouti franc
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Dominican peso
US dollar
Egyptian pound
US dollar
CFA franc
Eritrean nakfa
Euro
Swazi lilangeni
Ethiopian birr
Fijian dollar
Euro
Euro
CFA franc
Gambian dalasi
Georgian lari
Euro
Ghanaian cedi
Euro
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Guatemalan
quetzal
Guinean franc
CFA franc
Guyanese dollar
Haitian gourde
Honduran lempira
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Icelandic króna
Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Iranian rial
Iraqi dinar
Euro
New Israeli shekel
Euro
Jamaican dollar

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2017
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018

Base Year2
2015
2015
2010
2015
2010
2013
2006

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2017
2018
2019
2018
2018/19
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019

2007
2007
2016/17
2014
2006
2011
2015
2011
2015/16
2014
2010
2014
2001
2013
2015
2015
2013
2010
2006

SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

From 2007

CB

2019

2013

SNA 1993

From 2001

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2018
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019/20
2019
2019/20
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

2010
2015
20126
1986/87
2000
2018
2015
2005
2011/12
2010
2011/12
2007
2017
2015
2015
2007

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
MEP
CB
MEP and CB
IMF staff
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1968/93
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

From 2010

From 1980
From 1980

From 1996
From 1991
From 1995

From 1980
From 1995
From 1990

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO and CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019/20
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019

NSO

2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
IEO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019/20
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB and MoF
MoF
MoF and CB
MoF and MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
MoF and IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019/20
2019
2019
2018/19
2019
2017
2018
2019
2018/19
2018/19
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2019
2018
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019/20

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986
2014
ESA 2010
2014
2014
2001
1986
2014
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001
1986/2001
2001
1986
1986
2014
2014
2001
1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2014
2014
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986
2014
2001
ESA 2010
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
2014
2001
1986

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG
CG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG,LG,SS,MPC
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS,other
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
A
Mixed
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
A
A
A
C
C
A
C
A
CB
C
C
A
C
C
Mixed
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
A
...
A
C

Historical Data
Source1
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
NSO and CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2017
2018
2019
2019
2019/20
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019/20

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

129

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Macedonia
Norway

130

Currency
Japanese yen
Jordanian dinar
Kazakhstani tenge
Kenyan shilling
Australian dollar
South Korean won
Euro
Kuwaiti dinar
Kyrgyz som
Lao kip
Euro
Lebanese pound
Lesotho loti
US dollar
Libyan dinar
Euro
Euro
Macanese pataca
Malagasy ariary
Malawian kwacha
Malaysian ringgit
Maldivian rufiyaa
CFA franc
Euro
US dollar
New Mauritanian
ouguiya
Mauritian rupee
Mexican peso
US dollar
Moldovan leu
Mongolian tögrög
Euro
Moroccan dirham
Mozambican
metical
Myanmar kyat
Namibian dollar
Australian dollar
Nepalese rupee
Euro
New Zealand dollar
Nicaraguan
córdoba
CFA franc
Nigerian naira
Macedonian denar
Norwegian krone

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)
System of
National
Accounts
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1980

From 1999

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2017
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018
2017/18
2018
2017
2019
2019
2019
2018
2011
2019
2019
2018
2019
2017/18
2018

Base Year2
2011
2016
2007
2009
2006
2015
2016
2010
2005
2012
2015
2010
2012/13
2018
2007
2015
2010
2018
2007
2010
2015
2014
1999
2015
2003/04
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

2006
2013
2003/04
1995
2010
2006
2007
2014

MEP
NSO
...
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2018/19
2019
2018/19
2018/19
2019
2019
2019

2015/16
2000
2006/07
2000/01
2015
2009/10
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993/
2008
...
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2018

2015
2010
2005
2017

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

From 1994

From 1980

From 1995
From 2010

From 2005
From 1995
From 2001

From 2000
From 2014

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
NSO
CB
NSO
IMF staff
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2017
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019/20
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2017/18
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018

From 1980
From 1987
From 1994

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2018/19
2019
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2019
2019

From 1980

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019

From 2007

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Macedonia
Norway

Historical Data
Source1
GAD
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO and MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2019
2019
2019
2017
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019/20
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2018
2019
2017/18
2019
2019/20
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2018/19
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2014
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
...
2014
...
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
2001
1986
2014
2001
2014
1986
1986
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2014
2001
1986
2001
1986/2001
2001
2001
2014
2001
2001
2001
2001
2014
1986
1986
2001
1986
2014

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS
CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG
CG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,NFPC
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG
CG,NFPC
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG, LG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG,SS

Balance of Payments

Accounting
Practice5
A
C
A
C
C
C
C
Mixed
C
C
C
Mixed
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
Mixed
A
A
C
C
C
...
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
Mixed
C
A
A
C
A
C
C
A

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO and GAD
NSO
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
GAD
CB
IMF staff
CB
IMF staff
CB
CB
NSO
IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
NSO

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2018
2017
2019
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2019
2017/18
2018
2018
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2019
2018/19
2018/19
2019
2019
2018
2018
2019
2019
2018

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

131

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

132

Currency
Omani rial
Pakistan rupee
US dollar
US dollar
Papua New Guinea
kina
Paraguayan
guaraní
Peruvian sol
Philippine peso
Polish zloty
Euro
US dollar
Qatari riyal
Romanian leu
Russian ruble
Rwandan franc
Samoan tala
Euro
São Tomé and
Príncipe dobra
Saudi riyal
CFA franc
Serbian dinar
Seychelles rupee
Sierra Leonean
leone
Singapore dollar
Euro
Euro
Solomon Islands
dollar
US dollar
South African rand
South Sudanese
pound
Euro
Sri Lankan rupee
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Sudanese pound
Surinamese dollar

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2015

Base Year2
2010
2005/066
2014/15
2007
2013

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
...
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2018

2014

SNA 2008

CB

2019
2019
2019
2019
2017/18
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2018
2019

2007
2018
2010
2016
1954
2018
2015
2016
2017
2012/13
2007
2008

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1968
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
...
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2017
2018

2010
2014
2010
2006
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2019
2019
2019
2019

2015
2015
2010
2012

SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO and
IMF staff
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2018

2013
2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

2019
2019
2019

2015
2010
2006

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO

2018

2018

NSO

2019

NSO
NSO

2019
2018

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and MoF
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 2007

From 2010
From 1980

From 2000
From 1995

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2015
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2018
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019

CB
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019

SNA 1993

NSO

2018

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2019

1982
2007

SNA 1968
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2019
2019

From 2010
From 2010
From 2015
From 1997
From 2000

From 1995

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2015
2019

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986
2001
2014
1986
2001

CB and MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and Customs

2019
2019
2019
2019
2015/16
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2018
2019

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and NSO
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and MEP
MoF and NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2019/20
2018/19
2019
2015
2018

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

2019
2019
2019
2019
...
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018/19
2018
2019

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
...
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
...
BPM 6

CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
MoF, NSO, and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2019
2019
2018
2017
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2018
2018
2018

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

CB
CB

2019
2019

BPM 6
BPM 5

CB
CB
MoF
NSO
CB
CB

2001
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
1986
2001
2014
1986
2001
...
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
...
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG

Accounting
Practice5
C
C
...
C
C
C

Historical Data
Source1

Mixed
C
A
A
A
C
C
Mixed
Mixed
A
...
C

CB
CB
CB
CB
...
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
Other
CB

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019/20
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2017/18
2019

2014
2001
1986/2001
1986
1986
2014
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
...
ESA 2010
2001
1986
1986
1986

CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
CG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SG,SS,other
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG, SG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C

2019
2018

2001
1986

CG
CG

Mixed
Mixed

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

133

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago

Currency
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Syrian pound
New Taiwan dollar

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2010
2019

Base Year2
2019
2010
2000
2016

System of
National
Accounts
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Tajik somoni
Tanzanian shilling
Thai baht
US dollar
CFA franc
Tongan pa’anga
Trinidad and
Tobago dollar
Tunisian dinar
Turkish lira
New Turkmen
manat
Australian dollar
Ugandan shilling
Ukrainian hryvnia
U.A.E. dirham

NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2018
2018
2018
2018
2016
2018/19
2018

1995
2015
2002
20156
2007
2016/17
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2018

2010
2009
2008

SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

PFTAC advisors
NSO
NSO
NSO

2018
2019
2019
2019

2005
2016
2016
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008

British pound
US dollar
Uruguayan peso
Uzbek som

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019

2016
2012
2005
2015

ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
CB

2018
2018

2006
1997

SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen

Vanuatu vatu
Venezuelan bolívar
soberano
Vietnamese dong
New Israeli shekel
Yemeni rial

NSO
NSO
IMF staff

2019
2019
2019

2010
2015
1990

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

Zambia
Zimbabwe

Zambian kwacha
Zimbabwe dollar

NSO
NSO

2018
2019

2010
2012

SNA 2008
...

Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela

134

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1993
From 1980

From 1993

From 2009
From 2009
From 2000

From 2005

From 1980
From 1980

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2019
2019
2011
2019

NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2018
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018/19
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2018

NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2018
2018/19
2019
2019

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO and
IMF staff
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO,CB, and
IMF staff
NSO
NSO

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Balance of Payments

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2018
2009
2019

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
2001
1986
2001

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
C
C

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
CB
CB
CB

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2018
2019
2009
2019

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2018
2018
2018/19
2018
2019
2018/19
2018/19
2019
2019
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018

1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
2014
1986
1986
2001
1986
...
2001
2001
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG,BCG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,other
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,BCG,SG,SS

C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
Mixed
C
C
Mixed

CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and NSO
CB
CB
CB
NSO and IMF staff
IMF staff
CB
CB
CB

2018
2018
2018
2019
2018
2018/19
2019
2019
2019
2015
2012
2019
2019
2018

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

NSO
MEP
MoF

2019
2019
2019

2001
2014
1986

A
A
C

NSO
NSO
CB

2019
2019
2019

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2019
2019
2017
2018
2019
2019
2019
2018

2014
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986

CG,LG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS,NFPC,
NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
BCG,NFPC,SS,other
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C
Mixed
C
C
C

CB and MEP
CB
CB
CB
NSO
IMF staff
CB
CB and MoF

2019
2019
2018
2018
2019
2019
2018
2018

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning,
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to
calculate the index.
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public
corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

135

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in the
World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally based on
officially announced budgets, adjusted for differences
between the national authorities and the IMF staff
regarding macroeconomic assumptions and projected
fiscal outturns. When no official budget has been
announced, projections incorporate policy measures
that are judged likely to be implemented. The mediumterm fiscal projections are similarly based on a judgment about the most likely path of policies. For cases
in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to
assess the authorities’ budget intentions and prospects
for policy implementation, an unchanged structural
primary balance is assumed unless indicated otherwise.
Specific assumptions used in regard to some of the
advanced economies follow. See also Tables B5 to B9 in
the online section of the Statistical Appendix for data
on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural balances.1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the available information regarding budget outturn and budget
plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal
measures announced by the authorities, and the IMF
staff’s macroeconomic projections.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on data from
the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the fiscal year
2019/20 mid-year reviews of the Commonwealth and
States, the Economic and Fiscal Outlook in July 2020,
and the IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from
Statistics Austria, the authorities’ projections, and the
IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 2020–21
Stability Programme (covering only two years due
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors,
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations
of structural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates
of potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities.
(See Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated
as gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt
instruments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural
balance are subject to significant margins of uncertainty.

136

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

to the COVID-19 shock), the Draft Budgetary Plan
2020, and other available information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the IMF staff’s
assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2020 reflect policy
announcements as of July 31. Those for the medium
term assume compliance with the constitutional
spending ceiling.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in
the 2019 federal budget, the Economic and Fiscal
Snapshot 2020, and the latest provincial budget as
available. The IMF staff makes some adjustments
to these forecasts, including for differences in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s forecast
also incorporates the most recent data releases from
Statistics Canada’s Canadian System of National
Economic Accounts, including federal, provincial, and
territorial budgetary outturns through the first quarter
of 2020.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ quarterly fiscal reports, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s
projections for GDP and copper prices.
China: A large fiscal expansion is estimated for 2020
based on budgeted and announced tax and expenditure measures in response to offset the health and
economic repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic.
For 2021 a mild expansion is projected given that the
output gap is expected to remain relatively large.
Denmark: Estimates for 2020 are aligned with the
latest official budget numbers, adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions.
For 2021 the projections incorporate key features
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the
authorities’ latest budget.
France: Estimates for 2019 and projections for 2020
onward are based on the measures of the 2018 budget
law, the 2019 budget law, and the 2020 budget law,
adjusted for differences in assumptions on macroeconomic and financial variables, and revenue projections.
Historical fiscal data reflect the May 2019 revisions
and update of the historical fiscal accounts, debt data,
and national accounts.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2020 and
beyond are based on the 2020 Stability Program,
supplementary budgets, and data updates from the
national statistical agency and ministry of finance,
adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework and assumptions concerning
revenue elasticities. The estimate of gross debt includes

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
portfolios of impaired assets and noncore business
transferred to institutions that are winding up, as well
as other financial sector and EU support operations.
Greece: Historical data since 2010 reflect adjustments in line with the primary balance definition
under the enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections
are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal
projections on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s
projections of the macroeconomic framework and
fiscal policy plans announced in the 2020 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary execution data. Projections are based on available information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments
for the IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational data are
incorporated with a lag of up to one year; general
government data are thus finalized well after central
government data. IMF and Indian presentations differ,
particularly regarding disinvestment and license-auction
proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are consistent with
gradual unwinding of the large fiscal stimulus in
2020, including returning the fiscal deficit to below
3 percent of GDP by 2023.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s
Budget 2020 and Stability Programme Update 2020.
Israel: Historical data are based on government
finance statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau
of Statistics. Projections assume the partial implementation of the two fiscal packages provided by parliament in response to the coronavirus shock.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections are
informed by the fiscal plans included in the government’s 2020 budget and approved supplementary
budgets. The stock of maturing postal saving bonds is
included in the debt projections.
Japan: Projections reflect the fiscal measures already
announced by the government, as of September 11,
with adjustments for IMF staff assumptions.
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the
medium-term path for the overall fiscal balance in
the 2021 budget and the medium-term fiscal plan
announced in the 2021 budget, and IMF staff’s
adjustment.
Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2020 are informed
by the approved budget but take into account the
likely effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on fiscal

outturns; projections for 2021 onward assume compliance with rules established in the Fiscal Responsibility Law. The projections reflect data available
until August 31, 2020. Hence, they do not take into
account the draft 2021 budget.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2020–25 are based
on IMF staff forecasts and informed by the authorities’ draft budget plan and Bureau for Economic Policy
Analysis projections. Historical data were revised
following the June 2014 Central Bureau of Statistics
release of revised macro data because of the adoption
of the European System of National and Regional
Accounts (ESA 2010) and the revisions of data sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the
fiscal year 2020/21 budget and IMF staff estimates.
Portugal: The projections for the current year are
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast.
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of
unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the
Puerto Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans
(FEGPs), which were prepared in October 2018, and
are certified by the Oversight Board. In line with this
plan’s assumptions, IMF projections assume federal aid
for rebuilding after Hurricane Maria, which devastated
the island in September 2017. The projections also
assume revenue losses from the following: elimination
of federal funding for the Affordable Care Act starting
in 2020 for Puerto Rico; elimination of federal tax
incentives starting in 2018 that had neutralized the
effects of Puerto Rico’s Act 154 on foreign firms; and
the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which reduce
the tax advantage of US firms producing in Puerto
Rico. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some FEGP
and IMF assumptions may differ, in particular those
relating to the effects of the corporate tax reform,
tax compliance, and tax adjustments (fees and rates);
reduction of subsidies and expenses, freezing of payroll
operational costs, and improvement of mobility; reduction of expenses; and increased health care efficiency.
On the expenditure side, measures include extension
of Act 66, which freezes much government spending,
through 2020; reduction of operating costs; decreases
in government subsidies; and spending cuts in education. Although IMF policy assumptions are similar to
those in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the
IMF’s projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and
balance are different from the FEGPs’. This stems from

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

137

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Box A1 (continued)
two main differences in methodologies: first, while
IMF projections are on an accrual basis, the FEGPs’
are on a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGPs make
very different macroeconomic assumptions.
Russia: Fiscal policy will be countercyclical in 2020.
It will show a degree of consolidation in 2021 and will
return to the fiscal rule in 2022.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff baseline fiscal projections are based on IMF staff’s understanding of
government policies as outlined in the 2020 Budget
and government measures announced to counter the
adverse impact of COVID-19 and the decline in
oil prices. Exported oil revenues are based on WEO
baseline oil prices and staff’s understanding of Saudi
Arabia’s current oil export policy.
Singapore: For fiscal year 2020 projections are based
on the budget (February 18, 2020) and subsequent
supplementary budgets (March 26, April 6, April 21,
May 26). IMF staff assumes that support packages in
fiscal year 2020 are only for one year; for the rest of the
projection period, IMF staff assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions are mostly based
on the 2020 Budget Review. Nontax revenue excludes
transactions in financial assets and liabilities as they
involve primarily revenues associated with realized
exchange rate valuation gains from the holding of
foreign currency deposits, sale of assets, and conceptually similar items.
Spain: The 2020 fiscal projections include the
discretionary measures adopted in response to the
COVID-19 crisis, the legislated pension and public
wage increases, and the minimal vital income support.
Fiscal projections from 2021 onward assume an expiration of the temporary COVID-19 measures and no
further policy change. Disbursements under the EU
Recovery and Resilience Facility are reflected in the
projections for 2021–24.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2019 are based on the
data from the Swedish Ministry of Finance. Projections
for 2020 are based on preliminary information on the
fall 2020 budget bill. The fiscal impact of cyclical developments is calculated using the 2014 Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development’s elasticity2
to take into account output and employment gaps.
2 See Robert Price, Thai-Thanh Dang, and Yvan Guillemette,
“New Tax and Expenditure Elasticity Estimates for EU Budget
Surveillance,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers
1174 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, December 2019).

138

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Switzerland: The fiscal projections for 2020 reflect
the authorities’ discretionary stimulus, which is permitted within the context of the debt brake rule in the
event of “exceptional circumstances.”
Turkey: The basis for the projections in the WEO
and Fiscal Monitor is the IMF-defined fiscal balance,
which excludes some revenue and expenditure items
that are included in the authorities’ headline balance.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on the
UK’s Budget Statement 2020 and revised estimated
by the Office for Budget Responsibility. Expenditure
projections reflect the measures to respond to the
outbreak of the coronavirus. Revenue projections are
in addition adjusted for differences between the IMF
staff’s forecasts of macroeconomic variables (such as
GDP growth and inflation) and the forecasts of these
variables assumed in the authorities’ fiscal projections.
Projections assume that the measures taken in response
to the coronavirus outbreak expire as announced,
but also that there is some additional fiscal loosening
relative to the policies announced to date over the
next two years to support the economic recovery, and
gradual consolidation begins thereafter with the goal
of stabilizing public debt within five years. The IMF
staff’s data exclude public sector banks and the effect
of transferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension
Plan to the public sector in April 2012. Real government consumption and investment are part of the real
GDP path, which, according to the IMF staff, may or
may not be the same as projected by the UK Office
for Budget Responsibility. Fiscal year GDP is different
from current year GDP. The fiscal accounts are presented in terms of fiscal year. Projections do not take
into account revisions to the accounting (including on
student loans) implemented on September 24, 2019.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the
January 2020 Congressional Budget Office baseline,
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeconomic
assumptions. Projections incorporate the effects of the
Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, the Families First Coronavirus
Response Act, and the Paycheck Protection Program and
Health Care Enhancement Act. Finally, fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for
key macroeconomic and financial variables and different
accounting treatment of financial sector support and
of defined-benefit pension plans and are converted to
a general government basis. Data are compiled using
System of National Accounts 2008, and when translated

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
into government finance statistics, this is in accordance
with the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014.
Due to data limitations, most series begin in 2001.

Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the
established policy framework in each country. In most
cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance over the
business cycle: official interest rates will increase when
economic indicators suggest that inflation will rise
above its acceptable rate or range; they will decrease
when indicators suggest inflation will not exceed the
acceptable rate or range, that output growth is below
its potential rate, and that the margin of slack in the
economy is significant. On this basis, the London
interbank offered rate on six-month US dollar
deposits is assumed to average 0.7 percent in 2020
and 0.4 percent in 2021 (see Table 1.1). The rate
on three-month euro deposits is assumed to average
–0.4 percent in 2020 and –0.5 percent in 2021. The
interest rate on six-month Japanese yen deposits is
assumed to average 0.0 percent in 2020 and in 2021.
Argentina: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with a modest real appreciation this year and the
need for monetary financing of the fiscal deficit and
reabsorbing this liquidity.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the
middle of the target range.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are based on
the IMF staff’s analysis.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are based on
GDP growth rate.
China: Monetary policy is expected to be accommodative in 2020 and remain supportive in 2021 (but to
a lower degree than in 2020).
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg to
the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro area
member countries are in line with market expectations.
Greece: Interest rates are based on the WEO
LIBOR with an assumption of a spread for Greece.
Broad money projections are based on the monetary
financial institution balance sheets and deposit flow
assumptions.

Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF
staff assumes that the currency board system will
remain intact.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with the maintenance of inflation within the central
bank’s targeted band.
Israel: Assumptions include a moderately loose
monetary stance in the short term and normalization
of nonmonetary policy toward the medium term.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.
Korea: The projections assume that the policy rate
evolves in line with market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with attaining the inflation target.
Netherlands: Monetary projections are based on
IMF staff six-month euro LIBOR projections.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on
the growth of nominal GDP estimates.
Portugal: Monetary projections are based on
projections for the real and fiscal sectors.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the
Central Bank of Russia is adopting a moderately
accommodative monetary policy stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the
US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are
consistent with maintaining inflation within the
3–6 percent target band.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with
Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in
the policy rate in 2020–21.
Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial
conditions assumes no further monetary policy easing
in 2020.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is
based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the
federal funds target rate in line with the broader
macroeconomic outlook.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

139

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

List of Tables1
Output
A1.
A2.
A3.
A4.

Summary of World Output
Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP

Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices

Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt

Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices

Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance

Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances

Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing

Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium‐Term Baseline Scenario

1 In

140

the tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
2002–11
World
4.1
Advanced Economies
1.7
United States
1.8
Euro Area
1.1
Japan
0.6
Other Advanced Economies2
2.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.5
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.6
Middle East and Central Asia
5.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.9
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.6
Nonfuel
6.7
Of Which, Primary Products
4.5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
5.3
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
4.5
Other Groups
European Union
1.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.3
Middle East and North Africa
5.3
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.3
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
1.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
World Growth Rate Based on Market
Exchange Rates
2.7
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
53,903
At Purchasing Power Parities
75,026

Projections
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

3.5
1.2
2.2
–0.9
1.5
2.0
5.4

3.5
1.4
1.8
–0.2
2.0
2.4
5.1

3.5
2.1
2.5
1.4
0.4
2.9
4.7

3.4
2.4
3.1
2.0
1.2
2.1
4.3

3.3
1.8
1.7
1.9
0.5
2.2
4.5

3.8
2.5
2.3
2.6
2.2
2.8
4.8

3.5
2.2
3.0
1.8
0.3
2.3
4.5

2.8
1.7
2.2
1.3
0.7
1.7
3.7

–4.4
–5.8
–4.3
–8.3
–5.3
–5.5
–3.3

5.2
3.9
3.1
5.2
2.3
4.3
6.0

3.5
1.7
1.8
1.4
0.6
2.1
4.7

7.0
3.1
2.9
5.1
4.8

6.9
3.1
2.9
3.1
5.1

6.8
1.8
1.3
3.1
5.2

6.8
1.0
0.4
2.7
3.2

6.8
1.9
–0.6
4.5
1.5

6.7
4.1
1.4
2.6
3.1

6.3
3.3
1.1
2.1
3.3

5.5
2.1
0.0
1.4
3.2

–1.7
–4.6
–8.1
–4.1
–3.0

8.0
3.9
3.6
3.0
3.1

5.9
2.6
2.5
3.3
4.3

5.3
5.4
2.5

2.6
5.7
4.1

2.2
5.3
2.2

0.3
5.1
2.9

1.5
5.1
1.7

1.0
5.6
2.8

0.9
5.2
1.7

0.2
4.3
1.0

–5.4
–2.9
–7.1

2.8
6.6
4.5

2.1
5.1
3.3

4.4

4.7

4.4

4.1

4.1

4.8

4.4

3.4

–5.6

5.5

4.9

1.8

2.9

1.6

0.3

2.7

3.0

3.6

3.2

–2.4

2.6

4.9

–0.7
4.8
5.1

0.0
5.9
2.6

1.7
6.2
2.8

2.5
4.7
2.5

2.1
3.9
4.9

3.0
4.9
2.0

2.3
5.1
1.2

1.7
5.3
0.8

–7.6
–1.2
–5.0

5.0
4.9
3.2

1.6
5.7
2.9

1.0
4.3
5.1

1.3
4.0
5.3

2.3
3.8
5.4

2.2
3.3
3.9

2.2
3.4
4.3

3.0
3.7
4.5

2.7
3.5
4.0

1.9
3.0
4.5

–6.1
–4.8
–1.8

4.6
4.0
3.6

1.8
3.5
5.0

0.6
3.7
2.0

0.9
3.5
3.5

1.6
3.1
3.9

1.8
2.8
2.2

1.2
3.0
1.6

2.1
3.4
2.6

1.8
3.2
2.8

1.3
2.3
2.9

–6.2
–4.7
–3.3

3.6
4.8
2.7

1.4
3.6
3.4

2.5

2.6

2.8

2.9

2.6

3.3

3.1

2.4

–4.7

4.8

2.9

74,805 76,990 79,060 74,829 76,022 80,716 85,690
100,032 104,954 108,876 111,126 115,336 121,522 128,712

2025

87,552
83,845
91,031 113,482
134,557 130,187 139,824 174,434

1Real

GDP.
the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
2Excludes

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

141

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
(Annual percent change)
Average
2002–11
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Ireland
Portugal
Greece
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden
Hong Kong SAR
Czech Republic
Norway
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2017

2018 2019

1.8
1.7
1.9
2.2
1.1
1.3
3.0
2.2
1.5
2.1
1.7
2.0
–0.2
2.8
2.1
2.6
3.1
4.6
1.8
3.2
6.7
3.9
0.5
1.9
2.9
1.0
2.8
2.2
3.2
1.7
2.1
2.2
2.5
1.1
3.8
3.2
4.2
–1.3
–0.7
6.6
2.3

2.5
2.3
2.6
2.6
2.3
1.7
2.9
2.9
1.9
2.5
9.4
3.5
1.5
3.3
3.0
4.2
4.8
1.8
3.8
5.5
4.4
8.0
2.2
1.9
3.2
3.2
2.4
3.3
4.3
1.9
2.6
3.8
5.2
2.3
3.6
2.0
3.8
–2.7
9.9
4.5
0.4

2.2
3.0
1.8
1.3
1.8
0.8
2.4
2.4
1.5
2.4
9.3
2.6
1.9
1.5
3.9
3.6
4.1
3.1
4.3
4.4
4.1
5.2
0.3
1.3
2.9
2.0
2.8
2.7
3.4
2.7
2.0
2.8
3.2
1.3
3.5
2.4
3.2
–4.9
5.4
3.9
1.7

1.7
2.2
1.3
0.6
1.5
0.3
2.0
1.7
1.4
1.6
5.9
2.2
1.9
1.1
2.4
3.9
2.4
2.3
2.2
5.0
3.2
4.9
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.7
1.8
2.7
0.7
1.2
1.3
–1.2
2.3
1.2
3.4
2.3
2.2
2.0
–4.7
1.9
1.1

–5.8
–4.3
–8.3
–6.0
–9.8
–10.6
–12.8
–5.4
–8.3
–6.7
–3.0
–10.0
–9.5
–4.0
–7.1
–1.8
–6.7
–5.8
–6.0
–5.2
–6.4
–7.9
–5.3
–9.8
–1.9
–7.1
–4.2
0.0
–6.0
–5.3
–4.7
–7.5
–6.5
–2.8
–5.9
–4.5
–6.1
–7.5
–52.3
–7.2
–11.0

3.9
3.1
5.2
4.2
6.0
5.2
7.2
4.0
5.4
4.6
4.9
6.5
4.1
3.6
6.9
4.1
5.2
5.9
5.2
4.5
4.7
4.8
2.3
5.9
2.9
5.2
3.0
3.2
5.0
3.6
3.5
3.7
5.1
3.6
4.9
3.5
4.4
1.5
23.9
4.1
5.7

1.7
1.8
1.4
1.2
1.7
0.9
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.6
2.6
1.7
1.0
1.3
2.5
2.2
2.3
2.5
3.0
3.0
2.5
4.5
0.6
1.6
2.4
1.7
2.5
2.1
2.5
1.3
2.0
2.9
2.5
1.8
4.0
1.7
2.5
–0.3
6.0
1.8
0.5

1.5
2.3
1.0
0.4
0.8
0.1
1.8
1.7
1.3
0.4
7.7
2.2
0.8
0.9
2.0
3.9
0.8
3.0
1.0
4.1
3.2
4.3
–0.7
1.1
2.4
1.5
2.3
3.6
1.1
2.2
0.7
–3.0
2.0
1.8
3.9
2.1
1.8
...
...
2.9
...

–4.9
–4.1
–6.6
–5.2
–6.7
–8.0
–10.8
–5.6
–7.5
–4.2
–6.8
–9.4
–9.2
–3.6
–5.4
–2.9
–0.4
–4.5
–5.9
–6.7
–2.5
–7.9
–2.3
–6.4
–3.5
–5.9
–5.6
–1.3
–3.9
–5.2
–5.5
–4.8
–6.0
–4.1
–7.7
–3.7
–5.6
...
...
–9.0
...

3.8
3.2
4.8
4.6
4.0
3.4
6.6
5.6
5.6
2.5
9.6
7.9
6.8
4.5
7.4
6.6
2.4
5.3
7.9
7.0
4.3
7.1
0.7
3.7
5.0
4.9
5.2
5.0
3.3
3.6
6.6
4.1
6.3
5.5
7.5
2.9
5.6
...
...
3.5
...

2.2

1.5

2.3

2.1

1.6

–5.9

3.8

1.5

1.4

–4.6

3.2

2.1
2.7
1.4
1.7
1.5
0.1
1.9
0.4
3.2
1.7
2.8

2.7
3.7
2.3
1.4
1.5
1.2
4.1
0.8
2.6
–0.2
2.5

2.0
1.9
2.4
3.1
1.5
1.8
2.1
–0.1
2.5
0.4
2.9

2.5
2.5
2.3
2.7
2.4
1.8
3.1
1.6
1.2
4.1
3.6

2.2
3.2
1.8
1.8
1.4
1.1
2.7
0.3
1.3
1.9
2.6

1.8 –5.7
2.3 –4.5
1.9 –7.6
1.2 –4.1
1.7 –8.2
–0.2 –10.8
1.2 –12.0
0.8 –4.8
1.5 –11.5
1.3 –8.3
1.2 –3.5

4.0
3.2
4.9
3.4
6.1
5.2
7.2
2.3
7.9
6.0
3.3

1.6
1.8
1.3
1.2
1.3
0.9
1.1
0.5
1.6
1.6
2.4

1.2
1.9
1.4
0.3
1.6
–0.8
–0.1
–1.1
–1.6
1.6
1.6

–4.7
–3.9
–6.4
–3.4
–5.1
–9.7
–9.2
–3.2
–4.3
–6.6
–3.3

4.0
3.2
4.3
3.7
3.8
6.0
6.7
3.0
3.9
5.5
4.4

2.0

2.5

1.7

2.3

2.2

3.9

1.5

0.9

–4.3

3.6

2012 2013

2014

1.7
1.8
1.1
1.1
1.3
0.2
1.6
1.3
1.8
1.7
2.3
0.4
0.4
1.8
4.9
4.3
2.5
2.7
3.7
3.6
3.0
2.6
0.6
1.5
4.6
2.0
3.1
4.7
6.6
1.9
2.4
4.5
3.1
1.5
3.6
0.8
2.7
–0.3
13.2
2.4
–0.4

1.2
2.2
–0.9
0.4
0.3
–3.0
–3.0
–1.0
0.7
0.7
0.0
–4.1
–7.3
–1.4
1.9
3.8
–2.6
–0.4
4.1
3.1
–3.4
4.1
1.5
1.5
2.4
1.8
3.8
2.2
4.5
1.0
–0.6
1.7
–0.8
2.7
2.3
0.2
2.5
0.0
9.2
1.3
–7.2

1.4
1.8
–0.2
0.4
0.6
–1.8
–1.4
–0.1
0.5
0.0
1.6
–0.9
–3.2
–0.9
0.7
3.6
–1.0
3.7
2.3
1.3
–6.6
5.5
2.0
2.1
3.2
2.3
2.1
2.5
4.8
1.9
1.2
3.1
0.0
1.0
4.3
0.9
2.2
–0.3
11.2
4.1
–0.8

2.1
2.4
2.5
3.1
1.4
2.0
2.2
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.8
1.4
3.8
1.4
2.0
1.6
2.0
0.7
1.0
8.5 25.4
0.8
1.8
0.7 –0.4
–0.4
0.5
2.8
4.8
3.5
2.0
2.8
2.2
4.3
4.3
1.9
3.3
3.0
1.8
–1.9
3.4
7.6
9.6
0.4
1.2
2.6
2.4
3.2
2.8
2.9
0.7
2.6
2.3
4.7
1.5
3.9
3.0
2.5
1.3
2.7
4.5
2.8
2.4
2.3
5.4
2.0
2.0
3.9
2.2
1.6
2.3
3.2
4.1
–1.2 –1.0
–1.2 –21.6
2.1
4.7
–0.7
2.7

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.9

1.6
1.7
1.0
0.6
1.5
0.3
1.5
0.2
1.4
3.2
3.2

0.8
2.2
–2.4
–0.9
–0.4
–5.6
–4.9
2.3
1.9
2.0
2.0

1.1
1.6
–0.5
1.1
0.7
–2.7
–2.9
2.4
2.6
2.2
1.6

1.3

1.1

1.4

1From

2015 2016

1.7

the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

142

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Q4 over Q41
Projections
2019:Q4 2020:Q4 2021:Q4

Projections
2020 2021 2025

–5.8

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2002–11
2012–21
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Projections
2020
2021

1.7
2.0
0.9
0.4
1.6
0.4
1.4
0.7
1.4
3.1
3.0

1.2
1.8
0.3
0.9
0.5
–0.8
0.0
0.1
1.1
1.8
1.8

1.0
1.5
–1.1
1.5
–0.4
–3.7
–3.3
2.0
1.6
1.9
2.1

1.2
1.5
–0.6
0.4
0.5
–2.4
–2.9
2.4
2.7
2.6
2.3

1.9
3.0
0.9
1.1
0.8
0.2
1.7
–0.9
2.3
2.6
2.5

2.6
3.8
1.9
1.9
1.5
1.9
2.9
–0.2
3.0
2.3
2.9

2.3
2.8
2.0
2.4
1.8
1.2
2.7
–0.3
3.6
2.1
2.6

2.3
2.6
1.8
1.5
1.5
1.5
3.0
1.3
2.2
3.6
2.8

2.0
2.7
1.5
1.5
0.9
0.9
1.8
0.0
1.6
2.1
2.8

1.7
2.4
1.3
1.6
1.5
0.4
1.1
0.1
1.0
1.6
1.8

–7.1
–4.9
–9.2
–6.9
–8.4
–11.8
–14.8
–7.8
–12.6
–8.6
–5.8

4.4
2.8
5.5
4.1
6.1
4.9
9.1
4.3
6.7
8.9
4.3

1.5

1.2

1.1

1.3

1.8

2.6

2.2

2.2

1.9

1.7

–6.9

4.1

1.8
1.4
1.7
1.4
1.6
0.4
4.3
1.3
2.5
2.3
3.0

1.3
0.7
1.1
2.1
1.1
–0.2
0.5
1.1
1.6
1.4
3.1

0.0
–1.5
–0.3
1.3
1.6
–1.8
–4.2
1.7
1.1
0.7
2.3

–0.1
–1.9
0.2
1.4
1.5
–1.1
–2.1
1.5
–0.4
–0.8
2.7

0.5
–0.8
0.8
1.7
1.3
–0.6
–0.7
0.5
2.0
0.6
2.8

1.7
1.6
1.3
2.9
1.0
–0.6
2.0
1.5
1.8
1.4
2.8

2.0
1.8
1.9
4.0
1.4
0.7
1.0
1.4
1.0
1.8
3.2

1.1
0.6
1.1
1.6
1.4
–0.1
1.0
0.2
0.3
2.3
3.0

1.7
1.5
1.1
1.2
0.9
0.1
1.9
0.9
0.4
3.0
3.5

2.2
1.8
1.8
2.7
1.7
–0.4
2.3
1.9
3.4
2.1
3.5

2.4
1.7
2.2
4.8
–3.1
3.1
3.7
1.4
–2.0
1.5
5.6

1.8
1.9
0.9
–0.4
3.6
–1.0
0.2
–0.4
9.1
1.1
2.3

1.5

1.0

–0.2

–0.6

0.1

1.5

1.8

0.7

1.3

1.9

1.4

1.8

0.8
0.5
0.4
0.7
1.2
–0.5
–0.4
–1.8
0.3
3.8
3.5

2.1
3.1
1.1
1.6
0.8
–1.0
0.4
1.5
1.4
0.8
1.9

2.6
6.9
–3.2
–0.2
0.2
–9.7
–7.4
3.5
2.0
4.9
3.2

1.8
3.6
–2.4
–1.3
–0.8
–6.4
–3.8
4.9
3.5
1.4
2.6

3.4
5.1
1.4
3.2
0.0
–2.2
4.1
3.1
6.6
2.3
2.6

3.4
3.7
4.7
1.7
1.0
1.8
4.9
1.6
3.7
–5.2
2.3

2.3
1.8
4.0
3.8
2.7
4.0
2.4
–0.3
3.6
–4.7
3.1

3.8
3.5
3.8
2.5
4.7
3.2
5.9
3.0
1.6
3.6
5.6

2.9
4.8
3.1
3.5
3.2
3.1
5.3
0.6
–0.2
1.2
0.9

2.4
2.3
5.7
2.5
4.3
1.4
1.8
1.3
0.7
–0.4
0.0

–6.0
–2.7
–12.0
–5.0
–14.2
–15.1
–16.2
–2.5
–14.7
–3.9
–4.0

4.6
2.8
7.6
5.8
8.9
12.6
10.3
0.0
9.0
9.7
2.8

0.3

2.1

3.6

2.2

3.8

2.5

1.8

3.3

3.3

2.0

–5.4

4.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

143

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2002–11
2012–21
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

1.5
1.6
1.0
0.7
1.5
0.2
1.6
0.2
1.4
3.1
3.1

1.4
1.9
0.7
1.3
0.7
–0.7
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.4
2.0

1.1
2.0
–1.3
1.1
0.2
–4.5
–4.3
2.3
1.5
2.3
2.4

1.1
1.3
–0.8
0.2
0.5
–2.9
–2.9
2.8
2.2
1.6
2.4

2.0
2.8
1.0
1.7
0.8
–0.4
1.6
0.2
2.9
2.1
2.6

2.6
3.5
2.3
2.1
1.3
1.4
3.1
0.6
2.9
0.3
2.7

2.3
2.4
2.4
3.1
1.9
1.6
2.3
0.0
3.1
0.5
2.9

2.4
2.5
2.0
1.8
2.2
1.5
3.1
1.5
1.7
3.3
3.3

2.1
3.0
1.7
1.9
1.4
1.2
2.5
0.3
1.1
2.1
2.4

2.0
2.3
2.4
2.0
2.2
0.4
1.1
0.8
1.4
1.3
1.5

–5.2
–3.6
–7.4
–4.0
–8.5
–9.6
–12.1
–4.6
–11.0
–6.1
–3.3

3.8
2.7
4.9
3.4
6.1
5.0
7.3
2.4
7.5
6.6
3.4

1.3

1.3

1.4

1.2

2.0

2.4

2.1

2.2

2.1

1.8

–5.1

3.6

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1

–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.1

–0.3
0.2
–1.1
–1.8
–0.6
–1.1
–0.8
0.0
0.4
–0.3
–0.4

0.0
0.2
0.3
0.8
0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.4
0.1
0.5
–0.7

0.1
–0.1
0.4
0.0
0.7
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.6
–0.4
0.2

0.0
0.3
0.0
–0.7
0.3
–0.1
–1.5
0.3
–0.3
–0.5
–0.1

–0.3
–0.6
0.0
0.0
–0.4
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.6
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.0
0.3
0.8
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.6
0.8
0.2

0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
–0.2
0.2

–0.2
0.0
–0.5
–0.7
–0.4
–0.6
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
–0.3

–0.5
–0.9
–0.2
0.0
0.3
–1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
–1.6
–0.2

0.1
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1

0.0

–0.1

–0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

–0.4

0.1

0.1

–0.1

–0.6

0.2

0.1
0.0
0.2
0.5
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
–1.1
0.5

0.0
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.3
0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.2

0.4
0.0
1.5
1.2
0.7
2.6
2.0
–0.8
–0.3
–0.3
0.5

0.2
0.2
0.3
–0.5
–0.1
0.8
1.4
–0.4
–0.6
0.1
0.7

0.0
–0.3
0.1
0.7
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
0.0
–0.7
1.2
0.5

–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
0.3
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.8
0.0

–0.1
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.4
–0.5
1.0
0.6
–0.5
0.4
0.0

0.0
–0.2
0.4
0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.5
0.7
–1.0
–0.4

0.0
–0.3
0.2
–0.4
0.4
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.4

–0.1
–0.2
–0.5
–0.6
–0.2
0.5
0.5
–0.2
0.1
0.2
0.7

–0.2
0.3
–1.0
–2.1
–1.5
–0.1
–1.7
–0.5
1.9
0.9
–0.4

0.0
–0.2
0.5
0.9
–0.2
0.2
0.0
0.1
–1.9
–1.2
0.4

0.0

–0.1

0.2

0.0

–0.1

–0.4

–0.2

0.0

–0.2

–0.2

–0.1

–0.2

1Excludes

the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.

144

Projections
2020
2021

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India1
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste2
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania1
Belarus1
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Turkey
Ukraine1
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

8.6
5.9
8.8
1.5
7.9
10.7
1.4
7.7
5.7
1.0
7.5
5.1
7.0
1.0
0.3
7.5
10.0
...
3.8
0.3
4.1
4.9
3.3
4.9
6.2
4.3
3.5
0.4
1.4
3.4
6.8
4.8
5.0
7.5
3.7
4.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
5.1
3.5
3.5
4.2
3.9
4.8
4.7
5.8
4.0
3.6
1.7
4.5
–0.1
0.5
0.8
3.4
4.2
3.9
4.5
4.6

7.0
6.5
6.5
0.9
7.3
7.9
1.4
5.5
6.0
4.7
7.8
5.5
2.5
–2.4
–1.9
12.3
6.5
10.4
4.8
1.6
4.7
6.9
–4.1
1.9
9.1
7.2
6.0
0.8
–3.9
1.8
5.5
3.1
1.4
1.7
–0.7
0.4
–2.2
–1.5
2.8
–0.6
–2.7
–0.5
1.6
2.1
4.0
–0.7
4.8
0.2
2.9
3.4
–1.0
–1.4
3.1
–0.4
2.4
5.1
1.9
5.3
3.9

6.9
6.0
3.6
–2.1
7.4
7.8
4.7
6.4
5.6
4.2
8.0
4.7
7.3
3.7
–3.7
11.6
7.9
31.0
4.1
–1.7
3.8
6.8
–0.4
5.3
3.4
2.7
2.1
0.3
4.9
2.0
5.6
3.1
1.0
1.0
2.4
0.3
–0.5
2.0
3.4
9.0
3.5
2.9
1.4
3.5
1.8
2.9
8.5
0.0
2.9
–0.6
2.4
4.2
–2.7
–1.4
1.3
6.8
3.0
4.0
5.1

6.8
6.1
4.0
–2.5
7.1
7.3
5.6
7.4
5.0
–0.7
7.6
6.0
7.3
–0.9
–2.3
7.9
8.2
27.2
6.0
6.0
13.5
6.3
0.1
1.0
5.0
1.0
4.5
2.0
1.2
2.3
6.4
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.1
1.9
–0.1
4.2
1.2
5.0
1.8
3.6
3.3
3.4
0.7
–1.6
4.9
–6.6
1.3
3.8
–2.5
0.9
1.1
–0.1
3.6
5.5
0.5
1.8
4.5

6.8
6.6
6.2
–0.4
7.0
6.9
4.7
8.0
4.9
10.4
7.3
5.0
2.9
1.6
4.6
2.4
7.5
3.4
3.3
5.0
9.5
6.3
4.3
1.4
5.0
3.1
3.1
1.2
9.2
0.2
7.0
1.0
2.2
–3.8
3.1
4.0
2.4
3.8
4.1
–0.3
3.4
3.9
3.8
3.9
–2.0
1.8
6.1
–9.8
0.4
3.8
2.7
–0.4
0.2
2.4
2.8
4.9
–3.5
2.3
3.0

6.8
7.1
7.4
–2.5
6.9
6.8
2.5
8.3
5.0
5.1
7.0
4.4
6.3
1.3
0.9
1.2
6.4
3.0
0.6
–0.4
4.1
7.1
8.1
5.9
4.5
3.4
3.6
6.6
5.9
3.5
6.7
1.9
3.3
–2.5
3.1
3.8
3.5
2.2
4.1
4.4
2.9
2.8
3.1
4.8
0.2
3.3
3.3
2.4
–0.6
5.5
–2.1
0.5
1.4
2.5
0.1
4.3
–3.3
1.7
2.1

6.7
7.3
6.3
1.3
7.0
6.9
5.4
7.0
5.1
0.9
6.8
5.8
6.8
4.1
2.7
5.3
5.8
–5.5
8.2
–2.0
3.5
6.9
1.0
5.3
3.6
4.1
–3.8
3.3
4.6
4.4
6.9
4.1
3.8
2.5
3.2
3.5
3.1
4.3
4.2
4.7
4.7
1.1
4.9
7.1
1.8
2.0
7.5
2.5
1.4
3.1
2.8
2.3
3.1
0.5
1.9
4.2
1.3
1.2
1.4

6.3
7.9
3.8
0.1
7.5
6.7
3.5
6.1
5.2
2.3
6.3
4.8
6.9
3.6
0.2
7.2
6.4
5.7
6.7
5.8
–0.8
6.3
–2.2
3.9
3.3
4.2
–0.8
0.3
3.7
2.9
7.1
3.3
4.1
3.1
3.7
3.1
2.7
5.1
3.8
4.0
5.1
2.7
5.3
4.4
2.5
4.4
3.0
3.4
1.1
7.0
–2.6
1.2
3.0
–0.6
2.1
4.2
1.3
4.0
2.5

5.5
8.2
3.8
3.9
7.0
6.1
–1.3
4.2
5.0
2.3
5.2
4.3
5.7
5.3
1.2
5.1
6.5
1.0
7.1
–1.8
4.9
6.0
3.5
1.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
0.7
6.0
3.3
7.0
2.1
2.2
1.2
2.7
3.4
2.9
4.9
4.0
3.6
3.6
3.6
4.1
4.1
1.3
4.2
0.9
3.2
0.0
3.4
–2.1
0.4
1.2
–0.1
–2.0
2.2
1.1
1.1
3.3

–1.7
3.8
0.6
0.1
–2.8
1.9
–21.0
–10.3
–1.5
–1.1
0.2
–6.0
–18.6
–4.5
–3.8
–2.0
2.0
0.7
0.0
–11.4
–3.3
–8.3
–5.0
–5.0
–4.6
–7.1
–6.8
–2.5
–0.5
–8.3
1.6
–4.6
–7.5
–3.0
–6.5
–4.0
–9.0
–6.1
–7.5
–4.5
–12.0
–5.4
–3.6
–4.8
–4.1
–2.5
–5.0
–7.2
–8.1
–17.3
–11.8
–19.7
–14.8
–11.6
–16.0
–7.9
–5.8
–6.0
–8.2

Projections
2021
2025

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

8.0
4.4
–0.5
3.2
6.8
8.2
11.5
8.8
6.1
3.0
4.8
7.8
12.7
–0.9
1.2
6.0
5.7
1.3
2.5
–7.4
1.2
7.4
–1.5
4.5
5.3
4.0
4.0
–3.5
3.0
4.3
6.7
3.9
6.1
2.2
5.0
4.1
6.0
3.9
6.0
4.1
5.5
5.5
4.6
4.6
2.8
5.5
5.0
3.0
3.6
4.7
4.9
9.0
4.6
7.4
8.0
5.6
2.8
4.5
4.0

5.9
7.3
6.0
1.8
6.9
5.5
2.2
7.2
5.1
1.8
6.1
5.0
5.9
1.8
0.6
4.5
6.5
0.5
5.0
2.0
3.2
6.5
2.2
3.0
4.8
3.7
2.6
1.8
3.0
3.0
6.6
2.6
3.4
1.3
3.5
2.9
3.0
2.6
4.0
4.2
3.0
3.5
2.4
3.5
1.8
4.0
3.5
4.0
2.5
3.7
1.7
1.1
1.5
1.8
2.0
3.7
2.2
2.5
3.7

145

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the
Caribbean (continued)
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon1
Libya1
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan3
Syria4
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen

146

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

3.6
4.4
2.4
4.7
4.5
1.9
2.1
3.6
2.7
0.7
4.2
0.6
1.9
3.2
6.9
4.2
6.2
1.7
2.8
2.7
5.1
5.3
4.1
3.2
5.6
...
3.8
7.6
13.5
5.3
4.1
4.7
6.5
4.9
13.7
6.1
7.7
5.5
4.1
5.4
–8.6
4.3
4.7
2.8
4.7
14.2
4.5
...
3.6
...
7.7
3.6
12.7
4.4
7.2
6.5
2.5

2.9
4.8
–1.1
2.7
5.6
2.8
–1.2
3.1
5.0
2.9
4.1
–0.5
3.6
6.5
9.8
–0.5
6.0
–2.2
–0.3
1.4
2.7
–0.7
3.5
5.6
5.1
14.0
3.4
7.1
2.2
3.7
4.8
2.2
6.4
–7.7
13.9
2.4
4.8
6.6
–0.1
2.5
124.7
4.5
3.0
9.1
3.8
4.7
5.4
1.2
–17.0
...
7.5
4.1
11.1
4.5
7.4
6.1
2.4

2.9
2.3
–0.6
4.9
4.9
2.2
2.4
3.5
3.7
4.2
2.8
0.2
1.4
4.9
6.9
8.4
5.8
5.4
–2.2
1.8
2.9
2.2
4.6
1.3
3.1
5.7
2.8
3.4
5.8
5.4
5.0
3.3
3.6
–0.3
7.6
2.6
6.0
1.2
10.9
3.8
–36.8
4.2
4.5
5.1
3.7
5.6
2.7
1.9
2.0
...
7.4
2.8
10.2
5.1
7.6
4.7
4.8

1.3
3.5
4.4
7.1
3.8
1.7
7.3
4.4
1.7
2.8
3.1
0.6
2.8
4.8
5.1
4.9
2.4
6.3
1.3
1.2
0.3
–0.9
3.2
–3.9
3.1
2.7
3.8
3.6
2.8
4.4
7.1
2.9
4.4
3.2
0.7
3.4
4.2
0.5
4.0
2.5
–53.0
4.3
2.7
1.4
4.1
5.3
3.7
2.4
4.7
...
6.7
2.9
10.3
4.3
7.2
–0.2
–0.2

0.4
3.6
–2.6
6.9
0.1
2.4
6.4
4.1
0.7
1.2
3.8
0.9
3.3
4.8
5.7
3.1
3.3
1.0
–0.2
1.3
–3.4
1.8
0.4
–6.2
2.7
1.0
3.7
3.3
1.0
2.5
7.7
4.4
3.0
–1.6
2.5
2.5
1.2
0.6
3.9
0.2
–13.0
5.4
4.5
4.7
4.1
4.8
4.1
3.5
1.9
...
6.0
1.2
6.5
5.1
7.4
3.7
–28.0

–0.6
4.2
2.5
6.7
–1.2
2.5
3.7
2.7
3.8
1.5
3.9
1.5
2.6
4.6
5.0
4.3
4.1
2.8
3.8
1.9
–5.6
–6.3
1.7
–17.0
4.5
2.2
3.2
0.2
–3.1
3.6
6.7
4.3
2.9
12.5
15.2
2.0
1.1
2.9
4.3
1.5
–7.4
1.3
1.0
4.9
4.6
3.1
1.7
2.9
3.5
...
6.9
1.2
6.2
3.1
6.1
8.9
–9.4

1.4
3.9
–9.5
4.7
2.4
2.3
4.4
3.0
3.7
1.2
4.8
0.7
2.1
4.6
5.6
5.0
2.5
–2.0
3.5
1.0
1.8
–2.3
2.6
–15.7
2.6
2.6
1.3
7.5
0.2
4.3
5.4
4.1
4.8
3.7
–2.5
2.1
4.1
–4.7
4.7
0.9
64.0
3.5
4.2
0.3
5.2
–1.5
–0.7
1.4
0.7
...
7.1
1.9
6.5
2.4
4.5
1.4
–5.1

1.1
2.7
0.5
7.0
1.3
2.4
4.1
3.2
4.4
1.5
3.7
1.9
2.2
–4.0
3.7
3.4
4.0
2.9
2.6
2.2
2.6
–0.2
1.6
–19.6
2.1
1.2
1.4
5.2
1.5
1.8
8.4
5.3
4.8
–5.4
–0.1
1.9
4.1
1.2
3.5
–1.9
17.9
2.1
3.0
0.9
5.5
1.2
2.4
2.8
–2.3
...
7.3
2.7
6.2
1.2
5.4
1.2
0.8

0.0
2.1
8.4
5.1
0.1
2.4
3.0
3.8
5.4
–1.2
2.7
0.9
–0.3
–3.9
3.0
0.0
2.2
2.8
1.7
0.4
0.3
0.0
0.2
–35.0
1.4
3.9
0.8
7.6
2.2
1.8
7.5
5.6
5.1
–6.5
4.4
2.0
4.5
0.4
4.5
–6.9
9.9
5.9
2.2
–0.8
1.9
0.8
0.3
2.9
–2.5
...
7.5
1.0
6.3
1.7
5.6
0.9
2.1

–8.1
–5.5
–8.8
–6.0
–11.0
–9.0
–11.8
–2.0
26.2
–4.0
–6.6
–8.6
–9.0
–5.5
–9.0
–4.0
–13.9
–18.7
–16.9
–7.0
–13.1
–5.6
–4.5
–25.0
–4.1
–5.0
–5.5
–4.5
–4.0
–4.9
–1.0
3.5
–5.0
–5.0
–12.1
–5.0
–2.7
–8.1
–12.0
–25.0
–66.7
–3.2
–7.0
–10.0
–0.4
–4.5
–5.4
–1.5
–8.4
...
1.0
–7.0
1.8
–6.6
0.7
–12.0
–5.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

Projections
2021
2025
3.6
2.3
3.3
4.0
4.8
4.0
3.0
4.0
8.1
1.2
4.9
3.6
3.5
–0.5
4.0
5.5
7.3
8.0
7.2
3.7
1.5
2.6
4.3
–10.0
3.0
4.0
3.2
3.5
2.0
2.3
7.0
2.8
5.0
3.2
2.5
3.4
3.0
0.6
9.8
...
76.0
2.0
4.9
–0.5
1.0
2.5
3.1
2.9
0.8
...
6.0
4.0
4.6
1.3
5.0
8.2
0.5

2.5
3.2
1.5
5.0
2.3
2.2
2.7
3.3
1.1
1.4
3.7
2.1
2.1
2.1
5.0
4.0
3.8
2.7
1.8
2.7
2.1
1.5
2.4
...
3.3
4.0
0.9
4.5
1.7
3.3
6.0
5.6
5.2
1.2
0.9
3.3
3.1
2.4
4.1
...
0.3
4.3
3.7
3.1
5.0
2.5
2.6
3.9
4.5
...
4.0
3.0
5.0
2.6
5.5
2.0
6.2

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe1

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

5.9
8.7
3.6
4.7
5.9
4.0
5.2
3.9
2.5
8.6
2.9
5.6
4.0
0.6
10.6
2.8
3.7
8.9
1.9
2.0
6.7
3.3
3.7
4.4
4.4
2.5
2.2
5.8
4.6
4.1
7.6
4.3
4.4
8.7
7.3
5.4
3.7
2.8
7.8
3.5
...
6.8
2.8
7.8
7.5
–2.6

4.8
8.5
4.8
4.5
6.5
4.4
1.1
4.5
5.1
8.8
3.2
7.1
9.9
10.9
8.3
1.9
5.4
8.7
5.3
5.2
8.5
5.9
–1.7
4.6
6.1
8.4
3.0
1.9
–0.7
3.5
7.3
5.1
10.5
4.3
8.6
3.1
5.1
3.7
15.2
2.2
–52.4
5.1
6.5
2.3
7.6
16.7

5.1
5.0
7.2
11.3
5.8
5.9
0.8
5.4
–36.4
5.8
4.5
8.5
–0.7
9.3
–4.1
–10.5
3.9
9.9
5.5
2.9
7.2
3.9
3.3
5.9
3.9
8.8
2.3
5.2
2.2
3.4
7.0
5.6
5.3
5.4
5.9
4.8
2.8
6.0
20.7
2.5
29.3
6.8
6.1
3.9
5.1
2.0

5.2
4.8
6.4
4.1
4.3
4.3
0.6
5.9
0.1
6.9
2.1
9.5
6.7
8.8
0.4
30.9
0.9
10.3
4.4
–1.4
2.9
3.7
1.0
5.4
2.8
0.7
3.3
5.7
6.8
3.7
7.4
5.8
6.6
6.3
7.8
6.5
6.6
4.5
4.6
1.8
2.9
6.7
5.9
5.7
4.7
2.4

3.2
0.9
1.8
–1.7
3.9
–3.9
1.0
5.7
4.3
1.8
1.3
6.9
–3.6
8.8
–9.1
–20.6
2.3
10.4
3.9
4.1
2.2
3.8
6.1
5.7
3.3
0.0
3.1
2.9
6.6
3.6
6.7
4.5
4.4
2.7
8.9
3.8
6.4
4.9
–20.5
1.2
–0.2
6.2
5.7
6.8
2.9
1.8

1.5
–2.6
3.3
4.3
6.0
–0.6
4.7
4.6
4.7
–5.6
3.5
2.4
–10.7
7.2
–8.8
7.4
1.3
8.0
2.1
1.9
3.4
10.8
5.3
5.9
3.4
–1.6
4.0
2.3
5.9
3.8
3.8
–0.3
5.7
–1.6
6.0
4.2
6.4
4.6
6.4
0.4
–13.5
6.9
5.6
0.4
3.8
0.7

3.1
–0.2
5.7
2.9
6.2
0.5
3.7
3.5
4.5
–2.4
4.2
3.7
–4.4
7.4
–5.7
–10.0
2.0
10.2
0.5
4.8
8.1
10.3
4.8
4.8
–1.0
2.5
3.9
4.0
5.0
3.8
3.7
–0.3
5.0
0.8
4.0
3.9
7.4
4.4
3.8
1.4
–5.8
6.8
4.4
7.3
3.5
4.7

3.3
–1.2
6.7
4.5
6.8
1.6
4.5
4.1
3.8
2.3
3.6
5.8
–6.4
6.8
–5.8
13.0
2.4
7.7
1.0
7.2
6.3
6.2
3.4
6.3
0.4
1.2
4.6
3.2
5.2
3.8
3.4
0.7
7.2
1.9
8.6
3.0
6.4
3.8
3.5
0.8
–1.9
7.0
4.9
6.1
4.0
3.5

3.2
–0.9
6.9
3.0
5.7
1.8
5.7
3.9
3.0
3.0
1.9
4.4
–0.6
6.5
–6.1
3.8
1.1
9.0
3.8
6.1
6.5
5.6
4.5
5.4
1.0
–2.5
4.8
4.5
5.1
3.0
2.3
–1.0
5.9
2.2
9.4
1.3
5.3
3.9
5.4
0.2
0.9
7.0
5.3
6.7
1.4
–6.5

–3.0
–4.0
2.0
–9.6
–2.0
–3.2
–6.8
–2.8
–1.0
–0.7
–1.8
–2.2
–7.0
1.8
–6.0
–0.6
–3.5
1.9
–2.7
–1.8
0.9
1.4
–2.9
1.0
–4.8
–3.0
–3.2
0.6
–2.0
–14.2
–0.5
–5.9
0.5
–4.3
2.0
–6.5
–0.7
–13.8
–3.1
–8.0
4.1
1.9
0.0
–0.3
–4.8
–10.4

Projections
2021
2025
3.1
3.2
5.0
8.7
3.9
3.1
4.5
3.4
3.0
6.1
2.9
3.6
–0.8
6.2
2.2
5.7
1.4
0.0
2.1
6.0
4.2
6.6
3.0
4.7
3.9
3.2
3.2
2.5
4.0
9.9
2.1
3.4
6.9
1.7
6.3
3.0
5.2
4.2
2.7
3.0
–2.3
3.6
3.0
4.9
0.6
4.2

4.3
2.9
7.0
4.1
5.6
2.6
6.2
5.4
5.0
3.8
4.2
4.3
2.3
6.5
–2.2
3.9
2.1
8.0
4.5
5.8
4.5
5.0
5.0
5.8
2.1
5.4
5.0
6.2
5.0
3.3
11.2
2.7
6.0
2.5
6.1
4.5
6.0
4.0
4.6
2.3
5.4
6.7
5.5
9.3
1.2
2.2

1See

country-specific notes for Albania, Belarus, India, Lebanon, Libya, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
for Timor-Leste exclude projections for oil exports from the Joint Petroleum Development Area.
3Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
4Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
2Data

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

147

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)

GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area2
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products4
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Other Groups
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

1.6
2.1
1.8
–1.2
2.1

1.3
1.9
1.3
–0.8
1.3

1.3
1.8
1.2
–0.3
1.5

1.5
1.9
0.9
1.7
1.4

1.2
1.0
1.4
2.1
1.2

1.0
1.0
0.9
0.3
1.3

1.5
1.9
1.1
–0.2
1.9

1.7
2.4
1.4
–0.1
1.7

1.5
1.8
1.7
0.6
1.3

1.3
1.4
1.6
0.3
1.2

1.4
2.2
1.2
0.3
0.9

1.8
2.0
1.8
0.4
1.9

2.0
2.4
2.1
–0.2
2.3
6.4

2.0
2.1
2.5
–0.1
2.1
5.8

1.4
1.5
1.3
0.3
1.7
5.4

1.4
1.6
0.4
2.8
1.5
4.7

0.3
0.1
0.2
0.8
0.5
4.7

0.7
1.3
0.2
–0.1
0.9
4.3

1.7
2.1
1.5
0.5
1.8
4.4

2.0
2.4
1.8
1.0
1.9
4.9

1.4
1.8
1.2
0.5
1.4
5.1

0.8
1.5
0.4
–0.1
0.5
5.0

1.6
2.8
0.9
0.3
1.2
4.7

1.9
2.2
1.7
1.0
1.9
4.0

4.6
9.9
5.6
7.6
9.4

4.6
6.3
4.6
8.8
9.0

4.6
5.5
4.6
8.3
6.5

3.4
6.5
4.9
6.4
6.3

2.6
10.6
5.4
5.5
6.8

2.8
5.5
5.5
5.7
10.4

2.4
5.6
6.3
6.9
10.7

2.7
6.4
6.6
9.5
8.4

3.3
6.6
7.7
7.8
8.5

3.2
5.2
6.2
9.3
10.6

2.9
5.2
6.7
9.3
7.9

3.1
5.3
4.3
6.5
6.1

9.1
5.7
6.4

7.7
5.3
6.8

7.7
4.8
6.4

6.3
4.3
6.9

8.8
3.9
5.1

7.4
3.7
6.0

5.4
4.2
11.5

6.5
4.6
13.9

6.2
5.0
17.6

6.4
4.7
18.7

6.7
4.3
16.9

5.8
3.7
7.0

7.2

6.9

6.1

5.6

5.4

5.1

5.6

5.5

5.3

5.4

4.9

4.4

9.1

7.4

6.1

10.0

15.0

9.8

17.2

16.7

13.4

15.5

12.7

6.4

2.4
9.8
7.3

2.6
9.9
9.0

1.4
7.8
8.7

0.4
7.2
6.3

0.1
6.5
5.6

0.2
8.4
5.4

1.6
9.2
6.9

1.9
8.8
10.7

1.4
8.4
8.2

0.8
11.3
9.4

1.2
9.2
9.9

1.8
5.9
6.9

2.3
5.2

2.6
4.6

1.4
3.7

0.7
3.1

0.1
2.6

0.6
2.7

1.6
3.3

1.8
3.1

1.5
2.6

0.5
2.9

1.2
2.9

1.9
3.0

1Excludes

Projections
2021
2025

the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Venezuela and Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Based

148

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Ireland
Portugal
Greece
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden
Hong Kong SAR
Czech Republic
Norway
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Projections
2020
2021
2025

End of Period2
Projections
2019
2020
2021

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2.0
2.4
2.1
1.7
1.9
2.3
2.8
1.9
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.4
3.4
1.8
3.8
3.3
3.5
2.8
5.5
4.2
2.6
2.4
–0.2
2.4
3.2
2.1
2.9
1.1
2.0
0.8
1.8
1.1
2.3
1.8
2.4
2.0
2.8
3.0
3.0
6.0
...

2.0
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.2
3.3
2.4
2.8
2.6
2.6
1.9
2.8
1.0
3.2
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.9
2.3
4.2
3.1
3.2
–0.1
2.8
2.2
1.5
1.7
1.6
4.6
–0.7
0.9
4.1
3.3
0.7
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.3
6.1
5.2
2.8

1.4
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.4
2.6
1.2
2.1
0.5
0.4
–0.9
2.2
1.5
1.2
1.8
1.7
0.0
3.2
0.4
1.0
0.3
2.6
1.3
0.9
2.5
1.0
2.4
–0.2
0.4
4.3
1.4
2.1
1.5
0.5
1.1
1.1
5.5
3.9
1.6

1.4
1.6
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.2
–0.2
0.3
0.5
1.5
0.3
–0.2
–1.4
1.2
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.5
–0.3
0.8
2.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.5
1.3
1.0
0.0
0.2
4.4
0.4
2.0
0.5
0.4
1.2
0.6
6.0
2.0
1.1

0.3
0.1
0.2
0.7
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
0.0
0.5
–1.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
0.1
0.2
0.1
–1.5
1.2
0.8
0.0
0.7
1.1
1.5
–0.6
–0.5
–1.1
0.7
3.0
0.3
2.2
–0.6
0.2
0.3
–0.8
4.6
1.6
0.1

0.7
1.3
0.2
0.4
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
1.8
1.0
–0.2
0.6
0.0
0.4
–0.5
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.8
–1.2
0.9
–0.1
0.7
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.0
–0.5
–0.4
1.1
2.4
0.7
3.6
–0.5
0.0
0.6
–0.3
2.4
1.7
0.6

1.7
2.1
1.5
1.7
1.2
1.3
2.0
1.3
2.2
2.2
0.3
1.6
1.1
0.8
1.4
3.7
1.4
2.1
2.9
3.7
0.7
1.3
0.5
2.7
1.9
1.6
2.0
1.1
0.6
0.5
1.9
1.5
2.5
1.9
0.2
1.1
1.9
1.8
1.2
1.8
1.0

2.0
2.4
1.8
2.0
2.1
1.2
1.7
1.6
2.3
2.1
0.7
1.2
0.8
1.2
2.5
2.5
1.7
2.0
2.6
3.4
0.8
1.7
1.0
2.5
1.5
2.3
1.9
1.5
0.4
0.9
2.0
2.4
2.2
2.8
0.8
0.7
1.6
1.3
3.0
2.7
1.8

1.4
1.8
1.2
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.7
2.7
1.2
1.5
0.9
0.3
0.5
1.1
2.8
2.2
1.6
1.7
2.7
2.3
0.6
1.5
0.5
1.8
0.4
1.9
1.6
0.5
0.6
0.4
1.6
2.9
2.9
2.2
0.8
0.7
1.6
0.1
2.8
3.0
1.0

0.8
1.5
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.1
–0.2
1.2
0.6
1.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.6
0.7
1.5
1.3
0.5
0.4
0.6
0.2
–0.6
0.8
–0.1
0.8
0.5
0.6
0.7
–0.1
–0.4
–0.8
0.8
0.3
3.3
1.4
–0.5
0.4
1.7
–1.6
1.7
2.7
0.5

1.6
2.8
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.8
1.5
1.2
1.8
0.6
1.1
0.7
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.4
1.8
1.4
1.0
1.1
0.3
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.3
1.0
0.3
0.0
1.4
2.4
2.4
3.3
0.2
0.9
0.6
0.6
1.8
2.8
0.8

1.9
2.2
1.7
2.0
1.6
1.4
1.7
1.7
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.5
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.9
2.2
1.9
1.7
2.0
1.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.4
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.8
2.4
2.0
2.0
0.8
1.6
2.0
1.2
2.8
2.5
1.2

1.5
2.1
1.3
1.5
1.6
0.5
0.8
2.8
0.9
1.8
1.1
0.4
1.1
1.1
3.2
2.7
1.8
1.8
2.1
1.8
0.8
1.3
0.5
1.4
0.7
2.1
1.8
1.1
0.8
0.2
1.7
2.9
3.2
1.4
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.5
2.6
2.0
0.7

0.9
2.1
0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.1
–0.3
1.3
0.6
1.0
0.7
0.0
–1.1
1.2
0.2
1.3
1.2
0.5
1.3
0.2
–0.5
0.5
–0.6
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.6
–0.1
–0.5
–0.8
0.9
0.3
3.2
2.0
–0.6
0.4
1.7
–1.6
1.7
3.1
0.5

1.5
2.2
1.1
1.2
1.1
0.6
0.8
1.5
1.1
1.9
0.6
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.3
2.2
1.4
0.6
1.6
0.7
1.5
0.8
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.7
–0.3
1.5
2.4
2.4
1.8
0.5
0.9
0.0
0.6
1.8
2.5
0.8

1.9

1.9

1.3

1.5

0.3

0.8

1.8

2.1

1.5

0.9

1.8

1.9

1.6

1.1

1.6

1Movements

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

149

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania3
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria4
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Turkey
Ukraine3
Latin America and the Caribbean5
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina3
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

150

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

4.6
7.3
5.0
0.4
5.7
2.6
4.0
7.0
7.9
2.6
7.6
2.4
5.0
...
3.5
9.3
16.6
...
6.8
3.0
6.0
5.0
5.8
8.5
9.0
2.8
5.5
7.7
2.8
2.6
9.6
9.9
3.1
19.5
2.5
5.6
2.7
5.1
2.3
9.3
5.4
2.0
2.6
9.4
11.2
9.3
13.2
10.7
5.6
2.3
10.7
3.5
2.3
4.7
2.6
5.4
6.6
3.2
5.1

4.6
8.9
10.1
0.1
2.9
2.6
3.4
10.0
4.0
–3.0
4.3
1.7
10.9
4.3
6.3
14.3
0.4
0.3
8.3
5.4
4.5
3.0
6.2
5.9
7.5
3.0
10.9
3.3
1.4
1.3
9.1
6.3
2.0
59.2
2.1
2.4
3.4
5.7
2.5
4.6
4.1
3.3
3.7
3.3
5.1
7.3
8.9
0.6
4.6
3.4
10.0
0.6
1.9
4.5
1.2
4.5
5.4
3.0
3.2

4.6
6.8
8.1
0.4
3.0
2.6
2.9
9.4
6.4
–1.5
6.4
2.1
3.8
1.9
2.2
10.5
5.8
–1.1
9.9
2.8
5.0
2.6
–0.2
5.4
6.9
2.2
9.5
0.7
2.0
1.5
6.6
5.5
1.9
18.3
–0.1
0.4
2.2
1.7
1.8
4.6
2.2
2.8
0.9
4.0
6.8
7.7
7.5
–0.3
4.6
1.1
10.6
–2.4
0.4
1.8
0.5
5.7
6.2
1.8
2.0

3.4
7.3
9.6
–0.2
3.9
2.0
0.5
5.8
6.4
2.1
4.1
3.1
2.1
1.1
0.7
12.3
5.1
0.3
9.0
4.0
5.2
3.6
–1.2
5.2
2.8
1.9
0.8
2.3
1.1
0.8
4.1
6.5
1.6
18.1
–0.9
–1.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.4
5.1
–0.7
–0.3
0.0
1.1
7.8
2.1
8.9
12.1
4.9
1.1
...
0.4
1.2
1.8
1.2
5.8
6.3
4.7
2.9

2.6
6.4
6.7
–0.3
1.2
1.4
1.4
4.9
6.4
0.6
1.3
2.1
1.9
–2.2
–0.2
5.7
7.3
9.8
7.2
2.2
6.0
0.7
1.9
–0.6
2.2
–0.9
0.6
0.1
3.1
2.5
0.6
10.6
1.9
13.5
–1.0
–1.1
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
9.6
1.5
–0.3
–0.9
–0.6
15.5
1.4
7.7
48.7
5.4
1.0
...
0.5
1.9
–1.1
–0.9
4.1
9.0
4.3
5.0

2.8
5.9
3.3
–0.4
3.0
2.0
3.9
4.5
3.5
1.9
1.8
2.1
0.8
–1.5
–0.6
0.7
9.1
8.2
9.9
–1.3
6.7
1.3
0.1
0.5
4.0
0.2
–1.5
–0.6
3.5
0.8
2.7
5.5
1.3
11.8
–1.6
–1.3
–1.1
0.4
0.3
6.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.6
–1.6
7.0
1.1
7.8
13.9
5.5
–0.5
...
–0.9
–0.3
1.5
0.7
3.6
8.7
3.8
7.5

2.4
5.4
4.3
–1.3
2.9
1.6
3.4
3.6
3.8
0.4
0.7
3.8
2.3
0.1
0.1
4.3
4.6
5.1
4.5
1.1
5.4
2.9
1.3
0.5
6.6
0.7
0.5
7.2
4.1
3.1
3.5
5.6
2.0
6.0
0.8
1.2
1.1
2.4
1.5
6.6
2.4
1.4
2.0
1.3
3.7
3.1
11.1
14.4
6.3
2.4
25.7
–1.0
1.5
4.4
1.1
2.8
3.4
2.2
4.3

2.7
5.8
3.7
1.1
2.4
2.1
4.1
3.4
3.3
0.6
2.0
1.0
1.4
0.8
1.5
6.8
5.9
0.5
4.1
2.0
4.7
5.2
3.7
3.5
4.3
1.1
2.3
6.8
2.1
2.3
3.5
6.4
2.0
4.9
1.4
2.6
1.5
2.8
1.1
3.1
2.6
1.5
1.6
4.6
2.9
2.0
16.3
10.9
6.6
1.2
34.3
3.6
2.3
3.7
0.3
2.3
3.7
2.3
3.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

2019

Projections
2020 2021 2025

End of Period2
Projections
2019 2020 2021

3.3
5.5
2.6
–0.4
2.0
2.9
1.8
4.8
2.8
–1.9
3.3
0.7
1.3
1.2
1.9
7.3
8.6
4.3
4.6
0.6
3.7
2.5
2.2
1.8
4.3
0.7
0.9
3.3
2.2
2.7
2.8
6.6
1.4
5.6
0.6
2.5
0.8
3.4
2.7
4.8
0.4
0.8
2.3
3.8
4.5
1.9
15.2
7.9
7.7
1.5
53.5
4.3
1.3
4.1
0.2
1.8
3.7
2.3
3.5

3.2
5.6
3.6
0.3
2.5
2.9
–1.3
4.9
2.1
1.5
6.5
–1.1
0.4
0.9
–0.8
5.0
6.1
0.9
6.4
0.0
3.4
2.4
2.8
3.9
4.7
–0.4
0.9
0.5
1.5
2.9
3.8
5.2
1.4
5.1
–0.8
1.2
0.3
3.6
0.8
2.8
–0.1
0.9
3.3
2.9
3.2
1.5
11.9
3.2
6.2
1.0
...
1.2
1.8
2.9
0.8
1.7
2.7
2.9
2.4

4.7
5.5
2.7
0.3
3.1
4.5
–0.9
6.7
2.6
–1.2
6.3
1.0
1.3
1.2
1.9
5.2
9.5
4.5
6.0
–0.4
2.7
2.5
–0.1
2.8
4.8
0.9
0.3
–0.1
2.2
3.5
5.2
5.3
1.1
4.7
0.7
3.1
1.4
4.0
1.2
7.5
1.1
0.4
3.4
4.0
3.0
1.9
11.8
4.1
7.7
1.5
53.8
5.2
1.8
7.2
0.2
1.5
4.3
3.0
3.8

2.9
5.9
4.6
0.5
2.9
2.7
1.1
3.7
1.6
2.0
4.9
2.4
2.7
1.1
2.5
5.5
6.2
1.2
6.0
0.0
3.9
3.0
2.5
3.0
4.6
1.8
2.0
0.8
2.2
2.4
4.0
5.2
1.7
5.1
0.4
1.7
0.8
3.4
1.2
2.3
0.7
1.3
2.3
2.5
3.2
1.9
11.9
6.0
6.7
1.0
...
1.8
2.1
1.6
0.7
4.1
2.9
2.7
2.1

3.1
5.5
3.2
0.3
3.0
2.6
2.0
4.0
3.0
2.4
3.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
7.5
6.0
2.0
5.3
2.0
3.2
3.0
2.8
4.2
5.0
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.0
2.3
4.0
5.3
3.0
4.1
2.0
2.0
2.1
3.0
1.9
5.0
1.7
2.2
2.4
2.5
4.0
3.0
11.0
5.0
4.3
2.0
...
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
3.5
3.3
3.0
2.9

1.9
6.0
4.5
0.3
2.1
1.4
–1.8
3.4
1.5
1.2
6.3
–1.1
1.5
0.9
–0.8
4.5
3.3
–0.9
6.0
0.0
3.6
2.6
2.9
3.1
4.5
0.8
1.5
0.1
1.5
2.6
3.1
5.3
1.2
5.5
–0.8
0.5
0.2
3.7
1.5
0.5
–0.4
1.0
2.2
2.7
3.8
1.6
12.0
5.2
5.6
0.7
...
–1.1
1.7
–0.8
1.1
3.3
2.0
2.4
1.4

2.9
6.0
4.7
0.5
2.8
2.5
1.5
4.0
2.1
1.9
3.5
2.4
2.1
1.1
2.5
6.6
7.7
1.2
6.0
0.0
4.4
3.3
1.9
3.5
4.8
0.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.2
3.7
5.2
2.2
4.9
0.4
2.4
0.9
3.1
1.2
6.0
0.9
1.4
2.0
2.7
3.3
2.0
12.0
5.8
6.8
1.3
...
3.3
2.5
2.4
1.3
3.8
2.9
2.9
2.4

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
2002–11 2012 2013 2014 2015
Latin America and
the Caribbean
(continued)5
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela 3
Middle East and
Central Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon 3
Libya3
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan 6
Syria7
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen

5.6
9.7
2.2
12.1
5.2
3.6
3.1
6.7
6.1
13.1
7.3
11.5
4.4
8.4
3.1
7.9
2.5
3.7
2.4
3.1
11.7
6.9
9.1
23.4

2017

5.5
0.0
0.0
1.6
1.7
0.6
1.7
4.4
0.8
13.4
2.7
2.4
2.8
3.5
0.7
4.1
3.6
–0.7
–3.1

6.3
1.6
0.6
3.3
0.4
1.0
0.9
4.4
1.9
14.7
3.9
4.4
6.0
3.9
0.9
3.6
2.8
0.7
0.1

6.6
2.2
1.4
3.6
–0.2
1.1
0.8
3.8
1.3
12.9
4.3
3.7
4.9
4.9
0.8
4.0
1.3
–1.0
2.4

7.7
2.1
1.6
1.8
0.3
0.1
0.6
3.7
2.1
17.3
4.4
3.9
3.6
5.4
–0.4
2.8
2.1
–0.2
0.5

6.2
0.8
1.8
3.3
0.0
0.2
–0.2
2.1
1.0
22.4
3.3
5.1
3.4
4.4
–0.8
2.9
1.8
0.7
0.3

6.7
0.9
1.9
4.0
1.0
1.1
1.1
2.1
2.7
23.8
3.7
5.4
3.3
4.0
0.2
3.2
1.9
1.1
2.1

4.3
2.8
2.0
4.0
1.0
1.0
1.9
4.0
3.1
11.3
4.0
5.0
3.0
3.5
2.0
3.3
2.0
2.0
2.0

7.7
1.5
1.8
3.7
–0.1
0.0
0.1
3.4
2.1
19.7
4.1
6.2
2.8
6.1
–0.1
2.8
1.9
0.4
0.9

5.6
0.5
1.8
4.0
–0.3
0.7
–0.8
2.3
1.3
25.0
3.2
4.1
3.7
4.0
–0.5
3.0
1.8
1.0
1.5

6.8
1.2
2.0
4.0
2.0
1.5
1.2
3.1
2.9
22.0
4.2
5.7
2.9
3.5
0.5
3.3
2.0
1.3
2.1

2.6 0.8 0.2 –1.7 –0.2
2.2
5.0 1.9 3.4 6.9 55.5 22.0
9.3 5.2 5.7 4.7
3.1
1.9
8.1 8.6 8.9 8.7
9.6
6.2
21.1 40.6 62.2 121.7 254.9 438.1

2.3
6.9
1.0
7.6
65,374.1

0.9
4.4
1.0
7.9
19,906

0.9
49.8
0.0
10.0
6,500

1.6
51.0
1.0
8.2
6,500

2.0
9.0
1.0
4.0
...

0.5
4.2
0.4
8.8
9,585.5

1.5
104.9
0.0
9.5
6,500

2.0
20.9
1.0
7.5
6,500

9.5
0.6
4.3
2.4
2.3
2.1
0.1
20.9
2.6
31.2
0.4
4.5
6.0
0.6
1.5
4.6
–1.2
3.1
1.6
0.9
3.9
0.2
2.5
...
63.3
...
3.8
7.3
13.3
3.1
17.5
–0.2
27.6

7.8
2.3
2.0
1.4
2.7
1.0
3.3
13.9
4.9
41.0
–0.2
0.7
5.2
1.1
1.1
2.9
4.6
2.3
0.2
0.1
6.7
–0.6
–2.1
...
51.0
...
7.8
6.7
5.1
–1.9
14.5
1.6
10.0

9.3
5.4
3.5
0.9
3.0
0.0
2.9
5.7
5.3
30.5
0.8
–0.3
6.9
1.0
8.0
85.5
22.3
3.9
0.2
1.0
10.7
–2.2
3.6
...
141.6
...
8.1
5.8
8.0
–1.5
13.0
–1.2
26.4

9.3
4.8
3.8
2.0
3.1
2.8
2.4
6.2
2.5
30.0
1.0
1.4
6.2
2.3
5.5
...
15.1
4.5
0.8
3.4
8.8
1.8
3.7
...
129.7
...
7.0
5.3
6.0
1.5
10.7
0.3
31.0

6.5
4.0
7.0
3.8
3.2
2.2
2.0
7.4
3.0
25.0
2.0
2.5
4.0
2.5
5.0
...
12.2
4.0
2.0
2.5
6.5
2.0
2.0
...
16.8
...
6.5
4.0
6.0
2.1
5.1
2.0
8.0

6.9
2.8
2.4
0.7
2.7
1.7
3.3
9.4
7.0
26.0
0.1
0.7
5.4
1.5
3.1
7.0
4.6
2.7
1.0
0.1
8.0
...
–0.1
3.1
57.0
...
8.0
6.1
6.3
–1.9
15.2
1.3
6.2

10.7
5.0
5.2
1.5
3.0
2.0
2.5
5.6
3.5
35.0
1.0
–1.7
7.5
1.4
7.7
144.5
22.3
5.0
0.2
1.0
8.6
...
3.6
3.0
198.9
...
7.5
5.4
8.0
–1.5
12.1
–1.7
45.4

8.9
4.5
2.5
2.5
3.1
2.4
2.2
8.0
3.0
25.0
1.0
1.4
5.9
2.5
7.0
...
15.1
4.0
0.8
3.4
10.2
...
3.7
2.5
103.0
...
7.0
4.9
6.0
1.5
9.3
0.9
21.0

4.6 4.9 5.4
5.2 4.5 0.8
0.0 0.8 –0.9
4.8 3.0 0.8
2.7 3.6 4.0
0.8 1.1 –0.7
0.0 –1.0 –0.6
4.3 3.4 2.4
1.9 0.7 –0.9
6.8 3.9 7.5
5.2 6.1 3.2
9.3 8.3 3.7
3.8 4.0 2.7
7.1 6.0 4.0
4.0 2.6 0.1
2.7 5.0 3.1
2.8 3.2 3.5
1.1 0.2 –2.3
1.5 3.5 –1.0

7.6
8.8 8.3 6.4 5.5
11.1
6.4 7.4 4.7 –0.7
3.6
8.9 3.3 2.9 4.8
4.8
2.5 5.8 3.0 3.7
8.0
1.0 2.4 1.4 4.0
1.9
2.8 3.3 2.6 1.8
4.0
4.2 1.1 1.3 –0.8
8.8
8.7 6.9 10.1 11.0
7.0 –0.9 –0.5 3.1 4.0
15.6 30.6 34.7 15.6 11.9
...
6.1 1.9 2.2 1.4
4.1
4.6 4.9 3.0 –1.1
8.6
5.1 5.8 6.7 6.7
3.6
3.2 2.7 3.1 3.7
8.3
2.8 6.6 7.5 6.5
3.1
6.6 4.8 1.8 –3.7
2.9
6.1 2.6 2.4 14.8
6.6
4.9 4.1 3.8 0.5
2.0
0.7 1.6 0.4 1.4
3.4
2.9 1.2 1.0 0.1
9.0 11.0 7.4 8.6 4.5
5.1
1.8 3.2 4.2 1.0
3.2
2.9 3.6 2.2 1.2
...
... ... ... ...
12.4 35.6 36.5 36.9 16.9
...
... ... ... ...
11.1
5.8 5.0 6.1 5.8
3.5
4.6 5.3 4.6 4.4
6.6
5.3 6.8 6.0 7.4
5.3
0.7 1.1 2.3 4.1
13.1 11.9 11.7 9.1 8.5
4.3
2.8 1.7 1.7 1.4
11.7
9.9 11.0 8.2 22.0

5.7
4.4
6.4
–1.4
12.4
2.8
2.7
10.2
2.1
9.1
0.5
–0.6
14.6
3.5
0.4
–0.8
24.0
1.5
1.5
1.1
2.9
2.7
2.0
...
17.8
...
5.9
3.6
3.6
1.6
8.8
–0.2
21.3

6.9
5.0
5.6
1.0
12.8
1.4
0.6
23.5
6.0
9.6
0.1
3.6
7.4
1.5
3.2
4.5
28.0
2.3
0.7
1.6
4.1
0.5
–0.8
...
32.4
...
7.3
5.3
8.0
2.0
13.9
0.2
30.4

2019

2020

2025

End of Period2
Projections
2019
2020
2021

2016

4.6
4.5
1.4
3.7
5.1
1.7
2.4
3.8
2.4
6.8
5.2
6.9
4.1
7.2
5.7
3.7
3.7
0.8
4.2

2018

Projections
2021

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

151

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe3

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

9.4
31.5
3.0
8.7
2.6
9.1
2.5
2.4
3.0
2.2
3.8
19.1
3.0
3.0
5.2
17.1
7.1
15.3
1.1
7.0
13.4
17.6
2.5
7.8
6.9
9.6
10.4
8.1
2.5
5.8
11.2
6.6
2.4
12.2
8.1
16.7
2.1
7.3
8.7
5.9
...
7.4
2.4
7.7
14.2
–0.8

9.0
10.3
6.7
7.5
3.8
18.2
2.5
2.4
5.5
7.5
5.9
0.9
5.0
1.3
3.4
4.8
8.9
24.1
2.7
4.6
7.1
15.2
2.1
9.4
6.1
6.8
5.7
21.3
5.3
3.9
2.6
6.7
0.5
12.2
6.3
10.6
1.4
7.1
6.6
5.6
45.1
16.0
2.6
12.7
6.6
3.7

6.5
8.8
1.0
5.9
0.5
7.9
1.5
2.1
7.0
0.2
0.4
0.9
4.6
2.6
3.2
5.9
5.6
8.1
0.5
5.2
11.7
11.9
0.8
5.7
4.9
7.6
5.8
28.3
–2.4
3.5
4.3
5.6
2.3
8.5
4.2
8.1
0.7
4.3
5.5
5.8
0.0
7.9
1.8
4.9
7.0
1.6

6.3
7.3
–1.1
4.4
–0.3
4.4
–0.2
1.9
14.9
1.7
0.0
1.2
0.9
0.4
4.3
10.0
5.7
7.4
4.5
6.3
15.5
9.7
–1.0
6.9
5.4
9.9
6.1
23.8
2.7
3.2
2.6
5.3
–0.9
8.0
1.8
7.0
–1.1
1.4
4.6
6.1
1.7
6.1
0.2
3.1
7.8
–0.2

6.8
9.2
0.2
3.1
0.9
5.6
0.1
2.7
1.4
4.8
0.9
0.7
3.2
1.2
1.7
28.5
5.0
9.6
–0.1
6.8
17.2
8.2
1.5
6.6
3.2
7.7
7.4
21.9
1.4
1.3
3.6
3.4
1.0
9.0
2.5
5.3
0.9
4.0
6.7
4.6
52.8
5.6
1.8
5.4
10.1
–2.4

10.4
30.7
–0.8
2.8
–0.2
5.5
–1.4
0.9
4.9
–1.6
0.8
3.2
3.2
0.7
1.4
–5.6
7.8
6.6
2.1
7.2
17.5
8.2
2.7
6.3
6.6
8.8
6.1
21.7
–1.8
1.0
19.9
6.7
0.2
15.7
5.7
5.4
1.2
–1.0
10.9
6.3
379.8
5.2
0.9
5.5
17.9
–1.6

10.7
29.8
1.8
3.3
0.4
16.6
0.8
0.6
4.2
–0.9
0.1
35.8
0.4
0.7
0.7
–13.3
6.2
10.7
2.7
8.0
12.4
8.9
–0.2
8.0
4.4
12.4
8.6
11.5
1.8
3.7
15.1
6.1
0.2
16.5
4.8
5.7
1.1
2.9
18.2
5.3
187.9
5.3
–0.2
5.6
6.6
0.9

8.4
19.6
0.8
3.2
2.0
–2.8
1.3
1.1
1.6
4.0
1.7
29.3
1.2
0.4
1.3
–14.4
4.8
13.8
4.8
6.5
9.8
9.8
0.4
4.7
4.8
23.5
8.6
9.2
1.7
3.2
3.9
4.3
2.8
12.1
1.4
8.3
0.5
3.7
16.0
4.6
83.5
3.5
0.9
2.6
7.0
10.6

8.5
17.1
–0.9
2.8
–3.2
–0.7
1.1
2.5
2.7
–1.0
3.7
4.7
2.2
0.8
1.2
–16.4
2.6
15.8
2.0
7.1
7.2
9.5
0.2
5.2
5.2
27.0
5.6
9.4
–2.9
0.5
2.8
3.7
–2.5
11.4
2.4
8.4
1.0
1.8
14.8
4.1
51.2
3.4
0.7
2.9
9.8
255.3

1Movements

Projections
2020 2021 2025
10.6
21.0
2.5
1.6
2.0
7.6
1.0
2.8
2.9
2.8
3.0
11.5
2.5
1.2
3.0
4.7
4.1
20.2
3.0
6.1
10.6
9.1
2.0
5.3
4.3
11.9
4.3
9.3
0.5
2.5
3.6
2.3
4.4
12.9
6.9
7.9
2.0
3.9
15.7
3.3
27.1
3.6
1.4
4.2
14.5
622.8

7.9
20.6
2.0
3.0
2.0
5.2
1.2
2.2
2.5
3.0
2.1
12.1
2.6
1.4
2.2
2.6
4.2
11.5
3.0
6.0
8.7
8.0
2.0
5.0
4.5
9.5
5.5
9.5
1.5
3.2
5.6
3.4
1.7
12.7
1.0
8.0
2.0
2.9
15.5
3.9
33.1
3.7
1.5
4.8
13.3
3.7

6.1
6.0
2.0
4.0
2.5
3.2
1.7
2.0
2.5
3.0
2.0
5.0
3.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
4.9
8.0
2.5
5.0
6.0
7.8
2.0
5.0
5.5
5.0
5.4
5.0
2.0
3.3
5.5
4.5
2.0
10.6
5.0
3.0
1.5
3.0
8.4
4.5
11.9
4.2
2.0
5.0
7.0
3.0

End of Period2
Projections
2019 2020 2021
9.7
16.9
0.3
2.2
–2.6
5.1
1.9
2.4
–2.8
–1.7
6.3
4.6
3.8
1.6
4.1
27.2
2.0
19.5
1.0
7.7
7.9
9.1
–0.1
5.8
4.0
20.3
4.0
11.5
–3.3
0.9
3.5
2.6
–2.3
12.0
6.7
7.7
0.6
1.7
13.9
3.7
30.0
3.8
–0.3
3.6
11.7
521.1

10.5
22.2
2.5
1.6
3.5
7.9
1.0
2.4
4.6
1.6
–5.5
17.1
2.5
1.2
2.1
4.0
4.5
16.1
3.0
6.5
11.6
8.7
2.5
4.5
4.5
11.0
5.2
9.2
1.8
3.5
4.4
2.9
2.2
13.7
5.0
8.0
2.5
6.6
17.5
3.3
20.0
3.6
1.1
5.0
13.0
495.0

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3See country-specific notes for Albania, Argentina, Lebanon, Libya, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
5Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Venezuela and Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
2Monthly

152

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

7.3
19.6
2.0
3.0
2.5
3.0
1.2
2.1
2.5
4.4
4.1
8.0
2.7
1.4
2.2
2.0
4.1
8.0
3.0
5.8
8.7
8.0
2.0
5.0
5.0
8.0
5.5
9.5
1.7
3.7
5.5
3.4
2.0
11.6
5.0
8.0
0.9
3.0
13.5
4.3
23.8
3.7
4.5
5.2
11.2
3.0

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)

Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Germany
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt4
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt5
Gross Debt

Average
2002–11

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

–5.2
–1.8
–4.3

–6.5
–3.8
–4.6

–4.3
–3.5
–3.2

–3.6
–2.7
–2.6

–3.0
–1.8
–2.4

–3.3
–1.5
–2.9

–3.2
–0.5
–3.0

–3.7
0.2
–3.6

–4.2
0.4
–4.3

–16.2
–3.6
–12.5

–7.6
–2.2
–6.2

–4.0
–0.1
–3.9

–6.1
–3.1
–4.4
52.3
73.0

–8.0
–6.0
–4.9
80.8
103.3

–4.6
–5.4
–3.0
81.5
104.9

–4.1
–4.1
–2.6
81.2
104.5

–3.6
–2.3
–2.6
80.8
104.6

–4.4
–1.9
–3.7
81.8
106.6

–4.6
–1.0
–4.3
81.9
105.7

–5.8
0.4
–5.7
83.2
106.9

–6.3
1.0
–6.8
84.0
108.7

–18.7
–3.2
–15.0
106.8
131.2

–8.7
–1.5
–7.6
107.3
133.6

–5.5
–0.1
–5.4
113.8
136.9

–3.2
0.1
–3.3
58.8
73.5

–3.7
–2.2
–2.0
73.2
90.7

–3.0
–3.1
–1.1
75.7
92.6

–2.5
–2.8
–0.7
75.9
92.8

–2.0
–2.2
–0.6
74.7
90.9

–1.5
–1.5
–0.6
74.3
90.0

–1.0
–0.4
–0.6
72.1
87.6

–0.5
0.2
–0.5
70.4
85.7

–0.6
0.1
–0.6
69.2
84.0

–10.1
–5.1
–5.3
85.1
101.1

–5.0
–3.2
–3.1
84.7
100.0

–1.8
0.0
–1.8
80.9
94.3

–2.4
–0.2
–2.1
55.7
68.7

0.0
0.3
0.0
59.6
81.1

0.0
–0.8
0.6
58.6
78.7

0.6
–0.3
1.2
55.0
75.7

1.0
–0.3
1.2
52.2
72.2

1.2
0.2
1.2
49.3
69.2

1.4
1.0
1.2
45.5
65.0

1.8
1.2
1.3
42.7
61.6

1.5
0.4
1.3
41.1
59.5

–8.2
–3.5
–5.8
54.1
73.3

–3.2
–1.8
–1.8
54.2
72.2

1.0
0.0
1.0
43.8
59.5

–4.2
–0.1
–4.2
61.8
71.2

–5.0
–1.3
–4.0
80.0
90.6

–4.1
–1.9
–2.9
83.0
93.4

–3.9
–2.1
–2.6
85.5
94.9

–3.6
–2.2
–2.2
86.3
95.6

–3.6
–2.3
–2.1
89.2
98.0

–2.9
–1.3
–2.1
89.4
98.3

–2.3
–0.5
–1.7
89.3
98.1

–3.0
0.0
–2.0
89.4
98.1

–10.8
–5.6
–4.5
110.0
118.7

–6.5
–4.0
–4.0
109.8
118.6

–4.7
0.0
–4.7
114.6
123.3

–3.4
–0.1
–4.0
101.0
109.6

–2.9
–2.8
–1.6
114.6
126.5

–2.9
–4.1
–0.5
120.0
132.5

–3.0
–4.1
–1.0
122.3
135.4

–2.6
–3.4
–0.6
123.1
135.3

–2.4
–2.5
–1.3
122.4
134.8

–2.4
–1.2
–1.8
122.0
134.1

–2.2
–0.7
–1.9
122.9
134.8

–1.6
–0.7
–1.3
123.0
134.8

–13.0
–5.4
–3.8
148.8
161.8

–6.2
–5.4
–3.4
146.1
158.3

–2.5
–0.5
–2.5
141.5
152.6

–6.7
–1.9
–6.2
105.8
183.3

–8.6
–3.1
–7.6
145.3
228.7

–7.9
–1.7
–7.5
144.7
232.2

–5.6
–1.9
–5.5
146.6
235.8

–3.8
–1.5
–4.3
146.4
231.3

–3.7
–1.8
–4.1
152.0
236.4

–3.1
–0.3
–3.3
149.8
234.5

–2.5
–0.8
–2.5
153.5
236.6

–3.3
–0.7
–3.0
154.9
238.0

–14.2
–3.0
–12.7
177.1
266.2

–6.4
–2.1
–5.6
178.9
264.0

–2.7
0.0
–2.7
179.7
264.0

–4.9
0.4
–5.2
44.4
49.7

–7.6
–2.0
–6.1
74.8
83.2

–5.5
–1.5
–4.3
75.9
84.2

–5.6
–0.7
–4.9
78.0
86.2

–4.6
–0.1
–4.3
78.4
86.9

–3.3
0.0
–3.3
77.8
86.8

–2.5
0.3
–2.6
76.7
86.2

–2.3
0.0
–2.3
75.9
85.7

–2.2
0.0
–2.2
75.4
85.4

–16.5
–3.9
–14.0
98.1
108.0

–9.2
–3.5
–6.4
101.6
111.5

–4.4
0.0
–4.3
107.1
117.0

–0.6
0.0
–0.6
28.3
74.5

–2.5
–0.4
–2.3
28.9
85.4

–1.5
0.0
–1.5
29.7
86.1

0.2
1.0
–0.6
28.5
85.6

–0.1
–0.1
0.0
28.4
91.2

–0.5
–0.9
0.0
28.7
91.7

–0.1
0.4
–0.3
27.9
90.5

–0.4
0.6
–0.7
26.5
89.7

–0.3
0.4
–0.6
25.9
88.6

–19.9
–3.8
–16.5
46.4
114.6

–8.7
–1.4
–7.9
48.4
115.0

–0.3
0.0
–0.3
42.9
106.2

Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the
relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the System
of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans. Fiscal
data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Nonconsolidated basis.
5Includes equity shares.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

153

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2002–11
2012–21
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Trade in Goods
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

154

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Projections
2020
2021

5.7

2.3

3.0

3.6

3.9

2.9

2.2

5.6

3.9

1.0

–10.4

8.3

5.4
3.2

–1.5
–0.6

–1.8
1.3

–0.7
0.1

–1.7
–1.7

–13.3
–5.8

–4.1
–3.4

4.3
4.6

5.4
3.2

–2.7
–0.3

–2.8
–3.5

3.3
0.5

4.5
8.7

1.9
2.9

2.9
3.4

3.1
4.7

3.9
3.3

3.7
1.7

2.0
2.7

4.8
6.6

3.5
4.1

1.3
0.9

–11.6
–7.7

7.0
9.5

4.1
9.9

2.0
2.8

1.7
5.4

2.6
5.1

3.9
4.3

4.8
–0.8

2.6
1.7

4.8
7.4

3.6
5.0

1.7
–0.6

–11.5
–9.4

7.3
11.0

–0.2
1.6

0.4
–0.7

–0.6
0.6

1.0
–0.5

0.3
–0.6

1.8
–4.3

1.2
–1.4

–0.2
1.4

–0.5
1.2

0.1
–1.1

0.6
–2.6

0.3
0.3

5.8

2.3

2.8

3.3

3.0

2.3

2.1

5.6

3.8

0.2

–8.1

8.4

5.5
3.3

–1.9
–1.0

–1.9
1.1

–1.2
–0.4

–2.4
–2.3

–14.5
–7.2

–4.8
–4.2

4.9
5.1

5.7
3.6

–3.1
–0.7

–3.5
–4.2

2.9
0.1

2.7
15.6
11.6
7.7
13.2
9.3
17.5

–1.1
–7.7
–2.0
–1.8
–3.6
–4.8
–3.9

2.3
0.9
–7.6
–3.3
–18.1
–20.5
–17.8

–2.8
–0.9
–5.8
–0.3
–13.7
–4.4
–3.9

–0.4
–7.5
–5.5
–1.6
20.1
–7.5
–12.2

–3.0
–47.2
–17.1
–16.9
–7.2
–11.5
–27.3

–5.1
–15.7
–0.4
1.5
–3.1
0.0
–5.3

0.1
23.3
6.4
3.8
–4.7
5.2
22.2

1.9
29.4
1.3
–1.2
–8.2
2.0
6.6

0.4
–10.2
0.8
–3.1
–3.8
–5.4
3.7

–3.1
–32.1
5.6
0.4
3.6
–4.2
0.8

–1.3
12.0
5.1
4.3
3.9
1.7
3.0

0.5
13.2
9.3
5.4
10.8
7.0
15.0

–0.1
–6.8
–1.0
–0.8
–2.7
–3.8
–3.0

5.5
4.0
–4.7
–0.3
–15.6
–18.1
–15.3

–2.0
–0.1
–5.1
0.5
–13.0
–3.7
–3.1

–0.3
–7.5
–5.5
–1.5
20.1
–7.5
–12.1

5.3
–42.7
–10.0
–9.8
0.7
–4.0
–21.1

–4.5
–15.1
0.3
2.2
–2.5
0.6
–4.7

0.4
23.6
6.6
4.1
–4.5
5.5
22.5

–0.2
26.7
–0.8
–3.3
–10.1
–0.1
4.4

2.9
–8.0
3.3
–0.7
–1.4
–3.1
6.2

–3.7
–32.5
4.9
–0.2
3.0
–4.8
0.1

–4.0
9.0
2.2
1.4
1.1
–1.1
0.2

–1.8
10.7
6.8
3.0
8.4
4.6
12.4

0.1
–6.5
–0.8
–0.6
–2.4
–3.6
–2.7

10.8
9.2
0.0
4.7
–11.4
–14.0
–11.0

–5.9
–4.1
–8.9
–3.5
–16.4
–7.5
–7.0

–0.4
–7.6
–5.6
–1.6
20.0
–7.6
–12.2

16.2
–36.8
–0.7
–0.5
11.1
5.9
–12.9

–4.8
–15.4
–0.1
1.8
–2.8
0.3
–5.0

–1.9
20.8
4.2
1.7
–6.6
3.1
19.7

–2.6
23.7
–3.1
–5.6
–12.2
–2.5
1.9

6.0
–5.2
6.4
2.3
1.5
–0.2
9.4

–5.1
–33.5
3.4
–1.6
1.5
–6.1
–1.3

–8.3
4.1
–2.3
–3.1
–3.4
–5.5
–4.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
2002–11
2012–21
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Middle East and Central Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
Goods
Average Oil Price3
In US Dollars a Barrel
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Projections
2020
2021

4.5
8.5
5.4
9.8

1.8
2.8
0.3
3.5

2.7
3.8
2.6
4.3

2.6
4.6
1.9
5.8

3.1
2.7
–0.5
4.1

3.1
1.2
3.1
0.5

1.5
2.7
1.2
3.1

4.6
6.6
1.5
7.9

3.1
4.0
1.0
4.8

0.7
–0.5
–4.3
0.6

–9.7
–5.5
–7.8
–4.9

7.3
8.8
5.3
9.6

4.2
10.0
10.3
9.9

1.9
3.0
–0.3
3.6

1.1
5.2
8.6
4.5

2.3
4.7
3.0
5.1

3.3
2.6
0.4
3.1

3.7
–0.5
–6.4
0.8

2.3
2.1
–5.5
3.7

4.9
7.4
3.2
8.2

3.6
5.0
–2.0
6.3

0.5
–0.4
0.7
–0.6

–9.4
–6.4
–8.4
–6.0

7.6
10.9
4.9
11.9

2.3
5.8
10.7
3.9

–0.7
–1.3
–4.6
–0.3

–0.4
3.1
4.4
2.6

0.4
–1.1
–2.4
–0.5

–1.9
–3.1
–6.7
–1.6

–6.4
–9.0
–29.9
–1.0

–2.2
–7.0
–12.7
–5.4

4.4
6.9
17.0
4.4

2.8
4.8
15.3
2.1

–1.4
0.3
–2.7
1.1

–3.1
–6.4
–21.3
–2.4

1.2
–0.7
3.8
–1.7

2.6
4.0
4.6
3.8

–1.1
–0.8
–0.4
–0.9

0.6
2.4
3.0
2.3

–0.6
–0.6
0.9
–0.9

–2.0
–2.6
–2.1
–2.8

–8.1
–4.9
–4.0
–5.1

–3.6
–5.5
–3.1
–6.0

4.4
5.7
4.0
6.1

3.5
3.6
1.0
4.0

–1.3
0.4
2.0
0.1

–3.6
–4.4
–3.6
–4.6

0.5
–1.4
–1.5
–1.4

–0.3
1.8

0.4
–0.5

–1.0
0.7

1.0
–0.5

0.2
–0.5

1.8
–4.3

1.4
–1.6

–0.1
1.1

–0.7
1.2

–0.1
–0.1

0.6
–2.0

0.7
0.7

–1.4
2.8
3.2
4.8
5.1

1.0
–1.6
–0.7
–3.7
–1.1

1.4
1.4
–1.8
0.4
–0.2

1.1
–3.2
–1.1
–0.9
–0.5

2.5
–0.7
–2.5
–4.6
–2.7

8.4
–10.7
–8.7
–24.3
–13.5

0.2
–5.8
1.1
–6.1
–0.4

–3.3
2.7
4.2
10.1
7.3

–2.3
4.5
0.0
10.7
4.0

1.0
0.3
0.2
–4.3
–2.0

2.4
–3.3
–1.3
–15.4
–5.8

–0.6
–0.1
3.4
3.3
4.4

5.9
0.0

–4.3
0.6

1.3
0.3

–3.3
0.4

–4.7
1.2

–27.0
4.3

–9.9
0.6

12.5
–1.6

14.1
–1.9

–4.6
1.0

–18.3
2.3

5.3
–0.3

14,972
11,859
15.6
62.22
2.7

22,916 22,631 23,363 23,798 21,127 20,743 22,854 25,006 24,555 21,302 23,778
17,692 18,130 18,552 18,640 16,200 15,734 17,429 19,090 18,538 16,373 18,233
–7.7
0.9
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
29.4
–10.2 –32.1
12.0
52.81
68.33
61.39 41.69
46.70
66.99 105.01 104.07
96.25
50.79
42.84
–1.1
2.3
–2.8
–0.4
–3.0
–5.1
0.1
1.9
0.4
–3.1
–1.3

1Average

of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies' trade (export of goods)
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16
shares in world commodity imports.
3Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
4Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.
2As

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

155

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

156

Projections
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

50.7
–418.1
129.5
251.6
–25.9
–4.8
1.1
59.7
–92.8
–64.6
273.9
334.5

244.1
–336.9
278.1
244.8
–14.3
23.7
27.6
45.9
–132.7
–58.0
342.3
165.9

248.1
–367.8
319.6
280.3
–27.3
41.1
23.3
36.8
–144.8
–41.9
358.4
173.9

297.2
–407.4
322.9
288.8
–9.0
26.1
24.2
136.4
–143.7
–54.4
364.7
–57.9

391.1
–394.9
390.0
295.1
–12.0
48.7
39.1
197.9
–140.9
–47.2
345.6
–82.3

480.5
–365.3
393.4
286.7
–19.9
50.5
35.1
203.5
–93.1
–46.4
323.7
7.4

392.6
–449.7
418.7
292.4
–15.6
52.0
27.5
176.6
–110.7
–42.8
344.2
–46.2

339.3
–480.2
354.8
273.2
–18.1
59.2
27.5
184.3
–113.5
–35.4
392.0
62.8

242.2
–441.7
242.0
217.6
–48.9
59.6
6.7
143.5
–54.0
–31.8
314.2
–39.5

314.1
–463.0
344.5
294.9
–51.7
63.2
13.4
165.6
–107.6
–42.9
337.5
–144.7

435.0
–518.5
432.4
336.0
–28.9
70.4
32.2
187.0
–111.8
–48.6
400.5
–208.7

119.0
–28.4
–148.3
418.7
–26.6

98.9
–56.2
–172.9
333.7
–37.6

228.3
–8.0
–186.0
201.9
–62.4

308.6
36.3
–171.9
–138.9
–92.0

223.3
–6.6
–99.7
–143.2
–56.1

173.1
–16.3
–86.2
–26.9
–36.3

–49.2
69.3
–130.2
108.4
–44.4

133.0
54.9
–89.7
26.8
–62.2

201.2
–9.2
–21.6
–133.3
–76.6

64.8
4.3
–37.3
–106.7
–69.8

–7.5
–10.4
–71.3
–57.8
–61.7

593.8
–259.2
–63.4

460.6
–294.7
–87.5

311.3
–137.4
–53.2

–75.9
18.0
–64.2

–74.9
–7.4
–43.7

83.7
–76.4
–56.6

311.0
–357.2
–74.6

146.3
–83.6
–45.7

–95.6
56.1
–32.0

–41.4
–103.3
–32.3

16.7
–225.5
–33.9

–413.6

–379.1

–348.6

–312.2

–219.2

–243.0

–333.8

–228.1

–167.5

–233.4

–347.6

–56.5

–62.2

–43.0

–51.3

–55.2

–46.3

–46.0

–47.4

–41.7

–49.5

–40.0

385.2
314.1
–32.8
408.4

410.0
435.9
–38.6
326.5

422.0
456.1
–40.6
191.5

239.2
448.3
–74.1
–122.6

308.9
479.7
–41.1
–120.2

487.9
505.3
–34.7
–7.9

346.4
500.6
–57.0
125.3

402.0
434.7
–61.2
43.8

202.6
350.7
–88.6
–117.3

169.4
469.3
–85.7
–86.7

226.3
571.5
–76.4
–33.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

0.1
–2.6
1.0
7.1
–1.0
–0.2
0.1
1.0
–3.4
–3.5
4.1
1.2

0.5
–2.0
2.1
6.6
–0.5
1.1
2.0
0.9
–4.8
–3.1
5.0
0.5

0.5
–2.1
2.4
7.2
–1.0
1.9
1.7
0.8
–4.7
–2.3
5.1
0.6

0.7
–2.2
2.8
8.6
–0.4
1.4
2.0
3.1
–4.9
–3.5
5.7
–0.2

0.8
–2.1
3.3
8.5
–0.5
2.6
3.2
4.0
–5.2
–3.1
5.2
–0.3

1.0
–1.9
3.1
7.8
–0.8
2.6
2.7
4.2
–3.5
–2.8
4.6
0.0

0.8
–2.2
3.1
7.4
–0.6
2.5
1.9
3.6
–3.9
–2.5
4.6
–0.1

0.7
–2.2
2.7
7.1
–0.7
3.0
2.0
3.6
–4.0
–2.0
5.4
0.2

0.5
–2.1
1.9
5.8
–1.9
3.2
0.5
2.9
–2.0
–2.0
4.5
–0.1

0.6
–2.1
2.4
6.8
–1.8
3.0
0.9
3.2
–3.8
–2.4
4.4
–0.4

0.7
–2.0
2.5
6.7
–0.8
2.9
1.8
3.1
–3.3
–2.2
4.3
–0.4

0.9
–0.7
–2.5
11.2
–1.7

0.7
–1.2
–2.9
8.6
–2.2

1.5
–0.2
–3.1
5.1
–3.5

2.0
1.1
–3.3
–4.0
–5.8

1.4
–0.2
–2.0
–4.2
–3.8

1.0
–0.4
–1.6
–0.8
–2.3

–0.3
1.8
–2.5
2.8
–2.7

0.6
1.4
–1.7
0.7
–3.6

1.0
–0.3
–0.5
–3.7
–4.8

0.3
0.1
–0.8
–2.7
–4.1

0.0
–0.2
–1.3
–1.2
–2.5

9.6
–1.2
–3.3

7.3
–1.2
–4.4

5.1
–0.5
–2.7

–1.5
0.1
–3.3

–1.6
0.0
–2.4

1.7
–0.3
–2.8

5.9
–1.2
–3.8

2.7
–0.3
–2.4

–2.0
0.2
–1.9

–0.8
–0.3
–1.8

0.3
–0.5
–1.5

–3.0

–2.7

–2.4

–2.3

–1.6

–1.7

–2.2

–1.5

–1.2

–1.5

–1.7

–6.6

–6.9

–4.8

–5.9

–6.5

–5.9

–5.6

–5.3

–4.8

–5.4

–3.4

0.5
2.1
–1.9
13.3

0.5
2.8
–2.1
10.3

0.5
2.9
–2.0
6.0

0.3
3.3
–3.8
–4.3

0.4
3.5
–2.2
–4.3

0.6
3.4
–1.8
–0.3

0.4
3.1
–2.8
4.0

0.5
2.8
–2.8
1.3

0.2
2.3
–3.9
–3.9

0.2
2.8
–3.6
–2.7

0.2
2.8
–2.2
–0.9

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

157

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
1Excludes

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

0.4
–18.6
4.0
15.4
–3.2
–0.8
0.3
6.5
–11.4
–11.6
6.8
3.6

1.7
–14.6
8.2
14.4
–1.7
3.9
6.2
5.5
–15.9
–10.4
8.2
1.9

1.7
–15.4
9.0
15.8
–3.1
6.5
5.1
4.3
–16.6
–7.3
8.6
2.2

2.2
–17.9
10.0
18.3
–1.2
4.8
6.0
17.4
–17.7
–11.0
9.8
–0.6

2.9
–17.6
12.0
18.5
–1.5
8.8
9.4
24.4
–18.3
–9.8
9.5
–1.1

3.3
–15.3
11.1
16.5
–2.4
8.4
7.6
23.2
–11.5
–9.0
8.2
0.1

2.5
–17.7
10.8
15.6
–1.7
7.9
5.5
19.0
–12.6
–7.8
8.0
–0.5

2.2
–19.0
9.3
15.1
–2.0
9.4
5.7
20.4
–12.7
–6.4
9.4
0.7

1.8
–20.8
...
13.4
–6.7
11.4
1.8
18.6
–6.9
–7.1
8.5
–0.3

2.1
–20.2
...
15.7
–6.6
10.0
3.1
19.3
–12.4
–8.5
8.4
–1.6

2.3
–18.4
...
14.7
–2.9
8.8
5.2
18.2
–11.2
–7.1
8.1
–1.8

3.3
–2.0
–11.7
22.2
–5.6

2.6
–3.8
–13.7
18.8
–7.8

5.7
–0.5
–15.0
12.9
–13.7

8.1
3.0
–15.9
–10.3
–26.7

6.1
–0.6
–9.5
–11.8
–17.6

4.2
–1.2
–7.3
–2.2
–9.9

–1.1
4.5
–10.3
7.0
–10.6

3.0
3.6
–7.2
1.9
–15.3

4.8
–0.7
–2.0
–11.3
–23.7

1.4
0.3
–3.0
–8.3
–18.5

–0.1
–0.5
–4.8
–3.5
–12.0

22.5
–4.3
–12.9

18.3
–4.6
–18.0

13.8
–2.1
–11.3

–4.1
0.3
–15.9

–4.8
–0.1
–10.9

4.7
–1.2
–12.6

15.2
–5.0
–15.5

7.8
–1.2
–9.7

–6.0
0.9
–7.7

–2.2
–1.4
–6.9

1.2
–2.4
–5.6

–10.3

–9.2

–8.4

–8.5

–6.0

–5.8

–7.3

–5.0

–4.3

–5.2

–5.8

–21.3

–22.9

–17.0

–24.4

–28.5

–21.2

–18.2

–18.2

–19.5

–21.6

–11.3

1.6
4.8
–6.9
24.6

1.8
6.3
–7.5
20.9

1.9
6.3
–7.6
13.9

1.2
7.0
–15.4
–10.1

1.5
7.4
–8.5
–11.0

2.1
7.1
–6.2
–0.9

1.4
6.3
–8.9
9.1

1.6
5.6
–9.0
3.5

1.0
5.2
–15.0
–11.2

0.7
6.1
–12.8
–7.6

0.8
5.9
–7.9
–2.2

the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

158

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Ireland
Portugal
Greece
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden
Hong Kong SAR
Czech Republic
Norway
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Euro Area2
1Data
2Data

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

0.1
–2.6
1.0
7.1
–1.0
–0.2
0.1
10.2
–0.1
1.5
–3.4
–1.6
–2.4
–2.1
0.9
–1.4
1.3
5.6
–3.6
–1.9
–3.9
1.7
1.0
–3.4
3.8
–3.5
–4.3
8.7
17.6
10.7
5.5
1.6
–1.5
12.6
0.3
6.3
–3.9
...
39.3
–3.8
...

0.5
–2.0
2.1
6.6
–0.5
1.1
2.0
9.8
1.0
1.9
1.6
1.6
–2.6
–1.8
1.9
0.8
3.3
5.4
–2.7
0.3
–1.5
2.6
0.9
–4.8
5.6
–3.1
–3.4
9.7
15.7
11.6
5.1
1.5
–0.5
10.3
3.0
7.8
–3.2
...
40.2
5.8
...

0.5
–2.1
2.4
7.2
–1.0
1.9
1.7
8.2
0.8
2.5
1.1
0.2
–2.3
–1.3
1.1
3.2
5.1
5.2
–2.3
0.7
–4.1
8.5
0.8
–4.7
5.6
–2.3
–3.1
11.3
18.0
8.6
4.5
1.4

0.7
–2.2
2.8
8.6
–0.4
1.4
2.0
6.3
1.4
1.7
4.4
0.2
–1.5
–0.9
–2.1
–2.8
3.8
5.1
–0.9
1.8
–0.4
2.7
3.1
–4.9
7.2
–3.5
–4.6
13.6
18.7
11.3
4.1
3.3

0.8
–2.1
3.3
8.5
–0.5
2.6
3.2
8.1
0.6
2.7
–4.2
1.2
–2.3
–2.0
–2.7
–0.8
4.8
4.9
1.4
1.6
–4.2
3.7
4.0
–5.2
6.5
–3.1
–3.3
13.1
17.6
9.9
3.5
4.0

1.0
–1.9
3.1
7.8
–0.8
2.6
2.7
10.8
1.2
1.6
0.5
1.3
–2.5
–0.9
–1.9
0.6
6.2
4.9
1.0
2.7
–5.1
10.2
4.2
–3.5
4.6
–2.8
–2.6
14.1
16.3
6.4
3.1
4.6

0.8
–2.2
3.1
7.4
–0.6
2.5
1.9
10.8
–1.4
2.3
6.0
0.4
–3.5
–1.7
–2.6
0.3
5.9
4.8
–0.7
2.0
–4.4
11.0
3.6
–3.9
4.5
–2.5
–2.1
11.6
17.2
8.2
2.5
3.7

0.7
–2.2
2.7
7.1
–0.7
3.0
2.0
9.9
–1.2
2.6
–11.4
–0.1
–2.1
–0.5
–2.9
4.3
5.7
4.5
–0.5
2.6
–6.7
9.6
3.6
–4.0
3.6
–2.0
0.6
10.7
17.0
11.5
4.2
6.2

0.5
–2.1
1.9
5.8
–1.9
3.2
0.5
7.6
0.0
2.4
5.0
–3.1
–7.7
–1.8
–3.1
7.2
4.5
3.8
2.0
4.0
–10.6
7.6
2.9
–2.0
3.3
–2.0
1.8
9.6
15.0
8.5
3.2
4.4

0.6
–2.1
2.4
6.8
–1.8
3.0
0.9
9.0
–0.8
2.5
5.5
–3.5
–4.5
–0.7
–4.1
4.5
3.9
4.3
–0.8
2.0
–9.1
8.3
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–2.4
–0.1
9.8
14.5
9.0
4.2
4.7

0.7
–2.0
2.5
6.7
–0.8
2.9
1.8
8.7
–1.6
2.2
5.5
–3.7
–3.6
0.3
–2.8
–1.7
1.1
4.6
–1.2
–0.1
–3.5
10.3
3.1
–3.3
4.3
–2.2
–2.0
9.2
14.0
9.3
3.0
4.0

0.2
10.8
4.0
8.9
–3.1
...
34.2
3.9
...

0.2
8.0
5.1
8.2
–2.9
...
25.3
5.1
...

1.5
4.5
3.3
7.8
–2.2
...
28.1
7.6
...

1.6
4.6
3.1
7.8
–3.0
...
32.3
3.8
–0.1

0.4
7.1
2.1
7.0
–4.3
...
34.6
3.2
–1.6

–0.4
4.1
3.4
7.8
–3.4
...
34.8
6.2
0.7

–0.7
2.8
3.5
6.4
–2.0
...
–23.5
0.0
–4.5

–0.5
4.4
3.5
6.6
–2.4
...
–6.7
0.2
–1.2

1.0
4.3
2.8
7.2
–2.9
...
28.0
0.1
–0.1

–0.8
2.3

–0.6
2.9

–0.6
3.0

–0.5
3.4

–0.1
3.6

0.0
3.6

–0.3
3.5

–0.3
2.9

–0.4
2.5

–0.3
2.9

–0.2
3.1

corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

159

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania1
Belarus1
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Turkey
Ukraine1
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

160

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

0.9
–0.3
–21.9
29.8
–8.6
2.5
–1.4
–4.8
–2.7
1.9
–21.3
5.1
–6.6
–0.4
–13.6
–27.4
–1.8
35.7
4.8
–15.2
–36.7
2.7
–9.5
1.4
–5.8
–1.2
230.7
–14.9
18.4
–6.5
4.7
–0.7
–10.2
–2.8
–8.7
–0.9
–1.8
1.6
–5.8
–7.4
–15.3
–3.2
–3.7
–4.8
3.3
–10.8
–5.4
–8.1
–2.5
...
–0.4
3.5
–14.3
–8.5
–2.2
7.2
–3.4
–4.4
–3.1

0.7
1.6
–25.6
20.9
–8.5
1.5
–8.9
–1.7
–3.2
–5.5
–26.5
3.4
–4.3
–6.2
–9.9
–25.4
–1.2
49.5
3.3
–14.1
–30.9
4.0
–1.5
–3.0
–3.4
–2.1
171.4
–9.6
–6.7
–3.3
3.6
–1.2
–9.3
–10.0
–5.3
1.3
–1.1
3.5
–3.4
–5.2
–11.4
–1.6
–1.3
–0.8
1.5
–5.7
–5.8
–9.2
–2.9
...
–2.1
–12.9
–14.3
–8.4
–4.6
3.4
–3.2
–4.8
–3.3

1.5
0.8
–27.1
31.9
–8.6
2.2
–5.8
–1.3
–3.1
31.1
–23.3
4.3
–3.7
3.4
6.1
–11.3
–4.5
25.2
4.5
–17.8
15.1
3.6
–9.1
–3.7
–2.5
2.9
75.6
–6.3
3.0
6.2
3.7
–0.2
–10.8
–6.6
–7.3
1.2
0.3
1.2
–6.9
–6.0
–12.4
–0.5
–2.1
–0.2
2.8
–5.6
–4.1
–3.9
–3.1
0.3
–1.6
–5.0
–19.7
–9.2
–8.2
1.7
–4.1
–2.0
–5.2

2.0
1.8
–27.9
16.7
–8.7
2.7
–3.5
–1.0
–2.0
32.8
–22.4
3.0
–7.5
17.2
4.5
–4.0
–3.5
–21.3
5.0
–8.5
25.6
2.4
–2.8
–2.7
–2.3
6.9
12.8
–10.1
–53.5
–1.6
–0.9
1.1
–8.6
–3.3
–5.1
0.1
3.3
2.4
–8.6
–6.0
–11.0
–2.0
–0.6
–0.6
5.0
–3.5
–3.2
1.7
–3.3
2.2
–2.7
4.3
–13.8
–6.1
–10.1
–5.8
–3.0
–2.4
–6.3

1.4
1.9
–30.3
12.9
–8.5
1.8
–3.6
–0.6
–1.8
10.8
–11.0
2.4
–23.6
16.1
7.2
–6.3
–4.2
2.0
6.3
–13.4
29.4
–0.4
–4.5
–3.5
–2.1
10.5
–32.9
–6.5
21.5
0.8
0.2
–0.2
–7.6
–3.4
–4.7
3.2
2.1
4.5
–7.9
–3.5
–16.2
–2.9
–0.5
–1.4
1.9
–2.9
–3.1
–1.5
–2.0
–2.4
–2.7
5.1
–6.0
–4.3
–9.2
–5.6
–1.3
–2.0
–4.3

1.0
–0.5
–23.9
16.4
–7.9
1.6
–6.7
–1.8
–1.6
37.6
–10.6
2.8
–21.7
7.5
10.3
–10.1
–6.8
12.7
–0.4
–18.7
29.9
–0.7
–2.0
–4.3
–2.6
9.6
–21.1
–6.4
24.0
–6.4
–0.6
–0.4
–7.5
–1.7
–4.4
3.5
3.5
2.3
–5.4
–5.7
–16.1
–1.0
0.0
–2.8
2.0
–5.2
–4.7
–2.2
–1.6
–7.8
–4.8
1.1
–12.1
–3.8
–8.6
–4.8
–0.7
–2.3
–3.3

–0.3
–3.5
–19.1
6.9
–12.2
0.2
–8.5
–2.1
–2.9
38.7
–12.0
2.2
–26.4
6.5
21.0
–16.8
–4.7
–4.6
–8.1
–15.2
26.2
–2.5
0.8
–3.0
–3.2
5.6
–12.2
–5.6
7.1
9.4
1.9
1.8
–6.8
0.0
–3.7
1.4
1.8
0.0
–7.6
–10.7
–17.0
–0.1
–1.0
–4.4
6.9
–4.8
–2.7
–3.3
–2.5
–13.7
–5.2
–0.7
–11.4
–4.0
–8.1
–4.6
–2.2
–3.6
–3.9

0.6
–1.7
–22.5
6.6
–15.8
1.0
–12.9
–0.9
–2.7
32.0
–6.4
3.4
–26.0
8.0
16.0
–15.6
–2.6
10.5
–7.7
–26.6
22.2
–0.1
2.3
–9.6
–2.2
7.1
8.2
–4.8
12.4
13.1
3.4
1.4
–7.6
–1.8
–3.6
4.0
2.8
–0.8
–5.5
–8.9
–15.2
–2.8
0.4
–4.6
3.8
–6.9
1.2
–2.7
–1.7
–6.5
–0.9
2.1
0.6
–3.1
–9.6
–3.3
–2.8
–3.8
–4.2

1.0
–1.5
–21.4
0.0
–25.4
1.3
–15.3
0.3
–1.3
–1.6
–8.7
0.9
–31.8
1.6
1.6
–12.3
–3.5
4.2
–2.5
–32.7
14.7
1.6
–7.1
–11.3
–3.6
4.2
–13.7
–4.6
17.0
–0.3
1.2
–0.3
–11.7
–3.3
–4.4
1.9
–3.2
–1.6
–6.0
–8.3
–14.2
–4.7
3.0
–5.3
1.2
–6.4
–3.7
4.3
–0.5
–22.0
0.7
–20.8
–17.5
–11.1
–15.3
–2.6
0.3
–1.6
–4.0

0.3
–2.8
–13.5
2.8
–16.3
0.7
–12.1
–0.9
–2.4
2.8
–7.7
1.8
–17.0
1.2
3.5
–13.5
–4.4
3.4
–7.0
–35.4
18.9
–1.5
–7.0
–16.4
–3.2
4.6
–27.6
–17.5
–11.0
–1.6
1.7
0.1
–8.5
–2.2
–6.1
2.3
–3.1
–0.9
–5.5
–10.6
–13.6
–3.8
1.8
–4.5
1.8
–6.5
–0.9
–3.0
–0.8
–24.7
1.2
–17.2
–15.9
–6.8
–11.4
–3.5
0.0
–2.9
–3.9

0.0
–1.9
8.9
9.6
–7.5
0.5
–7.6
–2.5
–1.8
11.5
–6.7
0.7
–5.5
–2.3
–3.9
–4.1
–4.0
–1.0
–4.7
–29.0
16.7
–2.2
–1.3
–8.0
–2.4
4.0
–36.2
–12.1
–8.0
–4.0
0.0
–0.2
–7.5
–2.2
–3.8
0.5
1.6
–0.5
–4.2
–7.3
–9.1
–2.3
0.1
–3.9
1.8
–5.2
–1.4
–3.4
–1.3
–8.4
0.7
–5.6
–7.7
–3.1
–7.8
–4.0
–0.7
–0.9
–3.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Latin America and the Caribbean
(continued)
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon1
Libya1
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan
Syria2
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

–2.5
–5.1
...
–6.5
–0.2
–5.8
...
–3.7
–7.9
–5.7
–8.5
–9.8
–1.6
–11.7
–9.2
–0.9
–3.2
...
...
...
3.3
13.4
–4.0
0.7
11.2
10.9
5.9
–10.0
21.4
8.4
–23.4
–3.6
–11.4
5.6
5.1
–14.9
1.1
45.5
–15.5
–25.9
29.9
–18.8
–9.3
10.2
–2.1
33.2
22.4
...
–12.8
...
–9.0
–9.1
–0.9
19.5
0.9
–14.9
–1.7

–2.9
–4.8
...
–4.1
–1.0
–6.9
...
–4.2
–9.3
–6.6
–9.5
–9.5
–2.5
–12.6
–9.0
1.6
–5.1
...
...
...
–3.8
19.3
–3.6
1.8
8.6
1.4
0.4
–7.3
16.6
7.4
–30.8
–2.2
–5.6
5.8
1.1
–10.2
0.8
40.3
–13.9
–28.0
0.0
–17.2
–7.6
6.6
–1.1
30.4
18.1
–13.6
–11.0
...
–10.4
–9.7
–7.3
18.8
2.4
–14.8
–3.1

–3.1
–4.8
–5.4
–3.2
–0.7
–5.4
–11.6
–3.3
–6.7
–8.6
–6.9
–8.0
–1.9
–8.0
–13.4
–0.1
–4.5
0.1
–2.5
–26.1
–7.9
13.8
–3.2
2.4
5.1
6.6
–4.4
–7.8
13.9
4.6
24.0
–0.9
–10.2
3.2
2.6
–7.1
2.8
33.4
–17.0
–28.8
–78.4
–22.2
–5.9
5.2
–1.3
24.0
9.8
–8.3
–5.8
...
–3.4
–9.8
–6.1
13.5
3.3
–13.6
–0.7

–3.3
–3.5
–4.7
–1.8
–2.2
–3.2
–12.5
–1.2
–3.4
–3.0
–4.7
–3.0
–2.7
–9.9
–9.0
–0.4
–5.0
–8.7
0.0
–15.3
–16.4
7.0
–0.9
–5.0
–4.0
3.8
–16.4
–2.7
–0.4
–2.4
29.3
–3.7
–11.8
0.3
–6.5
–9.0
–3.3
3.5
–15.9
–19.9
–54.3
–15.5
–2.1
–15.9
–1.0
8.5
–8.7
–8.3
–8.4
...
–6.1
–9.7
–15.6
4.9
1.3
–13.9
–6.2

–2.0
–2.2
–7.7
–1.1
1.1
–2.3
–11.0
1.0
1.5
–0.9
–2.6
–0.3
–2.3
–8.5
–7.8
3.6
–2.6
–12.7
–6.5
–13.9
–5.1
–4.4
0.6
–1.4
–4.2
9.0
–16.5
–2.1
–3.6
–4.6
–1.0
–6.0
–12.5
3.8
–8.3
–9.7
–5.9
–4.6
–11.6
–23.5
–24.6
–11.0
–4.1
–19.1
–1.8
–5.5
–3.7
–9.3
–7.6
...
–4.2
–9.3
–20.2
3.7
0.4
–13.9
–2.9

–1.6
–3.3
–8.8
–0.2
–0.1
–1.9
–14.4
1.1
–4.9
–1.0
–0.8
–2.7
–1.8
–7.2
–5.9
3.1
–1.3
–11.2
–1.0
–11.6
1.9
5.3
0.7
6.1
–0.8
7.6
–13.2
–3.0
4.1
–4.1
–4.8
–6.1
–8.1
3.5
1.8
–10.6
–3.1
8.0
–6.2
–26.3
8.0
–10.0
–3.4
–15.6
–4.1
4.0
1.5
–9.7
–10.0
...
2.2
–10.2
–10.4
7.1
2.5
–13.2
–0.2

–2.5
–3.3
–44.6
–1.4
–1.2
–4.7
–15.9
0.8
–29.2
–3.9
–5.4
–1.6
–2.1
–1.9
–8.2
0.0
–1.7
–5.7
2.2
–12.0
–3.4
5.8
0.0
8.8
2.8
12.2
–9.6
–9.4
12.8
–6.5
14.2
–2.4
–6.8
6.1
6.7
–6.9
–0.1
14.5
–12.1
–28.2
1.8
–13.8
–5.3
–5.4
–6.4
9.1
9.2
–7.5
–13.1
...
–5.0
–11.2
5.5
9.6
–7.1
–13.1
–2.0

–1.7
–2.4
–27.2
–1.4
–0.1
–2.1
–15.8
2.4
–33.9
–1.4
–1.4
–2.0
–0.3
6.0
–5.2
–1.0
–1.4
–2.1
5.3
–10.0
–11.1
4.8
0.6
8.4
0.7
11.7
–10.1
–8.2
9.1
–2.1
13.0
–3.6
–5.1
1.1
1.1
–2.3
–3.6
9.4
–5.6
–27.4
–0.3
–10.6
–4.1
–4.6
–4.9
2.4
5.9
–10.5
–15.1
...
–2.3
–8.5
5.1
8.4
–5.6
–10.8
–3.9

–0.5
–4.5
–27.8
–6.0
–2.0
–4.9
–25.3
3.8
–22.0
–2.5
–2.2
–5.2
1.2
0.5
–7.0
–0.7
–1.1
–21.0
–16.8
–18.7
–8.0
–3.3
–1.7
–4.1
–3.7
9.5
–10.8
–8.8
–3.6
–8.0
–3.2
–3.2
–10.8
–0.5
–12.6
–6.8
–3.3
–6.8
–13.4
–16.3
–59.8
–15.3
–7.3
–14.6
–1.1
–0.6
–2.5
–12.8
–12.7
...
–7.1
–8.3
1.0
3.6
–6.4
–11.1
–6.5

–0.8
–4.1
–26.3
–4.5
–0.1
–4.5
–24.9
2.3
–16.2
–0.4
–2.8
–7.2
–0.1
–0.2
–6.2
0.0
–0.3
–20.0
–9.3
–16.9
–6.2
1.5
–3.3
–4.1
–2.7
7.8
–16.6
–7.3
–4.4
–5.7
–2.5
–4.2
–8.5
0.3
–12.1
–5.7
–2.8
–2.8
–12.8
...
–22.4
–17.3
–5.2
–12.9
–2.5
2.6
–1.6
–12.9
–10.7
...
–4.5
–8.7
1.8
7.5
–7.4
–13.7
–8.3

–1.3
–2.9
–11.4
–1.0
0.6
–5.0
–10.1
–0.4
5.3
–2.6
–4.4
–3.0
–2.0
–2.2
–3.1
0.0
–1.0
–12.4
–0.3
–7.0
–8.1
3.6
–2.2
...
–1.2
7.0
–12.2
–6.0
–0.4
–4.5
0.0
–2.7
–7.0
0.7
–7.5
–3.0
–2.1
1.4
–7.8
...
–8.6
–2.5
–4.1
–3.2
–2.7
3.4
–0.6
–15.0
–7.2
...
–3.9
–5.4
–3.2
8.5
–4.0
–12.2
–0.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

161

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe1
1See

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Projections
2021

2025

–1.7
10.8
–5.2
0.3
–1.3
–18.6
–12.6
–3.3
–5.6
–7.8
–3.2
–4.3
13.6
–0.9
–1.1
12.4
5.0
–7.1
17.9
–4.5
–8.7
–19.9
–7.9
–8.4
–8.8
–12.3
–7.6
–9.2
–2.2
–7.1
–41.8
–5.7
–10.8
3.8
–9.5
–21.8
–8.7
–21.1
–31.8
–5.1
–15.9
–12.0
–7.6
–5.4
4.9
–10.7

–2.2
6.1
–5.4
8.9
–10.0
–19.7
–4.9
–3.5
–2.9
–9.1
–4.0
–9.5
10.8
–1.0
–2.4
2.3
10.8
–6.1
7.3
–6.7
–9.0
–12.5
–4.3
–8.8
–5.2
–14.7
–5.5
–8.4
–2.9
–6.2
–40.5
–4.2
–11.3
3.7
–7.1
–14.5
–8.2
–11.9
–17.3
–5.8
–3.9
–10.7
–13.2
–5.7
–0.8
–13.2

–3.5
–2.6
–6.7
15.4
–7.2
–19.5
–9.1
–4.0
–13.3
–8.9
–3.8
–4.8
1.0
1.0
–4.3
17.3
11.6
–6.6
7.6
–7.3
–7.0
–12.9
0.5
–10.4
–5.1
–20.5
–0.3
–8.2
–4.7
–5.4
–36.5
–11.1
–12.0
0.2
–11.4
–20.7
–7.0
–23.1
–9.3
–5.1
0.0
–10.0
–10.0
–6.5
2.1
–11.6

–5.8
–8.8
–6.0
7.8
–7.6
–20.7
–3.2
–3.8
–9.1
–13.8
–0.3
–3.9
–39.0
–0.4
–16.4
20.8
12.9
–11.7
–5.6
–9.9
–5.8
–12.9
1.8
–6.9
–3.9
–22.2
–1.6
–17.2
–5.3
–3.6
–37.4
–12.6
–15.3
–3.1
–14.8
–12.0
–5.7
–18.6
–15.5
–4.6
–0.8
–7.8
–11.0
–6.1
–2.7
–7.6

–3.8
–4.8
–3.0
7.7
–6.1
–13.5
–3.8
–3.2
–5.3
–10.4
–4.3
–4.1
–48.7
–0.9
–13.0
15.3
7.8
–9.4
–10.4
–9.2
–5.2
–31.9
1.4
–5.8
–6.5
–19.2
0.5
–18.5
–7.2
–4.0
–32.2
–15.7
–11.4
0.7
–15.5
–6.1
–4.2
–20.6
–9.1
–2.9
7.1
–4.1
–9.8
–2.8
–3.3
–3.6

–2.3
–0.5
–4.2
5.3
–5.0
–15.0
–7.8
–2.7
–7.8
–7.1
–2.1
–3.3
–3.3
–2.0
–5.8
24.0
6.2
–8.5
–7.0
–7.4
–3.4
–6.7
0.3
–7.2
–2.5
–22.6
–0.4
–25.6
–7.3
–4.6
–19.7
–3.9
–11.4
2.8
–7.5
–13.2
–7.3
–20.1
–21.0
–2.5
–3.1
–2.6
–2.0
–4.8
–1.7
–1.3

–2.7
7.0
–4.6
0.6
–4.1
–14.5
–5.2
–3.6
–8.0
–1.4
–2.8
–3.6
1.5
–3.6
–5.4
15.4
1.3
–6.5
–3.2
–9.5
–3.1
–18.7
–3.6
–5.7
–1.3
–22.5
0.7
–20.5
–4.9
–3.9
–29.6
–2.8
–12.6
1.0
–7.9
–12.3
–8.8
–17.9
–18.7
–3.5
–7.5
–3.0
–3.5
–6.8
–1.3
–5.9

–3.6
5.7
–4.3
–7.6
–4.8
–17.9
0.3
–4.4
–4.9
–4.9
–3.8
–3.8
3.5
–2.7
–5.9
12.1
4.2
–5.3
–0.3
–5.3
–2.7
–13.7
–8.5
–5.8
–8.4
–21.5
–2.3
–17.1
–4.2
–5.4
–20.4
–2.3
–12.6
–3.8
–9.2
–12.5
–7.7
–16.7
–13.5
–3.0
0.9
–2.3
–4.3
–6.5
0.6
1.1

–4.8
–1.3
–5.5
–2.5
–3.5
–20.7
–15.2
–5.4
–5.6
–13.3
–2.1
–4.8
–5.7
–3.7
–9.6
10.1
1.0
–4.5
–9.1
–8.5
–3.4
–20.5
–12.1
–4.9
–13.3
–21.4
–4.2
–19.2
–2.0
–13.3
–60.0
–4.4
–16.8
–3.6
–16.7
–17.0
–9.2
–28.3
–12.1
–1.6
14.6
–3.2
–6.3
–8.0
–1.0
–3.6

–4.1
0.1
–4.8
–3.1
–3.5
–20.8
–10.0
–4.5
–5.3
–9.7
–1.5
–4.0
–1.9
–2.9
–5.8
10.8
5.7
–4.6
–6.0
–10.8
–2.9
–15.7
–4.2
–5.4
–11.9
–21.6
–2.9
–19.3
–1.2
–10.7
–68.9
–2.1
–19.2
–2.0
–10.5
–11.7
–9.9
–25.7
–13.3
–1.8
–9.2
–4.4
–4.4
–5.9
0.0
–2.0

–2.5
1.1
–4.5
1.4
–5.3
–17.7
–2.9
–1.2
–5.6
–5.1
–0.2
–3.8
1.5
–2.1
–16.9
9.1
5.4
–3.3
–0.5
–7.4
–2.1
–10.1
–4.0
–5.8
–4.7
–20.5
–3.4
–16.2
–5.8
–4.9
–27.7
–2.0
–6.9
–0.5
–8.3
–7.1
–4.1
–19.1
–10.7
–2.4
–14.8
–2.3
–3.8
–0.9
0.6
–5.5

country-specific notes for Albania, Belarus, Lebanon, Libya, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.

2Data

162

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United States
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Germany
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
France
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Italy
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

Projections
2020
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

–129.8
126.0
–247.0
–97.3
–185.0
273.5

245.6
178.5
–560.6
74.8
399.8
153.2

334.4
244.6
54.8
1.3
–106.2
140.1

347.6
–2.2
194.1
–82.3
11.8
226.6

441.3
–302.3
528.0
32.7
4.6
178.5

456.5
316.8
38.7
21.4
–164.5
244.5

329.1
–78.7
413.4
56.5
–189.7
127.5

298.2
–114.7
233.0
21.5
84.3
74.2

137.3
–183.4
375.7
–3.2
–107.3
55.5

326.0
–126.6
603.4
16.7
–232.9
65.4

–448.0
126.9
–498.3
7.1
–88.2
4.5

–400.1
104.7
–30.7
2.2
–473.2
–3.1

–297.1
135.7
–114.9
–54.3
–259.9
–3.6

–333.1
–209.4
–53.5
–27.0
–37.0
–6.3

–363.6
–174.6
–195.0
7.8
–4.0
2.1

–334.1
38.4
–221.4
24.0
–173.4
–1.7

–419.7
–412.8
32.2
–20.4
–23.7
5.0

–395.5
–163.2
–133.4
–38.3
–65.3
4.7

–539.3
–214.8
219.6
–33.2
–510.6
–0.2

–463.7
–221.8
355.7
–20.0
–577.5
0.0

171.7
59.4
–201.6
38.8
258.7
16.4

426.8
37.3
–184.1
41.9
523.4
8.3

339.1
90.3
40.1
76.2
127.9
4.6

310.2
254.8
142.1
101.4
–199.9
11.8

358.4
97.1
609.0
23.2
–387.9
17.0

392.3
–45.8
421.9
28.7
–11.0
–1.4

450.0
149.0
264.7
109.2
–102.4
29.6

309.4
17.0
–67.0
41.2
314.5
3.6

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

194.2
33.6
66.8
30.9
61.1
1.7

300.8
26.1
209.5
31.8
32.2
1.2

318.1
88.0
177.7
50.8
4.8
–3.3

259.5
68.4
210.0
33.8
–50.4
–2.4

288.8
47.1
220.1
31.6
–11.9
1.9

319.9
42.2
234.4
12.5
32.3
–1.5

279.9
5.2
185.7
27.3
61.2
0.5

230.1
62.3
106.6
25.1
36.7
–0.6

217.6
36.5
137.9
17.0
26.3
0.0

294.9
39.0
173.8
28.1
53.9
0.0

–48.0
19.4
–50.6
–18.4
–3.6
5.2

–19.2
–13.9
–79.3
–22.3
98.2
–1.9

–10.3
47.2
–23.8
–31.8
–2.9
1.0

–0.8
7.9
43.2
14.5
–74.2
8.0

–18.6
41.8
0.2
–17.6
–45.4
2.5

–36.1
11.1
30.3
–1.4
–72.7
–3.4

–27.6
67.5
11.1
–30.5
–87.9
12.3

–32.3
4.7
–104.1
4.1
59.8
3.2

–46.7
15.0
–70.6
–0.9
6.1
3.7

–49.4
23.3
–51.8
–3.8
–21.7
4.6

–4.1
6.8
–22.4
7.5
2.1
1.9

32.4
0.9
–5.1
4.0
30.5
2.0

73.0
3.1
–2.2
–1.9
75.2
–1.3

43.1
2.0
105.7
1.2
–66.5
0.6

36.2
–12.3
154.8
–3.6
–101.4
–1.3

53.8
0.5
95.0
–8.2
–36.5
3.0

35.9
–0.2
141.7
–3.2
–105.5
3.1

51.6
–1.6
–56.7
2.8
103.5
3.6

60.9
5.3
–52.8
1.7
106.7
0.0

64.9
6.2
–63.2
1.2
120.8
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

163

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Spain
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Japan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Canada
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

164

Projections
2020
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

11.0
–23.1
53.6
–10.7
–11.9
3.1

41.2
–14.1
–85.0
1.4
138.0
0.9

22.8
14.2
–8.8
1.3
10.9
5.2

31.8
33.4
12.0
4.2
–23.3
5.5

39.2
12.4
64.9
2.8
–50.1
9.1

36.9
13.5
37.1
8.4
–26.3
4.1

37.0
–17.9
25.6
1.9
24.8
2.6

34.4
12.1
–56.0
–9.6
87.0
0.8

10.8
–2.0
39.7
0.0
–26.9
0.0

33.7
3.3
46.6
0.0
–16.2
0.0

53.9
117.5
28.8
6.7
–61.1
–37.9

–4.3
144.7
–280.6
58.1
34.8
38.7

58.9
118.6
–42.2
34.0
–60.1
8.5

180.9
133.3
131.5
17.7
–106.7
5.1

266.8
137.5
276.5
–16.1
–125.4
–5.7

168.3
154.9
–50.6
30.4
10.0
23.6

182.7
133.4
92.2
0.9
–67.9
24.0

223.2
212.0
87.1
3.3
–104.7
25.5

140.1
156.4
99.1
3.3
–130.2
11.5

161.7
163.9
110.7
3.3
–127.7
11.5

–78.4
–34.8
281.2
–65.8
–271.2
12.1

–132.8
–11.2
–284.6
63.4
91.8
7.8

–153.1
–176.1
15.9
31.2
–35.8
11.7

–158.2
–106.0
–230.1
–128.6
274.3
32.2

–161.1
–297.4
–201.5
29.3
299.8
8.8

–101.8
16.3
–121.9
13.3
–18.4
8.8

–111.1
–23.9
–360.0
11.2
236.9
24.8

–142.3
–88.3
57.4
11.3
–121.6
–1.1

–56.2
–68.6
–105.5
10.6
97.6
9.8

–109.8
28.6
–153.6
5.0
–0.4
10.6

–63.9
12.8
–68.3
...
–10.1
1.7

–57.2
–12.0
–34.8
...
–15.2
4.7

–43.1
1.3
–32.8
...
–16.9
5.3

–51.8
23.6
–36.2
...
–47.8
8.6

–45.4
33.5
–103.6
...
19.1
5.6

–41.6
51.8
–76.4
...
–17.9
0.8

–35.4
6.4
3.1
...
–43.4
–1.5

–32.9
25.9
–3.4
...
–54.1
–1.3

–31.7
13.7
–94.2
...
48.7
0.0

–42.9
12.3
–45.4
...
–9.8
0.0

252.2
–33.3
150.0
–28.3
–110.9
274.7

377.1
31.2
139.6
–33.5
138.7
101.3

344.2
–6.0
175.5
–22.3
85.7
111.5

300.8
–96.1
334.6
–11.9
–101.4
176.0

338.7
–64.5
258.4
3.5
–8.6
150.2

312.8
–162.5
157.7
–1.8
106.7
213.1

328.2
12.3
345.2
32.1
–111.0
49.5

330.7
–58.7
280.5
21.4
48.8
38.7

314.6
7.9
235.9
–6.5
51.0
26.3

333.8
–35.6
241.0
–2.4
103.1
27.7

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

Projections
2020
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

87.3
–495.2
–243.7
...
424.2
407.9

–24.6
–483.7
–147.6
...
64.7
541.4

12.0
–428.8
–89.7
...
406.3
111.7

–306.1
–346.4
127.7
...
468.8
–562.6

–405.8
–260.3
–53.5
...
381.8
–467.1

–242.1
–303.2
–208.4
...
97.5
168.2

–220.7
–371.8
–94.2
...
125.5
116.4

–163.1
–356.3
–98.3
...
116.7
175.1

26.1
–276.6
53.1
...
55.1
195.4

–81.9
–301.2
–165.4
...
154.7
228.7

13.0
–220.5
–115.5
1.3
217.2
136.8

28.5
–271.2
–64.6
–2.1
–81.7
444.8

153.2
–201.6
–125.2
0.8
282.0
195.6

72.4
–139.6
81.6
0.6
458.8
–329.4

–24.8
–25.5
31.1
–4.6
352.9
–379.6

–53.6
–104.2
–70.1
2.2
–83.5
201.6

–256.5
–165.8
–99.6
4.6
–20.4
25.6

–84.0
–148.2
–70.9
–6.1
42.3
99.1

199.7
–128.8
–37.5
–11.9
–1.0
379.0

63.1
–140.2
–117.2
–5.6
60.0
266.8

–24.9
–37.4
–92.6
–1.6
55.1
51.6

–66.5
–15.4
–37.9
–0.9
–4.5
–7.8

–28.9
0.3
23.4
5.8
64.1
–122.7

65.6
–22.1
54.5
5.0
35.6
–7.4

3.8
–45.8
–7.4
0.3
21.1
35.5

–19.1
–28.7
–34.6
–2.5
30.3
16.5

99.9
–25.4
12.9
–3.0
67.9
47.4

60.7
–52.5
–3.6
1.5
22.0
93.3

6.3
–5.6
21.6
5.3
20.2
–35.2

26.0
–18.6
–14.7
0.5
43.1
15.6

–155.4
–159.5
–80.3
2.5
22.9
59.0

–196.8
–151.1
–99.8
1.8
39.8
12.4

–194.0
–136.6
–109.2
6.8
5.2
39.8

–192.6
–136.1
–48.1
1.2
19.1
–28.7

–105.4
–126.9
–48.5
–2.9
51.7
21.0

–101.1
–119.5
–39.9
3.9
36.9
17.1

–148.3
–148.8
–12.2
4.1
–5.1
13.6

–108.6
–117.8
5.0
5.0
31.3
–32.0

–11.6
–109.8
29.0
8.6
47.3
13.4

–33.6
–92.3
–17.4
8.8
57.9
9.4

278.8
–43.2
72.6
...
108.5
140.8

263.8
–22.7
75.3
...
121.7
89.6

159.8
–42.7
130.4
...
65.9
6.8

–184.1
–10.6
61.6
...
–52.5
–182.4

–218.5
–29.1
–11.9
...
–42.7
–134.3

–31.8
–13.6
–41.4
...
104.1
–80.6

110.9
–9.7
6.1
...
88.5
26.4

21.0
–10.4
–10.7
...
33.5
8.9

–107.0
–11.4
19.4
...
–1.0
–113.9

–80.0
–20.0
–13.1
...
10.8
–57.5

–24.2
–34.6
–27.9
–1.7
20.4
19.8

–53.6
–23.3
–20.7
–0.8
–10.6
2.4

–78.1
–48.3
–9.1
–1.5
–10.9
–7.8

–67.5
–38.0
–21.9
–0.4
7.8
–14.7

–60.8
–33.1
–16.8
0.9
–1.3
–9.7

–36.5
–37.3
–22.4
0.3
9.7
13.6

–26.7
–22.0
–1.4
–0.5
–5.5
3.5

–52.2
–27.3
–18.1
0.3
–12.3
5.9

–61.3
–21.0
20.8
0.2
–10.5
–48.0

–57.3
–30.0
–3.0
0.3
–17.1
–5.7

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

165

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears
and/or Rescheduling
during 2015–19
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance

Projections
2020
2021

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

426.3
–28.1
41.2
...
198.9
212.7

332.8
14.8
87.6
...
174.2
55.7

210.4
6.6
177.9
...
145.4
–124.5

–110.7
5.5
94.0
...
0.6
–218.0

–161.1
–27.8
–12.1
...
25.2
–146.4

65.0
21.5
–42.0
...
140.2
–54.8

312.0
35.6
17.6
...
182.6
77.2

140.5
–5.9
–25.7
...
84.9
84.6

–75.5
4.1
20.3
...
47.4
–145.7

–27.9
–2.0
–10.4
...
61.2
–76.6

–339.0
–467.1
–284.9
–1.0
225.3
195.2

–357.4
–498.5
–235.2
–2.3
–109.5
485.7

–198.4
–435.4
–267.6
6.7
260.9
236.2

–195.5
–351.9
33.7
–0.6
468.2
–344.6

–244.6
–232.6
–41.4
–6.2
356.5
–320.7

–307.1
–324.7
–166.4
3.5
–42.7
223.0

–532.7
–407.4
–111.8
5.8
–57.2
39.2

–303.6
–350.4
–72.7
–1.9
31.9
90.5

101.6
–280.8
32.9
3.0
7.6
341.1

–54.0
–299.1
–155.1
3.6
93.5
305.3

–409.8
–277.0
–220.5
...
–16.1
112.3

–409.4
–268.0
–175.9
...
–38.9
72.2

–352.7
–274.6
–188.8
...
–3.3
104.8

–288.5
–287.5
–26.0
...
41.5
–13.9

–231.0
–287.3
–53.3
...
29.2
93.6

–266.6
–263.7
–117.0
...
2.0
108.5

–319.0
–308.4
–11.1
...
–9.0
10.7

–243.5
–291.5
–31.8
...
–35.4
118.4

–119.9
–240.0
69.4
...
–8.8
59.0

–178.4
–259.9
–98.5
...
74.7
104.2

–56.8
–32.6
–0.1
...
–3.8
–20.4

–55.7
–26.0
–11.8
...
–17.4
–0.2

–34.3
–23.3
–4.4
...
0.0
–6.4

–45.4
–25.4
0.7
...
–20.8
0.4

–58.9
–26.6
–8.6
...
–28.1
4.6

–41.2
–25.8
–29.5
...
9.9
4.6

–36.6
–27.6
–12.8
...
–1.5
5.7

–43.7
–27.8
–14.7
...
4.9
–5.7

–29.3
–15.9
2.2
...
2.9
–18.0

–32.9
–24.0
–6.1
...
–12.2
9.9

–42.5

221.0

346.4

41.5

35.6

214.4

108.4

135.1

163.3

244.1

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available
because of data constraints.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

166

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2002–11 2006–13
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Average
2022–25

–0.7
–0.7
21.6
22.2
0.0

–0.4
–0.4
21.5
21.8
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.6
21.5
0.0

0.6
0.7
22.8
21.6
–0.1

0.8
0.8
22.4
21.4
0.0

1.0
1.0
23.0
21.8
0.0

0.7
0.8
22.9
22.0
–0.1

0.6
0.7
22.7
22.1
–0.1

0.5
0.5
21.7
21.4
0.0

0.6
0.6
22.0
21.6
0.0

0.7
0.6
22.5
22.1
0.0

–4.4
–4.4
17.0
21.2
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
17.0
20.4
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
20.4
20.8
0.0

–2.3
–2.2
20.1
21.2
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
18.7
20.4
0.0

–1.8
–1.9
19.2
20.5
0.1

–2.2
–2.2
19.1
21.0
0.0

–2.3
–2.2
18.6
21.0
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
17.7
20.3
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
17.8
20.6
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
18.5
21.1
0.0

0.0
–0.1
22.8
22.3
0.1

0.1
0.0
22.7
21.7
0.1

2.5
2.4
23.0
20.0
0.1

2.9
2.8
23.8
20.3
0.2

3.3
3.3
24.2
20.7
0.0

2.9
3.1
24.9
21.3
–0.2

2.8
3.1
25.2
21.8
–0.3

2.5
2.7
25.2
22.3
–0.2

...
1.9
23.7
21.3
...

...
2.4
24.8
21.9
...

...
2.5
25.8
22.7
...

4.8
4.9
25.3
20.4
0.0

6.2
6.2
26.7
20.4
0.0

7.3
7.2
27.6
20.4
0.1

8.6
8.6
28.3
19.7
0.0

8.6
8.5
28.5
20.0
0.1

7.7
7.8
28.6
20.8
–0.1

7.4
7.4
29.0
21.6
0.0

7.1
7.1
28.5
21.4
0.0

5.8
5.8
27.1
21.4
0.0

6.8
6.8
28.7
21.9
0.0

6.9
6.9
29.6
22.7
0.0

0.0
0.0
22.5
22.5
0.0

–0.5
–0.5
22.4
22.9
0.0

–1.0
–1.0
21.8
22.7
–0.1

–0.4
–0.4
22.3
22.7
0.0

–0.4
–0.5
22.1
22.6
0.1

–0.8
–0.8
22.7
23.4
0.0

–0.5
–0.6
23.3
23.9
0.1

–0.6
–0.7
23.5
24.2
0.1

–1.8
–1.9
20.8
22.7
0.1

–1.7
–1.8
21.4
23.2
0.1

–1.1
–1.1
22.6
23.8
0.1

–1.6
–1.6
19.5
21.2
0.1

–1.5
–1.6
18.6
20.2
0.1

2.1
1.9
18.9
17.0
0.2

1.8
1.4
18.5
17.1
0.4

2.4
2.6
20.2
17.6
–0.2

2.6
2.6
20.6
18.1
0.1

2.5
2.5
20.8
18.3
0.0

2.9
3.0
20.9
18.0
–0.1

3.3
3.2
19.5
16.3
0.1

3.1
3.0
21.2
18.2
0.1

3.1
3.0
22.3
19.3
0.1

–5.2
–5.8
20.9
26.8
0.6

–4.0
–4.4
19.5
23.9
0.4

2.1
1.7
19.6
17.9
0.4

2.7
2.0
21.0
19.0
0.6

3.4
3.2
21.9
18.8
0.2

2.9
2.7
22.1
19.4
0.2

2.4
1.9
22.3
20.4
0.5

2.3
2.0
22.8
20.8
0.3

0.9
0.5
20.8
20.3
0.3

2.3
0.9
21.7
20.8
1.4

2.8
1.8
23.0
21.2
1.0

3.2
3.3
27.0
23.7
–0.1

2.7
2.7
25.8
23.0
–0.1

0.7
0.8
24.7
23.9
0.0

3.1
3.1
27.1
24.0
–0.1

3.9
4.0
27.4
23.4
–0.1

4.1
4.2
28.2
24.0
–0.1

3.5
3.6
27.9
24.3
0.0

3.6
3.6
28.2
24.6
–0.1

2.9
2.9
27.8
24.9
–0.1

3.2
3.2
27.6
24.3
–0.1

3.0
3.0
26.9
23.9
–0.1

–2.7
–2.6
14.5
17.1
0.0

–3.3
–3.3
13.2
16.5
0.0

–4.8
–4.7
12.4
17.1
–0.1

–5.0
–4.9
12.5
17.4
–0.1

–5.3
–5.2
12.2
17.4
–0.1

–3.6
–3.5
14.0
17.5
–0.1

–4.0
–3.9
13.2
17.1
–0.1

–4.0
–4.0
13.3
17.3
0.0

–2.1
–2.0
13.7
15.7
–0.1

–3.8
–3.8
12.6
16.3
–0.1

–3.5
–3.5
13.4
16.9
–0.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

167

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2002–11 2006–13
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

168

Projections
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Average
2022–25

0.1
0.0
22.6
22.5
0.0

–1.7
–1.7
22.2
23.9
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
22.6
24.9
0.0

–3.5
–3.5
20.3
23.8
0.0

–3.1
–3.1
19.7
22.8
0.0

–2.8
–2.8
20.7
23.5
0.0

–2.5
–2.5
20.6
23.1
0.0

–2.0
–2.0
20.7
22.7
0.0

–2.0
–2.0
19.4
21.4
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
19.1
21.6
0.0

–2.4
–2.3
19.8
22.1
0.0

4.0
4.0
30.0
25.8
0.0

4.1
4.1
30.4
26.1
0.0

5.0
5.1
30.6
25.4
–0.1

5.2
5.7
30.9
25.0
–0.4

5.4
5.2
30.4
25.0
0.1

4.6
4.6
30.4
25.6
0.1

4.7
4.6
30.2
25.5
0.1

5.3
5.4
30.4
24.9
–0.1

4.4
4.5
29.4
24.5
0.0

4.3
4.4
29.0
24.1
0.0

4.3
4.3
28.9
24.2
0.0

2.6
2.5
30.9
28.6
0.2

2.3
2.2
32.6
30.6
0.2

0.6
0.6
32.6
32.2
0.0

0.0
–0.2
31.6
32.1
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
31.2
31.4
0.1

0.1
0.0
31.7
31.8
0.1

0.0
–0.1
32.5
32.8
0.1

0.3
0.2
32.5
32.5
0.1

0.0
–0.1
32.9
33.1
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
32.3
32.8
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
31.8
32.3
0.1

3.6
3.5
40.3
37.1
0.1

3.3
3.3
42.9
39.7
0.1

1.5
1.5
42.7
41.2
0.0

2.0
2.0
41.1
39.2
0.0

1.4
1.4
39.9
38.6
0.0

1.0
1.0
40.0
39.1
0.0

–0.2
–0.3
39.8
40.0
0.0

0.6
0.6
39.6
39.0
0.0

1.0
1.0
40.4
39.4
0.0

0.3
0.3
39.0
38.7
0.0

0.1
0.1
37.4
37.3
0.0

–0.2
–0.2
23.0
22.8
0.0

–0.7
–0.9
23.2
24.0
0.2

–0.6
–0.2
23.4
23.5
–0.4

1.8
1.1
24.7
23.5
0.7

0.1
–0.2
23.5
23.7
0.3

–0.1
–0.4
24.1
24.5
0.3

2.3
1.8
25.6
23.5
0.5

1.9
1.4
24.2
22.7
0.5

0.3
–0.3
22.3
22.6
0.6

0.7
0.1
22.6
22.6
0.6

0.4
–0.1
23.1
23.4
0.5

–0.1
–0.2
20.8
20.9
0.1

–1.0
–1.1
20.8
21.9
0.1

–3.1
–3.1
17.8
21.5
0.0

–3.2
–3.3
16.4
21.1
0.0

–1.9
–2.0
16.7
18.3
0.0

–1.5
–1.6
16.4
18.3
0.0

–2.4
–2.5
16.9
19.4
0.0

–1.7
–1.7
17.2
19.0
0.1

–0.4
–0.5
17.1
17.7
0.1

–0.8
–0.8
17.7
18.6
0.0

–1.1
–1.1
18.1
19.3
0.0

8.2
8.4
35.2
27.5
0.2

9.1
9.4
36.8
28.1
0.2

5.8
5.1
32.5
26.8
0.1

–3.6
–4.0
24.7
28.3
0.1

–4.0
–4.2
24.1
27.6
0.1

–0.7
–0.8
27.0
27.7
0.0

3.0
2.8
29.6
26.8
0.0

0.8
0.7
28.2
27.8
0.0

–3.2
–3.7
24.4
28.3
0.1

–2.5
–2.7
24.6
27.8
0.1

–1.2
–1.4
26.0
27.7
0.1

1.8
0.5
21.3
21.1
1.3

1.0
–0.3
21.5
22.0
1.3

–3.1
–3.5
19.3
22.7
0.4

–5.4
–5.8
17.5
23.0
0.4

–3.4
–3.8
18.4
21.8
0.4

–1.9
–2.3
19.0
21.3
0.4

–2.3
–2.7
19.6
22.3
0.4

–3.3
–3.6
20.2
24.1
0.4

–4.3
–4.8
18.1
23.0
0.5

–3.6
–4.1
18.8
22.9
0.5

–2.6
–3.0
20.5
23.6
0.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
2002–11 2006–13
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2015–19
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Average
2022–25

9.2
9.6
33.9
24.7
–0.1

9.1
9.3
34.4
25.5
0.0

4.7
5.1
30.5
25.5
–0.7

–1.5
–1.5
24.9
27.6
–0.1

–1.6
–1.6
24.8
25.3
0.0

1.6
1.7
27.2
25.6
0.0

5.9
5.9
31.2
25.2
0.0

2.7
2.7
29.5
26.9
0.0

–1.7
–2.0
25.3
27.4
0.0

–0.7
–0.8
25.8
26.9
0.0

0.3
0.2
26.6
26.6
0.0

0.8
0.6
30.1
29.6
0.2

0.3
0.1
32.1
32.0
0.2

–0.4
–0.5
33.2
33.8
0.2

0.2
0.1
33.0
33.0
0.2

0.1
0.0
32.4
32.4
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
32.5
32.8
0.1

–1.1
–1.2
32.8
34.1
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
33.0
33.4
0.1

0.3
0.2
34.1
34.0
0.1

–0.2
–0.3
33.3
33.7
0.1

–0.4
–0.5
32.5
33.1
0.1

–0.8
–1.1
23.3
24.6
0.3

–1.6
–2.0
23.8
25.8
0.3

–2.1
–2.4
22.7
25.1
0.3

–2.0
–2.3
22.4
24.8
0.3

–1.4
–1.6
22.4
24.1
0.2

–1.5
–1.7
22.6
24.4
0.2

–2.0
–2.2
22.7
25.0
0.2

–1.3
–1.5
22.7
24.3
0.2

–0.9
–1.2
22.1
23.4
0.2

–1.3
–1.5
22.3
24.0
0.2

–1.4
–1.7
23.2
25.0
0.2

–1.3
–2.3
19.9
22.6
1.0

–3.3
–4.4
18.4
22.9
1.0

–4.2
–4.8
14.7
19.4
0.6

–5.4
–5.9
12.9
19.0
0.5

–6.1
–6.5
12.6
19.5
0.3

–5.4
–5.9
13.7
20.0
0.6

–5.1
–5.6
14.8
20.7
0.4

–5.0
–5.3
13.7
19.5
0.3

–4.4
–4.8
13.2
18.5
0.4

–5.1
–5.4
13.6
19.6
0.4

–3.9
–4.2
16.2
20.9
0.4

0.2
0.2
24.3
24.1
0.0

0.4
0.4
25.2
24.8
0.1

0.5
0.5
26.5
25.7
0.0

0.4
0.3
26.3
25.7
0.0

0.4
0.4
25.8
25.2
0.0

0.6
0.6
26.4
25.7
0.0

0.4
0.4
26.7
26.3
0.0

0.4
0.5
26.7
26.3
0.0

0.3
0.2
26.3
26.1
0.0

0.3
0.2
26.2
26.1
0.1

0.3
0.2
26.4
26.4
0.0

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by
GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to
the current account balance (CAB) (S - I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

169

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Averages
2002–11
2012–21
World Real GDP
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
World Trade, Volume1
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Interest Rates
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1Data

2018

2019

2020

Projections
Averages
2021
2018–21
2022–25

4.1
1.7
6.5

2.8
1.3
3.9

Annual Percent Change
3.5
2.8
–4.4
2.2
1.7
–5.8
4.5
3.7
–3.3

5.2
3.9
6.0

1.7
0.4
2.7

3.8
2.2
4.9

1.8
5.7

1.0
2.3

1.3
3.9

1.3
1.0

–2.0
–10.4

2.3
8.3

0.7
0.4

1.5
4.3

4.1
9.9

2.0
2.8

3.6
5.0

1.7
–0.6

–11.5
–9.4

7.3
11.0

0.0
1.2

3.8
5.2

4.5
8.7

1.9
2.9

3.5
4.1

1.3
0.9

–11.6
–7.7

7.0
9.5

–0.2
1.5

3.9
4.9

–0.2
1.6

0.4
–0.7

–0.5
1.2

0.1
–1.1

0.6
–2.6

0.3
0.3

0.2
–0.6

0.0
0.0

2.7
15.6
11.6

–1.1
–7.7
–2.0

1.9
29.4
1.3

0.4
–10.2
0.8

–3.1
–32.1
5.6

–1.3
12.0
5.1

–0.5
–3.0
3.2

1.5
2.3
0.4

2.0
6.4

1.3
4.9

2.0
4.9

0.8
5.0

1.6
4.7

1.4
4.9

1.7
4.1

0.3
1.7

–0.7
0.1

0.1
–0.1

–0.5
–0.4

–1.6
–1.2

–0.4
–0.5

–1.5
–0.4

–0.7
2.5

0.6
0.1

0.8
–0.1

Percent of GDP
0.7
0.5
0.2
–0.1

0.6
–0.4

0.6
–0.1

0.6
–0.4

29.3

30.2

31.0

30.0

32.7

30.8

31.1

28.3

8.9

10.9

10.9

10.8

11.6

10.8

11.0

9.8

1.4
5.1
Percent
0.6
–0.2

refer to trade in goods and services.
interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator.
average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.
2London

3GDP-weighted

170

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS

World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth

April 2010

World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing

October 2010

World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities,
and Capital Flows

April 2011

World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks

September 2011

World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain

April 2012

World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth

October 2012

World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks

April 2013

World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions

October 2013

World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven

April 2014

World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties

October 2014

World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors

April 2015

World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices

October 2015

World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long

April 2016

World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

October 2016

World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?

April 2017

World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges

October 2017

World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change

April 2018

World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth

October 2018

World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery

April 2019

World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers

October 2019

World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown

April 2020

World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent

October 2020

I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Indicators for Tracking Growth

October 2010, Appendix 1.2

Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View

October 2010, Box 1.3

Uncoordinated Rebalancing

October 2010, Box 1.4

World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios

April 2011, Box 1.2

Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement

October 2014, Box 3.3

Tariff Scenarios

October 2016, Scenario Box

World Growth Projections over the Medium Term

October 2016, Box 1.1

Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices

April 2019, Box 1.2

On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis

April 2019, Box 3.3

Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices

October 2019, Box 1.3

Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19

April 2020, Scenario Box

Alternative Scenarios

October 2020, Scenario Box

Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights

October 2020, Box 1.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

171

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

II. Historical Surveys
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

What Is the Effect of Recessions?

October 2015, Box 1.1

III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond

April 2010, Chapter 3

Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?

October 2010, Box 1.1

The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?

April 2012, Box 1.2

How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?

October 2012, Box 1.3

Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?

October 2012, Chapter 4

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe
April 2013, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?

April 2013, Chapter 4

What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?

October 2013, Box 1.2

Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages

October 2013, Chapter 3

Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the
Caucasus and Central Asia

October 2013, Box 3.1

Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy

October 2013, Box 3.2

Saving and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 3.1

On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,
and after the Global Financial Crisis

April 2014, Chapter 4

The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies

April 2014, Box 4.1

The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011

October 2014, Box 1.2

Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers
October 2014, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output

April 2015, Chapter 3

Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output

April 2015, Box 3.1

Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—
The Role of External Factors

April 2016, Box 1.2

Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market
Reforms in Advanced Economies

April 2016, Chapter 3

Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated
External Environment

April 2017, Chapter 3

Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2017, Box 2.2

Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence
over the Forecast Horizon

October 2017, Box 1.3

Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality

April 2018, Chapter 3

Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?

April 2018, Chapter 4

Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth

April 2018, Box 1.3

Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies

October 2018, Box 1.2

Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 1.3

The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown

October 2018, Chapter 2

The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle

October 2019, Box 1.4

Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can
Structural Reforms Play?

October 2019, Chapter 3

172

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

SELECTED TOPICS

Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an
Era of Low Rates and High Debt

April 2020, Chapter 2

The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects

October 2020, Chapter 2

An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns

October 2020, Box 2.1

IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?

April 2010, Box 1.2

Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment

April 2010, Box 1.3

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2010, Appendix 1.1

Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector

October 2010, Box 1.2

Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?

October 2010, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2011, Appendix 1.2

Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances

April 2011, Chapter 3

Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production

April 2011, Box 3.1

Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?

April 2011, Box 3.2

Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity

April 2011, Box 3.3

Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends

April 2011, Appendix 3.1

The Energy and Oil Empirical Models

April 2011, Appendix 3.2

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects
September 2011,
		 Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices

September 2011, Box 1.4

Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy

September 2011, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Review
April 2012, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters

April 2012, Chapter 4

Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.1

Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.2

Commodity Market Review
October 2012, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Unconventional Energy in the United States

October 2012, Box 1.4

Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?

October 2012, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Review
April 2013, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?

April 2013, Chapter 3

Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?

April 2013, Box 3.1

Commodity Market Review
October 2013, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience

October 2013, Box 1.SF.1

Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread

October 2013, Box 1.SF.2

Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting

April 2014, Box 1.3

Commodity Prices and Forecasts
April 2014, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas
October 2014, Chapter 1,
in the World Economy		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment
April 2015, Chapter 1,
in an Era of Low Oil Prices		 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?

April 2015, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy
October 2015, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

173

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift
October 2015, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath
of the Commodity Boom

October 2015, Chapter 2

The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon

October 2015, Box 2.1

Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?

October 2015, Box 2.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the
April 2016, Chapter 1,
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices		 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

October 2016, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and
October 2016, Chapter 1,
Markets in the World Economy		 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

October 2016, Box 3.3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and
April 2017, Chapter 1,
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market 		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2017, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
April 2018, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?

April 2018, Box 1.2

The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles

April 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries

October 2018, Box 1.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand
October 2018, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy

October 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

October 2018, Chapter 3

Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 3.1

Commodity Special Feature
April 2019, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2019, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
April 2020, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2020, Chapter 1
		 Special Feature
What Happened with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?
October 2020, Chapter 1
		 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1.

V. Fiscal Policy
Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation

October 2010, Chapter 3

Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances

September 2011, Chapter 4

Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?

October 2012, Box 1.1

The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies

October 2012, Box 1.2

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance

April 2013, Box 1.2

Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.5

Commodity Booms and Public Investment

October 2015, Box 2.2

174

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

SELECTED TOPICS

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant

October 2017, Chapter 4

The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions

October 2017, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes

April 2018, Box 1.5

Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries

October 2019, Box 2.4

VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
Financial Conditions Indices

April 2011, Appendix 1.1

House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets

April 2011, Box 1.1

International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking

April 2011, Box 1.3

Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications

September 2011, Box 1.2

Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?

September 2011, Box 1.3

Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging
April 2012, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy
October 2012, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening

October 2013, Box 1.1

Credit Supply and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 1.1

Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?
April 2014, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates

April 2014, Chapter 3

Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update

October 2014, Box 1.1

U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Box 2.2

A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy

October 2016, Box 3.5

Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?

October 2017, Box 1.2

The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery

October 2018, Box 2.3

Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations

October 2018, Box 3.2

Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?

April 2020, Box 2.1

Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?

April 2020, Chapter 3

Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings

April 2020, Box 3.1

Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?

April 2020, Box 3.2

Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:
Assessment and Policy Options

April 2020, Box 1.3

VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues

April 2010, Box 3.1

Short-Time Work Programs

April 2010, Box 3.2

Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies

September 2011, Box 1.1

The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession

April 2012, Box 1.1

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment

April 2016, Box 3.2

Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares

April 2017, Chapter 3

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

175

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects

April 2018, Chapter 2

Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus
Advanced Economies

April 2018, Box 2.1

Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates

April 2018, Box 2.4

Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil

April 2018, Box 3.3

The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility

October 2018, Box 2.1

The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:
the Case of Industrial Robots

October 2018, Box 2.2

Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies

April 2019, Box 1.1

Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities

April 2019, Box 1.3

Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in
Advanced Economies

October 2019, Chapter 2

Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities

October 2019, Box 2.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration

April 2020, Chapter 4

Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation

April 2020, Box 4.1

Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19

October 2020, Box 1.2

VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

April 2010, Box 1.1

Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets

April 2014, Box 1.4

Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?

October 2015, Chapter 3

The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade

October 2015, Box 3.1

Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains

October 2015, Box 3.2

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses

April 2010, Chapter 4

Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.1

Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.2

Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?

October 2010, Chapter 4

Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery

April 2011, Box 2.1

International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?

April 2011, Chapter 4

External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points

September 2011, Box 1.5

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

External Rebalancing in the Euro Area

October 2013, Box 1.3

The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows

October 2013, Chapter 4

Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions

October 2013, Box 4.1

The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom

October 2014, Box 1.SF.1

Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?

October 2014, Chapter 4

Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment

October 2014, Box 4.1

A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area

October 2014, Box 4.2

Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2015, Box 1.2

Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits

October 2015, Box 1.2

176

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

SELECTED TOPICS

Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies

October 2015, Box 1.3

Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2016, Box 1.1

Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Chapter 2

Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2016, Box 2.1

The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization

April 2016, Box 3.3

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

October 2016, Chapter 2

The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with
China’s Final Demand

April 2017, Box 2.3

Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

April 2017, Box 2.4

Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters

October 2017, Box 1.4

Remittances and Consumption Smoothing

October 2017, Box 1.5

A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators

April 2018, Box 1.6

The Rise of Services Trade

April 2018, Box 3.2

Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2018, Box 4.3

Global Trade Tensions

October 2018, Scenario Box

The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?

April 2019, Chapter 3

Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries

April 2019, Box 3.2

Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia

April 2019, Box 3.4

The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs

April 2019, Chapter 4

Gross versus Value-Added Trade

April 2019, Box 4.1

Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances

April 2019, Box 4.2

Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?

April 2019, Box 4.3

The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models

April 2019, Box 4.4

A No-Deal Brexit

April 2019, Scenario Box

Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production
October 2019,
		 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario
October 2019,
		 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018

October 2019, Box 1.2

X. Regional Issues
East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe

April 2012, Box 2.1

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions

April 2018, Box 2.3

XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Japan after the Plaza Accord

April 2010, Box 4.1

Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s

April 2010, Box 4.2

Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?

April 2011, Box 1.4

Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?

April 2012, Box 1.3

The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation

April 2012, Box 3.1

Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland

April 2012, Box 3.2

Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?

October 2013, Box 1.4

Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?

April 2014, Box 1.2

Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade

October 2014, Box 3.1

Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?

October 2015, Box 3.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

177

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Long and Difficult Ascent

The Japanese Experience with Deflation

October 2016, Box 3.2

Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas

April 2018, Box 2.2

Immigration and Wages in Germany

April 2020, Box 4.2

The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean

April 2020, Box 4.3

XII. Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

October 2017, Chapter 3

The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones

October 2017, Box 3.1

The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis

October 2017, Box 3.2

Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies

October 2017, Box 3.3

Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets

October 2017, Box 3.4

Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution

October 2017, Box 3.5

Mitigating Climate Change

October 2017, Box 3.6

The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies

April 2019, Box 3.1

What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?

October 2019, Box 1.SF.1

Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies

October 2020, Chapter 3

Glossary

October 2020, Box 3.1.

Zooming In on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization

October 2020, Box 3.2

XIII. Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up
Human Development?

October 2015, Box 2.3

Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms

April 2016, Box 3.1

Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method

April 2016, Box 3.4

A Global Rush for Land

October 2016, Box 1.SF.1

Conflict, Growth, and Migration

April 2017, Box 1.1

Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity

April 2017, Box 1.2

Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa

April 2017, Box 2.1

Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview

April 2017, Box 3.1

The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation

April 2017, Box 3.2

Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World

April 2017, Box 3.3

Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income

April 2017, Box 3.4

Smartphones and Global Trade

April 2018, Box 1.1

Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?

April 2018, Box 1.4

The Changing Service Content of Manufactures

April 2018, Box 3.1

Patent Data and Concepts

April 2018, Box 4.1

International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers

April 2018, Box 4.2

Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation

April 2018, Box 4.4

Increasing Market Power

October 2018, Box 1.1

Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts

October 2018, Box 1.5

Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task

October 2018, Box 1.6

The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects

April 2019, Chapter 2

The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving

April 2019, Box 2.1

Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power

April 2019, Box 2.2

The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments and Implications for the Global Outlook

October 2019, Box 1.1

Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare

October 2019, Box 2.1

178

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

SELECTED TOPICS

The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures

October 2019, Box 2.3

The Political Effects of Structural Reforms

October 2019, Box 3.1

The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms

October 2019, Box 3.2

The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in
Advanced Economies

April 2020, Box 2.2

Social Unrest during COVID-19

October 2020, Box 1.4

The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the United States

October 2020, Box 2.2

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

179

IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,
OCTOBER 2020

The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 30, 2020.

E

xecutive Directors broadly concurred with the
assessment of the global economic outlook,
risks, and policy priorities. While noticing the
stronger-than-expected economic activity in
the second quarter, especially in advanced economies,
they agreed that the path to prepandemic activity will
be long and precarious with persistent scarring effects
on output and employment. They noted that the
projections assume that social distancing will continue into 2021 and then fade over time as therapies
improve and vaccines become more broadly available.
Directors noted with concern that the pandemic is
having dramatic effects on vulnerable people, leading
to higher inequality, and a sharp increase in the number of people living in extreme poverty.
Directors agreed that the uncertainty surrounding
the baseline projections remains exceptionally large
as the economic recovery will be shaped primarily
by the path of the pandemic, the efficacy of containment measures, and pharmaceutical innovations.
More rapid development of new therapeutics and
wide distribution of effective vaccines could accelerate the economic recovery, while medical setbacks
and new waves of infections could require new
lockdowns. Other important sources of uncertainty
include the extent of global spillovers, the damage
to the supply potential, the efficacy and duration
of policy support, and potential shifts in financial
market sentiment. Directors also noted prepandemic
risks stemming from trade and technology tensions,
geopolitical challenges, and climate change.
Directors agreed that effective and decisive policy
support is needed to ensure stronger, more equitable,
and resilient growth. Key near-term priorities include
supporting the economic recovery, protecting vulnerable people, and strengthening health care systems.
They stressed the need to reduce the scarring effects of
the crisis on potential output and employment and to
reverse the development toward greater inequality and

setbacks to human capital accumulation. Most Directors also saw the crisis as an opportunity to stimulate
innovation, develop the digital infrastructure, and to
transition to lower carbon emissions using different
climate tools, such as green investment and a gradual
increase of the carbon price, with due consideration to
offsetting negative social impact.
Directors welcomed the unprecedented fiscal actions
in response to the pandemic. Directors emphasized
that, as economies tentatively reopen, governments
should ensure that lifelines are not withdrawn prematurely. Support should gradually shift from protecting jobs to helping displaced workers find new jobs
through retraining and reskilling. Directors noted that
when the pandemic is under control, governments
will need to address the legacies of the crisis, including
record deficits and public debt levels, elevated unemployment, and increased poverty. Directors agreed
that public investment should play a crucial role in
supporting the postpandemic recovery, noted its sizable job creation potential, and underlined that good
governance, budget execution, and communication,
remain crucial to reap the full benefits of fiscal support
and maintain public trust.
Directors emphasized that governments will need
to do more with less and prepare credible and equitable measures to reduce fiscal deficits and debts over
the medium term. Countries with limited fiscal space
should protect public investment and support lowerincome households that have been disproportionately
hit by the pandemic. Governments could consider
increasing progressive taxation as well as reforms to
modernize business taxation, including multilateral
cooperation on the design of international corporate
taxation to respond to the challenges of the digital
economy. LICs in particular are faced with significant
financing constraints, and many countries will require
external support, including in the form of debt relief,
grants, and concessional financing.
International Monetary Fund | October 2020

181

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A LONG AND DIFFICULT ASCENT

Directors agreed that bold policy actions taken by
central banks to ease monetary policy, provide ample
liquidity, and maintain the flow of credit have helped
contain the near-term risks to global financial stability. They noted, however, that vulnerabilities are rising,
most notably in the nonfinancial corporate sector
as liquidity pressures may morph into insolvencies,
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises.
The credit outlook will ultimately be shaped by the
extent of continued policy support and the pace of the
recovery, which is expected to be uneven across sectors
and countries. Rising defaults could lead to significant
losses at banks and nonbank financial institutions.
While the global banking system is overall well capitalized, some banks and banking systems may experience aggregate capital shortfalls in the WEO adverse
scenario. Directors also highlighted the importance
of improving access of emerging markets and frontier
economies to capital markets.
Directors emphasized that as economies reopen,
accommodative policies and the continued flow of
credit to borrowers will be essential to sustaining
the recovery. Once the pandemic is under control,

182

International Monetary Fund | October 2020

policy support can be gradually withdrawn. The
postpandemic financial reform agenda should focus
on strengthening the regulatory framework to address
vulnerabilities in the nonbank financial sector exposed
by the crisis and stepping up prudential supervision
to contain excessive risk taking in the lower-for-longer
interest rate environment.
Directors underscored the importance of international cooperation in the fight against the global
health and economic crisis. A key priority is to scale up
production capacity and develop distribution channels
to ensure that all countries have access to an effective,
affordable, and safe vaccine. Directors noted that several emerging market and developing countries require
international assistance through debt relief, grants, and
concessional financing. They pointed out that the IMF
has rapidly scaled up its lending facilities since the
onset of the pandemic, providing swift financial assistance to more than 80 countries. Directors discussed
opportunities for multilateral cooperation to alleviate
trade and technology tensions between countries and
to collectively implement climate change mitigation
policies.

IMF Special Series on COVID-19
The IMF has responded to the COVID-19 crisis by quickly deploying financial assistance,
developing policy advice, and creating special tools to assist member countries.
The Special Notes Series (IMF.org/COVID19notes) features the latest analysis and research
from IMF staff in response to the pandemic. Below are four recent Notes from the dozens
published to date.

Options to Support the Income of
Informal Workers during COVID-19

The Disconnect Between
Financial Markets and the
Real Economy

Federico Díez, Romain Duval, Chiara Maggi, Yi Ji, Ippei
Shibata, and Marina Medes Tavares

Deniz Igan, Divya Kirti, and Soledad Martinez Peria

This note reviews available options to support
informal workers during COVID-19, as well as
potential costs and selected financing options.
A transfer to cover the basic food and energy
needs of all informal workers for two months
could cost over 2 and 5 percentage points of
annual GDP in the median emerging market
and low-income economies, respectively.

This note examines several prominent
hypotheses to explain the disconnect between
financial markets and the real economy in
2020. The note concludes that monetary
policy actions—and the associated decline in
discount rates—have lifted asset valuations.

Emerging Market Capital Flows
under COVID: What to Expect
Given What We Know

COVID-19 and Government
Debt Dynamics in Low-Income
Developing Countries

Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan

Gabriela Cugat, Giovanni Melina, and Felipe Zanna

This note summarizes recent empirical
research that focuses on emerging market
capital flows before and during the COVID-19
shock, examining the complex interaction
between domestic fiscal and external
financing needs in those economies.

This note assesses the potential medium-term
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on government debt in developing countries. The
estimates are based on calibrations of a structural model. Absent more multilateral support,
restructurings, and/or fiscal consolidations,
government debt may increase significantly in
many developing economies.

The views expressed in these notes are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF,
its Executive Board, or IMF management.

COVID-19 Policy Tracker

This periodically updated policy tracker summarizes the key economic responses
196 governments are taking to limit the human and economic impact of the pandemic.
IMF.org/COVID19policytracker

I

N

T

E

R

N

A

T

I

O

N

A

L

M

O

N

E

T

A

R

Y

F

U

N

D

IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the
Economic Eﬀects
CHAPTER 3
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth-and
Distribution-Friendly Strategies

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

OCTOBER 2020

