AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
Amnesty International is a movement of 10 million people which
mobilizes the humanity in everyone and campaigns for change so we
can all enjoy our human rights. Our vision is of a world where those in
power keep their promises, respect international law and are held to
account. We are independent of any government, political ideology,
economic interest or religion and are funded mainly by our
membership and individual donations. We believe that acting in
solidarity and compassion with people everywhere can change our
societies for the better.
Amnesty International is impartial. We take no position on issues of
sovereignty, territorial disputes or international political or legal
arrangements that might be adopted to implement the right to selfdetermination. This report is organized according to the countries we
monitored during the year. In general, they are independent states
that are accountable for the human rights situation on their territory.

First published in 2022 by
Amnesty International Ltd
Peter Benenson House,
1, Easton Street,
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
© Amnesty International 2022
Index: POL 10/4870/2022
ISBN: 0-86210-505-6
A catalogue record for this book
is available from the British
Library.

Except where otherwise noted,
content in this document is
licensed under a
CreativeCommons (attribution,
non-commercial, no derivatives,
international 4.0) licence.
https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode
For more information please visit
the permissions page on our
website: www.amnesty.org
amnesty.org

This report documents Amnesty
International’s work and concerns
through 2021.
The absence of an entry in this
report on a particular country or
territory does not imply that no
human rights violations of
concern to Amnesty International
have taken place there during the
year. Nor is the length of a
country entry any basis for a
comparison of the extent and
depth of Amnesty International’s
concerns in a country.

Original language: English

ii

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2021/22
THE STATE OF THE WORLD’S HUMAN RIGHTS

iv

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CONTENTS
ANNUAL REPORT 2021/22
Abbreviations vii
Preface ix
Global Analysis 14
Africa regional overview 19
Americas regional overview 27
Asia-Pacific regional overview 35
Europe and Central Asia regional
overview 44
Middle East and North Africa
regional overview 53
Country entries 63
Afghanistan 64
Albania 68
Algeria 69
Andorra 72
Angola 72
Argentina 75
Armenia 77
Australia 78
Austria 80
Azerbaijan 81
Bahrain 83
Bangladesh 85
Belarus 89
Belgium 92
Benin 93
Bolivia 95
Bosnia and Herzegovina 96
Botswana 98
Brazil 99
Bulgaria 104
Burkina Faso 106
Burundi 108
Cambodia 111
Cameroon 113
Canada 116
Central African Republic 118
Chad 120
Chile 122
China 124
Colombia 130
Congo (the) 135
Côte d'Ivoire 137
Croatia 139

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Cuba 140
Cyprus 142
Czech Republic 143
Democratic Republic of the
Congo 145
Denmark 149
Dominican Republic 150
Ecuador 151
Egypt 152
El Salvador 157
Equatorial Guinea 159
Eritrea 160
Estonia 161
Eswatini 162
Ethiopia 163
Fiji 165
Finland 166
France 167
Gambia 170
Georgia 172
Germany 174
Ghana 176
Greece 178
Guatemala 181
Guinea Republic 183
Haiti 185
Honduras 186
Hungary 187
India 190
Indonesia 193
Iran 197
Iraq 201
Ireland 205
Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories 207
Italy 211
Japan 214
Jordan 215
Kazakhstan 217
Kenya 220
Kosovo* 223
Kuwait 224
Kyrgyzstan 226
Latvia 228

v

Lebanon 229
Lesotho 232
Libya 234
Lithuania 238
Madagascar 239
Malawi 241
Malaysia 242
Maldives 244
Mali 245
Malta 247
Mexico 249
Moldova 253
Mongolia 255
Montenegro 256
Morocco/Western Sahara 258
Mozambique 261
Myanmar 263
Namibia 266
Nepal 268
Netherlands 270
New Zealand 271
Nicaragua 272
Niger 273
Nigeria 276
North Korea 280
North Macedonia 282
Norway 284
Oman 284
Pakistan 286
Palestine (State of) 290
Papua New Guinea 293
Paraguay 294
Peru 296
Philippines 298
Poland 301
Portugal 303
Puerto Rico 304
Qatar 305
Romania 308
Russian Federation 309
Rwanda 314
Saudi Arabia 316
Senegal 320
Serbia 322
Sierra Leone 324
Singapore 325
Slovakia 326
Slovenia 328
Somalia 329
South Africa 332

vi

South Korea 335
South Sudan 338
Spain 341
Sri Lanka 344
Sudan 347
Sweden 350
Switzerland 351
Syria 353
Taiwan 357
Tajikistan 358
Tanzania 360
Thailand 362
Togo 365
Trinidad and Tobago 366
Tunisia 367
Turkey 371
Turkmenistan 375
Uganda 377
Ukraine 380
United Arab Emirates 384
United Kingdom 386
United States of America 390
Uruguay 394
Uzbekistan 396
Venezuela 398
Viet Nam 403
Yemen 406
Zambia 410
Zimbabwe 412

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ABBREVIATIONS
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations

European Convention on Human Rights
(European) Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom

AU
African Union

GDP
Gross domestic product

CEDAW
UN Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women

ICC
International Criminal Court

CEDAW Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
CERD
International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination
CERD Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination
CIA
US Central Intelligence Agency
COVAX
Covid-19 Vaccines Global Access, directed
by the GAVI vaccine alliance, CEPI and the
WHO
Covid-19
Coronavirus disease-19
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States

ICCPR
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
ICESCR
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
ICRC
International Committee of the Red Cross
ILO
International Labour Organization
International Convention against Enforced
Disappearance
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
LGBTI
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex
MP
Member of Parliament

EU
European Union

NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

NGO
Non-governmental organization

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

OAS
Organization of American States

vii

OCHA
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
OHCHR
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights
OSCE
Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe
PPE
Personal protective equipment
TRIPS
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
UK
United Kingdom
UN
United Nations
UN Convention against Torture
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

UN Special Rapporteur on racism
UN Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
UN Special Rapporteur on torture
UN Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment
UN Special Rapporteur on toxics and human
rights
UN Special Rapporteur on the implications
for human rights of the environmentally
sound management and disposal of
hazardous substances and wastes
UN Special Rapporteur on violence against
women
UN Special rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund

UN Refugee Convention
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees

UPR
UN Universal Periodic Review

UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions

USA
United States of America
WHO
World Health Organization

UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
and human rights
UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of
expression
UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression

viii

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

PREFACE
How did people fare under the power politics of 2021? Were rights upheld
better amidst the world’s chaotic contests for profit, privilege and position?
Were rights holders better recognized, respected and protected as the
Covid-19 pandemic continued and conflicts deepened?
In 2021, slick slogans were the mantra: “we will build back better”.
Promises too were dangled: promises of a “global reset” of the economy; of a
global “common agenda” to curb corporate abuse, of a sustainable and green
recovery, of transformational global solidarity. But slogans, it transpired,
meant little, promises were not to be kept and more people were failed in
more places more often.
Faced with other options, still governments picked policies and pursued
paths that took more of us further away from dignity and rights. The systemic
inequalities that drove the pandemic were further entrenched, not
systematically reduced. The cross-border flows of health services and
supplies that could have broadened access to care often did not come to
pass. The intergovernmental cooperation needed to avert further disaster and
mitigate human rights crises rarely materialized.
A year ago, writing my first preface for Amnesty’s annual report, I had
ardently hoped that 2021 would see nations and peoples travel further down
the road to an inclusive recovery from Covid-19. With scientific
breakthroughs, won at an unprecedented pace, putting the pandemic’s end
within our reach, it seemed possible. So, what went wrong?
Instead of giving us genuine and meaningful global governance, the world’s
leaders retreated into their caves of national interest. Instead of providing
greater safety to more people, leaders pushed us closer to the abyss of
insecurity and, at times, war. Instead of stamping out the practices and
strategies that divide us, leaders pitched our nations into self-defeating
contests for wealth and resources, and conflict. Instead of upholding the
universal human rights norm of equality, racism became further hardwired
into the working of the international system, determining even who lived and
who did not – adding to the cruel history of whose lives matter and whose do
not.
2021 should have been a year of healing and recuperation. Instead, it
became an incubator for greater inequality and instability, not only in 2021,
not just for 2022, but for the decade ahead.
2021’s astronomical waves of Covid-19 infections, illness and death was
maddeningly predictable and distressingly avoidable. As wealthy governments
congratulated themselves for their vaccine roll-out, by the year’s end their
rampant vaccine nationalism had left more than half the world unvaccinated
or only partially vaccinated. Low immunization rates allowed new variants to
flourish, putting us all at risk of vaccine-resistant mutations and lengthening
the pandemic. Booster shots were delivered to citizens of rich nations while
millions in the Global South, including those most at risk of serious illness or
death, still awaited their first jab. In September, Amnesty International found
that developed countries were sitting on half a billion surplus doses, enough
to fully vaccinate several of the world’s least-vaccinated nations. Their

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ix

dumping of surplus doses allowed to expire was a shocking symptom of a
world without moral compass; a world that has lost its way. While companies’
CEOs and investors bagged big profits, those desperately needing the vaccine
were told to wait. And die.
In the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, new conflicts were incubated, and
unresolved conflicts deepened. In Afghanistan, Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Israel/
Palestine, Libya, Myanmar and Yemen, to name a few, conflict caused
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law on a vast scale.
In far too few instances did the needed international response come; in far too
few cases were justice and accountability provided. Instead, conflict
expanded. Extending over time, its impacts worsened. The numbers and
diversity of intervening parties rose. New theatres of conflict opened. New
weapons were tested. More deaths and injury were exacted. Life was
cheapened.
In no other place was the world’s decaying order more evident than in
Afghanistan where, following the withdrawal of all international troops, the
collapse of the government, and the takeover of the country by the Taliban,
Afghan women and men on the front line of the fight for human rights and
democratic values were left to fend for themselves.
Meanwhile, the global failure to build a global response to the pandemic
sowed the seeds of greater conflict and greater injustice. Rising poverty, food
insecurity and government instrumentalization of the pandemic to repress
dissent and protests – all were well planted in 2021, watered by vaccine
nationalism and fertilized by greed of the richer countries.
Such a legacy of 2021 was also evident at the COP26 climate conference.
Plagued by short-termism and thwarted by selfishness, a fortnight of
negotiations ended in betrayal. Governments betrayed their people by failing
to agree a deal to prevent catastrophic climate warming. In doing so, swathes
of humanity were condemned to a future of water scarcity, heatwaves,
flooding and starvation. The very governments who turn migrants away at
their borders sentenced millions to flee their homes in search of safety and
better living conditions. Countries already floundering in unsustainable levels
of debt were left without sufficient climate finance to tackle deadly
environmental change
2021 incubated further acceptability of racist policies and ideologies whose
practices forced millions to live at the very edge of life itself. We saw this in
vaccine producers steadfastly refusing to share their knowledge and
technology with low-income countries, preventing the expansion of
manufacturing needed to close the gap. We saw this again in many wealthy
governments’ refusal to support global initiatives such as the proposed TRIPS
waiver which could have scaled up vaccine production. We saw this in
governments’ policies predicated on “risk of death” as an acceptable
deterrent for the record number of refugees, migrants, internally displaced
people and asylum seekers; policies that went so far as to criminalize those
trying to save lives. We saw this again and again in the rise of public political
discourse demonizing minorities, pitching arbitrary ideas of freedoms
(including of “freedom to hate”) into toxic contest against universal rights,
norms and standards that are there to protect us from racism and sexism. We
saw this in the withdrawal of essential services for sexual and reproductive
health with devastating consequences for women and girls in particular.

x

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

If in 2021 those in power lacked the ambition and imagination to tackle
humanity’s gravest adversaries, the same cannot be said for the people they
should have represented. In 2021, people across the world stood up not only
for their own rights but in solidarity for the rights of all. They demanded better
institutions, just law and a fairer society. The Nobel Committee recognized
courageous exemplars of that dedication and vision when it awarded the
2021 Nobel Peace Prize to two journalists – Maria Ressa of the Philippines
and Dmitry Muratov of Russia – for their brave stances against corrupt
leadership and press restrictions in their respective countries.
People the world over rose up, even in the face of authorities’ cruel
repression and governments who at times used the pandemic as a
smokescreen to deny the right to protest. In 2021, at least 67 countries
introduced new laws to restrict freedom of expression, association or
assembly.
Yet people would not be deterred from making their voices heard. In more
than 80 countries, people rose to protest in vast numbers. In Russia, rallies in
support of opposition leader Aleksei Navalny went ahead in the face of
unprecedented numbers of mass arbitrary arrests and prosecutions. Farmers
in India demonstrated against three contentious farming laws until December
when India’s federal government bent to the wisdom of people power and
repealed the legislation. Throughout 2021, people kept rising – in Colombia,
Lebanon, Myanmar, Sudan, Thailand, Venezuela and many more countries.
The world over, in 2021, lawyers, academics, NGOs, victims and their
families tirelessly pursued justice for human rights violations, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Some landmark rulings were won. In February, two
courageous Vietnamese children, with the support of a London-based law
professor, won their case at the European Court of Human Rights against the
UK’s criminalization of trafficking victims. In June, Alieu Kosiah, a former
commander of a rebel group in Liberia, was found guilty in Switzerland for war
crimes and crimes against humanity and sentenced to 20 years’
imprisonment. Innovative strategic litigations and criminal complaints were
filed by NGOs against big multinational companies including Nike, Patagonia
and C&A for their complicity in forced labour in the Xinjiang region of China.
In 2021 civil society and journalists also took on Big Tech. The Pegasus
Project – a major collaborative effort between human rights experts and
investigative journalism – uncovered state surveillance of government critics
and human rights defenders, shining a light on the underhand tactics
deployed to crush dissent. In November, a US court allowed WhatsApp to
proceed with its case against NSO group, the creator of Pegasus spyware,
marking a major watershed moment for disclosure of information in court.
The year also saw the largest fines to date against leading tech companies for
breach of data protection and privacy laws, including Amazon (fined €746
million), WhatsApp (€225 million) and Grindr (€6.34 million).
NGOs, backed by ordinary people, also fostered positive developments in
international norms and mechanisms. Civil society organizations including
Amnesty International successfully lobbied the UN Human Rights Council to
recognize the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment and to
create Special Rapporteurs on human rights and climate change and on
human rights in Afghanistan.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

xi

If governments won’t build back better – as they build back broken – we are
left with little option. We must scrutinize every decision and fight every
attempt to muzzle our voices. But we must also step up and towards each
other. We must build together a more tangible, demanding and insistent
movement for global solidarity – people to people to people. If our leaders
won’t lead us to rights, then rights must lead us to each other.
For that we must organize, support and enable a global movement for
justice. We know that ultimately our futures and our fates are intertwined and
interdependent – people to planet. We know it. We must live it. We need to
take charge – human rights charge – and demand together global governance
for the rights of each one of us, to the exception of none of us, in the interests
of all of us. Now, let’s together – all of us – incubate that.

Agnès Callamard,
Secretary General Amnesty International

xii

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2021/22
GLOBAL ANALYSIS AND REGIONAL OVERVIEWS

GLOBAL ANALYSIS: THREE KEY TRENDS
The year 2021 was a year of hope and promises: everyone’s hope that vaccines would stop
the devastation caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and promises by governments and
groupings like the G7 and G20 to “build back better”. However, this was often merely lip
service, with some governments even redoubling their exploitation of the pandemic to
entrench their own positions.
This analysis explores three key trends arising from Amnesty International’s 2021 human
rights research in 154 countries: health and inequalities, civic space and Global North
pushback on refugees and migrants.

HEALTH AND INEQUALITIES
Vaccines provided hope for an eventual end to the pandemic, which, according to the WHO
had claimed at least 5.5 million lives by the end of 2021, though some estimates suggest the
actual number of deaths could be two to three times higher. Many governments pledged to
support global vaccination coverage, and the G7 and the G20 made notable commitments.
However, despite efforts by some governments in the Global South in particular, international
cooperation largely failed. High-income countries stockpiled millions more doses than they
could use, leaving some countries able to vaccinate their entire populations three to five times
over. In September it was estimated that a handful of these countries were still sitting on over
500 million surplus vaccine doses. While the EU had a vaccination rate of over 70%, many
countries in the Global South were still waiting for access to a first shot. By the end of the year,
less than 8% of Africa’s 1.2 billion people had been fully vaccinated, the lowest vaccination
rate of any continent in the world and a far cry from the WHO’s 40% vaccination target by the
end of 2021. Such global vaccine inequality further entrenched racial injustice.
Rich countries such as EU member states, Norway, Switzerland and the UK also
systematically blocked attempts to boost global production of vaccines, which would have
increased low and middle-income countries’ access to them, by refusing to support the
temporary waiver of intellectual property rights. Meanwhile, pharmaceutical companies,
backed by powerful governments, heavily prioritized delivery of vaccines to high-income
countries. The main companies at the helm of Covid-19 vaccine production monopolized
intellectual property and blocked technology transfers, lobbying aggressively against measures
that would expand the global manufacturing of these vaccines. This was in spite of most
companies receiving billions of dollars in public funding, and all the while making staggering
profits from the pandemic. Three – BioNTech, Pfizer and Moderna – were set to earn US$130
billion by the end of 2022.
National vaccination programmes presented a mixed picture. Some national health services
successfully delivered national vaccination programmes thanks to scientific approaches,
information campaigns and dedicated health workers. However, other government vaccination
programmes were characterized by a lack of transparency and consultation, and impacted by
corruption. Others deprioritized or actively excluded many in particularly vulnerable situations,
including migrants and refugees, internally displaced people, rural and Indigenous
communities, prisoners, the homeless and other undocumented people, along with other
groups facing historical discrimination. In Russia vaccination of the homeless and
undocumented migrants was complicated by a requirement for identity documents and
medical insurance, often unavailable to such groups. In Nicaragua some media reports

14

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

pointed to favouritism in vaccinating government supporters first, regardless of their risk profile
for Covid-19. Many countries, such as in the Americas region, also failed to create special
protocols to ensure culturally appropriate interventions in the vaccination of Indigenous
peoples.
Further, unscrupulous messaging and manipulation by those seeking to spread confusion for
their own gain, including politicians and even leaders, coupled with irresponsible social media
companies, fuelled misinformation and exacerbated vaccine hesitancy. Conflict and crises also
impacted vaccination programmes, and the right to health more generally, for instance in
Yemen and Ethiopia through attacks on civilian infrastructure and restrictions on humanitarian
access. Equally in Afghanistan and Myanmar, the political turmoil brought their already fragile
healthcare systems to the brink of collapse.
Human rights to health and through health were arguably never more pertinent or at risk.
There was an opportunity to use the huge global investment and medical breakthroughs to
improve delivery of healthcare. However, governments around the world failed to show
leadership. They failed to reverse the widespread neglect and underfunding of these services
over decades or to address limited and unequal access to healthcare. These were both major
reasons for the scale of the crisis faced by health systems facing the dual challenge of
responding to Covid-19 and providing regular health services. The failure was felt in particular
by racialized minorities, migrant workers and older people, as well as women seeking sexual
and reproductive healthcare. Some authorities exacerbated the situation by actions such as
denying the existence of Covid-19 cases, dismissing risks or banning vaccines from certain
countries for political reasons. In some African countries including Congo, Nigeria and Togo,
health workers had to go on strike or protest to demand action on dysfunctional health systems
or payment of months of salary arrears. Elsewhere, including in Europe, some governments
took reprisals against health workers who spoke out about the stress on health services.
Meanwhile, the pandemic and responses to it continued to have a devastating impact in
many countries on other economic and social rights, trapping hundreds of millions in extreme
poverty. Increased debt resulting from the pandemic negatively impacted possibilities for the
necessary investment in essential social services, and the much-promised economic recovery
was undermined by limited debt relief. The very limited debt relief of US$45 billion agreed by
the G20 in April 2020, which was extended twice to the end of 2021, only translated into
US$10.3 billion in actual relief to more than 40 eligible countries. This shortcoming was
further compounded by the fact that this initiative only resulted in a suspension of debt
repayments and the 46 countries that applied still made US$36.4 billion in debt payments. It
also failed to deal with the issue of private creditors’ debt repayments, only 0.2% of which
were suspended.
At the same time, 2021 signalled some opportunities which governments could seize to lay
the groundwork for corporate accountability and effective responses to future pandemics, if
they place human rights at the heart of these efforts. The World Health Assembly agreed in
December to kick-start a global process to draft and negotiate an international instrument to
strengthen pandemic prevention, preparedness and response, although no meaningful
reference to human rights was included by the end of the year. Any such treaty will have only a
limited impact unless it is accompanied by a comprehensive reform of global health law and a
transformational change in the working of governments within such institutions. In addition,
after decades of failure to achieve any consensus, the G20 governments struck a deal on
some reform of the global taxation system. This, though flawed and not enough, was a step in
the right direction to address one of the most intractable and damaging global issues –
corporate tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

15

CIVIC SPACE
Instead of providing room for discussion and debate on how best to meet the challenges of
2021, the continuing trend was for governments to suppress independent and critical voices,
with some even using the pandemic as a pretext to shrink further the civic space. During the
year, many governments redoubled efforts to impose and/or implement repressive measures to
target their critics, with many of these measures framed ostensibly to curb the spread of
misinformation about Covid-19. In China, Iran and beyond, authorities arrested and
prosecuted individuals who criticized or challenged their Covid-19 responses. Across the
globe, governments unduly prevented and dispersed peaceful protests, sometimes using the
pretext of regulations to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Several governments, notably in
Africa, the Middle East and North Africa and Asia, blocked or heavily restricted access to the
internet and social media; in countries like Eswatini and South Sudan, the internet was
sometimes disrupted in an effort to derail planned protests. Attacks on journalists, critics and
human rights defenders, including those defending the rights of women and LGBTI
individuals, were a prominent part of this backlash against free expression.
A retrograde trend was the preparation and introduction of new legislation restricting the
rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly. Based on Amnesty
International’s monitoring, such legislation was introduced during the year in at least 67 of the
154 countries covered in this report, including Cambodia, Egypt, Pakistan, Turkey and the
USA. At the same time, restrictions introduced in 2020 with the stated intention of tackling
Covid-19 were maintained even when the public health situation had changed.
Human rights defenders and government critics remained vocal and uncowed, although they
were assaulted by governments and powerful corporations with a widening array of tools.
These included arbitrary detention and unjust prosecution, intimidatory and baseless lawsuits,
administrative restrictions and other threats as well as violence, including enforced
disappearance and torture. There was increased use of strategic lawsuits against public
participation (SLAPPs) to target and harass human rights defenders, including in Kosovo
against activists that raised concerns over the environmental impact of Austria-based Kelkos
Energy’s hydropower projects. The Andorran government also brought a case for criminal
defamation against an activist for speaking out on women’s rights at a UN expert forum.
Defenders were arbitrarily detained in at least 84 of the 154 countries monitored by Amnesty
International, including 17 of the 19 countries in the Middle East and North Africa. The
Americas remained one of the world’s most dangerous regions in which to champion human
rights, with scores of human rights defenders killed in at least eight countries. Events in
Myanmar and Afghanistan saw human rights defenders face greater violence and intimidation
than before, as human rights gains were reversed. In some countries, governments took
dramatic steps to close down NGOs and/or media outlets, such as in Russia and the Hong
Kong region of China, in actions that might previously have been considered unthinkable. In
Afghanistan, more than 200 media outlets were shut down across the country after the Taliban
took over. In a particularly brazen attack, Belarus used a fake bomb threat to divert a civilian
aircraft so it could arrest an exiled journalist on board. Marginalized groups daring to claim
their place in public life and lead human rights struggles faced a particular set of risks and
challenges, ranging from discrimination and exclusion, to racist and gender-based attacks,
both offline and online. Governments also increasingly used technological tools, including
spyware, to target journalists, human rights defenders, political opponents and other critical
voices. In a combination of restrictions from the pandemic and ongoing repression, NGOs in
many countries, from India to Zimbabwe, faced new challenges in carrying out activities or
accessing foreign funding.
Attacks on civic space, minority communities and dissenting views were also driven by nonstate actors, sometimes armed, sometimes in complicity with states. This was evident In India,

16

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

where Dalits, Adivasis and Muslims continued to face widespread abuses and hate crimes. In
Brazil, killings of environmental activists by non-state actors continued unabated. In Europe, in
a context characterized by increasing racism, islamophobia and antisemitism, minority
communities such as Muslims, Jewish people and others often faced rising hate crimes,
including in Austria, France, Germany, Italy and the UK.
In the face of protests, 2021 saw an increased trend for governments to securitize civic
space, criminalizing peaceful assemblies, militarizing their policing, using national security
powers in the face of protest movements, and otherwise introducing regulations to crack down
on demonstrations. The response to protests by security forces was heavy-handed: Amnesty
International documented the use of unnecessary and/or excessive force against
demonstrators in at least 85 of the 154 countries monitored, across all regions. Security forces
regularly misused firearms and less-lethal weapons, including tear gas and rubber bullets,
unlawfully killing hundreds and injuring many more. In some countries there was a continuing
trend towards the militarization of state responses to protests, including the use of armed
forces and military equipment. Compromised judiciaries failed to prevent or even facilitated
attacks against protesters, as well as human rights defenders and other critics.
Governments often followed up with arrests and prosecutions, and increasingly used
technological means, including facial recognition and other forms of surveillance, to identify
protest leaders and participants.

GLOBAL NORTH PUSHBACK – REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
There were unfolding mass displacements in 2021 caused by emerging and entrenched
crises. Events in places such as Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Myanmar led to new waves of
displacement. Thousands continued to leave Venezuela and the ongoing conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone caused 1.5 million people to leave their homes in
2021. Globally, millions of people continued to flee their countries due to human rights
violations related to conflict and violence, inequality, climate change and environmental
degradation, with ethnic minorities among those most affected. According to the UNHCR, the
UN Refugee Agency, as of mid-2021 there were 26.6 million refugees and 4.4 million asylum
seekers worldwide. Most remained in camps for years, for example in Bangladesh, Jordan,
Kenya, Turkey and Uganda, many living in constant fear of being returned back to countries
they fled seeking safety.
At a grassroots level, solidarity grew for people on the move, as seen in an increasing number
of countries, now 15, offering some form of sponsorship scheme allowing communities to
welcome refugees. Such solidarity was too often woefully lacking, however, at the national and
international level. Xenophobic narratives about migration were still allowed to permeate public
opinion, especially in the Global North, while domestic policies hardened further. A full dozen
countries in the EU called on the bloc’s executive to dilute refugee protection rules. The
international community failed to provide adequate support and, worse, restricted access to
safe havens.
Too often, such people on the move were also subjected to a litany of abuses – and impunity
reigned for patterns of widespread violations such as pushbacks, torture and sexual violence.
Many governments eschewed their responsibilities to provide protection and violated rights in
their attempts to keep refugees and migrants from reaching their territory and averting
spontaneous arrivals. The tactic of pushbacks became increasingly normalized, some at new
flashpoints such as the Belarus/EU border. US border control officials carried out mass
pushbacks of over a million refugees and migrants at the US-Mexico border using Covid-19
public health provisions as a pretext. Similarly, governments increasingly sought to externalize
national asylum application procedures (even in the face of flows of refugees whom they
claimed to want to support, such as from Afghanistan). Governments also continued a trend of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

17

deploying surveillance and data-driven technologies as means of securitizing and entrenching
violence at borders. Such border technology was often used in white-majority
countries disproportionately, in a systemically discriminatory manner against people of colour.
The situation was also frequently dire for those managing to cross borders. Many authorities
continued to unlawfully arrest and indefinitely detain refugees and migrants, often without valid
legal grounds or allowing them to challenge the legality of their detention. Some governments
also engaged in unlawful deportations; Amnesty International documented credible allegations
that refugees or migrants had been unlawfully returned to their countries or pushed across
borders in at least 48 of 154 countries monitored in 2021. In Libya thousands were forcibly
disappeared following disembarkation by EU-backed Libyan coastguards, while hundreds
more were forcibly expelled without due process and left at land borders. Malaysia deported
over one thousand people back to Myanmar despite the real risk of persecution and other
serious human rights violations.
Many governments discriminated unlawfully against people on the move, including refugees
and asylum seekers. In Peru, around a million migrants, including half a million regularized
asylum seekers, were not able to access rights such as healthcare. However, pressure to
prevent widespread labour abuses against migrant workers continued to be catalysed by the
spotlight on high-profile projects such as preparations for the 2022 men’s football World Cup
in Qatar. This led to further reforms in some countries, although major concerns remained.
There were also increasing calls to phase out the detention of migrants, particularly migrant
children.

RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to fulfil their promises, governments and institutions should build their pandemic
recovery and crisis response firmly on a human rights framework, and facilitate real
dialogue with civil society as partners in reaching solutions.
All governments should put in place measures, including legislation, to prevent vaccine
developers from impeding access to Covid-19 vaccines. Richer countries in particular must
redistribute surplus Covid-19 vaccine stocks to lower-income countries and ramp up debt
relief to facilitate economic recovery. Pharmaceutical companies should prioritize deliveries
where they are needed the most. Social media companies must take concrete action to
respond adequately to the dissemination of false or misleading information.
Governments should stop using the pandemic as an excuse to silence independent
reporting and debate and urgently lift all undue restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly. In tandem, governments should adopt or
expand laws ensuring the creation of a safe and enabling environment for people to come
together for the defence and promotion of human rights, and repeal or amend legislation
which hinders the legitimate activity of NGOs, including seeking, receiving and utilizing
funding. It is also crucial that governments revoke regimes that require prior authorization
to hold peaceful assemblies, and ensure that emergency and other restrictive measures
adopted during the pandemic do not become the “new normal”. They should impose tighter
controls on the export and import of equipment that can have a legitimate law enforcement
function but be readily misused, like batons, tear gas, pepper spray and rubber bullets.
Governments must fulfil their obligation to protect people seeking international
protection, respect and safeguard their rights and enable them to remain in their territory,
in decent conditions, until a durable solution is found. They should stop pushbacks and
externalization, and support community sponsorship. Governments must end abuses
including discrimination against migrants, stop detaining migrant children, and deepen
reforms to end labour abuses.

18

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

AFRICA REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Civilians continued to pay the price of protracted armed conflicts in Africa. Parties to the
conflicts in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic (CAR), the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Somalia and
South Sudan committed war crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In certain cases, such violations amounted to crimes
against humanity. The pursuit of justice for victims proved largely to be elusive. Conflicts
displaced millions, yet the humanitarian and security situations in refugee and internally
displaced people (IDP) camps remained precarious.
As conflicts raged, the Covid-19 pandemic tore through Africa with a devastating impact
on human rights. Governments’ efforts to stem its tide were hindered by the global vaccine
inequality created by pharmaceutical companies and wealthy nations. By the year’s end,
less than 8% of the continent’s 1.2 billion people had been fully vaccinated. The pandemic
led to school closures and disruption to learning, with children in conflict-affected
countries experiencing additional difficulties in accessing education. In several countries,
forced evictions were carried out regardless of the pandemic, leaving tens of thousands
homeless.
Measures to curb the spread of Covid-19 provided governments with a justification for
repressing the right to dissent and other freedoms. Many governments banned peaceful
protests, citing health and safety concerns. When people defied bans and poured onto the
streets, security forces used excessive force to break them up. Authorities also continued to
silence human rights defenders or to criminalize them. Governments took measures to
close civic space and curtail media freedom, and weaponized sedition, terrorism and
criminal defamation laws.
Gender discrimination and other forms of inequality remained entrenched in African
countries. Major concerns included spikes in gender-based violence, limited access to
sexual and reproductive health services and information, early and forced marriages, and
the exclusion of pregnant girls from schools. Meanwhile, LGBTI people faced harassment,
arrest and prosecution for their real or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity.
Several countries were particularly affected by drought aggravated by climate change,
while concerns relating to environmental degradation emerged in others.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Targeted attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure were pervasive in every conflict in the
region. In Cameroon’s Far North region, Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West Africa
(ISWAP) had killed at least 70 civilians in around 51 attacks by 24 October. In CAR, national
forces and their allies targeted a mosque in February, killing 14 people. The UN
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
said that 228 civilians were killed between June and October as a result of the conflict. In
Ethiopia, the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), national security forces, and militia
groups were responsible for the massacre, in many cases based on ethnic identity, of
hundreds of civilians, including in the towns of Bora, Edaga Berhe and Adi-Goshu. In Niger,
the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) attacked villagers and traders in the Tillabéri and
Tahoua regions. Three such attacks between January and March resulted in at least 298

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

19

civilian deaths. In North East Nigeria, Boko Haram and ISWAP carried out at least 30 attacks
causing more than 123 civilian deaths.
Indiscriminate attacks that killed and injured civilians were also common in each of the
region’s conflicts. In CAR, improvised explosive devices killed at least 15 people in the first half
of the year. In Ethiopia, an airstrike by the Ethiopian military on a market in Edaga Selus village
in Tigray killed more than 50 civilians and wounded many more. Similarly, an artillery attack,
allegedly by TPLF forces, killed six people in a residential area in Debre Tabor town in Amhara
region. In Mozambique’s Cabo Delgado conflict, the Dyck Advisory Group, a private military
company hired by the government as a quick reaction force, fired machine guns and dropped
explosives indiscriminately from their helicopters, often failing to distinguish between civilian
and military targets.
In North East Nigeria, at least 16 people were killed and 47 injured in February when Boko
Haram fired rocket-propelled grenades on parts of Maiduguri city, Borno state. In September,
nine people were killed and several injured during a military air strike in Buwari village, Yobe
state. In Somalia, the UN documented 241 civilian deaths and 295 injuries between February
and July. The armed group, Al-Shabaab, caused 68% of the casualties during indiscriminate
attacks; the rest were attributed to state security forces, clan militias, and international and
regional forces including the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Almost all actors involved in Africa’s armed conflicts deployed sexual violence as a war tactic.
In CAR, MINUSCA documented 131 such cases, including 115 rapes, between January and
June. In DRC, conflict-related sexual violence remained widespread – at least 1,100 women
were raped in North Kivu and Ituri alone between January and September, according to the
UN. In Ethiopia, parties to the conflict committed widespread rape against women and girls in
Tigray and Amhara. In South Sudan, the UN estimated that state security forces and non-state
armed actors committed at least 63 incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape, gang rape and forced nudity. In Niger, members of the Chadian contingent of the G5
Sahel raped two women and an 11-year-old girl in April in Tera, Tillabéri region.
Blockades and restrictions on humanitarian access were also used as a war tactic in some
conflicts. In Burkina Faso, the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM) blockaded
Mansila town, Yagha province, causing food insecurity among the population. In Mali, GSIM
blockaded many villages and communities, restricting villagers’ free movement and access to
farmland and water, to force them to cease collaboration with the army. Denial of, and
restrictions to, humanitarian access by armed groups and vigilante groups or governments
continued in Cameroon, DRC, Ethiopia and South Sudan. This contributed to leaving over 5
million people in Ethiopia, 19.6 million in DRC, and 8.3 million in South Sudan in dire need of
humanitarian assistance according to UN estimates, particularly food and medicine.
In several countries, many people were killed in spates of inter-communal violence and
political unrest. In Cameroon, people, healthcare facilities and schools in anglophone
Northwest and Southwest regions were targeted by suspected armed separatists. These
abuses happened in the context of growing inter-communal tensions. In Ethiopia, ethnic
violence claimed at least 1,500 lives in Afar, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Oromia and Somali
regions. In Nigeria, inter-communal violence between herders and farming communities, as
well as attacks by bandits, resulted in more than 3,494 deaths. In South Africa, violence
triggered by former president Jacob Zuma’s arrest resulted in at least 360 deaths.

IMPUNITY
In almost every country, perpetrators of crimes under international law, and other serious
human rights violations and abuses, enjoyed impunity. In Burkina Faso, two members of
armed group Ansaroul Islam were convicted on terrorism-related charges, but no significant
progress was made in the investigation into the unlawful killing in 2019 of 50 people and the

20

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

enforced disappearance of 66 others, allegedly by the armed group Koglweogo in Yirgou
village, Sanmatenga province. In CAR, the Special Criminal Court announced that it had
issued 25 arrest warrants, but none of them have been successfully implemented to date.
While the government established a Commission of Inquiry to investigate violations committed
by all parties since the beginning of the offensive by armed group Coalition of Patriots for
Change (CPC), it did not make its report or next steps public.
In DRC, at least 80 army and police officers were prosecuted in North Kivu, South Kivu, Ituri,
Tanganyika and Kasaï provinces for serious crimes including sexual violence. Former
Congolese warlord Roger Lumbala was arrested by French authorities over war crimes and
crimes against humanity. However, many other perpetrators of crimes under international law
in DRC continued to enjoy impunity. In Mali, trials on terrorism charges took place but there
were concerns about whether they met international fair trial standards. Meanwhile, there was
little progress in the investigation of crimes under international law committed by armed
groups and the military.
In Rwanda, Jean-Claude Iyamuremye, accused of being a leader of the Interahamwe militia
in Kicukiro commune during the 1994 genocide, was convicted of genocide and sentenced to
25 years in prison. Two genocide suspects were extradited from the USA to Rwanda to stand
trial while another suspect was extradited from the Netherlands. In South Sudan, the
government seemingly prioritized truth over trials, continuing to delay and block the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. In Sudan, the year ended without anyone
being held accountable for the killing of at least 100 protesters on 3 June 2019. Authorities
also continued to fail in their obligation to transfer Omar al Bashir and two other suspects to
the ICC to answer charges of crimes against humanity, genocide and war crimes in Darfur.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to tear through Africa with a devastating impact on human
rights. Nearly 9 million cases and more than 220,000 deaths were recorded during the year.
South Africa remained the epicentre of the pandemic, in terms of reported cases and deaths.
Governments’ efforts to stem the tide of Covid-19 were hindered by inequality in the global
distribution of the vaccine, created by pharmaceutical companies and wealthy nations.
Pharmaceutical companies prioritized delivering vaccines to high-income countries, who in
turn stockpiled more doses than they could use. Rich countries also blocked attempts to
increase supplies to low and middle-income countries by supporting the temporary waiver of
intellectual property rights and increased sharing of technology and know-how.
Covid-19 vaccines were mainly supplied to African countries through the COVAX facility, the
Africa Vaccine Acquisition Trust and bilateral donations. Too often, supplies were insufficient,
or their arrival times unpredictable, making it hard for governments to build trust among their
populations and structure effective roll out campaigns. In countries like DRC, Malawi and
South Sudan vaccine deliveries arrived with short expiry dates forcing authorities to destroy
supplies or return the bulk for reallocation to other countries. Supply problems made it more
difficult to ensure vaccines reached vulnerable groups, including older people and those with
chronic conditions. Internal factors impeding effective vaccination programmes in Africa
included inequality, vaccine hesitancy and national insecurity. Less than 8% of Africa’s 1.2
billion people were fully vaccinated at the year’s end, the lowest rate in the world and a far cry
from the WHO’s 40% vaccination target.
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to highlight the region’s chronic lack of investment in
health sectors over many decades. The already inadequate healthcare systems in most

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

21

countries were severely strained, especially during the pandemic’s third wave. In Somalia, only
one hospital in Mogadishu, the capital, handled all Covid-19-related cases across south central
regions for much of the year. With about 91% of their beds occupied during July, private and
public hospitals in the Gauteng province of South Africa struggled to cope. In Congo, DRC,
Nigeria and Togo, health workers went on strike or organized sit-ins to denounce dysfunctional
health systems or to demand months of unpaid salaries. Allegations of corruption, including in
relation to Covid-19 funds, further undermined health sectors in many countries, including
Cameroon and South Africa.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
School closures and other disruptions to learning due to the pandemic remained a major
concern. In Chad, girls’ enrolment in secondary schools fell from 31% in 2017 to 12% in 2021
due to school closures and high rates of early and forced marriage. In South Africa,
approximately 750,000 children had dropped out of school by May, over three times the prepandemic number of 230,000. In Uganda, where schools began a phased reopening in
February but closed again in June, the National Planning Authority predicted that more than
30% of learners would not return to school.
Children in conflict-affected countries experienced unique and profound difficulties in
accessing education. In Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Niger, Boko Haram, GSIM, ISGS and
other armed groups continued to prohibit “western education” and committed war crimes by
attacking schools. Meanwhile, threats and violence continued to deter teachers from going to
work. In Burkina Faso, UNICEF reported that 2,682 schools remained closed, affecting
304,564 students and 12,480 teachers. In CAR, the CPC attacked or occupied at least 37
schools between January and June. In Niger, 377 schools in the Tillabéri region had closed by
June, by which time over 50% of seven-to-16-year-olds nationwide were not enrolled in
schools, according to UNICEF.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Despite the Covid-19 pandemic, forced evictions were recorded in several countries, leaving
tens of thousands homeless. In Ghana, Kenya and Nigeria, forced evictions were mainly
carried out in urban centres, involving the demolition of hundreds of homes built on what the
respective governments called illegal settlements. Other forced evictions in the region were
driven by economic interests. In Uganda’s Kiryandongo district, more than 35,000 people were
forcibly evicted from their homes to make way for industrial farming projects. In Zimbabwe,
thousands of villagers were driven from their land in Chisumbanje to allow a fuel company to
expand its sugarcane fields.
On a positive note, courts in Kenya and Uganda affirmed the right to housing and
condemned forced evictions. The Supreme Court of Kenya ruled that the 2013 eviction of
residents of City Carton, an informal settlement in Nairobi, the capital, violated their right to
housing. The Constitutional Court of Uganda found that the Wildlife Authority had illegally
evicted the Batwa Indigenous people from their ancestral land in the Mgahinga forest in the
south-west.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
PROTESTS AND THE USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE
Measures to curb the spread of Covid-19 provided a pretext for the repression of peaceful
dissent and other rights which continued unabated across the region. The first instinct of many
governments was to ban peaceful protests, citing health and safety concerns, including in

22

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Cameroon, Chad and Côte d’Ivoire. Meanwhile, in countries like Eswatini and South Sudan,
organizers were arrested beforehand, and the internet disrupted in what may have amounted
to efforts to derail planned protests. Security forces used excessive force to break up peaceful
protests of hundreds or thousands of people who defied bans. In over 12 countries, including
Angola, Benin, Chad, Eswatini, Guinea, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Sudan, many people died
when security forces fired live ammunition. In Eswatini, the violent dispersal of pro-democracy
protests that began in May resulted in 80 deaths and more than 200 injuries by October. In
Sudan, at least 53 people died when security forces used live ammunition to disperse protests
against the October military coup.
Peaceful protesters also faced arbitrary arrest and prosecution. In Chad, at least 700 people
protesting against the electoral process and later against the establishment of the transitional
government were arrested. In DRC, three activists arrested in North Kivu for organizing a
peaceful sit-in to protest mismanagement in a local healthcare administration remained in
detention. In Eswatini, at least 1,000 pro-democracy protesters, including 38 children, were
arbitrarily arrested.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The defence of human rights remained an act of courage. Authorities sought to silence human
rights defenders or to criminalize them. Along with opposition activists, they were arrested and
judicially harassed in many countries, including Benin, Congo, DRC, Eswatini, Kenya, Niger,
Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
In DRC, two whistleblowers were sentenced to death in their absence after they revealed
financial transactions made for the benefit of individuals and entities under international
sanctions. In Rwanda, Yvonne Idamange, a YouTuber, was sentenced to 15 years in prison for
criticizing government policy. Authorities in Congo, Niger, Zambia and elsewhere used criminal
defamation laws to intimidate and muzzle critics. Trumped-up charges were brought against
critics under Eswatini’s terrorism and sedition laws.
Some human rights defenders paid the ultimate price. Joannah Stutchbury, an environmental
activist in Kenya, was shot dead at her home in July after receiving death threats. Two
journalists were also killed in Somalia.
Laws and policies to restrict the space for NGOs were introduced or implemented in several
countries. In Togo, the government suspended the granting and renewal of NGO licences. The
Ugandan government ordered the immediate suspension of 54 organizations for allegedly
failing to comply with NGO legislation. In Zimbabwe, NGOs were directed to submit work plans
to authorities before carrying out activities in Harare, the capital. The High Court ruled that the
directive was unconstitutional. Subsequently an amendment to the Private Voluntary
Organizations Act regulations, allowing for the closure of organizations suspected of funding, or
campaigning for, politicians during elections was gazetted.

MEDIA FREEDOM
Governments continued to curtail media freedom. In Angola, Burkina Faso, DRC, Madagascar,
Senegal, Tanzania, Togo and elsewhere newspapers and radio and TV stations were
suspended. In some countries, such as Ghana and Zambia, authorities stormed media houses
disrupting live programmes and destroying property. In Zambia, for example, unidentified
people set fire to Kalungwishi radio station in Chiengi district in June. In Nigeria, media
organizations staged a campaign tagged “Information Blackout” to protest against two bills
which threatened to tighten media regulation and undermine access to information.
Internet disruptions and shutdowns and suspension of social media were recorded, including
in Eswatini, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Sudan, Sudan, Uganda and Zambia. In June,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

23

Nigerian authorities suspended Twitter after the site deleted a controversial tweet from
President Buhari for violating its community rule.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, MIGRANTS AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Conflicts that raged across the region continued to displace millions from their homes,
including 1.5 million people in DRC during 2021, bringing the total number of IDPs in the
country to 5 million. In Somalia, where more than 2.6 million people were internally displaced
in previous years, 573,000 people fled their homes between January and August. Most of the
region’s refugees were hosted by a handful of countries, including Cameroon, Chad, DRC,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Niger, Rwanda and Sudan while Uganda had the largest refugee population
in Africa with over 1.5 million. Paradoxically, some host countries, such as DRC and Ethiopia,
also produced large numbers of refugees.
The humanitarian and security situations in nearly all the region’s refugee and IDP camps
remained precarious. Lack of adequate access to food, water, education, health and housing,
sometimes because of blockades and restrictions of humanitarian access, was common. In
March, the Kenyan government gave UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, a 14-day ultimatum to
close the Kakuma and Dadaab refugee camps. The threat was later retracted, and the closure
of the camps postponed to June 2022. In Niger, ISGS attacked settlements inhabited by
Malian refugees in Intikane, Tahoua region, killing dozens of people. In Tanzania, the police
and intelligence services, in cooperation with the Burundian intelligence services, continued to
use violence, arbitrary arrests, strict encampment policies and threats of deportation to
pressure Burundian refugees to leave the country.

DISCRIMINATION AND MARGINALIZATION
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Gender discrimination and inequality remained entrenched in African countries. Major
concerns documented in the region included spikes in gender-based violence, limited access
to sexual and reproductive health services and information, the persistence of early and forced
marriage, and the exclusion of pregnant girls from schools.
Restrictive lockdown measures enforced by governments to curb the spread of Covid-19
contributed to soaring rates of sexual and gender-based violence across the region. Genderbased violence reached crisis levels in South Africa where official crime statistics showed a
74.1% increase in all sexual offences. There were also at least 117 cases of femicide in the
first half of the year.
Specific cases of gender-based violence in the region triggered public outrage and calls for
action. Women in Chad protested in the streets against sexual violence and a culture of
impunity for perpetrators after the gang rape of a 15-year-old girl was filmed and shared on
social media. In South Africa, the killing of Nosicelo Mtebeni, a 23-year-old law student, by her
boyfriend led to a public outcry. Her body was dismembered and placed in a suitcase and in
plastic bags.
While gender-based violence spiked, access to protection and support services for survivors,
as well as to sexual and reproductive health services and information, remained limited across
the region. Early and forced marriages persisted in many countries. In Namibia, it emerged
that a four-year-old’s parents had married her to a 25-year-old man when she was two. In

24

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Equatorial Guinea, a ban on pregnant girls attending school continued. In Tanzania the
Ministry of Education announced in November that it would lift a similar ban.
Legislative proposals to address specific forms of gender discrimination were introduced in
Côte d’Ivoire and Madagascar. In Sudan, the cabinet approved the country’s ratification of the
Maputo Protocol and CEDAW. Other positive reports included a judgment in favour of survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence in Nigeria and the presidential pardon of 10 girls and
women who were released from prison for abortion-related offences in Rwanda.

PERSONS WITH ALBINISM
In Eastern and Southern Africa, persons with albinism and their families continued to live in
fear for their lives. Violent attacks against persons with albinism were recorded in Malawi
where a man was killed in February and the body of another was found in August. In Zambia,
two children, aged two and nine, were mutilated in separate attacks in June and July.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face harassment, arrest and prosecution for their real or perceived
sexual orientation or gender identity. In Benin, three transgender women were forced to
undress before being beaten and robbed by a group of men in Cotonou; the attack was filmed
and shared on social media. Filmed attacks on LGBTI people were also common in Senegal,
where conservative groups organized a protest calling for the criminalization of consensual
same-sexual relations. In Cameroon, two transgender women accused of such acts were
sentenced to five years’ imprisonment but released pending appeal. In Namibia, police
accused a transgender woman of faking her identity to avoid prosecution and subjected her to
transphobic harassment in custody. A new law in Taraba state, Nigeria, contained a provision
for life imprisonment for transgender people.
In Kenya’s Kakuma and Dadaab refugee camps, LGBTI refugees were routinely harassed and
attacked. Chriton Atuherwa’s death, after suffering severe burns from an arson attack in
Kakuma camp, illustrated the government’s inadequate protection of LGBTI refugees from
homophobic attacks.
In Cameroon, police officers raided the offices of Colibri, an HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment group in Bafoussam, West region, and arrested 13 people on charges related to
consensual same-sexual conduct before releasing them days later after they were forced to
undergo HIV tests and anal examinations. In Ghana, where a bill further criminalizing LGBTI
people was introduced in parliament, the LGBTI+ Rights Ghana offices were searched and
closed by police officers. Police also arrested 21 LGBTI activists for unlawful assembly during
a training session. Charges against them were later dismissed. The Malagasy interior ministry
suspended an annual LGBT event.
On a positive note, the Botswana Court of Appeal upheld a high court judgment that declared
a law criminalizing consensual same-sexual relations unconstitutional; in Uganda, Cleopatra
Kambugu announced that she was the first trans woman to obtain a Ugandan identification
card and passport recognizing her female gender.

CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Several countries in the region were particularly impacted by drought aggravated by climate
change. In Angola, low rainfall caused the worst drought in 40 years. Malnutrition peaked due
to lack of food, safe water and adequate sanitation, with women, children and older people
disproportionately affected. Southern Madagascar was affected by severe drought impacting
those reliant on subsistence agriculture, livestock and fishing as their main sources of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

25

livelihood. In South Africa, a drought disaster was declared in the Eastern Cape, Northern
Cape and Western Cape provinces in July.
Concerns relating to environmental degradation emerged in several countries, including
Botswana, Congo, DRC, Ghana, Namibia and South Africa. In Botswana and Namibia, oil
exploration licences continued to be granted in environmentally sensitive areas in the
Okavango River basin to Canadian-based mining company ReconAfrica, despite their adverse
impact on climate change and on the rights of local residents, including Indigenous peoples, a
point also made by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee. Extensive pollution was caused to
the Tshikapa and Kasaï rivers and their tributaries in southern DRC. The government said the
pollution was caused by a spillage upstream from a diamond mining and processing company
based in northern Angola. The disaster led to at least 40 deaths, hundreds of cases of severe
diarrhoea, and wiped-out aquatic life.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Despite some positive developments, 2021 was a difficult year for human rights in Africa.
African governments and relevant non-state actors must take bold actions to address the
many concerns that arose during the year, as follows:
All parties to armed conflicts must protect civilians, not least by ending targeted and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. This includes taking all steps
to ensure that refugees and internally displaced people are protected and given full access
to humanitarian aid, including food, water and shelter.
Governments must bolster efforts to fight impunity by undertaking thorough, independent,
impartial, effective and transparent investigations into crimes under international law and
by bringing suspected perpetrators to justice.
In the absence of adequate Covid-19 vaccine supplies, governments should continue to
prioritize the vaccination of groups at most risk, as well as those in hard-to-reach areas.
They must cooperate at regional and international levels to strengthen their national
healthcare systems and provide transparent information about health budgets.
Governments must immediately take action to protect women’s and girls’ rights to
equality, health, information, education, and to allow them to live free from gender-based
violence and discrimination, including by ensuring that survivors of such violence, during
the Covid-19 restrictions, continue to have access to police protection and justice, to
shelters, helplines and community support services.
Governments must end the harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders and
activists, drop all charges against those facing prosecution, and immediately and
unconditionally release those who are arbitrarily detained or imprisoned. They must respect
media freedom, including by ensuring that media outlets can operate independently.

26

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

AMERICAS REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Even before the Covid-19 crisis, the Americas had the highest rates of income inequality of
any region in the world. The continent’s uneven economic recovery during the year made
little impact on the wide-ranging consequences of decades of structural inequality. Despite
implementing various programmes to tackle the consequences of the pandemic, many
governments failed to protect the social, economic and cultural rights of their most
vulnerable populations – and often undermined them further with discriminatory policies
and practices.
In 2021, 1.5 million people lost their lives due to Covid-19 in the Americas, which continued
to have the world’s highest per capita death toll from Covid-19. Limited and unequal access to
healthcare was a major cause, compounded by poorly funded health systems, inadequate
social protection policies and measures for marginalized communities, and a lack of adequate
access to vaccines. The impact of the pandemic on Indigenous peoples was made particularly
acute by ongoing inadequate access to sanitation, health services and social benefits.
Many governments did not do enough to prioritize sexual and reproductive health. Essential
services were lacking and access to abortion services remained criminalized in most countries.
Violence against women and girls remained a major concern throughout the region.
Investigations into cases of gender-based violence, including domestic violence, rape,
homicide and femicide, were often inadequate.
The right to freedom of expression was under threat in several countries, with dozens of
journalists and government critics threatened, censored, attacked and detained. Police and
other security forces cracked down on peaceful protests in many countries with excessive use
of force, arbitrary detentions and, in some cases, unlawful killings.
Impunity for these and other human rights violations and crimes under international law
remained a serious concern in more than half the countries in the region. Attacks on judicial
independence also increased.
Tens of thousands of people fled their countries due to human rights violations related to
violence, poverty, inequality and climate change. However, many governments continued to
prohibit the entry of refugees, asylum seekers and migrants, and violated international law by
forcibly returning, without proper consideration of their claims, those who did make it across
borders.
The landmark Regional Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice
in Environmental Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean (Escazú Agreement) finally came
into force in April. However, acts of environmental destruction continued in many countries
and the Americas remained one of the world’s most dangerous regions for those defending
environmental and human rights.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
Despite an upturn in economic growth during the year, these gains were insufficient to reverse
the 2020 economic downturn, which saw record unemployment, falling incomes and
increases in poverty and inequality.
In Argentina, Brazil, Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela the hardship was
particularly severe. By June, 40.6% of the Argentine population was living in poverty. In Brazil,
56% of the population faced food insecurity. In Haiti, nearly half of the population was in need

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

27

of food assistance. And in Venezuela, 94.5% of the population was living in income poverty
and 76.6% in extreme poverty.
Inequality and discrimination remained prevalent region-wide. According to the UN
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the average
unemployment rate for women in the region was 12.7% compared to 9.7% for men.
Many governments failed to protect the social, economic and cultural rights of those in the
most vulnerable situations and some even further undermined them. For example, forced
evictions increased in Paraguay – particularly among Indigenous and rural communities –
without effective judicial remedies or the offer of resettlement alternatives. According to the
Zero Eviction campaign, 23,500 Brazilian families were evicted from their homes between
March 2020 and October 2021, during the pandemic. In the USA, the Supreme Court struck
down efforts to extend a federal moratorium on evictions.
In Venezuela more than 3,000 protests took place in the first half of the year as the country’s
food distribution system failed to meet nutritional needs and access to medical assistance,
drinking water, food and fuel further deteriorated.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The pandemic continued to have a devastating impact in many countries where access to
healthcare and vaccines was limited and unequal.
With 2.3 million deaths from Covid-19 since the beginning of the pandemic, the region
accounted for 45% of the global total of deaths, despite representing just 13% of the world’s
population.
Widespread neglect and underfunding of public health services was a major reason for the
scale of the crisis. In several countries, the number of doctors and nurses per capita was far
below the threshold that the WHO considers necessary for delivering basic health services in
the world’s poorest countries.
In Venezuela, there was a lack of protective equipment and local NGOs reported that more
than 800 health professionals had died from Covid-19 since March 2020. A chronic lack of
oxygen and insufficient hospital capacity contributed to Peru becoming the country with the
highest number of deaths per capita in the world. In Brazil, President Jair Bolsonaro
responded to the Covid-19 pandemic with a mixture of denial, negligence, opportunism and
contempt for human rights.
By late August, over half of the population of North America was fully vaccinated against
Covid-19 – compared to just a quarter in Latin America and the Caribbean. A month later, data
science company Airfinity estimated that developed countries were sitting on over 500 million
surplus vaccine doses.
Some higher-income countries actively blocked the expanded production of vaccines. By the
end of the year, Canada had still not granted a compulsory licence for the Canadian
pharmaceutical company Biolyse to produce 20 million doses of the Johnson & Johnson
vaccine, with the first 15 million going to Bolivia.
By the end of the year, overall vaccination coverage was similar in North and South America,
with over half of the population fully vaccinated. However, there remained considerable
disparity between countries in the region. While Canada, Chile and Uruguay had fully
vaccinated three quarters or more of their population, Guatemala and Venezuela had only
reached a fifth of their population, while Nicaragua and Haiti had only reached less than 6%
and 1% respectively.
Government vaccination programmes frequently overlooked or actively excluded those at risk
of Covid-19, including, in many cases, migrants and refugees. Many countries failed to create

28

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

special protocols to ensure culturally appropriate vaccination programmes tailored for
Indigenous peoples.
In some cases, health workers were excluded from vaccination programmes. For example, in
Nicaragua, health workers only started being vaccinated in May – long after others; some
media reports pointed to favouritism in vaccinating government supporters first, regardless of
their risk profile for Covid-19.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Many governments did not do enough to prioritize sexual and reproductive health. Essential
services were lacking and safe abortion services remained criminalized in most countries. The
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica and Nicaragua maintained total
bans on abortion.
Despite Argentina’s landmark decriminalization and legalization of abortion within the first 14
weeks of pregnancy at the end of 2020, other countries failed to follow suit. In Chile, a bill
decriminalizing abortion within the first 14 weeks of pregnancy was rejected. In Colombia, the
Constitutional Court failed to decide on a case of decriminalization of abortion filed by Causa
Justa, a broad coalition of NGOs. In the Dominican Republic and El Salvador efforts to
decriminalize abortion under much more limited circumstances failed to receive legislative
approval.
In Honduras, in January, Congress passed a constitutional reform making it harder to remove
the bans on abortion and same-sex marriage – although a challenge to the total ban on
abortion was pending before the Supreme Court of Justice at the end of the year.
In the USA, state governments introduced more abortion restrictions in 2021 than in any
other year. In Texas, a near-total abortion ban was enacted, criminalizing abortion as early as
six weeks into pregnancy.
A rare example of limited progress was the decision in April by Ecuador’s Constitutional Court
to decriminalize abortion on the grounds of rape.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous peoples in the Americas continued to face inadequate access to their rights to
water, sanitation, health and social protection, as well as a lack of culturally appropriate
mechanisms to protect their rights to health and livelihoods – all of which exacerbated the
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.
The plight of Indigenous peoples in Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador,
Nicaragua, Paraguay and Venezuela was particularly acute.
In Brazil, Indigenous peoples lacked protection from land invasions, deforestation and
mining, as well as the spread of Covid-19. In August, the Articulation of Indigenous Peoples of
Brazil submitted an unprecedented statement at the ICC, accusing the Bolsonaro government
of genocide and ecocide.
In many countries – including Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela
– governments continued to allow major extractive, agricultural and infrastructure projects to
proceed without obtaining the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous peoples affected,
and sometimes despite judicial orders to suspend operations.
In Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Peru, Indigenous peoples were injured
and killed in violent attacks and shootings by state security forces or armed civilians.
In Canada, the remains of hundreds of Indigenous children buried at former residential
schools – established by the Canadian government and administered by churches – were
located. Many Indigenous people, associations, organizations and band councils denounced

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

29

this as genocide and called for justice. In September, Canada’s Federal Court ordered Ottawa
to pay Can$40,000 (approximately US$32,000) to each of approximately 50,000 First Nations
children forcibly separated from their families.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly came under threat in several
countries in the region.
Journalists and government critics were intimidated, harassed, threatened, censored,
criminalized or denied access to public information in Brazil, Canada, Cuba, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Uruguay and Venezuela.
In February, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) granted
precautionary measures in favour of 34 staff members of El Salvador’s El Faro digital
newspaper who had been subjected to harassment, threats and intimidation.
In Venezuela, several media broadcasts were banned and a leading newspaper was fined for
defamation of a high-ranking government official. A local NGO reported more than 290 attacks
on journalists.
In Colombia, the Foundation for Press Freedom reported 402 attacks on the press
documenting the social protests.
Following Cuba’s largest demonstration in decades on 11 July, the IACHR received reports of
violent attacks on the media by police and government supporters and the arrest of at least 10
journalists.
Restrictions, repression and bans on peaceful protest further undermined freedom of
expression in Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, the USA and Venezuela.
The Colombian government issued measures restricting the movement of transport and
people to prevent participation in protests scheduled in various cities on 20 July. In Cuba,
hundreds of people were detained during the historic protests on 11 July and in October the
government banned another march to call for their release. Meanwhile, US lawmakers in at
least 36 states and at the federal level introduced more than 80 pieces of draft legislation
limiting freedom of assembly, with nine states enacting 10 such bills into law.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Excessive use of force was employed to repress protests in many countries – including
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay, Puerto Rico and Venezuela.
The OHCHR verified 46 deaths (44 civilian and two police officers) during Colombia’s
National Strike demonstrations in April and May, as well as 49 reports of sexual violence. In
Venezuela, the police, military and pro-government armed groups attacked at least 59 protests
– resulting in the death of one protester and the injury of seven others.
In Mexico, the police used unnecessary and excessive force, arbitrary detentions and even
sexual violence to silence women protesting against gender-based violence.
In Chile, updated figures from the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the National Institute of
Human Rights showed there had been more than 8,000 victims of state agents violence since
protests began in October 2019.
Excessive use of force in police operations to tackle crime also resulted in significant loss of
life. In Brazil, 6 May saw the most deadly operation ever by police in Rio de Janeiro which left
27 residents of the city’s Jacarezinho favela dead. In November, a further nine people died as
the result of another police operation in Rio de Janeiro’s Complexo do Salgueiro favela.
In November, police in Buenos Aires, Argentina, shot and killed 17-year-old footballer Lucas
González in his car as he left a grocery store.

30

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In the USA, at least 888 people were reported killed by police using firearms, with Black
people disproportionately impacted. Six US states still had no use-of-force statutes and, of
those that did, none complied with international law and standards regarding the use of lethal
force. The US Senate also failed to introduce the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act – a bill
providing a bipartisan set of proposals to reform certain aspects of policing in the USA.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
Cases of arbitrary detention were reported in many countries including Colombia, Cuba,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Venezuela and at the US Naval Base in Guantánamo Bay.
According to the Campaign Defending Freedom, 3,275 people were arbitrarily detained in the
context of Colombia’s National Strike. The Working Group on Enforced Disappearances
recorded that the whereabouts of 327 people disappeared, remained unknown at the end of
the year.
The Cuban authorities arbitrarily imprisoned hundreds of people for exercising their rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful assembly in the context of the 11 July protests.
In Nicaragua, in the months leading up to the re-election of President Daniel Ortega in
November, police arbitrarily detained or forcibly disappeared dozens of human rights
defenders, journalists and government opponents, including seven potential presidential
candidates.
According to the Venezuelan human rights organization Foro Penal, the country’s security
forces arbitrarily detained 44 political activists, students and human rights defenders during
the year. Some detainees died in custody, including three whose arbitrary detention was
politically motivated.
Despite US President Biden’s stated intention to close the detention facility at the US Naval
Base in Guantánamo Bay, 39 men remained arbitrarily and indefinitely detained in the facility;
10 could face the death penalty.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The Americas remained one of the world’s most dangerous regions in which to defend human
rights.
Human rights defenders were killed in several countries including Brazil, Colombia,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
A report by the NGO Global Witness described Colombia as the country with the highest
recorded number of attacks on environmental and human rights workers in the world.
Human rights defenders were also subjected to threats, violence, prosecutions, arbitrary
detention and unlawful surveillance in Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and the USA.
Venezuela saw one of the sharpest deteriorations in the situation of human rights defenders.
According to the Centre for Human Rights Defenders and Justice, in 2021 there were 743
attacks on activists – an increase of 145% compared to 2020.

IMPUNITY AND ACCESS TO JUSTICE
Impunity for human rights violations and crimes under international law – as well as a lack of
access to justice, truth or reparation – remained a serious concern in more than half of the
countries in the region.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

31

Judicial independence came under sustained attack in Brazil, Bolivia, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Venezuela.
For example, in El Salvador, the new Legislative Assembly adopted a series of measures
limiting the independence of the judiciary – including the removal of members of the
Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Attorney General. In
Guatemala members of the judiciary who play key roles in the fight against impunity for cases
of serious human rights violations and corruption were removed or prevented from taking up
their positions.
In the run-up to November’s elections, Nicaragua’s President Daniel Ortega continued to use
judicial and legislative bodies to implement repressive tactics, while thousands of victims of
human rights violations awaited justice for crimes committed by state agents under his rule.
In Venezuela, the justice system played a significant role in state repression of government
opponents, while victims of human rights violations and crimes were left unprotected. In
November, ICC Prosecutor Karim Khan announced the opening of an investigation into
possible crimes against humanity in Venezuela.
In Argentina, Peru and Uruguay some progress was made in bringing to justice those
suspected of criminal responsibility for crimes under international law committed in the 1970s,
1980s and 1990s.
In April, the US government rescinded sanctions against the ICC Office of the Prosecutor
personnel that were imposed by the previous administration – though it continued to reject the
ICC’s jurisdiction over alleged war crimes committed by US military personnel in Afghanistan,
Iraq or elsewhere.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Measures to protect women and girls were inadequate throughout the region and
investigations into cases of gender-based violence were often flawed.
In Mexico, for example, violence against women continued to be widespread. There were
3,427 killings of women registered during the year, of which 887 were under investigation as
femicides. Investigations by the State of Mexico Attorney General’s Office into cases of women
who disappeared before being killed were seriously flawed. Mexican security forces also used
excessive force, arbitrary detentions and sexual violence against women protesters.
In Colombia, where the Colombian Femicide Observatory reported 432 femicides in the first
eight months of the year, security forces also regularly committed acts of sexual violence
against women.
Both Paraguay and Puerto Rico declared states of emergency because of increased violence
against women. There were also significant increases in violence against women in Peru and
Uruguay. In Puerto Rico, 511 cases of domestic violence were filed by May – a sharp increase
compared to the same period in 2020. In Peru, 146 women were victims of femicide in 2021,
compared with 136 in 2020. Furthermore, 12,084 women disappeared between January and
October and 25% of femicides in Peru are previously reported as disappearances.
In Venezuela, the Attorney General’s Office announced the existence of 72 prosecutorial
offices specialized in criminal investigations into gender-based violence. However, local NGOs
questioned their effectiveness and the Centre for Justice and Peace documented 125
femicides between January and June.

32

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Americas saw some limited progress in the recognition of the rights of LGBTI people – but
overall legislation was blocked and LGBTI people continued to be the targets of discrimination,
violence and killings in several countries.
Argentina introduced new identity cards recognizing people who identify as non-binary, and
in June Congress passed a law to promote the employment of trans people.
In the USA, the Biden administration took steps to repeal the previous administration’s
discriminatory policies toward LGBTI people. Nonetheless, hundreds of state-level bills were
also introduced that would curtail the rights of LGBTI people.
Elsewhere in the Americas, LGBTI people faced lethal violence. Brazil’s National Association
of Transvestites and Transsexuals reported that 80 transgender people were killed in Brazil in
the first half of the year and Colombia’s Transgender Community Network reported that 30
trans people had been killed by November.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Tens of thousands of people – mostly from Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras and Venezuela – fled
human rights violations related to violence, poverty, inequality and climate change during the
year.
Governments – including those of Canada, Chile, Curaçao, Mexico, Peru, Trinidad and
Tobago, and the USA – prohibited the entry of refugees, asylum seekers and migrants and
forcibly returned those that did make it across their borders without proper consideration of
their refugee and asylum claims.
US border control officials carried out mass pushbacks of over a million refugees and
migrants at the US-Mexico border using Covid-19 public health provisions as a pretext.
Canadian immigration detention practices also continued to violate international human rights
law, including the rights of people with disabilities and children.
Mexico sent thousands of troops to shut down its southern border with Guatemala.
Immigration authorities illegally turned back or deported thousands of people to Guatemala
and launched major operations in Mexico to intercept and repatriate unaccompanied children,
in violation of their rights.
Thousands of people – mostly from Venezuela – tried to enter Chile on foot, with at least 20
dying en route. In April, Chile imposed new restrictions on migrants’ ability to regularize their
status and hundreds of people were deported in what may have amounted to mass expulsion
without due process.
In Peru, around a million migrants, including half a million regularized asylum seekers, were
not able to access rights such as healthcare.
Tens of thousands of Haitian refugees sought international protection, but governments
across the region failed to shield them from a range of violations, including detention and
unlawful pushbacks, extortion, racial discrimination and other abuses, including gender-based
violence by armed groups.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Despite some positive developments during the year, action on climate change remained
limited, in turn undermining human rights across the continent.
The Escazú Agreement came into effect on 22 April, but by the end of the year, Cuba and
Venezuela had yet to sign it and 12 countries had not ratified it.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

33

In February, the new US administration rejoined the Paris Agreement and sought to reverse
hundreds of laws and policies that had been passed during the previous administration to
deregulate the environmental and energy sectors.
Nevertheless, elsewhere progress on tackling climate change was disappointing. By
encouraging deforestation and extraction of natural resources in the Amazon, Brazil’s
President Bolsonaro exacerbated the impact of the climate crisis on Indigenous peoples’ lands
and territories, leaving a legacy of environmental destruction. According to the NGO Imazon,
the Brazilian Amazon had the highest deforestation rate for the month of August in 10 years.
Bolivia passed regulations that incentivized logging and the burning of forests. Canada
continued to subsidize the fossil fuel industry. Despite re-engaging with the world on climate
change, the new US administration continued to approve oil drilling projects on federal land.
And Mexico, the world’s 11th largest greenhouse gas emitter, failed to present any new
emission reduction targets at the UN conference on climate change.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Governments have a duty to guarantee the right to health without discrimination and
should pay particular attention to marginalized groups and others at greater risk from
Covid-19. They must guarantee access to economic, social and cultural rights, with special
efforts to address the disproportionate impact of the pandemic on those facing multiple
forms of discrimination and marginalization, including the violations resulting from the
historic marginalization of and discrimination against Indigenous peoples. They must also
ensure access to sexual and reproductive rights, including access to safe abortion services.
Governments must respect and facilitate the exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression and assembly, including ensuring that journalists are able to carry out their
legitimate work free of harassment and violence. They must recognize the legitimate work
of human rights defenders and create an environment conducive to enabling them to carry
out their work in safety and stop responding to social protests or criticism with repression
and by resorting to arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance to silence opponents.
Governments must ensure that law enforcement protocols and practices are consistent
with international standards and that any breaches of such standards are properly
investigated and those suspected of criminal responsibility are brought to justice in fair
trials before ordinary civilian courts. They must refrain from undermining the independence
of the judiciary so that the right to access to justice, truth and reparation can be a
meaningful reality for those under its jurisdiction. They must also address the impunity that
surrounds violence based on gender or sexual orientation and identity. They must take
urgent steps to address violence against women and girls and its root causes and to protect
LGBTI people from all forms of violence and eliminate the discrimination that underpins
the range of human rights violations they experience.
Governments must fulfil their obligation to protect people seeking international
protection, respect and safeguard their rights and enable them to remain in their territory,
in decent conditions, until a durable solution is found.

34

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Several countries in the Asia-Pacific region descended into full-blown human rights crisis
during the year. In Myanmar, widespread opposition to the military coup in February was
met by a ferocious response from the military in which hundreds of people were killed and
thousands arbitrarily detained. The Taliban takeover in Afghanistan in August was
accompanied by war crimes and the abrupt curtailment of women and girls’ hard won
fundamental rights and freedoms. In China, crimes against humanity persisted against
Muslims living in Xinjiang, and the human rights situation deteriorated, particularly in
Hong Kong. Failures over many years to embed respect for human rights and to hold
perpetrators accountable for human rights violations directly contributed to these unfolding
human rights catastrophes.
Many governments continued to use the Covid-19 pandemic as a pretext for clamping
down on rights. New laws were enacted in several countries to criminalize the spreading of
“fake” or “false” information about Covid-19, and existing laws used to silence critics and
prevent and disperse protests.
This reflected a growing intolerance of dissent in the region. Controls on the media and
internet tightened in many countries. Political opponents and others who criticized
government policies or actions were subjected to increasingly harsh restrictions and
punishments. Excessive force was frequently used against peaceful protesters, and
governments across the region not only failed to protect the rights of human rights
defenders, but actively prevented them from carrying out their vital work.
Many governments remained ill-prepared to respond to new surges in Covid-19 infections.
Their failure to adequately fund health sectors, tackle corruption, and protect rights at work
of health workers resulted in thousands of people being denied adequate access to
healthcare and avoidable deaths.
Beyond Afghanistan, the situation of women and girls worsened in many countries in the
context of the pandemic and related restrictions. In the absence of adequate social
support, women working in the informal sector were among those plunged further into
poverty. Across the region, women and girls continued to face high-levels of sexual and
gender-based violence for which there was little or no accountability. Campaigns were
waged against LGBTI people in several countries. Across the region, Indigenous people
increasingly suffered the effects of environmental degradation.
Tens of thousands of people in Afghanistan and Myanmar were forcibly displaced or
sought refuge across borders. However, many were unlawfully returned from neighbouring
countries to situations where they were at serious risk of human rights violations.
Elsewhere, governments refused entry to asylum seekers and detained and ill-treated
refugees and migrants.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The space for dissent narrowed in the Asia-Pacific region. The new military government in
Myanmar sought to silence opposition to its coup by violently cracking down on country-wide
protests, and arresting members of the former ruling party and pro-democracy activists. In the
immediate aftermath of its takeover in Afghanistan, the Taliban curtailed media freedoms and
used force to break up protests against its policies. In North Korea, anyone considered to be a
threat to the country’s leadership or political system was interned in prison or sentenced to

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

35

“reform through labour”. Authorities in many other countries harassed, arrested, detained and,
in some cases killed, political opponents and others critical of them.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Governments continued to justify repressive laws and other measures that unduly restricted
freedom of expression as necessary to prevent the spread of disinformation about Covid-19.
The government of Malaysia enacted an ordinance giving it unfettered powers to silence critics
under the guise of preventing “fake news” about Covid-19. In China, Bangladesh, Fiji and Viet
Nam, authorities arrested and prosecuted individuals who criticized Covid-19 responses. Sri
Lankan authorities issued threats of disciplinary action against health sector employees who
spoke to the media about their concerns on the response there.
Independent media came under assault across the region. In Myanmar, the military
authorities closed news publications, revoked the licences of media outlets and arrested
journalists. Journalists were also detained, beaten and harassed in Afghanistan where new
media regulations effectively prohibited any criticism of the Taliban; by October, more than 200
media outlets had closed down.
Defamation suits were brought against bloggers and journalists by the Singaporean
authorities, and spurious accusations of financial irregularities used to shut down the
independent news site The Online Citizen. Indian authorities raided offices of a Hindi-language
news daily following its reporting on the mass dumping of bodies of Covid-19 victims along the
River Ganges. In the Philippines, the work of journalist Marie Ressa was recognized when she
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, but she faced decades in jail for pending cases brought
against her for her criticism of government.
Many governments sought to further control access to and sharing of other online
information. The Singapore government enacted a new law that gave it sweeping powers to
remove or block online content where “foreign interference” was suspected. New legislation in
Cambodia required all internet traffic to pass through an oversight body charged with
“monitoring” online activity. In China, the authorities ordered internet service providers to sever
access to websites that “endangered national security”, and blocked apps on which
controversial topics such as Xinjiang and Hong Kong were discussed. In Pakistan, draconian
legislation to censor online content was also enacted.
Authorities in many countries also used existing laws to arrest and prosecute dissenting
voices, including journalists, activists and educators. In Indonesia, the Electronic Information
and Transaction Law, which carries a prison sentence of up to six years, was used against at
least 100 people for their legitimate criticisms of official policies or actions. The Chair of
Amnesty International India, Aakar Patel, was arrested and charged with “creating communal
disharmony” after tweeting concerns about hostility towards the Ghanchi Muslim community.
Nepal authorities used the Electronic Transactions Act to arbitrarily detain those who criticized
the government and ruling party leaders. After a two-year hiatus, the Thai authorities resumed
their use of lèse majesté laws. A former civil servant, who was among over 116 people charged
under these laws for criticizing the monarchy, was sentenced to 87 years’ imprisonment.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
Waves of protest took place throughout the region in response to political developments, the
mishandling of Covid-19 responses, workers’ rights and other issues.
Regulations designed to prevent the spread of Covid-19 were used in some countries to
prevent and disperse peaceful protests. In Malaysia, the authorities used Covid-19 control laws
and other legislation to further intensify its crackdown on rights to peaceful assembly,
including vigils for Covid-19 victims which were arbitrarily dispersed and participants

36

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

harassed, arrested and fined. In the Maldives, authorities also cited Covid-related health
guidelines to break-up protests, particularly those organized by political opposition groups. In
Mongolia, prohibitions on demonstrations under Covid-19 restrictions were also used to
arbitrarily disperse peaceful protests and to arrest, detain and fine protest organizers.
Excessive force was used against peaceful protesters in at least 10 countries in the region.
The military in Myanmar responded to country-wide protests against the coup with extreme
violence using lethal tactics and weapons appropriate only for battlefield use against peaceful
protesters. The numbers of protesters killed had reached close to 1,400 by years’ end.
In India, police used batons in August to beat farmers who were peacefully protesting against
contentious farming laws. Security forces in Indonesia used water cannons, rubber batons,
and baton rounds to disperse peaceful demonstrations against the renewal in July of the
Special Autonomy Law for Papua.
Riot police in Thailand repeatedly responded with violence to protests calling for political
reform and improved handling of the pandemic, indiscriminately firing rubber bullets and tear
gas canisters at short range at protesters, bystanders and journalists. In one incident, several
children were injured and one died after live ammunition was used against protesters.
Excessive use of force by law enforcement agencies in Pakistan against demonstrations,
including in support of Pashtun rights, resulted in scores of people being injured and at least
one death.
New blows were also struck to the right to freedom of association as governments across the
region employed an ever-wider range of measures against political parties and activists, trade
unions and NGOs.
In Cambodia, mass trials of members of the banned opposition party, the Cambodia National
Rescue Party, took place in which nine senior leaders were found guilty in their absence and
sentenced to up to 25 years in prison. In Viet Nam, a citizen journalist who had applied to be
an independent candidate in National Assembly elections was arrested and sentenced to five
years’ imprisonment.
The full and chilling effects of Hong Kong’s 2020 National Security Law (NSL) became visible
during the year. At least 61 civil society organizations disbanded due to the law, including
Hong Kong’s largest professional union. All possibility of organized political opposition
effectively ended following the arrest of dozens of opposition party members in January. In
October, Amnesty International announced the closure of its two offices in Hong Kong due to
the risk of reprisals under the NSL.
Pressure on national and international NGOs in India also increased where dozens of
organizations working on human rights and environmental-related issues had their licences
suspended, registration cancelled or were required to seek government clearance for any
funds received or disbursed. In the Maldives, a widely respected NGO, the Maldivian
Democracy Network, continued to be investigated by the authorities.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders were killed in several countries, including in Afghanistan where they
were the target of unlawful killings by non-state actors. Following the Taliban takeover, many
fled the country or went into hiding, including commissioners and staff of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission. In the Philippines, human rights and environmental
defenders were among those accused of links to communist groups, or “red tagged”, which
effectively gave security forces licence to kill them.
The Chinese authorities intensified their crackdown on human rights defenders. Many were
detained for lengthy periods, and reports of torture and other ill-treatment against them was
common. Several human rights lawyers and activists detained in previous years remained

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

37

missing. Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, 24 people were given prison sentences for peacefully
commemorating the victims of the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown.
Elsewhere, including Bangladesh, Cambodia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal,
Singapore, Sri Lanka Thailand and Viet Nam, human rights defenders were harassed,
threatened, detained, prosecuted and/or imprisoned. In Indonesia, physical assaults, digital
attacks, threats and other forms of attack against over 357 human rights defenders were
reported during the year. Human rights defenders, journalists and activists were among
hundreds of people imprisoned in Bangladesh under the Digital Security Act. In Nepal, police
detained 13 activists in October who were peacefully demanding impartial investigations into
the death of one woman and the disappearance of another in Banke district.
The extent of surveillance of human rights defenders by some governments also became
increasingly apparent. In India, where many human rights activists were officially designated
“enemies of the state”, a massive unlawful surveillance operation against human rights
defenders was revealed. In Viet Nam, an investigation by Amnesty International revealed a
campaign of unlawful surveillance targeting human rights defenders both within the country
and overseas.
In a positive development, Mongolia passed a law that consolidated legal protections for
human rights defenders. However, rights activists, including herders working on environmental
and land rights issues, continued to face threats, intimidation and prosecution for their
legitimate activities.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Underinvestment and corruption contributed to the continuing inability of public health sectors
in the region to respond adequately to the Covid-19 pandemic. In some countries, severe
shortages of staff, beds and equipment meant that Covid-19 patients were unable to access
adequate healthcare. This resulted in thousands of preventable deaths, including in India and
Nepal, both of which experienced steep surges in infections during the year. In India, as well
as the Philippines, there were concerns about lack of transparency or irregularities in the
handling of government funds for the pandemic response.
Political turmoil in Afghanistan and Myanmar brought already fragile health care systems
close to collapse. The suspension of aid to Afghanistan’s health sector by international donors
resulted in the closure of at least 3,000 healthcare facilities, including Covid-19 hospitals. In
Myanmar, access to healthcare was impeded by numerous attacks on health facilities and
personnel.
Access to Covid-19 vaccines was problematic in some countries. Authorities in North Korea
denied that Covid-19 existed in the country and turned down offers of millions of vaccine
doses through the COVAX initiative. Nepal did not receive its expected supply of vaccines, and
1.4 million people had to wait for months to receive a second dose.
Misinformation also contributed to low uptake in some countries. In Papua New Guinea for
example, where only 3% of the population had been vaccinated by the end of the year, the
government failed to provide timely, accessible information about the virus and vaccine
programme.
Authorities in some countries continued to ignore calls to reduce prison populations to limit
the spread of Covid-19. Some 87,000 cases were recorded among detainees in Thailand’s
unsanitary and overcrowded prisons. In Pakistan, vaccines were reportedly prioritized for
prisoners, and some prisoners in Sindh state were released as a preventative measure.
However, prison authorities in other states stopped reporting infection rates among detainees.
Harsh lockdown measures also undermined the rights to health and adequate food in some
countries. In Viet Nam, residents in Ho Chi Minh City were not permitted to leave their homes

38

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

for weeks on end, leaving many in a position of severe food insecurity and hunger. Similar
measures were imposed by the authorities in Cambodia in several cities, seriously impacting
access by residents to food, healthcare and other essential goods and services.

WORKERS' RIGHTS
The pandemic continued to place enormous strain on health workers across the region. In
many countries they worked in intolerable conditions without adequate protection or
remuneration. In Mongolia, health workers were subjected to harassment by the authorities
and physical assaults by frustrated and desperate patients. In India, community health
workers were not given adequate wages or PPE. In Indonesia, disbursement of incentive
payments to health workers in recognition of their work during the Covid-19 pandemic were
delayed.
The socio-economic impacts of the pandemic and associated restrictions also continued to
bite, disproportionality impacting those who were already marginalized, including people who
lacked secure employment and regular incomes. In Nepal, for example, Dalits and people
living in poverty, including daily wage earners, were hit by the worsening economic situation
there. In Viet Nam, women migrant workers, including street vendors, suffered especially
severe effects, with many reporting food insecurity and inability to meet other basic needs.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Events in Afghanistan and Myanmar led to new waves of displacement in the region. Following
the chaotic evacuation from Kabul airport in August, many fled overland towards Pakistan and
Iran, but the Taliban imposed restrictions on departures and border closures compromised
their right to seek asylum in third countries. By year end, over one million undocumented
Afghans had been returned from Iran and Pakistan, most of them involuntarily.
Asylum seekers and migrants from Myanmar were also forcibly returned or refused entry by
other countries in the region. Thai border guards pushed back approximately 2,000 Karen
villagers who were fleeing military air strikes. Authorities in Malaysia deported over 1,000
people back to Myanmar despite the serious risk of persecution and other human rights
violations.
The human rights situation in Myanmar also made voluntary repatriations of Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh impossible. However, their rights continued to be restricted in
Bangladesh where they were also vulnerable to violence. More than 19,000 were transferred to
a remote island, Bhasan Char, where they were denied their right to freedom of movement.
In several other countries, refugees and migrants were subjected to prolonged detention and
ill-treatment. In Japan, asylum seekers and irregular migrants were held in indefinite
detention. An investigation into the death of a Sri Lankan woman in immigration custody there
found that her medical care had been inadequate. Australian authorities continued to
indefinitely and arbitrarily detain refugees and asylum seekers both within the country and
offshore. Detained asylum seekers in New Zealand were subjected to ill-treatment, although in
a positive move, the government announced an independent review into the practice of
detaining asylum seekers in criminal detention facilities solely on immigration grounds.
In countries including Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Viet Nam, Covid-19
preventive measures unfairly discriminated against migrant workers.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

39

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
There were major setbacks to the rights of women and girls in the region. In Afghanistan, 20
years of progress towards enhanced protection and promotion of women’s rights was rolled
back overnight. Women were excluded from representation in the new Taliban administration
and prevented from working in many sectors. Girls' access to education was severely
restricted, and women human rights defenders, journalists, judges and prosecutors faced
threats and intimidation. Protests in support of women’s rights were met with violence by the
Taliban.
Sexual and gender-based violence, already endemic in many countries of the region, was
exacerbated in the context of states’ responses to Covid-19. Increased rates of gender-based
violence were reported, for example, in Bangladesh, Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Sri Lanka.
Demands for accountability for violence against women and stronger protections made little
headway. The Chinese government conducted a smear campaign against exiled women
formerly detained in the Xinjiang region who spoke out about sexual violence in so-called “reeducation centres”. In Pakistan, a domestic violence bill was passed by parliament but
opposition from conservative parties reportedly led the government to request a religious
advisory body to review it. In the meantime, lack of accountability for sexual and gender-based
violence there remained common. No progress was made in Nepal towards reforming
constitutional provisions which denied women equal citizenship rights, or removing overly
restrictive statutory limitations for rape.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to be persecuted or otherwise face discrimination in law and practice
in many countries in the region. Consensual same-sex sexual relations remained criminalized
in some countries.
Anti-LGBTI campaigns were waged in several countries. In Malaysia over 1,700 people were
sent to government-run rehabilitation camps designed to change the “lifestyle” and “sexual
orientation” of LGBTI people. Chinese authorities continued their campaign to “clean” the
internet of LGBTI representation. Effeminate looking men were banned from appearing on
television and the social media accounts of LGBTI organizations shut down. In Afghanistan,
the Taliban made it clear that they would not respect LGBTI rights.
Small advances were made in the recognition of same-sex marriages in Taiwan, but LGBTI
people continued to face discrimination.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Commercial interests and environmental degradation increasingly encroached on the traditions
and livelihoods of Indigenous people in the region, and their legal protections were watered
down in at least one country. In Bangladesh, Indigenous peoples experienced scarcity of
resources because of increasing deforestation and land-grabbing. Indigenous people in Papua
New Guinea protested the impacts of deep-sea mining for minerals and metals on their
livelihoods and culture. An Indigenous community in Malaysia filed a judicial review against
the Selangor state government challenging plans to evict them from their land to make way for
a tourism project. In Nepal and Thailand, Indigenous peoples who had been forcibly evicted in
previous years were not permitted to return or provided with alternative land or livelihoods.
In Fiji, parliament passed amendments to the iTaukei Land Trust Act which removed the
requirement for consent for mortgages and leases issued on land owned by Indigenous
peoples, leading to protests in which over a dozen people were arrested. Courts in Taiwan took

40

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

some steps to realize the rights of Indigenous peoples to their land and traditional hunting
practices, but existing legislation still provided inadequate protections.
In Cambodia, Indigenous peoples and grassroots forest defenders were denied access to
their traditional lands for conservation activities. There and elsewhere, efforts to protect their
lands met with arrests and violence. In Indonesia, Indigenous peoples in North Sumatra and
Riau provinces were violently assaulted by private security guards employed by paper
companies when trying to stop eucalyptus trees being planted on their lands.
In the Philippines, Indigenous peoples and Indigenous peoples’ rights activists were arrested
and killed. Unknown assailants shot dead a village chief, Julie Catamin, who was a witness in a
case relating to a police raid in December 2020 in which Tumandok community leaders were
arrested and others killed. In India, Dalit and Adivasi (Indigenous) women remained at
particular risk of sexual violence by men from dominant classes.

CRIMES UNDER INTERNATIONAL LAW
Amnesty International gathered conclusive evidence that the Chinese government committed
crimes against humanity, including imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical
liberty, torture and persecution against predominantly Muslim ethnic groups living in Xinjiang.
Despite their claims to the contrary, the government continued a campaign of arbitrary mass
detention, combined with violence and intimidation to root out Islamic religious beliefs and
Turkic Muslim ethno-cultural practices.
Parties to the conflict in Afghanistan committed serious violations of international
humanitarian law, including war crimes. Ethnic Hazaras were frequently targeted, including
during the Taliban offensive and takeover. More than 100 former members of security forces
were forcibly disappeared or extrajudicially executed by the Taliban and nine surrendered
Hazara soldiers were executed in Daykundi alone. Several massacres by the Taliban of Hazara
civilians also took place, including in Ghazni and Daykundi provinces.
In Myanmar, the military was responsible for indiscriminate attacks and attacks directed
against civilians. It also blocked humanitarian access to internally displaced populations. Two
humanitarian workers from Save the Children were among those killed by the military in
eastern Kayah State in December.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Limited progress was made on preventing torture and other forms of ill-treatment which
remained pervasive in a significant number of countries in the region. There were moves in
both Pakistan and Thailand to criminalize torture. However, proposed legislation in the latter
was not fully consistent with international standards. In Sri Lanka, new regulations issued
under the Prevention of Terrorism Act potentially placed detainees at increased risk of torture.
Torture and ill-treatment continued to be reported in these and other countries. In Myanmar,
the widespread use of torture or other ill-treatment against people detained for their opposition
to the coup was documented, in some cases resulting in death. Chinese authorities continued
to use torture against detainees in Xinjiang and beyond and prosecuted those who spoke out
about their experiences. In Nepal, torture and other ill-treatment were widely used in pretrial
detention to extract “confessions” and intimidate detainees. There had yet to be any
convictions under the 2017 Criminal Code, which criminalized these practices. Deaths in
custody or shortly after release remained all too common in Malaysia, attributable, at least in
some cases, to beatings and other ill-treatment sustained while in detention.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

41

IMPUNITY
Impunity for serious human rights violations and crimes under international law remained a
serious concern in a significant number of countries.
Justice continued to be denied to victims of crimes under international law and other grave
human rights violations committed during past armed conflicts in Nepal and Sri Lanka. In
Nepal, transitional justice mechanisms failed to resolve a single case. Following repeated
failures by the Sri Lankan government to advance justice domestically, the UN Human Rights
Council adopted a resolution to establish a mechanism to gather evidence of international
crimes committed by parties to the conflict.
In the absence of domestic-level progress, the International Criminal Court (ICC) proceeded
with investigations in two countries. However, its investigation in the Philippines into crimes
against humanity committed in the context of the “war on drugs” was suspended while the ICC
considered a deferral request from the government. The ICC also resumed investigations In
Afghanistan, but by focusing only on acts committed by the Taliban and Islamic State –
Khorasan Province, while ignoring war crimes committed by the Afghan government security
forces and by US military and intelligence personnel, it risked both its reputation and further
entrenching impunity. Australian authorities failed to take any action against members of its
Special Forces referred for investigation in 2020 in connection with alleged war crimes
committed in Afghanistan.
Impunity continued to facilitate human rights violations elsewhere, including in India where
enforced disappearances and torture and other ill-treatment were committed on a widespread
and systematic basis. In Pakistan, a bill proposing amendments to the Pakistan Criminal Penal
Code to criminalize enforced disappearances was presented before parliament but was
insufficient to protect against this crime. In Bangladesh, the government denied responsibility
or claimed that the security forces were acting in “self-defence” rather than investigating cases
of alleged disappearances and unlawful killings. Indonesian security forces continued to
commit unlawful killings in Papua and West Papua largely with impunity.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Despite a few positive developments, the erosion of respect for and protection of human
rights continued in the Asia-Pacific region. Afghanistan and Myanmar’s tragic descents into
crisis were unsurprising in a region where human rights are too often ignored, governments
increasingly intolerant of criticism, discrimination against women and girls and
marginalized groups pervasive, and impunity rife.
Governments must respect and facilitate the exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and association. Laws that limit these rights, including
restrictive regulations on media, internet access and NGOs, should be revoked and the
arbitrary arrest and detention of government critics ended. The legitimate work of human
rights defenders must be respected and protected.
Governments must learn lessons from challenges faced in responding to the Covid-19
pandemic and commit to higher levels of investment in healthcare systems and protecting
the rights to health.
Increased concerted efforts are needed by governments across the region to reverse
setbacks to the rights of women and girls in the context of the pandemic, and to tackle
sexual and gender-based violence. Pressure must also be intensified on the Taliban
government in Afghanistan to reverse its roll-back of rights and freedoms of women and
girls.

42

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Governments worldwide should refrain from returning any person to Afghanistan, or
Myanmar, regardless of their immigration status, until human rights protections can be
guaranteed. Detention of asylum seekers on the basis of immigration status alone must
end.
Governments must bolster efforts to fight impunity by undertaking thorough, independent,
impartial, effective and transparent investigations into crimes under international law and
by bringing suspected perpetrators to justice. Full cooperation should be extended to
international justice processes.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

43

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
Authoritarianism was on the march in Europe and Central Asia in 2021. A number of states
demonstrated an unprecedented brazenness in their disregard for human rights, which
threatened to make human rights commitments a dead letter and turn regional
organizations into meaningless forums for empty “dialogue”. In some countries such
tendencies were evidenced in continuing state overreach and the erosion of judicial
independence, in clampdowns on freedoms and the muzzling of dissenting voices. Human
rights defenders across the region faced restrictions, unjust prosecutions and intimidation.
Throughout the region xenophobic narratives about migration permeated public opinion,
while policy hardened further. The fortification of the EU’s external frontiers continued
apace, while many countries openly announced the number of illegal pushbacks at their
borders. “Pushback” is an anodyne term for what were frequently horrifically violent
practices. A full dozen countries in the EU called on the bloc’s executive to dilute refugee
protection rules.
Racism against Black people, Muslims, Roma and Jewish people grew. Many countries
witnessed a backlash against the Black Lives Matter protests of 2020, fear of migration
reinforced prejudices against Muslims, and Roma faced further social exclusion under the
Covid-19 pandemic and Jewish people experienced a significant increase in verbal and
physical attacks. It was difficult not to see racism in the vaccine and climate policies of
European countries towards the rest of the world. By contrast within Europe vaccination
rates were relatively high although numbers in some Eastern European and Central Asian
countries remained persistently low.
Racism often went hand in hand with sexism and homophobia. While some countries
marked progress in women’s rights, several continued their backsliding. The authoritarian
turn was also marked by legislative initiatives stigmatizing and restricting the rights of
LGBTI people. Authoritarian backsliding, combined with the impact of Covid-19 and the
Taliban takeover in Afghanistan, may have set women’s and LGBTI rights back decades in
some countries.
The internal backsliding was accompanied by more aggressive international relations. The
aftermath of the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan continued to exact a deadly toll.
At year’s end Russia had amassed troops on the border with Ukraine; war on the European
continent seemed increasingly possible.

STATE OVERREACH
State overreach and disregard for traditional checks and balances were part of the
authoritarian trend. In Russia the country’s main opposition politician, Aleksei Navalny,
received a lengthy prison sentence on politically motivated charges and Russia ignored orders
by the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) to free him. In Belarus the government used
a fake bomb threat to divert a civilian aircraft so it could arrest exiled journalist Raman
Pratasevich who was on board.
A number of governments continued to overstep the limits of legitimate action under the
smokescreen of Covid-19, migration “crises”, and combating terrorism/extremism. Thus,

44

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Poland, Lithuania and Latvia declared states of emergency which failed to meet international
standards and severely limited media and NGO work at the border.
Governments deployed increasingly sophisticated technical means for use against critics. The
Pegasus Project revealed that Hungary, Poland, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan used Pegasus
spyware from surveillance company NSO Group against human rights defenders, journalists,
and others, while the German government admitted that it had purchased the technology.
Thousands of files were leaked showing widespread surveillance by Georgia’s state security
services of journalists, civil activists, politicians, clerics and diplomats.
Some faced a reckoning for past practices. In North Macedonia, the former head of the
secret police and others were convicted for unlawful wiretapping. The ECtHR ruled that UK
bulk interception of communication powers lacked safeguards against abuse. At the same
time, in Switzerland, a referendum approved a new counter-terrorism law providing police with
far-reaching powers. The withdrawal from Afghanistan did not occasion any rethink of state
overreach in surveillance or other abuses in combating terrorism.

EROSION OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE
One key feature of state overreach was the erosion of judicial independence. Poland continued
its defiance of attempts by European organizations to halt the destruction of the independence
of the country’s judiciary, confronting the EU with its greatest rule of law crisis to date. In a
series of judgments, the ECtHR and the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) found
that Poland’s judicial changes failed to meet fair trial requirements. In response, Poland’s
Constitutional Tribunal ruled that Polish law had primacy over EU law and that the right to a
fair trial under the European Convention on human rights was incompatible with the
constitution, prompting a rare inquiry by the Council of Europe Secretary General.
The situation was worse in Belarus, where authorities weaponized the justice system to
punish victims of torture and witnesses of human rights violations. In Georgia, the arrest and
degrading treatment in detention of prominent opposition leaders including former president
Mikheil Saakashvili raised concerns about judicial independence. Multilateral organizations
noted that a new constitution in Kyrgyzstan could encroach upon judicial independence.
Turkey took only cosmetic steps around the judiciary, but failed to address the deep flaws in
the system. It resisted pressure to implement key judgments of the ECtHR and faced a rarely
used infringement proceeding at the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Many governments sought to silence criticism, muzzle civil society organizations that could
aggregate grievances, and deter protests on the streets. In some countries the primary dangers
to media freedom were smear campaigns, online harassment of journalists, especially women,
and threats. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, journalists faced almost 300 defamation suits, mostly
from politicians, while the total for Croatia was over 900. In Bulgaria, the Czech Republic and
Slovenia, the authorities encroached on public service media.
In Poland, women’s and LGBTI rights activists continued to face harassment and
criminalization. In Romania, reporters investigating corruption were questioned by law
enforcement simply for their journalistic work. In Kosovo, an Austrian energy company
dropped intimidatory lawsuits against environmental activists who spoke publicly about the
impact of construction of hydropower plants on the country’s rivers.
Further to the east, numerous civil society activists and journalists who sought to express
dissenting views were criminally prosecuted for legitimate activities, and insulting public

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

45

figures was also criminalized in more countries. Kazakhstan and Russia increasingly used antiextremism legislation to repress dissent.
In Belarus, the authorities continued to imprison activists and journalists, all but eliminating
any vestige of independent expression and peaceful dissent. Allegations repeatedly suggested
that the Belarusian authorities pursued dissenting voices in exile: evidence proposed that the
murder of journalist Pavlo Sheremets was planned by these authorities, while Belarusian exile
Vital Shyshou was found hanged in a park in the Ukrainian capital following his complaints of
threats from Belarusian security services. Some Turkmenistani internet users reported they
were forced to swear on the Qur’an that they would not use virtual private networks to access
the internet.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Many countries enacted or maintained disproportionate restrictions on peaceful assemblies,
while police often engaged in unlawful use of force or discriminatory policing against
protesters. Greece continued to use the pandemic as a smokescreen to unduly restrict the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly, including by introducing a third blanket ban on public
outdoor assemblies and dispersing several peaceful demonstrations. Cyprus also maintained a
blanket ban. The Turkish authorities continued to arbitrarily restrict freedom of peaceful
assembly, arbitrarily detaining hundreds of people, subjecting them to unlawful use of force,
and prosecuting them for simply exercising their rights.
In Belarus the right to peaceful protest effectively ceased to exist, and thousands fled the
country in fear of reprisals. In Russia even individuals mounting single-person pickets were
routinely prosecuted, and in Moscow facial recognition was reportedly used to identify and
punish peaceful protesters. In Kazakhstan restrictive legislation led to frequent denials of
requests to hold peaceful demonstrations.
There was no progress in criminal complaints by 40 people in Serbia injured by police during
a demonstration in 2020. In the UK, prosecutors decided not to prosecute Black Lives Matter
protesters and in Northern Ireland, police took steps to refund fines to 72 protesters. However,
a controversial draft police bill envisaged drastically expanding police powers to unduly restrict
protests and foresaw draconian penalties for violations.
At the end of 2021, Covid-19-related restrictions sparked large protests in Austria, Belgium,
Croatia, Italy, and the Netherlands. Some demonstrations were marked by violence and led to
dozens of arrests and injuries among protesters and law enforcement.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Freedom of association continued to be under threat across the region. A law imposing
arbitrary restrictions on NGOs was repealed in Hungary, but replacement legislation raised new
concerns and the CJEU found another piece of legislation – criminalizing assistance to
migrants – in breach of EU law. In Greece, restrictive regulations on the registration of NGOs
working with migrants and refugees remained in place. The Turkish authorities used the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force as a smokescreen for new legislation
facilitating harassment of NGOs.
In the east, authorities increasingly linked civil society activity to political activities, and made
the violation of restrictive freedom of association rules punishable by imprisonment. Russia
systematically deployed “foreign agent” and “undesirable organization” legislation to cripple or
ban large numbers of civil society and media organizations, and liquidated Memorial, one of
the country’s most respected human rights organizations, allegedly due to violations of the
“foreign agent” law.
By year’s end in Belarus over 270 civil society organizations had been arbitrarily dissolved or
were being forcibly closed. In a BBC interview Alyaksandr Lukashenka conflated NGOs with

46

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the political opposition, promising to “massacre all the scum that you [the West] have been
financing”. In Uzbekistan violation of restrictive rules on “unlawful formation of a public
association or religious organization” remained punishable by imprisonment.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
States continued to breach their obligation to ensure a safe and enabling environment for
human rights defenders. Defenders of people on the move faced administrative restrictions,
criminal prosecutions and police harassment. Women’s and LGBTI rights defenders faced
harassment, unjust prosecution, threats and smear campaigns.
Migrants’ rights defenders continued to face criminalization, including in Cyprus, France,
Greece, Italy and Malta. Court cases continued against individuals and NGOs in Italy and
Greece. 2021 also saw acquittals of some migrants’ rights defenders, for example in the
Stansted case in the UK.
Authorities in Poland appealed against the acquittal of three women defenders who had been
charged for “offending religious beliefs” for posters depicting the Virgin Mary with a rainbow
halo. Women defenders advocating access to safe and legal abortion care faced smear
campaigns and death threats.
In Turkey, human rights defenders faced baseless investigations, prosecutions and
convictions. The most emblematic case was that of Osman Kavala, who remained in detention
after four years facing new charges despite an ECtHR ruling calling for his immediate release.
In Russia reprisals against human rights defenders were widespread and egregious. When
human rights lawyer Ivan Pavlov was arbitrarily charged with “divulging the results of a
preliminary investigation” he left Russia and was placed on a “wanted” list. The ECtHR held
that the authorities failed to properly investigate the abduction and murder of Natalia
Estemirova. In Belarus activists from all sectors of society were persecuted. At year’s end
seven members of Viasna, the country’s leading human rights organization, had been
arbitrarily detained and dealt lengthy criminal sentences or were awaiting sentences.
Azerbaijani government critic Huseyn Abdullayev remained in prison although the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention deemed his detention arbitrary and called for his release.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
2021 saw new border fences built, the erosion of the protection regime, and widespread
acceptance of death and torture at the borders as a deterrent to irregular migration.
Greece designated Turkey a safe country for asylum seekers from Afghanistan, Somalia, and
other countries. The efforts of Denmark to rescind the residence permits of Syrian refugees
and return them to Syria marked a new low. A number of countries returned Afghan asylum
seekers until shortly before the takeover by the Taliban.
Belarus authorities facilitated the creation of new migration routes through Belarus to the EU,
violently pushing migrants and refugees towards the borders of Poland, Lithuania and Latvia,
which abrogated the right to seek asylum at the border and legalized pushbacks. By year’s
end numerous people were stuck at the borders, while several died. “Older” migration routes
from Turkey to Greece, the Central Mediterranean to Italy, and Morocco to Spain continued to
feature violent pushbacks, while those saved at sea faced long delays before disembarkation.
Many countries openly announced the number of people “prevented” from entry, which often
meant summary returns without assessing protection needs. The numbers announced in
Turkey and Hungary reached the tens of thousands, while those at Belarus’ borders with
Poland, Latvia and Lithuania surpassed 40,000.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

47

Many other countries engaged in summary, unlawful, forcible transfers of refugees and
migrants without consideration of their individual circumstances, then denied doing so,
including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Greece, and North Macedonia. Ethnic Kazakhs
fleeing Xinjiang in China faced prosecution for crossing the Kazakhstani border illegally.
Some courts recognized the illegality of such actions. The constitutional courts of Serbia and
Croatia ruled that police had violated the rights of people in pushbacks. The ECtHR ruled that
Croatia violated the rights of an Afghan girl who was killed by a train after being pushed back
to Serbia in 2017. Courts in Italy and Austria found that chain expulsions of asylum seekers to
Slovenia and Croatia were in breach of international law. Despite these rulings, however,
accountability for pushbacks or ill-treatment was rare.
The EU and Italy remained complicit in funding “pullbacks” by the Libyan coastguard to
Libya, where migrants faced serious rights violations. By October more than 27,000 refugees
and migrants had been captured in the Central Mediterranean and returned to Libya by Libyan
coastguards.

DISCRIMINATION
Racism and discrimination against Black people, Muslims, Roma and Jewish people became
more overt in many contexts. In the UK, a government report dismissed concerns about
institutional racism, while a new police bill augured more discrimination against Black, Gypsy,
Roma and Traveller communities. The Danish authorities removed references to “ghettos”
from legislation, but continued to enforce social housing limits on residents of “non-Western
background.” In moves justified to counter radicalization and terrorism, Austria and France
stepped up surveillance of Muslim communities, raided mosques and/or shut down
organizations monitoring Islamophobia. In Germany, there were 1,850 antisemitism and other
hate crimes against Jewish people officially reported up to 5 November 2021 – the highest
number since 2018 – while steep spikes in reported similar incidents were also recorded in,
Austria, France, Italy and the UK.

ROMA
Roma continued to experience harassment and discrimination, including segregation in
education, housing and employment. Roma communities remained over-policed and underschooled. Two high profile fatalities of Roma at the hands of police in the Czech Republic and
Greece echoed the death of George Floyd in the USA.
After years of campaigning by activists, the Czech senate voted for a bill to compensate
thousands of Roma women who were unlawfully sterilized by the authorities between 1966
and 2012. The government of Slovakia officially apologized for the forced sterilization of
thousands of Roma women, but had yet to put in place an effective compensation
mechanism.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to suffer discrimination and violence across the region. A number of
countries discussed or adopted legislation stigmatizing or discriminating against LGBTI
persons, including Poland and Hungary. In Serbia, the president declined to sign a law on civil
partnerships. Some politicians engaged in homophobic speech or actions, including in
Bulgaria and Turkey.
Consensual sex between men was a criminal offence in Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
Russia’s “gay propaganda” law fuelled discrimination against LGBTI people, and in Georgia a
journalist died when a mob attacked Tbilisi Pride offices.

48

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to safe and legal abortion continued to be a central human rights issue in Andorra,
Malta, Poland, San Marino and elsewhere. In Poland a Constitutional Tribunal ruling that
abortion on the ground of serious fetal impairment was unconstitutional entered into force. In
the year following the ruling, 34,000 women contacted the NGO Abortion without Borders,
which facilitates travel abroad for abortion care and advice.
In Andorra defamation charges remained ongoing against a defender who had raised
concerns about the country’s total ban on abortion before the UN. In a positive development, a
popular vote in San Marino legalized abortion.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The picture remained mixed with regard to violence against women. While Turkey withdrew
from a landmark treaty on combating violence against women, the Istanbul Convention,
Moldova and Liechtenstein both ratified it. Further, Slovenia reformed its rape law to make it
consent-based, and rape legislation reforms were also underway in the Netherlands, Spain
and Switzerland.
Violence against women remained widespread, however. The Russian Women’s NGO
Consortium found that 66% of women murdered from 2011-2019 had been victims of
domestic violence. Uzbekistan’s interior ministry rejected a request from the NGO NeMolchi
about prosecutions for violence against women, stating it was “to no purpose”. In Azerbaijan
women's rights activists and journalists were blackmailed and subjected to gender specific
smear campaigns, while women’s rallies on domestic violence were violently dispersed. The
Taliban takeover in Afghanistan strengthened efforts in Central Asia to promote “traditional”
values. In Ukraine homophobic attacks continued and there were reports of lack of services for
survivors of domestic violence in the non-government controlled areas of Donbas.

RIGHTS TO HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to have a significant impact lessened to some extent by
high rates of vaccination of many countries in the region, especially in the EU. The pandemic
put immense pressure on underfunded and overstretched health systems.
Some states derogated from the European Convention on Human Rights, and several
declared extended medical emergencies and imposed new lockdowns and other restrictions,
as further waves of infections and new mutations emerged.
Vaccine inequality within the region became more pronounced, often because of high levels
of vaccine hesitancy. Thus, in Iceland, Malta, Portugal and Spain more than 80% of the
population was vaccinated, while in Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Ukraine less than 30% was vaccinated. In some cases,
undocumented migrants and people from groups historically facing discrimination faced
challenges in accessing vaccines. Deaths continued to disproportionately affect older people.
Europe made considerable pledges for vaccine donations, but global vaccine inequality was
exacerbated by the EU, Norway, Switzerland and the UK continuing to block a waiver on
intellectual property rights (TRIPS) that would greatly increase the numbers of vaccines being
produced, particularly in the global south.
In Donbas in Ukraine local medical facilities were reportedly overwhelmed with patients while
lacking sufficient medical personnel and supplies, including vaccines. In Turkmenistan

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

49

authorities continued to deny Covid-19 cases but in July introduced mandatory vaccination for
adults.
Covid-19 pushed more and more workers into precarity in the absence of comprehensive
social protection schemes. Especially vulnerable were women and migrant workers. In Austria,
migrant women live-in care workers experienced abuse, discriminatory and unfair wages and
excessive working hours. In Italy, health and care home workers who raised concerns about
unsafe working conditions in care homes or sought to unionize were subject to disciplinary
measures and reprisals. In Armenia the pandemic exacerbated the heavy burden of unpaid
care work on women and girls.

HUMAN RIGHTS IN CONFLICT ZONES
Little change in conflict zones in countries of the former Soviet Union meant that development
remained impeded, and freedom of movement and the right to health were heavily impacted
for residents on both sides of lines of contact.
The 2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict saw over 100 people killed or injured during the year
by mines planted by Armenian forces in areas ceded to Azerbaijan. There was no
accountability or justice for victims of war crimes committed during that conflict, and over 40
ethnic Armenians captured after the ceasefire remained in captivity, reportedly in inhumane
conditions. The majority of 40,000 Azerbaijani civilians displaced during the 2020 conflict
returned to their homes but mines, destruction of infrastructure and lost livelihoods prevented
the return of over 650,000 displaced during the 1990s. Some 36,000 ethnic Armenians
remained internally displaced.
The conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine continued as the government and the Russianbacked separatists accused each other of ceasefire violations, and the UN monitoring mission
reported at least nine new cases of arbitrary detention by Ukraine’s secret security service. At
year’s end Russia had assembled large troop numbers on its border with Ukraine, sparking
fears of a possible invasion.
Movement was restricted in and out of government-controlled territory in the breakaway
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region. Torture and other illtreatment continued: there was no effective investigation into the 2020 death in custody of Inal
Dzhabiev in South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region; and Anri Ateiba died following detention in
Abkhazia.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Europe has a special responsibility to the rest of the world to tackle the climate crisis due to its
role in global emissions to date and its wealth. Nevertheless, European countries and the
European Union continued to fail to adopt emission reduction targets, including fossil fuel
phase-out policies, aligned with their level of responsibility and with the imperative of keeping
the rise of global temperatures within 1.5°C. At the annual UN climate change negotiations
(COP26), European countries also opposed the establishment of a global financial facility to
provide financial support to developing countries facing loss and damage as the result of the
climate crisis. However, Scotland and the Belgian region of Wallonia committed dedicated
funding for loss and damage.
Activists used litigation to compel governments to curb emissions and combat climate
change with legal victories in Belgium, France and Germany. In a landmark case brought by
civil society organizations, a Dutch court ordered Shell to cut its global carbon emissions by
45% by the end of 2030 compared with 2019 levels, anchoring its decision, among other
arguments, in the responsibility of business enterprises to respect human rights. In Georgia

50

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

construction of a hydropower plant was cancelled following protest around environmental
safety concerns.

HUMAN RIGHTS AT HOME AND IN THE WORLD
The authoritarian turn was accompanied by increasing disengagement from multilateral
organizations. The OSCE seemed powerless to halt the slide towards conflict, while major
countries ignored its advice and dismissed its monitoring, if they allowed it to take place at all.
The Council of Europe was unable to compel member states to implement ECtHR judgments
and fulfil their obligations. The EU was paralysed by rule of law crises and unwilling to enforce
its own rules on the rights of migrants and refugees.
Russia and China continued to build and wield influence, particularly in the east. The two
countries undermined the international human rights framework and Russia backed Belarus’s
crackdown against its own population. Economic and political sanctions applied by the EU
against Russia and Belarus failed to stem the unrelenting tide of repression.
In the UK, legislation was adopted which could facilitate impunity for crimes committed
abroad. The Overseas Operation Act introduced restrictions on legal proceedings related to
overseas military operations, including time limits for civil claims and a presumption against
prosecution for most offences committed over five years ago.
However, some positive initiatives were adopted. In March, the Council of Europe adopted a
recommendation on measures against the trade in goods used for the death penalty, torture
and other ill-treatment. Some countries took steps to curb irresponsible arms transfers.
Germany prolonged an arms export moratorium to Saudi Arabia – but not to others involved in
the conflict in Yemen. In France, NGOs launched legal proceedings to ensure transparency of
arms transfers to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Switzerland adopted a law
regulating the export of arms, prohibiting transfer to states in internal conflict or at risk of
serious or systematic human rights violations.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The foregoing should be a wake-up call for governments to recommit to human rights and
collectively enforce states’ obligations. Thus far, a sense of urgency has been shown primarily
by climate activists and human rights defenders, but both are under strong pressures from
governments and corporations. The cause of human rights needs more champions now, or the
gains of recent decades risk being destroyed.
Governments should recognize the crucial role played by human rights defenders, rather
than stigmatizing and criminalizing their activities. The space for all to exercise the rights
to freedom of expression, association and peaceful assembly must be protected from state
overreach under various pretexts. States must stop the slide to surveillance societies,
respect the rule of law, and end the erosion of judicial independence.
Governments must also redouble their efforts to prevent discrimination against Black
people, Muslims, Roma and Jewish people and ensure that state actors refrain from
mainstreaming stigmatizing rhetoric and implementing policies that target these
communities.
In the face of the continuing Covid-19 pandemic equal access to vaccines within and
across countries both in the region and beyond is urgent, and cooperation between states
imperative, to ensure that treatment and vaccines are acceptable, affordable, accessible
and available to all.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

51

As people fleeing conflict and poverty continue to die on land and sea attempting to reach
safety, governments must expand the provision of safe and regular pathways of migration,
particularly for people in need to come to Europe, including humanitarian visas,
resettlement, community sponsorship and family reunification.
Governments must urgently combat the frequently hidden emergency of violence against
women and girls, prioritizing the elimination of gender-based violence and addressing its
root causes. More steps are also needed to eliminate all forms of discrimination, in law and
practice.
Governments must increase their emission reduction targets and implement adequate and
human rights-consistent policies, including phasing out the use and production of fossil
fuel through a just transition. They should also urgently scale up climate finance to lowerincome countries and commit to providing additional dedicated funding for loss and
damage in lower-income countries.

52

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
REGIONAL OVERVIEW
The second year of the pandemic continued to expose the failure of many governments
across the region to prioritize adequate access to health, including Covid-19 vaccines, for
their populations, with the notable exception of some Gulf countries.
Freedom of expression remained severely restricted as governments introduced further
draconian legislation criminalizing free speech; they continued to censor the internet and
invest in digital surveillance equipment. Human rights defenders faced criminal
prosecutions, imprisonment, administrative restrictions, threats and intimidation. Civil
society organizations saw their activity criminalized. Security forces across the region used
unlawful force to crush peaceful protests.
Overcrowding and insanitary conditions put prisoners in the region at increased risk of
Covid-19, a situation that was exacerbated by inadequate healthcare and torture or other
ill-treatment in prisons. Impunity prevailed for members of security forces, militias and
armed groups reasonably suspected of crimes under international law and serious human
rights violations.
Parties to armed conflicts committed war crimes and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law. Authorities restricted humanitarian aid in Syria and Yemen,
exacerbating the poor state of healthcare systems which were already depleted. Other
military powers fuelled violations through illicit arms transfers and direct military support to
belligerents.
Authorities continued to arrest and indefinitely detain refugees and migrants, often
without legal grounds. Jordan and Lebanon continued to host over 3 million refugees from
Syria but thousands of them continued to be deported or to return due to a range of push
factors. Authorities across the region failed to protect low paid workers from job or wage
loss. Migrant workers were particularly vulnerable given that the kafala (sponsorship)
system ties their residency to employment in many countries.
Impunity for violence against women, ranging from sexual harassment to so-called
“honour” killings, continued unchecked by any state commitment to hold perpetrators to
account. Authorities heavily repressed the rights of LGBTI people, arresting many for their
real or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity and subjecting some men to forced
anal examinations. Across the region, members of religious and ethnic minorities faced
entrenched discrimination.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In Egypt, Iran, Libya and Tunisia, Covid-19 vaccine roll-outs were characterized by lack of
transparency and consultation, delays in prioritizing at-risk groups, and failure to ensure
equitable and fair access for marginalized groups, including refugees and migrants, internally
displaced persons, prisoners, the homeless and other undocumented people. Access to
vaccines was also often affected by political considerations. In Iran, delays in the vaccine rollout were largely attributed to the Supreme Leader’s January decision to ban vaccines
produced in the UK and USA; once the ban was lifted in August, vaccinations accelerated to
reach over 80% of the population receiving the first dose by the end of the year. In Tunisia, by
mid-July daily confirmed deaths per million was the second highest in the world and a dearth

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

53

of vaccines meant only 6% of the population had been vaccinated. Yet after President Kaïs
Saïed dissolved parliament and claimed exceptional powers, vaccine roll-out accelerated and
by the end of the year 46% of the population had been vaccinated. In an act of
institutionalized discrimination, Israel left out around 5 million Palestinians under military
occupation in the West Bank and Gaza from its vaccine campaign.
Tunisia and Morocco introduced mandatory vaccine passes for all those entering public or
private workplaces, and for travel outside of the country. In Tunisia, the decree on the vaccine
pass infringed on other rights, allowing employers to suspend unvaccinated workers without
pay.
With the exception of Gulf states and Israel, the second year of the pandemic exposed the
shortcomings of health systems across the region, and the challenges of accessibility and
affordability of adequate healthcare. In Lebanon, the government failed to ensure access to
fuel for critical health facilities, including hospitals, or roll out any social protection plan in the
midst of an economic collapse. In November it lifted subsidies on medicines without ensuring
access to essential supplies for those unable to afford spiralling prices, including patients with
severe chronic conditions. In Egypt, a national budget adopted in June failed to meet the
constitutionally mandated allocation of 3% of GDP to health, and reduced spending on health
insurance and medicine.
The Syrian government actively contributed to ongoing shortages in the health sector in
north-east Syria by restricting delivery of humanitarian aid, impacting cancer and diabetes
patients. In Libya, where armed groups and militias continued to attack health care and
humanitarian workers, several Covid-19 isolation facilities were closed due to damage or lack
of equipment and infrastructure.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities across the region continued to arrest, detain and prosecute individuals solely for
their peaceful expression, often using subjective penal code provisions criminalizing “insult” to
prosecute criticism of the authorities, including their response to the pandemic, and imprison
critics. A court in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq sentenced five activists and journalists to six
years’ imprisonment each for acts related to their use of social media and journalistic work,
under vaguely worded laws, while the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) justified speechrelated prosecutions as necessary for “national security reasons”. In one particularly flagrant
case, in Saudi Arabia Abdulrahman al-Sadhan was sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment and
a travel ban of equal duration for his tweets that were critical of the government's economic
policies. In Morocco, a court sentenced YouTuber Jamila Saadane to three months in prison
for “insulting” state institutions after uploading videos accusing the authorities of covering up
prostitution networks and human trafficking. In Algeria, the authorities increasingly used
vaguely worded terrorism-related charges to prosecute people for their legitimate political
speech or activism.
Governments across the region introduced further draconian legislation criminalizing free
speech. In Libya, parliament passed a cybercrime law that severely limits free expression
online, allows for government surveillance and censorship, and punishes with imprisonment
the dissemination of content deemed “immoral”. In Egypt, the president ratified a law
criminalizing the publication of information on pandemics on vaguely worded grounds. The
Iranian authorities arrested and prosecuted six people for discussing legal action against the
government’s failure to secure access to Covid-19 vaccines. The Tunisian Ministry of Health
barred all but a selected list of public sector health workers from speaking publicly about the
Covid-19 pandemic, threatening them with disciplinary action or criminal prosecution if they
do not comply.

54

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Governments across the region continued to censor the internet. Authorities in Egypt and
Palestine persisted in blocking access to websites and the Iranian authorities blocked social
media platforms.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Governments also continued to invest in expensive digital surveillance equipment such as
Pegasus spyware by surveillance company NSO Group to target human rights defenders. In
July, Forbidden Stories, a coalition of news organizations with the technical support of Amnesty
International, revealed the extent to which Pegasus spyware was being used across the region,
with the governments in Bahrain, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates being
identified as potential clients. In July, a Moroccan court sentenced journalist Omar Radi, who
was often critical of the authorities, to six years in prison on charges of espionage and rape
after a trial which did not meet international fair trial standards. He had been targeted for
surveillance by the Moroccan authorities through a “network injection” on his iPhone between
January 2019 and January 2020.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND FREEDOM OF
ASSOCIATION
Human rights defenders across the region continued to pay a heavy price for their bravery with
the authorities seeking to silence and punish them for their work. Saudi Arabian authorities
resumed their relentless crackdown on all dissent with a spate of sentences: courts sentenced
five defenders to prison terms of up to 20 years on charges solely related to their human rights
work, often combined with lengthy travel bans. In Israel and the Occupied Palestinian
Territories, the Israeli Ministry of Defence designated six prominent Palestinian civil society
organizations as “terrorist”, based on secret information which they could not see or challenge,
effectively criminalizing them and crippling their activity. This while Israel continued to prevent
international human rights monitors and investigators, including from the UN, entry.
In Egypt, human rights defenders remained subject to politically motivated criminal
investigations, extrajudicial probation measures, unjust imprisonment, travel bans, asset
freezes and arbitrary inclusion on the “list of terrorists”, which in effect banned them from
civic work. In Libya, militias and armed groups ramped up their attacks on civil society activists
through abductions, threats and intimidation ahead of presidential elections, which were
indefinitely postponed on 22 December, two days before they were scheduled to begin.

PROTESTS AND THE UNLAWFUL USE OF FORCE
Despite frequent bans on public gatherings as part of government Covid-19 measures, people
staged protests throughout the year in many countries in the region, usually to demand socioeconomic rights. In Tunisia, police arrested more than 1,500 people during the January wave
of demonstrations. Protest movements in Algeria, Iraq and Lebanon continued throughout the
year as protesters faced arrest, beatings and at times prosecutions solely for participating in
peaceful demonstrations.
Security forces across the region used unlawful force in dispersing protests, often using
excessive or unnecessary force. In Iran, security forces used unlawful force, including live
ammunition and birdshot, to crush mostly peaceful protests, leading to at least 11 deaths and
hundreds of injuries including loss of eyesight. They also carried out mass arbitrary arrests of
protesters and bystanders and tampered with internet access during protests. In Iraq, KRG
authorities arrested over 100 individuals for taking part in protests; and Iraqi security forces

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

55

resorted to excessive use of force, including live ammunition, to disperse protests between
January and May. In Lebanon, in a rare occurrence in January, security services used live
ammunition in the northern city of Tripoli after clashes over the economic collapse, detained
dozens and subsequently brought them before the military justice system. Jordanian
authorities responded with force, including heavy use of tear gas, against protesters who had
mobilized against worsening economic conditions, and arrested members of the teachers’
trade union to prevent a solidarity march.
In May and June, Israeli police used excessive force against Palestinian citizens of Israel
demonstrating against evictions in East Jerusalem and military strikes on Gaza, and carried out
mass arrests of organizers and participants of protests. Most of those arrested were charged
with misdemeanours unrelated to violence. The death in custody of a prominent critic of the
West Bank Palestinian authorities sparked demonstrations across Palestinian towns which the
authorities met with excessive and unnecessary force. Demonstrators and bystanders were
arrested and allegedly tortured.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Prisoners across several countries were held in cruel and inhuman detention conditions,
characterized by overcrowding, poor ventilation and hygiene, and lack of sufficient food and
water – putting them at increased risk of Covid-19 and other infectious diseases. Overcrowding
was common due to arbitrary detention practices, including prolonged pretrial detention
without effective appeal such as in Egypt, indefinite detention for migration status, such as in
Libya, or administrative detention, such as in Israel and Palestine. In some countries, prison
visits were banned during national lockdowns and at times for longer, without providing
prisoners with alternative means of communicating with their families.
Across the region, authorities failed to provide detainees with adequate healthcare,
sometimes deliberately to punish dissent. Many governments failed to ensure the timely
vaccination of prisoners: in Iran, prisoner vaccination did not begin until August. In Egypt,
some prisoners held for political reasons including those who were at risk due to their older
age or pre-existing medical conditions were excluded from the prisoner vaccine roll-out.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in official and unofficial places of detention continued in at least
18 countries, including during interrogation to extract “confessions” and indefinite solitary
confinement in dire conditions. Authorities in Egypt, Iran, Libya and Saudi Arabia failed to
carry out investigations into the causes and circumstances of suspicious deaths in custody
following reports of torture, including deliberate denial of healthcare. In Lebanon 26 cases
were reported of Syrian refugees, including four children, held on terrorism-related charges,
facing torture by military intelligence officers and others. The authorities failed to investigate
the torture claims even when detainees told the court they had been tortured. Prominent
political critic Nizar Banat died in the custody of Palestinian Preventive Security forces after
they arrested and tortured him in Hebron, southern West Bank. An autopsy found fractures,
bruises and abrasions all over his body.
Legislation in several countries in the region retained corporal punishment including flogging,
amputation, blinding, stoning and crucifixion. Floggings were carried out in Iran and Libya.

DEATH PENALTY
Countries in the region retained the death penalty, including for offences not involving
intentional killing and for acts protected under international law including consensual same-

56

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

sexual relations. Death sentences were passed after grossly unfair trials by counter-terror,
military, emergency or revolutionary courts in Egypt, Iran, Libya and Saudi Arabia. Executions
were carried out in at least six countries, sometimes in secret without last family visits.
In Iran and Saudi Arabia, authorities executed young men convicted of crimes committed
when they were under the age of 18.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for members of security forces, militias and armed groups reasonably suspected of
crimes under international law and serious human rights violations, including unlawful killings,
torture, enforced disappearance and rape, prevailed across the region. In Libya, authorities
continued to integrate into state institutions, appoint and promote commanders and members
of abusive militias and armed groups, including those under sanction by the UN Security
Council. Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, wanted by the ICC for his role in the violent suppression of
protests against his father’s rule in 2011, remained at large and presented himself as a
candidate for presidential elections. In Iran, Ebrahim Raisi, rose to the presidency instead of
being investigated for crimes against humanity related to the mass enforced disappearances
and extrajudicial executions of 1988. In Lebanon, authorities repeatedly obstructed throughout
the year the investigation into the Beirut port explosion of 2020, taking numerous steps to
shield politicians and officials from the investigative judge’s summons.
In Tunisia, President Kaïs Saïed’s July dissolution of parliament was followed by 10 new
military trials of civilians, four for criticizing the president, a marked increase compared to the
previous years. Ten trials against members of security forces for human rights violations as part
of the transitional justice process, dragged on for a third year without verdict.
At the international level, some steps were taken in the pursuit of accountability. In October,
the UN Human Rights Council extended the mandate of the Fact-Finding Mission to
investigate crimes under international law committed in Libya since 2016. August saw the start
of the trial of former Iranian official Hamid Nouri, arrested in Sweden for alleged involvement in
prison massacres in 1988, under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
At least four European states investigated and prosecuted individuals suspected of
committing war crimes or other crimes under international law in Syria through their national
courts. February saw the sentencing in Germany of a former Syrian security officer for crimes
against humanity for his role in aiding and abetting the torture of detained protesters in
Damascus.
In a retrograde move, however, intensive lobbying by Saudi Arabia and Bahrain forced the
termination of the UN’s Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen, the
only international, impartial investigative mechanism for international humanitarian law
violations in Yemen.

APARTHEID
Israel maintained a system of oppression and domination over Palestinians through territorial
fragmentation, segregation and control, dispossession of land and property, and denial of
economic and social rights, which amounted to the human rights violation and internationally
wrongful act of apartheid. Israel perpetrated unlawful acts against Palestinians with the intent
to maintain this system, including forcible transfers, administrative detention and
torture, unlawful killings, denial of basic rights and freedoms and persecution which
constituted the crime against humanity of apartheid.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

57

ARMED CONFLICT
Years of armed conflict and insecurity continued to afflict the lives of civilians in Iraq, Libya,
Syria and Yemen, where fluctuating levels of violence by state and non-state actors reflected
shifting alliances on the ground and the interests of external backers. The conflicts’ multiple
actors committed war crimes and other serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Almost all parties carried out indiscriminate attacks that killed and injured civilians in the
form of air strikes, in the case of those with air power, and shelling of residential areas with
artillery, mortars and rockets. In Libya, while the national ceasefire mostly held, sporadic
localized clashes between armed groups and militias in residential areas led to casualties
among civilians and damage to civilian infrastructure. In Yemen, the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
as well as Huthi forces continued to conduct unlawful attacks killing and injuring scores of
civilians, including hitting camps for internally displaced people, and civilian objects such food
distribution facilities. In Syria, the government, supported by Russian forces, conducted
attacks in north-west Syria that hit residential buildings, markets and hospitals.
The transfer of weapons used to commit war crimes and other violations continued. Russia,
Turkey and the UAE violated the UN arms embargo on Libya, by retaining foreign fighters and
military equipment in Libya. Armoured vehicles manufactured and exported from the UAE
were used in raids against refugees and migrants in Tripoli in October.
Restriction of humanitarian access in Libya and Syria remained a tactic of some actors.
Politically motivated sporadic attacks on water infrastructure by armed actors in Libya affected
access to water for millions of Libyans. In Syria, government forces besieged thousands of
civilians in Daraa al-Balad between June and September, during which time it prevented aid
organizations from delivering food, medical supplies and other life-saving aid.
During the armed conflict in May, Israeli and Palestinian armed groups committed apparent
war crimes in the Gaza Strip. At least 242 Palestinians were killed, including 63 children, and
thousands injured. More than 74,000 Palestinians were displaced. Palestinian armed groups
in the Gaza Strip carried out unlawful attacks, firing thousands of indiscriminate rockets
towards Israel, most of which were intercepted by Israel, but 13 people in Israel died as a
result.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, MIGRANTS AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Authorities continued to arrest and indefinitely detain refugees and migrants, often without
legal grounds or allowing them to challenge the legality of their detention. In October, Libyan
security forces and Tripoli-based militias used unlawful lethal force and other violence to
arbitrarily round up over 5,000 men, women and children from sub-Saharan Africa.
In Libya, Saudi Arabia and Yemen, state and non-state actors continued to subject refugees
and migrants to a litany of crimes including unlawful killings, indefinite arbitrary detention in
life-threatening conditions, torture and other ill-treatment, rape and other sexual violence. In
Libya thousands were forcibly disappeared following disembarkation by EU-backed Libyan
coastguards, while at least 2,839 were forcibly expelled without due process and left at land
borders with Chad, Egypt and Sudan. In Yemen, Huthi de facto authorities arbitrarily detained
hundreds of migrant men, women and children, mostly Ethiopian and Somali nationals, in
poor conditions for indefinite periods. In March, authorities responded to a hunger strike by
firing projectiles into a building housing 350 migrants, igniting a fire that killed 46 male
detainees. In June, the UAE arbitrarily detained at least 375 African migrant workers, held

58

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

them incommunicado for up to six weeks in poor conditions, stripped them of all their
belongings and then deported them. Syrian government forces subjected refugees, including
children, who returned to Syria between 2017 and 2021 to arbitrary detention; torture and
other ill-treatment, including rape and other sexual violence; and enforced disappearance.
In Qatar, authorities failed to properly investigate the deaths of migrant workers, thousands of
whom had died suddenly and unexpectedly in the past decade despite passing mandatory
medical tests before travelling to the country. This failure, which precluded any assessment of
whether the deaths were work-related, denied the workers’ bereaved families the opportunity
to receive compensation from the employer or authorities. In Egypt, authorities forcibly
returned 40 Eritreans to Eritrea without due process or giving them the opportunity to claim
asylum.
In Libya, Syria and Iraq, tens of thousands of internally displaced persons were unable to
return to their homes due to insecurity, fear of reprisals, or lack of essential services. They
faced additional barriers in securing access to healthcare including Covid-19 vaccines,
education, housing and employment opportunities. The Iraqi government’s drive to close
almost all camps for internally displaced people in the beginning of the year rendered
thousands in secondary displacement or homeless.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Authorities across the region failed to protect low-paid workers from job or wage loss, including
as a result of the economic impact of the pandemic. Governments also repressed workers’
right to strike and failed to protect workers unfairly dismissed for participating in strikes. In
Egypt, authorities continued to penalize workers for expressing their opinions or for their
alleged dissent. New legislation allowed for the automatic dismissal of public sector employees
on the “list of terrorists”, while a court sanctioned the dismissal without compensation of a
public sector company worker for “publicly expressing his political opinions”. However,
reforms to improve protection for migrant workers were announced in several countries,
particularly in the Gulf, where they make up a very high proportion of the workforce.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Across the region, violence against women and girls went mostly unpunished by criminal
justice systems. So-called “honour” killings continued to take place in Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait
and in Palestine with the authorities failing to take action to prosecute the perpetrators.
Proposed legislation on addressing violence against women in Iran contained some welcome
provisions including on the establishment of safe houses, but failed to define domestic
violence as a separate offence, criminalize marital rape and child marriage, and favoured
reconciliation over accountability in cases of domestic violence.
Additional legislative changes in Iran further undermined women’s reproductive rights,
severely restricting access to contraception, voluntary sterilization services and related
information. In Libya, authorities failed to provide protection or redress for women and girls
from rape and other sexual and gender-based violence as well as killings, torture and unlawful
deprivation of liberty by militias, armed groups, and other non-state actors. In Yemen, Huthi
authorities pursued a campaign of detention and enforced disappearance of women and girls,
targeting those perceived to be challenging Huthi-enforced gender norms.
Women across the region continued to face entrenched discrimination in law, including in
relation to marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance and, additionally in Saudi Arabia and
Iran, employment and political office. Proposed legislative changes to personal status laws in
Egypt further undermined women’s autonomy and retained discriminatory provisions.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

59

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Across the region, LGBTI people faced arrest and prosecution, and at times anal testing
amounting to torture, on the basis of their real or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity. Criminal courts continued to treat consensual same-sex sexual relations as a crime,
often issuing sentences against men, and sometimes women, either under public decency
laws or dedicated provisions. In Egypt, a court convicted four men of engaging in same-sex
sexual relations and sentenced them to prison terms ranging from six to nine years. Authorities
also failed to protect LGBTI people from violence by non-state actors. A young man who selfidentified as a non-binary gay was murdered in Iran after his military exemption card identified
him as having a “perversion”. Two police officers in Tunisia insulted and violently assaulted the
LGBTI activist Badr Baabou, who heads the prominent Tunisian LGBTI rights group DAMJ,
telling him the beating was retaliation for filing complaints against police and “defending
whores” and gay people, about whom they used derogatory language.
In a partially positive move, the Moroccan parliament passed a law stating that the gender
assigned at birth to “hermaphrodite” newborns can be changed later in life but did not extend
to allowing transgender people to transition.

RELIGIOUS AND ETHNIC MINORITIES
Across the region, members of religious minorities faced entrenched discrimination in law and
practice including in their right to worship. In some countries, including Egypt and Iran,
members of religious minorities and individuals born to parents identified as Muslim by
authorities were arrested, prosecuted and arbitrarily detained for professing their faith or
expressing non-sanctioned beliefs. In Iran, three Christian converts were sentenced to
imprisonment on the basis of new legislation prescribing up to five years’ imprisonment for
insulting “divine religions” or for engaging “in proselytizing”.
Ethnic minorities in Iran and Libya faced discrimination curtailing their access to
employment, political office and essential services including education and healthcare, and
violating their linguistic and cultural rights. In Libya, students from the Tabu tribe in al-Kufra
were unable to access the city’s only university based in a neighbourhood controlled by rival
armed groups. In Iran, ethnic minorities remained disproportionately affected by death
sentences imposed for vaguely worded charges such as “enmity against God”.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Authorities should ensure that the healthcare they provide, including vaccines, is
delivered without discrimination, that healthcare workers are adequately protected and that
any restrictions on rights to combat the pandemic are strictly necessary and proportionate.
Governments must halt all investigations or prosecutions related to peaceful expression,
repeal subjective provisions that criminalize “insult”, and decriminalize defamation. They
must also recognize their obligations to respect and guarantee the right to defend human
rights by ensuring that human rights defenders are able to work free from arbitrary arrest
and prosecution, threats, attacks, and harassment.
Governments must end the litany of crimes against refugees and migrants. They should
respect and protect the right to asylum, ending the arrest and arbitrary detention of
refugees and migrants solely on the basis on their migration status. They should end all
deportations of refugees and ensure they are protected from refoulement. Governments
should also extend labour law protections to migrant workers, including migrant domestic
workers, and abolish the kafala system.

60

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Parties to armed conflicts must abide by international humanitarian law, in particular
ending direct attacks against civilians or civilian infrastructure and indiscriminate attacks.
Military powers must halt arms transfers where there is a significant risk that they will be
used in violation of international law, as was the case in the ongoing conflicts in the region.
Authorities should ensure that their law enforcement officers comply with international
standards on the use of firearms and less-lethal weapons, investigate the unlawful use of
force and hold law enforcement officers to account, and uphold the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

61

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2021/22
A-Z COUNTRY ENTRIES

AFGHANISTAN
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Head of state and government: Mohammad Hassan
Akhund (replaced Mohammad Ashraf Ghani in
September)
Parties to the conflict in Afghanistan
continued to commit serious violations of
international humanitarian law, including
war crimes, and other serious human rights
violations and abuses with impunity.
Indiscriminate and targeted killings reached
record levels. Human rights defenders,
women activists, journalists, health and
humanitarian workers, and religious and
ethnic minorities were among those
targeted by the Taliban and non-state
actors. A wave of reprisal killings was
unleashed during the Taliban takeover of
the country. Thousands of people,
predominantly Shia Hazaras, were forcibly
evicted. The limited progress made towards
improving women’s rights was sharply
reversed under Taliban rule. Rights to
freedom of assembly and expression were
drastically curtailed by the Taliban. Access
to healthcare, already severely compromised
by the pandemic, was further undermined
by the suspension of international aid.

BACKGROUND
The conflict in Afghanistan took a dramatic
turn with the withdrawal of all international
troops, the collapse of the government, and
the takeover of the country by Taliban forces.
On 14 April, US President Joe Biden
announced that remaining US troops in
Afghanistan would be withdrawn by 11
September. A subsequent Taliban military
offensive overran the provinces and reached
the capital, Kabul, on 15 August, causing the
government to collapse and President Ghani
to flee the country. In early September, the
Taliban announced an interim government.
An evacuation operation accompanied the
final withdrawal of US and NATO forces,
which was brought forward to 31 August in
the face of Taliban gains. Some 123,000

64

people were airlifted in chaotic conditions
from Kabul airport, including thousands of
Afghan nationals at risk of reprisals from the
Taliban.
The already precarious humanitarian
situation deteriorated further in the second
half of the year due to the conflict, drought,
the Covid-19 pandemic and an economic
crisis exacerbated by the suspension of
foreign aid, the freezing of government
assets, and international sanctions against
the Taliban. In December, the UN warned
that some 23 million people faced acute food
insecurity and hunger, including more than 3
million children at risk of death from severe
malnutrition.

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS AND
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Government forces under the leadership of
President Ghani, as well as non-state actors,
carried out indiscriminate attacks with
improvised explosive devices and air strikes,
killing and injuring thousands of civilians.
According to the UN Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, civilian casualties reached
record levels in the first half of the year,
sharply increasing in May as international
military forces began to withdraw. By June,
5,183 civilian deaths or injuries had been
recorded, including 2,409 women and
children. More than two-thirds (68%) were
attributed to the Taliban and other non-state
actors and 25% to Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF) and other progovernment forces. On 29 August, a US
drone strike killed 10 members of one family
in Kabul, including seven children. The US
Department of Defense later admitted acting
in error and offered financial compensation to
the victims’ relatives.
Non-state groups deliberately targeted
civilians and civilian objects throughout the
year. A bomb attack on Sayed-ul-Shuhada
High School in West Kabul on 8 May killed or
injured more than 230 people, nearly all
girls.1 On 26 August, a suicide attack outside
Kabul airport carried out by the armed group
Islamic State – Khorasan Province (IS-K)
resulted in at least 380 casualties, mostly

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Afghans seeking evacuation. Three separate
attacks took place in October on Eid Gah
Mosque in Kabul and two Shia-Hazara
mosques in the cities of Kandahar and
Kunduz, reportedly killing dozens and
injuring hundreds of others.
The Taliban and other armed actors were
responsible for numerous targeted killings
throughout the year, including of human
rights defenders, women activists,
humanitarian and health workers, journalists,
former government officials and security
force members. Religious and ethnic
minorities were at particular risk.
During its offensive and following its
takeover, the Taliban carried out reprisal and
extrajudicial killings of people associated with
the former administration, including
members of the ANDSF. On 19 July, the
Taliban abducted and killed two sons of
former Kandahar provincial council member
Fida Mohammad Afghan. Former police
officers, particularly women, were also
targeted. Also in July, Taliban fighters killed
nine ethnic Hazara men in Mundarakht
village in Malistan district, Ghazni province.2
On 30 August, in Kahor village in Khidir
district, Daykundi province, the Taliban
extrajudicially executed nine ANDSF
members after they had surrendered, and
killed two civilians, including a 17-year-old
girl, as they attempted to flee the village. All
were ethnic Hazaras. On 4 September, Banu
Negar, a former member of the police force
in Ghor province, was beaten and shot dead
by Taliban fighters in front of her children. A
further 100 former members of the security
forces were killed or forcibly disappeared by
the Taliban between mid-August and the end
of December.

FORCED DISPLACEMENT AND
EVICTIONS
Between January and December, some
682,031 people were displaced by fighting,
adding to the 4 million already displaced by
conflict and natural disasters.
The Taliban forcibly evicted thousands of
people from their homes and land in
Daykundi and Helmand provinces and also

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

threatened to evict residents of Balkh,
Kandahar, Kunduz and Uruzgan provinces.
Evictions particularly targeted Hazara
communities, as well as people associated
with the former government. In June, the
Taliban ordered Tajik residents of Bagh-e
Sherkat in Kunduz province to leave the town
in apparent retaliation for their support of
President Ghani’s government. In late
September, more than 740 Hazara families
were forcibly evicted from their homes and
land in Kindir and Tagabdar villages in Gizab
district, Daykundi province.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Taliban takeover increased the number
of Afghan refugees entering neighbouring
countries. After evacuations from Kabul
airport were stopped, thousands of desperate
Afghans sought land routes to Pakistan and
Iran. Tens of thousands crossed into Pakistan
before it closed its borders on 2 September to
most Afghans. Only the Torkham crossing
point was open to those holding gate passes.
In November, the Norwegian Refugee
Council reported that 4,000-5,000 Afghans
were crossing the border to Iran every day.
The right of Afghans, including those at risk
of reprisals, to seek asylum in third countries
was compromised by Taliban-imposed
restrictions on departures, including often
insurmountable challenges in obtaining
passports and visas. There were fears that
border restrictions by neighbouring countries
would force Afghans to make irregular
journeys using smugglers, placing them at
further risk of human rights abuses.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Prior to the Taliban takeover, women and girls
continued to experience gender-based
discrimination and violence. After the Taliban
takeover, they lost many of their fundamental
human rights. Despite reassurances from the
Taliban that women’s rights would be
respected, the limited progress made in the
previous two decades was quickly reversed.

65

WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT AND THE
RIGHT TO WORK
Women were severely under-represented in
the final round of the failed peace talks, with
just four women in the government
delegation and none in the Taliban
delegation.3 Four cabinet posts were held by
women under President Ghani’s
administration; women were excluded
altogether from the Taliban’s interim
government. Shortly after coming to power,
the Taliban disbanded the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs (MoWA) and its provincial
offices.
In August, a Taliban spokesman told
reporters that women should refrain from
attending work until “proper systems” were
put in place to “ensure their safety”. In
September, women employed in government
ministries were told to stay at home while
their male colleagues resumed work. There
were reports of women being barred from
their workplaces or sent home in different
parts of the country – with the exception of
women working in the passport office, airport
and health sector. In some cases, women
were reportedly escorted home from work by
Taliban fighters and told that they would be
replaced by their male relatives.4
Women lawyers, judges and prosecutors
were effectively dismissed from their jobs and
forced into hiding. They faced reprisals from
men whom they had convicted and
imprisoned for domestic and other genderbased violence, who were subsequently freed
from prison by the Taliban. There were
reports of ex-prisoners and Taliban fighters
ransacking the homes of female judges.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
On taking power, Taliban leaders announced
that a “safe learning environment” was
required before women and girls could return
to education. Boys were permitted to resume
school in mid-September, but the situation
for girls remained unclear. At the end of the
year, except in Kunduz, Balkh and Sar-e Pul
provinces, the majority of secondary schools
remained closed to girls. Intimidation and
harassment of teachers and pupils led to low
attendance rates, particularly among girls,

66

even where schools and other education
facilities were open.5
SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Violence against women and girls remained
widespread but chronically under-reported.
In the vast majority of cases, no action was
taken against perpetrators. Between January
and June, the MoWA registered 1,518 cases
of violence against women, including 33
murders. Beatings, harassment, forced
prostitution, deprivation of alimony, and
forced and early marriages remained the
main manifestations of violence against
women. There was no government data
available for the second half of the year.
Violence against women escalated further
from August when women’s legal and other
support mechanisms began shutting down –
in particular when women’s shelters closed.
The Taliban’s ending of institutional and legal
support for women left women at risk of
further violence, and they feared the
consequences of reporting incidents.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders faced intimidation,
harassment, threats, violence and targeted
killings. A spike in attacks that began in late
2020 continued into 2021. According to the
Afghan Human Rights Defenders Committee,
at least 17 human rights defenders were
killed between September 2020 and May
2021, while hundreds more received threats.
From late August, the Taliban occupied all
14 offices of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, forcing its staff
to flee the country or go into hiding. Door-todoor searches by Taliban fighters looking for
human rights defenders and journalists were
reported, and NGO workers and their families
were beaten.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 29 October, the Taliban spokesperson for
the Ministry of Finance said that LGBTI rights
would not be recognized under sharia law.
Afghanistan’s Penal Code continued to
criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
relations.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The Taliban forcibly dispersed peaceful
protests across Afghanistan, including using
gunfire, electroshock weapons and tear gas,
and beat and lashed protesters with whips
and cables. On 4 September, a protest in
Kabul involving around 100 women
demanding the inclusion of women in the
new government and respect for women’s
rights was dispersed by Taliban special
forces, reportedly with tear gas and
electroshock weapons. Women protesters
were beaten. On 7 September, the Taliban
shot and killed Omid Sharifi, a civil society
activist, and Bashir Ahmad Bayat, a
schoolteacher, as they protested against the
Taliban in Herat province. Eight other
protesters were injured. On 8 September, the
Taliban’s Ministry of the Interior issued an
order banning all demonstrations and
gatherings “until a policy of demonstration is
codified”.
Despite assurances that it would respect
freedom of expression, the Taliban severely
curtailed media freedom. Journalists were
detained and beaten and had equipment
confiscated, particularly when covering
protests. Media workers, particularly women,
were intimidated, threatened and harassed,
forcing many to go into hiding or leave the
country. House-to-house searches for
journalists were conducted, particularly those
working for western media outlets. On 20
August, Taliban members broke into the
home of a journalist working for the German
media outlet Deutsche Welle. Unable to find
him, they killed one of his relatives and
injured another. By late October, more than
200 media outlets had closed. The Afghan
Journalist Safety Committee announced that
at least 12 journalists had been killed and
230 assaulted in the 12 months to November
2021.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The already weak health sector was further
damaged in August by the suspension of
international aid to the System Enhancement
for Health Action in Transition Project for

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Afghanistan (Sehatmandi). As of November,
3,000 health clinics had closed due to lack of
funding. The multi-donor project was the
main source of support for quality health
care, nutrition and family planning services
across Afghanistan. In September, the WHO
warned of a rapid decline in public health
conditions, including escalating rates of
measles, diarrhoea and polio in children.
Lack of emergency preparedness and the
poor state of public health infrastructure
meant that Afghanistan was already illequipped to deal with a mid-year surge in
Covid-19 cases. Internally displaced people
living in overcrowded conditions with
insufficient access to water, sanitation and
health facilities were at particular risk.6 As of
15 November there had been at least 7,293
deaths from Covid-19. About 7% of the
population were vaccinated.
Health workers and health facilities came
under attack throughout the year. Nine polio
vaccinators were shot and killed in
Nangarhar province in the first six months of
the year.7 In October, the Taliban committed
to supporting the resumption of a nationwide
polio vaccination campaign and to permit the
involvement of women frontline workers.
They also committed to provide security and
safety for all frontline health workers.

IMPUNITY
On 27 September the Prosecutor of the ICC
announced plans to resume investigations
into crimes committed in Afghanistan, but
focused only on those crimes allegedly
committed by the Taliban and IS-K. The
decision to “deprioritize” investigations into
possible war crimes committed by the
National Directorate of Security, ANDSF, US
armed forces and the US Central Intelligence
Agency risked further entrenching impunity
and undermining the legitimacy of the ICC.8
1. “Afghanistan: Unspeakable killings of civilians must prompt end to
impunity”, 10 May
2. “Afghanistan: Taliban responsible for brutal massacre of Hazara men
– new investigation”, 19 August
3. “Afghanistan: Unravelling of women’s and girls’ rights looms as
peace talks falter”, 24 May

67

4. The Fate of Thousands Hanging in the Balance: Afghanistan’s Fall
into the Hands of the Taliban, (Index: ASA 11/4727/2021), 21
September
5. “Afghanistan: Taliban must allow girls to return to school
immediately – new testimony”, 13 October
6. “Afghanistan: Oxygen and vaccines urgently needed as Covid-19
infections surge”, 11 June
7. “Afghanistan: Despicable killing of female polio vaccine workers
must be investigated”, 30 March
8. Afghanistan: ICC Prosecutor’s Statement on Afghanistan Jeopardises
his Office’s Legitimacy and Future (Index: IOR 53/4842/2021), 5
October

ALBANIA
Republic of Albania
Head of state: Ilir Meta
Head of government: Edi Rama
In April, parliamentary elections confirmed
the third mandate for the ruling Socialist
Party. The right to privacy of around
900,000 citizens was violated. Violence
persisted against women, journalists and
LGBTI people. The absence of a specialized
medical institution made implementation of
European Court of Human Rights and High
Court rulings impossible.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In early April an unlawful database holding
the personal data of some 900,000 citizens
and used by the Socialist Party for electoral
purposes was leaked days before the
elections. A total of 162 citizens sued the
Socialist Party for violation of data protection
law. In December, two other databases were
leaked, causing public outrage. They held
personal data such as salaries, workplaces
and type of car owned for more than 600,000
taxpayers.
In July, the Constitutional Court nullified
certain provisions of the Law on the State
Police which had allowed the police to
conduct mass surveillance of citizens without
prior court authorization. Those provisions
were found unconstitutional as they imposed
illegal limitations on the right to privacy.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, the Special Anti-Corruption Structure
seized the database containing the personal
data of 900,000 citizens (see above: Right to
privacy) from the news portal Lapsi.al, which
had made it public. Concerns arose
regarding freedom of expression, protection
of sources and intimidation of journalists. The
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
issued an interim measure ordering the
authorities to cease seizing any data from the
news portal.
While filming a police operation in July,
journalist Ergys Gjencaj was physically
attacked by officers. He was detained and his
phone was confiscated.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
In July, following the ECtHR decision on
Strazimiri v. Albania, the High Court ordered
that Arben Strazimiri be moved from prison
facilities to a specialized medical institution,
in order to end the inhuman and degrading
treatment he had suffered.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In August, the Ministry of Health ordered
compulsory Covid-19 vaccination for highrisk groups such as medical staff, teachers
and students.
According to the Ombudsman, the number
of people infected with Covid-19 far
outnumbered the treatment packages for
which they could be reimbursed. Patients
diagnosed during March-November 2020, as
well as those tested positive by private health
institutions, were not eligible to be
reimbursed for medication.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people remained subject to
discrimination and harassment. A
transgender woman was beaten in the street.
In June, the Civil Registry prohibited a
lesbian couple from registering as parents.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women candidates faced hate speech during
the electoral campaign in March.

68

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Violence against women sparked public
outrage. By early December, 2,754 protection
orders had been issued, but were poorly
implemented. According to State Police, of all
murders committed during the year, 30%
were by men against their domestic partners;
16 women were killed. In May, one woman
was murdered at Elbasan District Court after
her divorce hearing.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Justice reform continued slowly. The ECtHR
upheld the legitimacy of the vetting process
in the case of a constitutional judge who was
dismissed, after assessing her claims for
violations of the rights to fair trial and privacy.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, the prime minister announced that
Albania would temporarily host 4,000 people
from Afghanistan. By October, 866 had
arrived and were granted temporary
protection status for one year.

ALGERIA
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria
Head of state: Abdelmadjid Tebboune
Head of government: Aïmene Benabderrahmane
(replaced Abdelaziz Djerad in June)
Authorities continued to arrest, prosecute,
detain and convict activists linked to the
mass, peaceful protest movement known as
Hirak, as well as human rights defenders
and journalists for expressing their views or
covering protests. Courts increasingly
resorted to terrorism-related charges to
prosecute and detain activists and
journalists for their alleged ties with two
unregistered political organizations.
Authorities disbanded a prominent
association. They also ordered at least three
churches to close and prosecuted at least
six Christians for exercising their right to
freedom of religion. Thousands of asylum
seekers and migrants were expelled to Niger
without due process. Discrimination against
women in law and practice continued, and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

consensual same-sex sexual relations
remained criminalized.

BACKGROUND
Following legislative elections in June, which
saw the lowest turnout in 20 years, a new
government was established in July.
In August, Algeria cut diplomatic ties with
Morocco.
According to the Algerian authorities, about
14.6% of the Algerian population was
vaccinated against Covid-19 by December.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities arrested and detained hundreds
of political and civil society activists as well as
journalists for expressing their views or for
doing their jobs, prosecuting them under
vaguely worded Penal Code provisions.1
From April onwards, authorities increasingly
resorted to terrorism-related charges to arrest
and detain human rights defenders,
journalists and other individuals for their
legitimate political activism or speech. Those
targeted included members or perceived
members of the unregistered political
organizations Rachad and the Movement for
the Self Determination of Kabylie (MAK),
which in May the authorities declared were
“terrorist” organizations.
In April, a court in Oran city in west Algeria
prosecuted a group of 15 activists, human
rights defenders and journalists – including
Kaddour Chouicha, Jamila Loukil and Said
Boudour – for “terrorism” for exercising their
right to freedom of expression.2 In October, a
judge transferred their files to a dedicated
anti-terrorism chamber inside a court in the
capital, Algiers.
In September, judicial authorities used
terrorism-related charges to provisionally
detain two journalists, Hassan Bouras and
Mohamed Mouloudj, for their online
criticisms of the authorities and alleged ties
with Rachad and the MAK.3
Authorities also violated the right to freedom
of expression in other ways during 2021. In
April, a tribunal in Algiers ordered the
provisional detention of five Hirak activists for
videos they published online, including one

69

that denounced the alleged sexual abuse of a
boy in police custody. In July, authorities
arrested and provisionally detained Fethi
Ghares, leader of the Social and Democratic
Movement (MDS), for publicly criticizing the
authorities during a press conference at the
party’s headquarters.
In May, the High Council of Magistracy
dismissed Sadedin Merzoug, a judge and a
founder of the Club of Algerian Magistrates,
for expressing support for Hirak and
democracy.
Authorities arbitrarily arrested at least three
journalists for their work and prosecuted
them on charges related to their reporting.
They also closed two TV channels on
security-related grounds and suspended two
other channels for a week because of
programmes they broadcast. In May, a
tribunal in Algiers sentenced journalist Kenza
Khatto from Radio M to a three-month
suspended prison term for covering a protest.
In September, the Appeal Court in Algiers
postponed the appeal of journalist Khaled
Drareni to 2 December, to rule on his twoyear prison sentence for covering Hirak
protests.
In October, a tribunal in Tamanrasset city in
the south sentenced on appeal journalist
Rabah Karèche to a year in prison with six
months suspended for “harming national
security” and “spreading false news”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Hirak protests, which halted in 2020 due to
Covid-19, resumed in February on a sporadic
basis, with the authorities at times arresting,
prosecuting and detaining peaceful
protesters. In May, a court in Algiers ordered
the pretrial detention of peaceful protesters
Fatima Boudouda and Moufida Kharchi in
connection with a demonstration on 21 May
in Algiers, pending investigation on charges
of “incitement to unarmed gathering” and
“conspiracy against the state”. They were still
detained at the end of the year.
In November, a court in Algiers sentenced
Nacer Meghnine, president of the cultural
association SOS Bab El-Oued, to eight

70

months’ imprisonment and a fine for
“harming the national interest” and
“incitement to unarmed gathering”.
Authorities cracked down on associations
and political parties who they perceived as
organizing activities that did not conform with
the law. In May, the interior ministry
announced that only authorized protests were
allowed. Hundreds of peaceful protesters
were arrested and detained during the year.4
In April, the interior ministry asked the
Administrative Tribunal to suspend two
political parties, the Socialist Workers Party
and the Union for Change and Progress.
On 13 October, the Administrative Tribunal
dissolved the Youth Action Rally (RAJ)
association.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Police continued to ill-treat activists and
peaceful protesters during protests and in
custody.5
On 26 March, in El Bayadh city in west
Algeria, police arrested Hirak activist Ayoub
Chahetou and raped him in custody by
inserting a finger into his anus, according to
his testimony. A judge refused to hear his
testimony. Chahetou was sentenced ̶ on
appeal ̶ to six months in prison, of which
two months were suspended.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities used Decree 03-06 of 2006,
which restricts the exercise of religions other
than Islam, and the Penal Code to prosecute
or convict at least 11 individuals for
“exercising cults other than Islam” or
“insulting” Islam.
In February, a court in Oran city sentenced
on appeal Rachid Seighir, a Christian pastor
and owner of a bookshop, and Nouah
Hamimi, who worked in the bookshop, each
to one year in prison and a fine for material
that was in the shop. The two men were
awaiting a ruling by the Supreme Court.
In April, a tribunal in Algiers convicted
Islamic scholar Said Djabelkheir to three
years in prison for “offending” Islam in online
posts that, among other things, referred to
some texts in the Qur’an as myths. On 4 May,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

a tribunal in Chéraga, a suburb of Algiers,
sentenced activist Amira Bouraoui to two
years in prison for “offending” the Prophet
Muhammad in online posts about him. The
verdict was confirmed on appeal on 18
October.
In December, a judge in Ain Defla city in
north Algeria sentenced Foudhil Bahloul, a
Christian convert, to a six-month prison
sentence and a fine for illegally “accepting
donations”.
On 7 July, authorities ordered the sealing
and closure of three Protestant churches in
Oran city.

Algerian media reported interceptions by
Algeria’s coastguard of migrants’ dinghies
heading for Spain. One such interception
returned Hirak activist Brahim Laalami, who
was subsequently sentenced to three months
in prison for irregular exit. At least 29
migrants attempting to reach Europe died off
the coast of west Algeria between April and
June.
Despite government efforts to vaccinate
Sahrawi refugees in camps in Tindouf from
the beginning of May, the Covid-19 wave in
July resulted in over 63 deaths of refugees.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

The Penal Code and Family Code continued
to unlawfully discriminate against women in
matters of inheritance, marriage, divorce,
child custody and guardianship.
Algerian law still does not explicitly
recognize marital rape as a crime. The Penal
Code’s “forgiveness clause” continued to
allow rapists to escape punishment if their
victims pardon them.
Authorities took no steps to address
violence against women. The women’s group
Feminicides Algérie recorded at least 55
femicides in 2021, saying that the police had
failed to adequately investigate those cases or
prosecute those responsible.

Between July and mid-August, a third wave
of Covid-19 led to hundreds of deaths and a
shortage of oxygen supplies.
The National Syndicate of Practitioners of
Public Health recorded 470 deaths of health
sector workers due to Covid-19 between
March 2020, when the pandemic began, and
August 2021.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to detain asylum
seekers indefinitely while seeking to facilitate
their deportation before their asylum claim
had been fully evaluated. Irregular migration
remained punishable by up to two years in
prison. From December 2019 to June 2021,
authorities arbitrarily detained in degrading
and insanitary conditions seven Yemeni
asylum seekers registered with UNHCR, after
originally denying them access to the UN
refugee agency.
Authorities continued to round up and
collectively expel asylum seekers and
migrants across the Niger border without due
process or individual evaluations of their
protection needs, often forcing them to walk
long distances in the desert before reaching
the nearest town in Niger. Expelled migrants
often reported or bore signs of physical
abuse. Between January and August, the
project Alarm Phone Sahara documented the
expulsions of at least 16,580 individuals,
including children.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

WOMEN'S RIGHTS

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code continued to criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual acts, which
remained punishable by up to two years’
imprisonment and a fine.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were reported.
1. “Algeria: Repressive tactics used to target Hirak activists two years
on”, 22 February
2. “Algeria: Drop trumped-up charges against three human rights
defenders”, 17 May
3. “Algeria: Stop using bogus terrorism charges to prosecute peaceful
activists and journalists”, 28 September
4. “Algeria: Scores detained in escalation of crackdown against
activists”, 24 June

71

5. “Algeria: Islamic scholar sentenced to three-year prison term for
‘offending Islam’”, 22 April

ANDORRA
Principality of Andorra
Co-heads of state: Joan Enric Vives Sicília and
Emmanuel Macron
Head of government: Xavier Espot Zamora
Access to abortion remained fully
criminalized. A woman human rights
defender faced criminal charges after
raising concerns about women’s rights,
including access to abortion, at a UN
committee.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In January, three UN Special Rapporteurs
and the Working Group on discrimination
against women and girls called on the
Andorran authorities to put an end to the
apparent retaliation against Vanessa
Mendoza Cortés for her engagement with UN
human rights mechanisms.
In February, Vanessa Mendoza Cortés,
president of the organization Stop Violence,
appeared before a judge to answer charges
brought by the public prosecutor in 2020
following a complaint by the Andorran
government as a result of her intervention at
the CEDAW Committee, and statements she
made in 2019 to the press, calling for the
decriminalization of abortion and an
improvement to women’s rights.1 The original
charges against her included offences of
slandering the co-prince and government
institutions. In June, the public prosecutor
dropped two charges of slandering with
prison sentences but kept the charge against
the prestige of the institutions involving a fine
of up to 30,000 euros.
All criminal charges against Vanessa
Mendoza Cortés were still pending at the end
of the year.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A discriminatory and harmful total ban on
abortion was still in place. As a result, people

72

in need of abortions were compelled to travel
to France and Spain to seek the healthcare
they needed. In March Andorra rejected all
UPR recommendations to decriminalize
abortion.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Defamation and related offences against
public officials and institutions remained a
criminal offence. In March the Andorran
authorities rejected a UPR recommendation
to decriminalize defamation in line with
international human rights standards.
1. “Andorra: Defamation charges against activist who raised rights
concerns before UN Committee must be dropped”, 16 February

ANGOLA
Republic of Angola
Head of state and government: João Lourenço
Security forces continued to carry out
serious human rights violations, including
dozens of unlawful killings, using excessive
and unnecessary force. The police violated
the rights to freedom of expression while
peaceful protesters faced arbitrary arrest
and detention. Pastoral communities had
their land expropriated for use by
commercial farmers. The government
responded inadequately to secure food and
water for victims of land dispossession,
drought and displacement. The
embezzlement of state funds undermined
the government’s ability to alleviate
widespread economic hardship and address
the failing health sector.

BACKGROUND
Concerns remained over the rising cost of
living and Covid-19-related economic and
social devastation. Public awareness of
inequity, especially among the young, grew in
response to the shocking contrast of images
of starving people in rural areas, particularly
in the southern region, and opulence in the
capital, Luanda. While most Angolans faced
severe food shortages, the “Operation Crab”

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

investigation, led by the State Information
and Security Services and the Criminal
Investigation Service (SIC), uncovered
millions in embezzled public funds in various
currencies, and other assets, in the private
homes of 24 senior government officials. The
president was compelled to fire eight of them,
most of whom were military generals and
close to him, but public scepticism remained.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Security forces used excessive force to crack
down on peaceful protests, killing dozens of
protesters. In January, they shot and killed
dozens of activists who were peacefully
protesting against the high cost of living in
the mining town of Cafunfo in Lunda Norte
province. In addition to shooting at peaceful
protesters on the streets, the security forces
hunted them down in surrounding
neighbourhoods and forests. While the exact
numbers killed and injured remained
unknown, reports emerged of bodies
dumped in the nearby Cuango river.1
Although Lunda Norte province is rich in
minerals, its residents lived in devastating
poverty with poor education, health,
transportation, water and sanitation services.
To survive, many people, especially young
men, practised artisanal mining of diamonds;
some had been killed by diamond company
security guards over many years. Suspected
perpetrators of these killings enjoyed
impunity for their crimes.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities continued to arbitrarily arrest
and detain peaceful protesters and
community leaders. For example, following
the violent repression of a peaceful protest on
8 February, the SIC arrested José Mateus
Zecamutchima, the leader of the Lunda
Tchokwe Protectorate Movement. They
accused him of “association with evil-doers
and armed rebellion” and “leading the
rebellion to overthrow the government”, and
transferred him from Lunda Norte to a
detention centre in Luanda. He was denied
contact with his lawyer and remained in
detention.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

On 30 May, the police in Cabinda arrested
and detained several protesters after violently
ending their procession and confiscating their
property, including mobile phones and bags.
The demonstration was part of a larger fiveprovince protest against hunger,
unemployment and the unaffordable cost of
living.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Economic and social crises and human rights
violations fuelled an increase in protests
throughout the country. However, security
forces stepped up nationwide operations to
prevent them from taking place. For example,
on 4 February, the police stopped members
of the Contestatory Civil Society in Luanda
from peacefully protesting to demand political
alternatives to the 45-year rule of the
government party, the People’s Movement for
the Liberation of Angola (MPLA). Again, on
21 August, the police prevented civil society
groups from conducting a protest in Luanda.
The groups, who had organized under the
consortium United Angola Movement, were
peacefully protesting against human rights
violations, increasing economic and social
misery, and in favour of the newly announced
United Patriotic Front, a union of opposition
political parties set to challenge the MPLA in
the 2022 general election.
On 30 August, the police prevented activists
from gathering in front of parliament to
protest against the new electoral law under
parliamentary debate. On 25 September, they
stopped hundreds of Angolan Student
Movement members from peacefully
protesting against fee increases in public and
private secondary and post-secondary
institutions.
Attacks on media freedom continued as the
authorities suspended private television
channels’ licences, while opposition militants
prevented journalists from doing their work.
On 19 April, the Ministry of
Telecommunications, Information
Technologies and Social Communication
(MINTTICS) suspended the licences of
television channels Zap Viva, Vida TV and TV

73

Record Africa Angola, resulting in hundreds
of job losses. MINTTICS alleged that these
companies were operating under provisional
registrations and would remain suspended
until they regularized their status. The three
media companies were taken aback by the
suspensions, saying they had not received
prior information or notification of any
administrative procedure against them.2
On 11 September, National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola militants
prevented TV Zimbo reporters from covering
their public protest in Luanda. While the
reporters confirmed the incident, they
preferred to remain anonymous for fear of
reprisals.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Economic and social misery was intensified
by the haemorrhaging of public funds into
senior government officials’ personal bank
accounts and their private homes. In June,
the General Public Prosecutor announced
the arrest of 24 senior military officials of the
Office of the Head of State Security Affairs,
accused of embezzling large sums of funds
from state coffers. One of them was arrested
at Luanda airport, as he tried to leave the
country with two suitcases of cash. He
reportedly owned a fleet of 15 luxury
vehicles, 51 properties in Angola, Namibia
and Portugal, in addition to boxes and bags
found in his apartments which contained
AOA 10 million, €4 million and US$1.2
million. Meanwhile, the country’s public debt
exceeded 100% of the GDP.
Cunene, Huíla and Namibe provinces
continued to face extreme weather conditions
symptomatic of climate change. The
prolonged drought resulted in food and water
scarcity. Consequently, many people and
their cattle died, and others sought refuge in
Namibia. Diversion of traditional grazing
lands by government authorities for
commercial farming continued, violating
domestic and international human rights
standards, including by the failure of the
authorities to carry out community

74

consultations and provide adequate
compensation; all these aggravated the crisis.
RIGHT TO FOOD
Drought, alongside the unlawful occupation
by commercial farmers of communal grazing
land, eroded the ability of pastoral
communities to produce food for themselves.
Data indicated that low rainfall had caused
the worst drought in 40 years and that
malnutrition was at its peak due to lack of
food, water and safe sanitation, with women,
children and older people disproportionately
affected.
The widescale death of cattle in a region
which relies on such stock as the basis of its
economic, social and cultural wealth,
weakened the communities’ resilience.
Pastoralists in Curoca, Oukwanyama and
Onamakunde municipalities in Cunene
province, Quipungo and Gambos
municipalities in Huila province, and Virei
and Bibala municipalities in Namibe
province, lacked access to food, and dozens
of them were dying of hunger and
malnutrition, particularly older people and
children.
Throughout the country, people living in
poverty and in marginalized communities
became severely food insecure and many
turned to foraging amongst rubbish for food
to feed themselves and their families.
RIGHT TO WATER
Extreme water shortages in the southern
provinces, regions which are home to most
pastoral communities, particularly affected
women and girls who travelled long distances
and spent extended periods searching for
water. The communities competed with
domestic and wild animals for unsafe muddy
water, collected from naturally occurring
holes and ponds.
In addition, water shortages created the
conditions for hygiene-related diseases.
Children, in particular, displayed signs of
scabies and skin damage due to lack of
regular bathing. Consequently, they
scratched their skin day and night, often
using rocks, until they bled, to experience
momentary relief from itchiness.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Covid-19 and its associated restrictions
aggravated the effects of decades of
underfunded services. This was most visible
in the health sector, which was on the brink
of collapse. A public outcry from the Angola
Doctors Union went unanswered. On
average, dozens of people died each day in
Luanda hospitals alone. According to the
union, despite the Covid-19 pandemic, the
most common causes of death were malaria,
malnutrition, acute diarrhoeal diseases, lack
of medicines and, among health workers,
overwork. The pandemic’s economic and
social impact caused an exponential increase
in the large numbers of sick people using
hospitals that were unable to meet demand.
1. “Angola: Shooting spree by security forces kills at least 10
protesters”, 2 February
2. “East and Southern Africa: Media freedoms curtailed as Covid-19
regional crises expose urgent need for access to information”, 3 May

hygiene and, in some cases, family
reunification.
Healthcare and essential workers continued
playing a key role in the response to
Covid-19. By the end of the year 71.9% of
the population had been fully vaccinated.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The pandemic exacerbated existing gender
inequalities. For example, unpaid domestic
and care work that would represent 16% of
GDP if it were paid, increased to 21.8% as a
result of the pandemic, according to official
data. Women performed over 76% of
domestic and care work in the country.
In July, Argentina recognized identities
beyond the binary categories of gender in the
registration and identification systems
(Decree No. 476/21). Congress passed Law
27,636 recognizing a quota for transgender
employment.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

The Covid-19 pandemic continued to
exacerbate existing inequalities amid the
country’s ongoing economic crisis. Violence
against women and girls and the lack of
effective measures to address it remained a
serious concern. There were challenges
regarding implementation of the 2020 law
legalizing abortion. Impunity persisted for
enforced disappearances and excessive use
of force by law enforcement officials.

According to civil society monitoring groups,
there were at least 256 femicides in 2021. In
numerous cases the victim had previously
filed complaints against the perpetrator,
restraining orders had been violated and the
perpetrator was a member of the security
forces. These cases demonstrated the lack of
effective public policies and measures to
address gender-based violence and the
absence of a gender perspective among law
enforcement officials.
Sex workers’ movements reported an
increase in harassment and arbitrary
detentions by the City of Buenos Aires
security forces in the context of Covid-19
restrictions.

BACKGROUND

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

The country’s profound economic and social
crisis continued. According to official figures,
by June, 40.6% of the population was living
in poverty and the unemployment rate was
8.6% in the third trimester of the year.
Strict controls on movement, reinstated in
response to the second wave of Covid-19, left
hundreds of Argentinians stranded abroad,
without access to adequate healthcare or

During the first year after Congress approved
the law for the decriminalization and
legalization of abortion within the first 14
weeks of pregnancy, challenges persisted
over implementation. No jurisdiction, either
national or local, undertook a mass campaign
to provide information on access to abortion.
There were reports of abusive use of
conscientious objection clauses, delays in

ARGENTINA
Argentine Republic
Head of state and government: Alberto Fernández

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

75

public and private sector facilities and the
collapse of the national 0800 hotline for
abortion consultations and referrals.
By December, at least 37 judicial actions
had been initiated against the abortion law.
However, the law remained in force.
According to official data, every four hours a
girl aged under 15 gives birth in Argentina.
Most are forced to carry to term pregnancies
that are the result of rape.
Analysis from an official survey (Aprender
2019) revealed that only 4% of secondary
school students had access to all the basic
and mandatory content of comprehensive
sexuality education.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous peoples continued to face serious
difficulties in accessing collective land rights.
The Executive Branch approved the
extension of Emergency Law 26,160 ordering
the suspension of evictions of Indigenous
communities. However, the National Institute
for Indigenous Affairs barely made any
progress in carrying out the survey of
Indigenous territories mandated by the same
law, with just 43% of the survey completed
by the end of the year.

IMPUNITY
Trials before ordinary civilian courts
continued for crimes against humanity
committed under the 1976-1983 military
regime. Between 2006 and September 2021,
264 rulings were handed down, bringing the
total number of convictions to 1,044 and
acquittals to 162.
The investigation into the disappearance
and death of Facundo Astudillo Castro failed
to make significant progress by the end of the
year. His body was found 107 days after he
was reported missing in late April 2020. He
was last seen at a police checkpoint in
Buenos Aires province.
A decision by the Supreme Court in the
case of the possible enforced disappearance
of Santiago Maldonado remained pending at
the end of the year. His body was found in
2017 in a river on Mapuche territory in

76

Chubut province 78 days after the security
forces had closed off the area.
Concerns remained over the lack of
institutional public policies on effective
searches for missing persons and
investigations of alleged enforced
disappearances.
A further autopsy was performed on Mauro
Coronel, who was tortured by police in
Santiago del Estero province in May 2020. By
the end of the year, no one had been
charged in connection with his death.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 17 November, 17-year-old Lucas
González was shot and killed by members of
the Buenos Aires City Police after plainclothes officers in an unmarked car
intercepted the car in which he was travelling
with three friends, who also reported they
were subjected to torture and ill-treatment.
On 11 June, Josué Lagos, a 23-year-old
member of the Qom Indigenous people was
shot by a member of the Chaco province
security forces during a police operation. The
Special Criminal Prosecutor's Office for
Human Rights ordered the release of the only
person charged in the case on grounds that
there was insufficient evidence to detain him
further. The investigation continued. The
Comprehensive Approach to Institutional
Violence by police officials in the Security and
Penitentiary Services Bill remained pending
before the Lower House at the end of the
year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In May, the executive branch repealed
Executive Order 70/2017, which had
introduced serious regressive measures
regarding migrants' rights.
Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers with
limited access to the formal labour market
and adequate housing were among those
most affected by Covid-19.
Border restrictions continued to affect the
resettlement of refugees through Argentina’s
community sponsorship-based Syria
Programme. Five Syrian refugee families with
approval to travel to Argentina had their

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

resettlement stalled and new community
sponsorship applications were suspended.
The government failed to establish a new
programme that would expand the
resettlement opportunities to refugees of
other nationalities.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Although during the COP26 the executive
branch announced its commitment to
improve by almost 26% its nationally
determined contribution (NDC) compared to
its 2016 NDC and to achieve carbon
neutrality by 2050, these targets remain
insufficient as they fail to align with the 1.5°C
global warming commitment. Concerns
remained over the failure to enact a law on
conserving wetlands or to reform the
hydrocarbons law, which promotes fossil
fuels.

ARMENIA
Republic of Armenia
Head of state: Armen Sarkissian
Head of government: Nikol Pashinyan
There was no accountability or justice for
victims of violations committed during the
2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict and its
aftermath. Over 100 people were killed or
injured by mines planted by Armenian
forces in areas ceded to Azerbaijan. Some
36,000 ethnic Armenians remained
internally displaced. Peaceful protests were
largely permitted after Covid-19 and martial
law restrictions were lifted, but freedom of
expression and access to information
continued to be restricted. Environmental
concerns at the Amulsar gold mine
remained unaddressed. Domestic violence
remained a widespread problem,
exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic.

BACKGROUND
Political tensions remained high throughout
the year. The prime minister resigned in April
following months of anti-government protests
over his handling of the Armenia-Azerbaijan

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

conflict but was re-appointed after his party
won a majority in snap elections in June.
Security along the Armenia-Azerbaijan
border remained volatile with uncertainties
over demarcation lines. Occasional crossborder fighting led to military and civilian
casualties.
The Covid-19 pandemic and the aftermath
of the 2020 conflict exacerbated the
country’s economic hardships. According to
the World Bank, Armenia suffered an 8%
contraction in GDP, leading to the
impoverishment of 70,000 people and driving
720,000 people into a lower welfare group.
The elderly and less well-off were
disproportionately impacted by the
pandemic, facing greater obstacles in
accessing healthcare due to the lockdown
restrictions and repurposing of public
healthcare resources. Their ability to cover
routine expenses – especially household
services, utilities, food, medicines and
medical services – also decreased
significantly.
Vaccination uptake remained low, with only
23 % of the population receiving a full dose
of the vaccine by December, amid a
widespread anti-vax campaign. In response,
in August, the government made Covid-19
vaccination mandatory for all government
workers and many private company
employees.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
No progress was made in investigating war
crimes and other violations of international
humanitarian law during the 2020 conflict
and its immediate aftermath, or in bringing
those suspected of individual criminal
responsibility to justice.
Over 100 people were reported killed or
injured by mines planted by Armenian forces
in territories where they had ceded control to
Azerbaijan. Armenia shared several maps
detailing landmine fields in exchange for
Azerbaijan returning Armenian captives. In
December the president of the European
Council reported that Armenia had returned

77

all landmine maps. However, the accuracy of
these maps was challenged by Azerbaijan.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Many of the approximately 91,000 people
displaced at the height of the fighting in 2020
returned to Stepanakert/Khankendi and other
parts of the Nagorno-Karabakh region, which
remained under the control of Armenia.
Some 36,000 people remained displaced in
Armenia and Armenia-controlled NagornoKarabakh, and 24,000 of them from areas
controlled by Azerbaijan faced long-term
displacement. Returnees faced difficulties in
accessing livelihoods, education and
healthcare.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Peaceful protests and demonstrations were
largely permitted throughout the year. By
January, the government had rescinded most
public health and emergency law-related
restrictions imposed due to security concerns
and the Covid-19 pandemic, including
restrictions on public gatherings.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression continued
to be unduly restricted.
The government introduced several
legislative amendments curtailing
independent media and other critical voices.
In March, the National Assembly increased
the maximum fine for insult and defamation
to AMD 6 million (approximately
US$12,000). In August, another set of
legislative amendments criminalized insulting
public figures, making repeated insults
punishable by up to three months’
imprisonment. In September, police opened
a criminal case under this new law against a
Facebook user for insulting the prime
minister in a comment under a photo
featuring him.
The authorities continued the prosecution
on trumped-up charges of human rights
defender Sashik Sultanian in retaliation for
his criticism of the treatment of the Yazidi
ethnic minority in Armenia. An investigation

78

into his alleged incitement of national hatred
had been opened in October 2020, after he
published an online interview on problems
faced by the ethnic Yazidis. His trial started in
August and was ongoing at the end of the
year. If convicted, he could face three to six
years in prison.
The Prosecutor General’s Office and state
investigative bodies failed to effectively
investigate attacks and threats against NGOs
and media outlets, including looting of the
offices of Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty and Open Society Foundations, in the
aftermath of the conflict in 2020.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The Amulsar gold mine project in southern
Armenia remained halted, pending the
outcome of an ongoing criminal investigation
into intentional concealment of information
on its environmental impacts. The
investigation was launched in response to
protests by local residents and environmental
campaigners since 2018.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to be affected by higher
levels of domestic violence during the
Covid-19 pandemic while access to services
and protection remained inadequate. The
pandemic also exacerbated the heavy burden
of unpaid care work which continued to fall
mainly on women and girls.

AUSTRALIA
Australia
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by David Hurley
Head of government: Scott Morrison
The rights of Indigenous peoples, refugees
and asylum seekers continued to be
violated. Proposed new legislation
threatened to further entrench
discrimination against LGBTI people.
Government responses to sexual and
gender-based violence against women
remained inadequate. No one was held
accountable for alleged war crimes

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

committed by Australian troops in
Afghanistan.

BACKGROUND
Lockdown measures in response to the
Covid-19 pandemic continued for much of
the year in major cities. Stringent border
restrictions also remained in place. In April,
all arrivals from India were halted due to the
Delta variant outbreak there. Critics
described this government action as racist
and xenophobic because it did not impose
such comprehensive bans on travel from
other destinations with similar outbreaks.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The government’s first progress report on the
“Closing the Gap Agreement”, published in
July, showed that targets for reducing
incarceration rates of adult Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people by at least 15%
had not been met. Whereas detention levels
among Indigenous children dropped slightly,
rates among adults increased.
Twenty-six Indigenous people were reported
to have died in custody between July 2020
and June 2021, bringing the total number of
deaths to at least 500 since the 1991 Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Custody. No one had been held to account in
relation to any of these deaths.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Australia continued to detain children as
young as 10 years old, but efforts to raise the
age of criminal responsibility progressed. In
October, the Australian Capital Territory
committed to increase the minimum age of
criminal responsibility to 14.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The brutal treatment of refugees and asylum
seekers continued. This included their
indefinite and arbitrary detention within
Australia, and in Nauru and Papua New
Guinea, although the government announced
an end to offshore processing in Papua New
Guinea by the end of the year. Those arriving
by boat were not permitted to apply for
asylum in Australia. The number of refugees

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

accepted for resettlement decreased from
18,750 in 2020 to 13,750 in 2021.
In the context of the crisis in Myanmar, the
government committed to temporarily extend
visas of Myanmar citizens already in
Australia, but did not permit family
reunifications.

IMPUNITY
An Office of the Special Investigator was
established to investigate allegations of war
crimes committed by Australia’s Special
Forces in Afghanistan between 2005 and
2016. However, no action had been taken by
the end of the year against any of the 19
members of Australia’s special forces referred
for investigation by the Inspector-General of
the Australian Defence Force in 2020.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Attacks on the LGBTI community continued.
The government announced plans to
introduce a revised Bill on Religious Freedom
that included provisions that would allow
religious schools to refuse to hire or dismiss
teachers on grounds of their sexual
orientation or gender identity.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In February a former staffer in the Federal
Government revealed that she had been
raped inside Parliament House in 2019.
Although senior ministers were made aware
of the allegations no action was taken against
her alleged attacker at the time, who was only
charged after the allegations became public.
Recommendations, including for legislative
reforms, made by the Australian Human
Rights Commission in 2020 following its
inquiry into sexual harassment in the
workplace had not been fully implemented by
the end of the year.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government continued to fund coal and
gas development projects, often in violation of
Indigenous peoples’ rights whose land was
affected. It failed to adopt carbon emission
reduction targets consistent with its
obligations under the Paris Agreement and

79

human rights law, and its 2021-22 budget
emphasized a “gas-led recovery” over
renewable energy.

AUSTRIA
Republic of Austria
Head of state: Alexander Van der Bellen
Head of government: Karl Nehammer (replaced
Alexander Schallenberg in December, who replaced
Sebastian Kurz in October)
Some bans on public assemblies
disproportionately restricted the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly. Whistleblowers lacked effective protection. There
was insufficient support for women
survivors of gender-based violence. Afghan
nationals continued to be deported to
Afghanistan until shortly before the Taliban
takeover of the country in August. The
regular use of facial recognition technology
was introduced in law enforcement
operations in August 2020. Failures to
effectively investigate allegations of illtreatment by the police persisted. Social
assistance benefits in some states were
inadequate. The right to adequate housing
was not protected.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities used laws enacted to counter
the Covid-19 pandemic to ban some public
assemblies. Courts found that, in some
cases, the bans constituted a
disproportionate restriction of the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Civil society organizations raised concerns
over a decline in press freedoms. Fifteen civil
society organizations described as excessive
the criminal prosecution of Julian H., who
played a key role in the making of the socalled “Ibiza video” alleging high-level
corruption. His trial, which began in
September, was ongoing at the end of the
year.

80

In February, the government put forward the
Freedom of Information Bill, which contained
measures to improve access to information,
including by abolishing official secrecy.
Concerns remained over the effectiveness of
the procedure should the authorities decide
to deny access to information, as well as the
lack of an independent information
commissioner and an effective mechanism
for the protection of whistle-blowers. The bill
was passed to the relevant ministry in April,
but no revised proposal was presented to
parliament by the end of the year. Reforms of
the intelligence service, which entered into
force on 1 December, fell short of ensuring
protection for whistle-blowers and
establishing an independent oversight
mechanism.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The number of femicides remained high and
the authorities again failed to provide
sufficient resources to improve access to
women’s support services. Barriers in
accessing affordable and safe abortion
services persisted.
Migrant women caring for older people in
their homes received low wages, worked
excessively long hours without adequate
breaks and faced barriers in accessing social
security benefits because of multiple
discrimination.1

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Between January and August, 64 Afghan
nationals were deported to Afghanistan,
despite a real risk of serious human rights
violations upon return.
In August, the government opposed the
evacuation of Afghans fleeing the Taliban
takeover of Afghanistan. The government also
continued to oppose the relocation of asylum
seekers from the Greek islands.
In July, the Styrian Regional Administrative
Court ruled that a group of seven asylum
seekers had been illegally pushed back to
Slovenia, noting that such illegal pushbacks
were a recurrent practice.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION
In July, the Anti-Terrorism Act was adopted.
Civil society organizations and UN experts
raised concerns that the newly introduced
crime of leading or founding a “religiously
motivated extremist organization” would
stigmatize and discriminate against Muslims.
In August 2020, the regular use of facial
recognition technology was introduced in law
enforcement operations. This raised
concerns regarding its potentially
discriminatory impact on ethnic and racial
minorities, as well as the rights to privacy,
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
The number of allegations of racial profiling
by police remained high.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In May, the Ministry of Justice proposed
measures to reform the system of preventive
measures of detention for offenders with
mental illness. However, their access to
adequate healthcare was not addressed by
the planned reforms.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Failures to effectively investigate allegations
of excessive use of force by the police
persisted. An independent investigation body,
announced by the government in January
2020, had not been established by the end of
the year. Impunity and lack of accountability
were also worsened by the continuing lack of
a requirement for police officers to wear
identification badges.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In July, six federal states implemented the
Fundamental Law on Social Assistance which
provided for caps on social aid benefits for
adults rather than ensuring a minimum level
of cash and in-kind benefits to ensure a life
in dignity.

RIGHT TO ADEQUATE HOUSING
The deferral of rental payments and the
prohibition on evictions, agreed by the
authorities in April 2020 to protect tenants
unable to pay rent because of Covid-19

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

lockdown measures, ended in March. In the
absence of government measures to continue
to prohibit evictions, experts anticipated a
wave of evictions.
1. Austria: “We Just Want Some Rights!”: Migrant Care Workers Denied
Rights in Austria (Index: EUR 13/4326/2021), 1 July

AZERBAIJAN
Republic of Azerbaijan
Head of state: Ilham Aliyev
Head of government: Ali Asadov
There was no accountability for violations
committed during the 2020 ArmeniaAzerbaijan conflict and its aftermath.
Military hostilities negatively impacted the
enjoyment of economic, social and cultural
rights. Most Azerbaijanis displaced during
that conflict returned, but ethnic
Azerbaijanis displaced from within and near
Nagorno-Karabakh during the 1990s did
not. Persecution and harassment of
government critics continued. Peaceful
protests were violently broken up. Arbitrary
restrictions continued to cripple the work of
human rights defenders and NGOs. Genderbased violence and torture and other illtreatment remained widespread.

BACKGROUND
International revelations of abusive
surveillance and corruption implicated the
Azerbaijani authorities. In July, a collaborative
investigation with journalists, media
organizations and others exposed the
Azerbaijani authorities as spying on hundreds
of local activists and journalists by using the
NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware. In October,
another investigation led by the International
Consortium of Investigative Journalists –
the Pandora papers – found that the
president’s family and their close associates
had been secretly involved in property deals
worth US$700 million in Britain using
offshore companies.
Azerbaijan rolled out Covid-19 vaccines in
January. In September, proof of vaccination

81

became mandatory to access most indoor
public places. As of December, 50% of the
country’s population had been vaccinated
with one dose of the coronavirus vaccine and
45% had received two.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
No substantive progress was made in
investigating war crimes and other violations
of international humanitarian law during the
2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict and in its
immediate aftermath or in bringing suspected
perpetrators to justice.1
Over 100 people were reported killed and
injured by mines planted by Armenian forces
in territories where they had ceded control to
Azerbaijan. By the end of the year Azerbaijan
had reportedly handed over 60 captives to
Armenia, some in exchange for minefield
maps in the conflict affected areas, including
Agdam, Fizuli and Zangilan districts. The
exact number of people remaining in captivity
in Azerbaijan at the end of the year was
unknown. In its September report the Council
of Europe raised concerns that dozens of
captives continued to be held in inhumane
conditions and subjected to speedy, unfair
trials, while the fate and whereabouts of
around 30 Armenian captives remained
unknown amid allegations of their enforced
disappearance and possible killing.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In November, the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(CESCR) noted “reports of economic, social
and cultural rights violations, in the context of
armed hostilities involving [Azerbaijan’s]
military forces” in 2020 in and around
Nagorno-Karabakh. These included the
destruction of residential, educational,
cultural and religious buildings. The
Committee called on Azerbaijan to effectively
investigate all violations reported in the
context of military hostilities and provide
access to remedies for victims.

82

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
The majority of the 40,000 Azeri civilians
displaced to government-held territory during
the 2020 conflict returned to their homes.
However, conditions remained inadequate for
the safe and dignified return of over 650,000
people displaced since the 1990s because of
mines, destruction of infrastructure and lost
livelihoods.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Peaceful protests over both political and
social issues continued to be broken up by
police using unnecessary and excessive
force, while peaceful protesters faced
arbitrary administrative and criminal charges.
On 8 March in the capital, Baku, police
detained 20 women activists attempting to
hold a peaceful march to mark International
Women’s Day. They were taken to the police
station and forced to sign “explanatory
statements” before being released.
On 1 and 15 December, also in Baku,
police violently broke up peaceful rallies
demanding the release of unfairly imprisoned
opposition activist Saleh Rustamli. Police
used excessive force against protesters
arrested at the 1 December rally, including
opposition activist Tofig Yagoublu, who was
hospitalized with serious injuries. Five of the
protesters detained on 1 December were
given up to 30 days’ administrative detention,
the rest were released.
In March, 625 prisoners, including 38
people considered by local human rights
groups to be detained for political reasons,
were freed by presidential pardon. Politically
motivated persecution and harassment of
government critics continued unabated,
however, and many of its victims remained
imprisoned.
Government critic Huseyn Abdullayev
remained in prison, in spite of the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
regarding his deprivation of liberty as
arbitrary and UN human rights experts
demanding his immediate release. In
October, opposition activist Niyameddin

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Ahmedov was sentenced to 13 years’
imprisonment for sedition and financing
terrorism on apparently politically motivated
charges.
In March, bloggers Elchin Gasanzade and
Ibragim Salamov were convicted of
defamation and sentenced to eight months’
imprisonment; and in January another
blogger, Sadar Askerov, was detained, beaten
and released after being forced to apologize
for a post criticizing local authorities.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Excessive restrictions both in law and
practice continued to hinder the work of
human rights defenders and NGOs. In
November, the UN Committee for Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights recommended that
Azerbaijan “repeal any legal provisions that
unduly restrict the activities of nongovernmental organizations”.
In May, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) ruled that Azerbaijan had
arbitrarily denied registration to 25 NGOs in
violation of the right to freedom of association
(Mehman Aliyev and others v. Azerbaijan and
Abdullayev and others v. Azerbaijan). In
October, another ECtHR ruling against
Azerbaijan found that the authorities had
frozen bank accounts and imposed travel
bans to paralyse an NGO’s human rights
work (Democracy and Human Rights
Resource Centre and Mustafayev v.
Azerbaijan).

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Women’s rights activists, women journalists
and women associated with the political
opposition were blackmailed and subjected
to degrading gender-specific smear
campaigns after their social media accounts
were hacked and private information
including photos and videos were published
online.2
In November, the CESCR raised concerns
about the high incidence of gender-based
violence against women and the very low rate
of reporting, particularly of domestic violence,
and the limited availability of shelters and
support services for survivors. Despite

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

continuing demands by local women’s groups
the authorities made no progress in signing
or ratifying the Council of Europe Convention
on preventing and combating violence
against women and domestic violence
(Istanbul Convention), while the welcome
given by pro-government media to
neighbouring Turkey’s withdrawal from the
treaty undermined the process further.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment
remained widespread. Allegations that
Azerbaijani forces subjected captured
Armenians to torture or other ill-treatment
either when they were captured, during their
transfer or while in custody were not
effectively investigated.
1. Armenia-Azerbaijan: In the Line of Fire: Civilian Casualties from
Unlawful Strikes in the Armenian-Azerbaijani Conflict Over NagornoKarabakh (Index: EUR 55/3502/2021), 14 January
2. Azerbaijan: Gender-Based Reprisals Against Women Must Stop
(Index: EUR 55/4103/2021), 12 May

BAHRAIN
Kingdom of Bahrain
Head of state: Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
Head of government: Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa
The government continued to commit
serious human rights violations, including
torture and other ill-treatment as well as
suppression of freedom of expression and
assembly. Official investigations of illtreatment resulted in impunity for
perpetrators. Migrant workers faced wage
theft and, along with prisoners, violations of
their right to health. The government
violated the right to privacy through invasive
surveillance.

BACKGROUND
In January, Bahrain was party to a Gulf
Cooperation Council summit that nominally
ended its diplomatic dispute and severance
of economic links with Qatar, which began in
2017. However, Bahrain had not restored full

83

diplomatic relations and direct travel and
trade links by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
From late 2020, Bahrain provided free
Covid-19 vaccines for nationals and legal
residents, but the estimated 70,000
undocumented migrants were ineligible as
they lacked a valid Bahraini ID. Prisoners,
who became eligible for vaccination in
February, complained that they were not told
which vaccine was being offered so they
could not make an informed medical
decision.
A rolling outbreak of Covid-19 in Bahrain’s
central prison at Jaw lasted from March to
June. The interior ministry acknowledged
three cases, but relatives of prisoners told
Amnesty International in April that scores of
prisoners were infected.1
In June, Jaw inmate Husain Barakat died of
complications after contracting Covid-19,
despite having been vaccinated. His wife told
Amnesty International that he had told her he
could not breathe and that the guards had
not heeded his requests to be transferred to
hospital until he was too weak to walk.
Throughout the year, other than offering
vaccination, the prison administration failed
to take Covid-19 preventative steps such as
distributing masks and sanitizers, and social
distancing remained impossible due to
overcrowding.2

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
As in past years, detainees and their families
gave accounts of torture in state detention
centres. In January, Sheikh Zuhair Jasim
Abbas was finally allowed to call his family
after five months’ incommunicado detention
in Jaw prison. He told relatives that during
this period prison guards had tortured him,
using methods including sleep deprivation,
threatening that he was about to be
executed, and beating with fists, feet and
hoses.3
In April, Jaw prison authorities violently
broke up a protest by prisoners following the
death in custody of prisoner Abbas MalAllah.
Alhough some prisoners violently resisted

84

guards’ efforts to force them back into their
cells, the OHCHR found that the level of force
used was excessive and unjustified. Prison
guards struck detainees on the head with
batons and in some cases beat detainees
until they were bleeding severely.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In April, Jaw prison administration
confiscated a manuscript on Bahraini dialect
written by AbdulJalil al-Singace, one of the
leaders of the peaceful protests imprisoned
since 2011, when he asked a fellow prisoner
being released to deliver the manuscript to
his family. On 8 July, AbdulJalil al-Singace
began a hunger strike in protest.4

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The new Corrective Justice Law for Children,
which came into effect in August, expands
children’s procedural rights in court.
However, child defendants’ rights were still
not fully respected in practice.
In February, interior ministry investigators
detained 16-year-old Sayed Hasan Ameen
and separated him from his parents before
interrogating him without a lawyer or relative
present. The Office of Public Prosecution,
acting in part based on this interrogation,
included him as one of four children aged
under 18 who were tried on charges of arson
and throwing Molotov cocktails under the
same procedural conditions as adults, in
breach of Bahrain’s obligations under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.5 In
March, following public outcry, the court
released the four children under an
alternative sentence of attending a six-month
rehabilitation programme.6

IMPUNITY
Implementation of the right to a remedy
remained inadequate and non-transparent.
The Special Investigation Unit (SIU), a
branch of the Office of Public Prosecution,
stated that it had received reports of torture
and other ill-treatment, but did not report
how many. It said it referred seven members
of the security forces for criminal prosecution
for unauthorized use of physical force, and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

three other members to a military court for
mistreatment of civilians, but gave no details
allowing the cases to be identified and did
not fully report the outcomes. In the most
detailed example, the SIU said a civilian court
convicted three members of the security
forces of unlawful use of force and gave them
“sentences that ranged from jail time to a
fine”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In a positive step, authorities in April released
Mohamed Hasan Jawad, one of 11 political
and civil society leaders of peaceful protests
in 2011 who were detained at the time, tried
and sentenced to between 15 years and life
in prison. However, the other 10 remained
behind bars.
Unlike in 2020, there were no reported
prosecutions for “spreading fake news” in
2021.
In August, Citizen Lab identified nine
Bahraini activists whose devices were
targeted by NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware
between June 2020 and February 2021 in
violation of their rights to privacy and freedom
of expression. The activists included three
members of the Bahrain Center for Human
Rights, three members of the opposition
political group Wa‘d, one member of the
opposition political group al-Wefaq, and two
exiled Bahraini dissidents.
In September, authorities released Kameel
Juma Hasan, whose mother is the wellknown activist Najah Yusuf. In reprisal for his
mother speaking out about her ill-treatment
in detention, the government had sentenced
him to over 29 years in prison after grossly
unfair trials for acts they accused him of
having committed as a child.7 After public
outcry, the government released him under a
new law, Decree of Act No. 24 of 2021,
which expanded alternative sentencing.
However, the probationary conditions
effectively annulled his rights to freedom of
expression and assembly and to travel for
over 25 years.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHTS AT WORK
Migrant workers’ limited rights under the
kafala system, which ties legal status to
remain in the country to the worker’s
relationship with a sponsoring employer,
made this group vulnerable to exploitation.
Lawyers Beyond Borders was preparing a
class action case before the Indian judiciary
to seek remuneration for hundreds of Indian
nationals who had complained of nonpayment of salaries and termination benefits
when they were dismissed during Covid-19
lockdowns between March and October 2020
and forced to return home without their full
pay. The Migrant Forum in Asia reported in
June that they had received a group
complaint of wage theft from 43 Nepali
workers in Bahrain.

DEATH PENALTY
No new death sentences or executions were
reported.
1. “Bahraini authorities flouting prisoners’ rights to health amid rise in
Covid-19 cases at Jaw Prison”, 9 April
2. “Bahrain: Death of prisoner a warning for Covid-19 failings in Jaw
Prison”, 14 June
3. “Bahrain: Investigate cleric’s report of torture”, 20 January
4. Bahrain: Rights Groups Urge Bahrain to Release Dr AbdulJalil alSingace, Jailed Academic on Hunger Strike (Index: MDE
11/4529/2021), 30 July
5. Bahrain: Four Bahraini Minors Tried as Adults: Husain Abdulrasool
Salman Abdulla Husain, Sayed Hasan Ameen Jawad Abdulla, Faris
Husain Habib Ahmed Salman and Mohammed Jaafar Jasim Ali
Abdulla (Index: MDE 11/3766/2021), 3 March
6. Bahrain: Further Information: Four Minors Released under Judicial
Supervision (Index: MDE 11/3997/2021), 16 April
7. Bahrain: Further Information: Youth Remains in Prison in Family
Reprisal Case: Kameel Juma Hasan (Index: MDE 11/4081/2021), 11
May

BANGLADESH
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Head of state: Mohammad Abdul Hamid
Head of government: Sheikh Hasina
Freedom of expression continued to be
heavily curtailed by draconian laws. The
authorities carried out serious human rights

85

violations including enforced
disappearances, unlawful detention, torture
and extrajudicial executions. Peaceful
protests by opposition political parties and
students were prevented and suppressed by
the authorities, on some occasions using
excessive force. Violence against women
increased during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Indigenous peoples experienced scarcity of
resources because of increasing
deforestation and land-grabbing. Refugees
and religious minorities suffered violent
attacks.

BACKGROUND
Bangladesh was ranked seventh among
nations most affected by extreme weather in
the past 20 years. Tens of millions of people
were at risk from the devastating impact of
frequent cyclones, floods, erosion and rising
sea levels, which continued to cause
displacement. Farmers’ livelihoods were
threatened by waterlogging and high levels of
salinity, which killed crops. From March to
May, at least four strong heatwaves
dominated the pre-monsoon period.
Bangladesh’s climate continued to shift
towards hotter and longer summers, warmer
winters and longer monsoons from February
to October. It was predicted that average
temperatures in Bangladesh would rise by
1.4°C by 2050. Community adaptation efforts
fell short of providing adequate protection,
and experts warned that government
investment in climate-related projects
remained too low. The 10-year Bangladesh
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan
expired in 2019 and had yet to be replaced.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities cracked down strongly on
peaceful protests and dissent. Criticism of the
government’s response to the Covid-19
pandemic and other issues led to arrests and
ill-treatment of journalists, cartoonists, writers
and critics’ family members. The death in
prison of a writer, after he was tortured and
detained for 10 months under Bangladesh’s
draconian Digital Security Act, stirred protests

86

across the country calling for a repeal of the
law.
The authorities imprisoned 433 people
under the Digital Security Act, the majority of
whom were held on allegations of publishing
“false or offensive information” under Section
25.1 This represented a 21% year-on-year
increase in the number of people detained
under the Act. As of 11 July, the longestserving prisoner detained under the Act had
been held since 24 December 2018. Section
25 (publication of false or offensive
information), Section 29 (publication of
defamatory information) and Section 31
(offence and punishment for deteriorating law
and order) of the Act were used
systematically to target and harass dissenting
voices, including those of journalists, activists
and human rights defenders. These actions
contravened Bangladesh’s commitments
under the ICCPR as well as its domestic
constitutional obligations.
In May, the authorities arrested human
rights defender Shahnewaz Chowdhury on
charges of attempting to “deteriorate law and
order” for sharing his personal opinion in a
Facebook post. Released on bail on 16
August, he was facing up to 10 years in
prison if convicted.
On 17 May, the authorities arrested Rozina
Islam, a senior journalist, on allegations of
stealing confidential documents and
espionage.2 No concrete evidence suggesting
a recognizable criminal offence was provided.
The government also shut down websites,
including five Indigenous and human rightsrelated news portals. These included Hill
Voice, an online news portal on the rights of
Indigenous peoples in Bangladesh, published
in Canada.
In October, Bangladesh’s Rapid Action
Battalion arrested Nusrat Shahrin Raka,
sister of exiled journalist Kanak Sarwar. Four
days before her arrest, she filed a complaint
with the police about a fake Facebook
account that was created using her
information, which criticized the government.
Instead of investigating her complaint, the
authorities arrested her under the Digital
Security Act and Narcotics Control Act. Her

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

brother said that she was targeted in
retaliation for his criticism of the government.

COMMUNAL VIOLENCE
In October, at least 40 pandals (temporary
structures made for the Hindu religious
ceremony of Durga Puja) and 25 homes and
properties belonging to members of the
Hindu community were damaged or set on
fire during and after the Durga Puja, the
country’s biggest Hindu festival. The
authorities filed at least 71 cases across the
country, arrested more than 450 people and
accused 10,000 unidentified people in
connection with the violence that erupted
following allegations on social media that a
copy of the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam,
had been desecrated at a puja pandal. At
least seven people were killed and hundreds
injured in violent clashes across the country.
A lack of proper investigations into previous
incidents of communal violence created an
environment of impunity.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
According to local human rights group Ain o
Salish Kendra, 157 people were killed and
10,833 injured in 932 incidents of political
violence and clashes with the police and
between supporters of ruling and opposition
political parties during the year.
Opposition leaders were detained and
otherwise prevented from carrying out
protests throughout the year.
On 25 March, at least 14 people, including
a journalist, were injured at a demonstration
that opposed the visit of Indian prime
minister Narendra Modi to Bangladesh.
On 26 October, police prevented supporters
and activists of the leading opposition
Bangladesh Nationalist Party from carrying
out a “peace rally” to protest against
communal violence in the country. Police
alleged that the party did not have permission
to hold a rally; however, having to seek
permission contravenes the right to peaceful
assembly. At least 44 members and
supporters of the party were detained during
clashes with the police.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 10 March, political cartoonist Ahmed
Kabir Kishore filed a case with the
metropolitan sessions judge’s court in the
capital, Dhaka, under the Torture and
Custodial Death (Prevention) Act 2013. He
accused state security agencies of torturing
him in custody.3 He had been detained along
with writer Mushtaq Ahmed in May 2020
under the Digital Security Act, for posting
satirical cartoons and comments on
Facebook, critiquing the government’s
response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Mushtaq Ahmed died after 10 months in
prison without trial. The government’s
investigative committee concluded that he
died of natural causes. He had been denied
bail at least six times. Ahmed Kabir Kishore
told Amnesty International that he was
forcibly disappeared from his Dhaka
residence at least three days prior to the date
stated in official records of his arrest. He
added that both he and Mushtaq Ahmed
were tortured in custody by state security
agents. The cartoonist required a hearing aid
after losing the hearing in his right ear.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
According to Ain o Salish Kendra, at least 80
people were subjected to extrajudicial
executions during the year. Among them, 73
people were killed allegedly in “shootouts” or
“crossfire” and seven others died after they
were subjected to physical torture. Odhikar,
another local human rights organization,
reported that 18 people were allegedly
subjected to enforced disappearance in the
first nine months of the year.
Despite allegations of hundreds of enforced
disappearances reported in the media, the
government continued to deny them. In some
cases they justified extrajudicial executions
as “self-defence” by the security forces.
Police frequently attributed deaths of
suspects to “gunfights”, “shootouts” or
“crossfire”. In many cases, the fact that these
deaths occurred after victims had been taken
into police custody raised concerns that the
victims were extrajudicially executed by the

87

authorities. On 13 November, state minister
Kamal Ahmed Majumder told high-school
students: “I’m in favour of crossfire because
hundreds of thousands of people pass
sleepless nights because of criminals. Those
criminals have no right to live.” His statement
indicated that “crossfire” was used by the
authorities to mean extrajudicial execution, as
opposed to retaliation in self-defence.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
At least 1,321 women were reported to have
been raped during the year, although actual
numbers were likely to be higher. Reports
indicated a rise in the number of incidents of
sexual harassment and violence against
women compared to previous years.
According to Ain o Salish Kendra, 224
women were murdered by their husbands,
alongside other incidences of violence
against women including physical assault by
male partners or family members. Section
155(4) of the Evidence Act 1872 allows
defence counsels to raise questions
regarding the character of a woman who files
a complaint of sexual violence. Calls for
reforms to the legislation and justice system
from rights activists were not addressed
during the year.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
On 28 October the cabinet secretary,
Khandker Anwarul Islam, said that people
living in forests would be removed to other
places in a bid to keep forests “intact”.
Indigenous peoples’ rights activists expressed
concern that the action could put Indigenous
peoples at risk of forced eviction. Some
Indigenous communities have been living in
the forests for centuries and Indigenous
groups reported continued violations of their
rights, including land grabbing and
deforestation. On 30 May, non-state actors
cut down 1,000 betel trees belonging to 48
Indigenous Khasi families at Agar punji, a
cluster village in Moulvibazar. The trees had
been a key source of livelihood for the
community. Continued deforestation and
clearing of stones and sand from surface
water bodies across Rangamati,

88

Khagrachhari and Bandarban districts of
Chittagong Hill Tracts worsened the problem
of water scarcity for hill people in the region.

REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
Violence in the refugee camps in Cox’s Bazar
escalated, with fires damaging shelters in the
camps, killing at least 15 people, injuring
hundreds and displacing thousands in the
first quarter of the year. On 29 September,
armed men shot dead Mohib Ullah, a
prominent Rohingya civil society leader, in
the Kutupalong camp.4 At least seven more
people were killed by violent groups on 22
October in the Balukhali camp. Some
Rohingya refugees reported feeling insecure
inside the camps after they received death
threats by phone. Refugees reported that
armed groups operating drug cartels and
committing extortion killed people as they
vied for control of the camps.
Bangladesh relocated more than 19,000
Rohingya refugees to Bhashan Char, a
remote island in the Bay of Bengal, despite
concerns about conditions on the island.
Refugees with friends and family in camps on
the mainland were not permitted to leave the
island. Media reported that more than 200
refugees were arrested or detained for
“escaping” from the island, which remained
off-limits to journalists, human rights
defenders and humanitarian workers without
prior permission. The Bangladeshi
government and the UN signed a
memorandum of understanding on 9
October, establishing a common protection
and policy framework for the humanitarian
response to the Rohingya refugee situation.
Although the memorandum paved the way
for refugees to access services such as
education and the right to voluntary
relocation, it continued to restrict freedom of
movement.
1. “Bangladesh: End crackdown on freedom of expression online”, 25
July
2. “Bangladesh: Rozina Islam must not be punished for her journalistic
work”, 19 May
3. Bangladesh Mid-Term UPR Assessment (Index: ASA 13/4732/2021),
22 September

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

4. “Bangladesh: Investigate killing of prominent Rohingya activist
Mohib Ullah”, 29 September

BELARUS
Republic of Belarus
Head of state: Alyaksandr Lukashenka
Head of government: Raman Halouchanka
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
remained severely restricted. Torture and
other ill-treatment remained endemic and
were committed with impunity. The justice
system was systematically abused to
suppress dissent. Children’s rights were
routinely violated in the criminal justice
system. Death sentences and executions
continued. Migrants suffered abuses at the
hands of the authorities. Arbitrary
dismissals and prosecutions of medical
professionals adversely affected the quality
and availability of healthcare.

BACKGROUND
Following the disputed presidential election in
August 2020 and the refusal by the EU and
the USA, among others, to recognize the
incumbent Alyaksandr Lukashenka as the
elected president, the country faced growing
international isolation, with further sanctions
introduced against its leadership.
The Belarusian authorities facilitated the
transit of people from refugee- and migrantsending countries to Belarus and pushed
them towards the EU, implementing
Alyaksandr Lukashenka’s threat to “stop
protecting” its borders from refugees.
Allegations repeatedly emerged suggesting
the authorities were pursuing dissenting
voices in exile, including by deadly means.
Around half of the population was
vaccinated against Covid-19, including nearly
40% with two doses; available vaccines
exceeded the uptake. The number of
officially reported pandemic-related deaths
exceeded 5,500, but the real number may
have been considerably higher, due to
deliberate under-reporting, the absence of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

free media and independent health
watchdogs and retaliation against whistleblowers.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained severely
restricted. Dozens of independent journalists
and bloggers were prosecuted and
imprisoned. More than 480 websites,
including those of major national and
international news media outlets, and over
400 Telegram groups were blocked for their
independent reporting and some were
arbitrarily banned as “extremist”. Dozens of
government critics were imprisoned for
insulting officials, which remained a crime.
In March, TUT.by reporter Katsyaryna
Barysevich was sentenced to six months in
prison and an extortionate fine on trumpedup charges for uncovering official falsification
of evidence regarding the November 2020
killing of artist and peaceful protester Raman
Bandarenka.
In May, the authorities blocked access to
TUT.by for purported “numerous violations of
the Mass Media Law”, conducted mass
searches of its premises across Belarus, and
detained 14 members of staff on unfounded
charges, including tax evasion. On 13
August, TUT.by and its mirror site, Zerkalo.io,
were declared “extremist”, criminalizing
dissemination of their materials.
At the end of the year, 32 journalists
remained jailed for their independent work.
On 23 May, exiled journalist and blogger
Raman Pratasevich and his partner Sofia
Sapega were arrested after their flight from
Greece to Lithuania was forced to land in the
Belarusian capital, Minsk, following a
manifestly false bomb alert. Both were held
incommunicado for several days and charged
arbitrarily with inciting mass riots and “gross
violation of public order”; Raman Pratasevich
was additionally charged with “incitement of
social hatred”. He appeared on television
three times to “confess” and testify against
others, and to give assurances he was not
being ill-treated, although the first video
showed possible injuries. He and Sofia
Sapega were then moved to an undisclosed

89

location, under house arrest, on 25 June,
and allowed to post on Twitter until August.
Both were still awaiting trial in December,
although their whereabouts remained
unknown and their lawyers were barred from
disclosing any information.
All instances of critical free speech by
people from various walks of life were
prosecuted in unfair proceedings.1

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The authorities stepped up suppression of
independent civil society organizations,
including NGOs and lawyers’ professional
associations, trade unions, political groups,
and self-organized ethnic and religious
communities.
On 22 July alone, the authorities ordered
the closure of 53 NGOs. By the end of the
year, over 270 civil society organizations had
been arbitrarily dissolved or were in the
process of forced closure. Hundreds,
possibly thousands, of civil activists left
Belarus fearing reprisals. In a BBC interview
in November, in response to a question about
mass NGO closures, Alyaksandr Lukashenka
conflated NGOs with the political opposition
and promised to “massacre all the scum that
you [the West] have been financing”.
In February the authorities raided the office
of the prominent human rights group Viasna
in Minsk, and in March unfounded criminal
proceedings against Viasna were opened.
During the year five staff members, including
its founder Ales Bialiatski, were detained. In
November, Leanid Sudalenka and Tatsyana
Lasitsa were sentenced to three and two-anda-half years’ imprisonment respectively for
their purported role behind a “violation of
public order”. Other Viasna members,
including previously detained Marfa Rabkova
and Andrei Chapyuk, were awaiting trial at
the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities maintained an effective ban
on peaceful protest, targeting participants
with detention for up to 15 days or hefty
fines. Over 900 individuals were arrested and
prosecuted in politically motivated

90

proceedings according to Viasna; many of
them were given lengthy prison sentences
under false “mass disorder” and other
protest-related charges.
In January, a leaked audio recording came
to light in which a top police official
instructed officers under his command to
disregard international human rights law
when dealing with protesters and condoned
firing rubber bullets at protesters’ vital
organs, implying that their deaths would be
acceptable.2
In July, legal amendments to “the laws
protecting sovereignty and the constitutional
order” were enacted. Expressly drawing on
the lessons of suppressing peaceful protests
in 2020, these included extending the
applicability and scope of state of emergency
measures, increasing the authority of law
enforcement agencies and tasking the Armed
Forces with “suppression of mass disorder”.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread and endemic, while perpetrators
continued to enjoy absolute impunity. In a
November BBC interview, Alyaksandr
Lukashenka admitted violence had been
inflicted on detainees in the Akrestsina
Detention Centre in Minsk in August 2020;
he and his officials had previously dismissed
evidence of this as “fake”. His admission was
not followed by any attempt to prosecute
those responsible.
Law enforcement officers who used torture
and other ill-treatment, including excessive
force against protesters, enjoyed total
impunity. Demonstrators prosecuted for
participating in the 2020 protests were
singled out for particularly harsh treatment
and jail conditions.
In May, peaceful opposition activist Vitold
Ashurak died suddenly in prison in Shklou,
where he was serving a five-year sentence. In
a letter he had complained that the prison
administration had forced him and other
“political” prisoners to wear distinct yellow
labels on their prison clothes. The authorities
refused to treat his death as suspicious and
issued a video, apparently doctored, in which

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Vitold Ashurak is seen walking and collapsing
suddenly in an empty cell.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The justice system was systematically abused
by the authorities to crack down on all
dissent, imprison political opponents and
human rights defenders, and intimidate and
silence their lawyers. Judges were manifestly
biased towards the prosecution and law
enforcement agencies, which were widely
deployed to initiate unfounded criminal and
administrative procedures and provide the
necessary “evidence” for the trials. Closed
hearings in criminal cases became the norm
in politically motivated cases, with entire case
materials being classified as secret and
lawyers routinely forced to sign nondisclosure undertakings or face severe
penalties.
According to the Defenders.by project,
between February and August over 30
lawyers were disbarred or refused extension
of their licences, after they defended victims
of politically motivated prosecutions or took
part in peaceful protests. In November, a new
law further increased the Ministry of Justice’s
control over the legal profession and,
following other new regulations, the number
of licensed lawyers fell by 7% between
January and November.
In July, the Supreme Court sentenced a
former banker who had tried to stand in the
2020 presidential election to 14 years’
imprisonment on false charges of bribery and
money laundering. Viktar Babaryka was also
fined the equivalent of US$57,000 and
ordered to pay more than US$18 million as
“compensation for the damage caused”.
In September the two most prominent
opposition members remaining in Belarus,
Maryia Kalesnikava and Maksim Znak, were
convicted following a swift closed trial, and
sentenced to 11 and 10 years’ imprisonment
respectively on false charges of conspiracy,
“extremism” and national security-related
offences.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Children’s rights were routinely violated in the
context of criminal justice.
At least 10 child protesters and one blogger
were arrested after the post-election protests.
All were convicted in 2021 in closed,
politically motivated trials and given custodial
sentences. Three turned 18 in 2021 while
awaiting trial and were tried as adults. Many
complained of torture in detention.
Mikita Zalatarou, aged 16 when arrested in
2020, was denied his epilepsy medication
and subjected to repeated beatings and
electrocution. He was sentenced to five years’
imprisonment and subsequently accused of
violence towards a prison guard for which he
was given an additional prison term.
Children continued to be imprisoned for
minor, non-violent drug offences and
sentenced to between seven and 12 years’
imprisonment. The number of such
convictions in 2021 was unknown but the
authorities indicated a growing number of
such prosecutions of children.3

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed
and executions carried out, in secret. Two
brothers in their twenties sentenced to death
in 2020, Stanislau and Ilya Kostseu, were
granted clemency, only the second such
clemency since Belarus’s independence.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Belarusian authorities facilitated the entry of
thousands of people from migrant- and
refugee-sending countries to Belarus, lured
by a false promise of easy passage into the
EU. Instead, migrants and refugees faced
pushbacks from Poland, Lithuania and
Latvia.4 Migrants who were returned or failed
to cross into Poland were beaten and
subjected to other forms of violence; were
deprived of food, water, shelter and
sanitation; and were the targets of phone
theft and extortion by Belarusian forces.
Belarusian border guards regularly prevented
people stranded in the border area from
leaving the fenced border strip area. Several

91

people, including at least one child, died of
hypothermia.
An Iraqi national, Rebin Sirwan, was
expelled from Belarus after he tried to seek
asylum in the country.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
A continuing shortage of capacity in the
healthcare sector caused by the pandemic
was further exacerbated by severe reprisals,
including arbitrary dismissals and criminal
prosecutions, against medical professionals
who supported the peaceful protests in 2020
or exposed the ferocity and scale of police
violence against protesters.5
Such moves impacted the quality and
availability of healthcare. In Hrodna, an
independent children’s hospice funded by
private donations was shut down in response
to its director showing solidarity with postelection protests.
1. “Stand with Belarus" campaign, January
2. “Belarus: Government’s threats and history of crackdown on
protesters require urgent international response”, 24 March
3. “Belarus: Crackdown on children”, January
4. “Belarus/EU: New evidence of brutal violence from Belarusian forces
against asylum seekers and migrants facing pushbacks from the
EU”, 20 December
5. “Belarus: Crackdown on medics”, January

BELGIUM
Kingdom of Belgium
Head of state: Philippe
Head of government: Alexander De Croo
Irregular migrants lacked adequate access
to housing, health and education.
Allegations of racial profiling by police
continued. Inhumane prison conditions
persisted. The police used excessive force
to disperse peaceful demonstrators.
Belgium adopted an action plan to combat
gender-based violence. The Wallonia region
continued to authorize arms transfers to
parties to the Yemen conflict. A court in
Brussels ruled that the authorities had
failed to combat climate change.

92

BACKGROUND
In July, an international investigative
journalism initiative known as the Pegasus
Project revealed that several Belgian citizens
and high-ranking politicians had been
targeted by NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware.
Peter Verlinden, a journalist known for his
work on human rights in Rwanda, and his
wife were also targeted.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, the federal minister for justice
agreed to extradite a man to Ingushetia in the
Russian Federation, despite a serious risk of
torture and other grave human rights
violations. At the end of the year, the
extradition decision was still pending before a
court.1
From late May until 21 July over 400
irregular migrants conducted a hunger strike
demanding better treatment and
regularization. On 15 July, the UN Special
Rapporteurs on extreme poverty and human
rights and on the human rights of migrants
concluded that the estimated 150,000
irregular migrants in Belgium were exposed
to abuse and discrimination at work in the
informal sector, as well as in their access to
housing, healthcare, education and justice.
Following the visits of the Special
Rapporteurs, the government proposed
assessing the individual situation of the
protesters to determine whether they could
obtain residency rights. In November, five of
the former hunger strikers filed a complaint
against the Belgian state for not honouring
the commitments made to them.
In the first seven months of the year, six
Afghan nationals were forcibly returned to
Afghanistan, despite the continued
widespread insecurity and high levels of
poverty in the country. After the Taliban
takeover, no further people were forcibly
returned to Afghanistan.
Every day from mid-October until the end of
December tens of asylum seekers were not
provided with access to housing as the
numbers exceeded reception capacity.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

RACIAL, ETHNIC AND RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Civil society groups continued to receive
allegations of racial profiling by the police. In
May, the CERD Committee urged the
authorities to prohibit racial profiling,
introduce the use of stop forms and improve
the collection of disaggregated data. In May,
the government rejected recommendations
made during the UN’s UPR process to
explicitly prohibit racial profiling.
OLDER PEOPLE
In September, a survey commissioned by
Amnesty International found that 27% of
people over 55 experienced abuse and that
seven out of 10 faced prejudice because of
their age in the French-speaking part of
Belgium.
In October, the equality body UNIA
confirmed that older people in care homes
were at greater risk of suffering abuses of
their human rights during the pandemic.

In June a large-scale survey conducted by
Ghent University indicated that two thirds of
the Belgian population had experienced
sexual violence in their lives; 81% of women
and girls aged 16-69 reported having been
victims of such violence. At the end of
November, a national action plan against
gender-based violence was adopted.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Overcrowding in dilapidated prisons
continued, with insufficient access for people
deprived of their liberty to basic services,
including healthcare and sanitary facilities. In
May, the state rejected a UPR
recommendation to ensure that the prison
population remained below prison capacity.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January, police used unnecessary and
excessive force to disperse about 100
peaceful protesters who opposed police
violence and impunity. Police arrested 245
people, including many passers-by who were
not taking part in the protest. Some of the
people arrested, including children, reported
being ill-treated while in detention. At the end
of the year, an investigation into allegations of
ill-treatment by police was ongoing.
In July, the UN Committee Against Torture
expressed concerns regarding ill-treatment
and excessive use of force by the police,
including against detainees and protesters.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The Wallonia region continued to authorize
arms transfers to members of the Saudi-led
coalition in Yemen, despite the substantial
risk that these arms could be used to commit
or facilitate serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
In June, the Brussels Court of First Instance
ruled that both the federal and the federated
authorities had failed to implement adequate
policies to tackle the climate emergency and
had thus violated the rights to life and to
private life of the plaintiffs.
1. Belgium: Submission to the UN Committee Against Torture 71st
Session, 12-30 July 2021 (Index: EUR 14/4290/2021), 15 June

BENIN
Republic of Benin
Head of state and government: Patrice Talon
The Digital Code continued to be used to
restrict freedom of expression. The rights of
detained political opponents were
reportedly violated. At least five people were
killed during clashes between
demonstrators and defence and security
forces in the context of the presidential
elections. Members of transgender and
LGBTI associations were assaulted and
threatened.

BACKGROUND
Patrice Talon was re-elected in the first round
of the 11 April presidential election with
86.36% of the vote. The Constitutional Court

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

93

had rejected the candidacies of the main
political opponents.
On 14 October, Benin was elected as a
member of the UN Human Rights Council for
the period 2022-2024.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ARBITRARY DETENTION
Jean Kpoton, a pro-good-governance activist,
was arrested on 13 January and sentenced
on 9 February by the Cotonou Court of First
Instance to 12 months’ imprisonment and a
fine of 200,000 FCFA (€304); he had
commented on a post alleging that the car
used by President Talon during a crosscountry tour in January was rented for 6
million FCFA (€9,146) per day. He was
convicted under the 2018 Digital Code of
“harassment by means of electronic
communication”, an offence whose definition
was considered “vague and too broad” by the
UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in
its October 2020 Opinion.
On 19 May, the Supreme Court upheld the
May 2020 Appeal Court judgment sentencing
journalist Ignace Sossou to six months in
prison and six months suspended for
“harassment by means of electronic
communications” under the Digital Code
after he quoted the Public Prosecutor in a
Twitter post. Ignace Sossou’s lawyers had
wanted the Supreme Court to consider their
client’s detention as arbitrary, as the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had
done in August 2020.
On 7 December, two journalists with the
newspaper Le Soleil Bénin Info were
sentenced to six months’ suspended
imprisonment and a fine of more than
500,000 FCFA (€762) for “harassment by
means of electronic communication”,
following a complaint of libel by a customs
inspector.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
At least 10 activists and political opponents
were arrested and detained during
demonstrations and violence between
protesters and defence and security forces in

94

several towns around the time of the
presidential election.
Joël Aïvo – whose candidacy to run for the
presidential election was rejected – was
arrested and detained in Cotonou on 15
April. He was accused of “money laundering
and endangering the security of the State”.
Reckiatou Madougou, a member of the
opposition party Les Démocrates and whose
candidacy was also rejected, was arrested on
3 March in Porto-Novo and detained in
Akpro-Missérété prison. She was charged
with “financing terrorism” for her “intent to
disrupt the next ballot by perpetrating largescale acts of terror”. Lawyers for the two
political opponents denounced violations of
their rights to communicate with, and receive
regular visits from, their families and to have
confidential access to lawyers. On 6 and 11
December, the Court for the Repression of
Economic Crimes and Terrorism sentenced
Joël Aïvo and Reckiatou Madougou to 10
years’ and 20 years’ imprisonment
respectively. The US Department of State
declared that their trials “raise grave
concerns about political interference in
Benin’s criminal justice system”.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Demonstrations and riots erupted in several
cities in the north and centre of the country
several days before the 11 April presidential
election. At least five people were killed by
government forces using live ammunition in
Bantè and Savè in Collines department,
according to the National Human Rights
Commission. The Ministry of Interior and
Public Security stated on 14 April that 21
members of the defence and security forces
received gunshot wounds when they cleared
roadblocks.
In a 4 May resolution, the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
condemned “the crackdown on
demonstrations by the army”, and called for
the opening of “an independent and impartial
investigation.”

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 30 April, three transgender women were
forced to undress before being beaten and
robbed by a group of men in a bar in
Cotonou. The attack was filmed by the
assailants who posted the video on social
media. The three victims sought refuge with a
local transgender association and continued
to receive threats. LGBTI rights associations
across Benin which supported the three
women also received threats. On 30 June,
the Cotonou Court of First Instance
sentenced one of the attackers to 12 months’
imprisonment, including a six-month
suspended sentence, for assault and battery.

former interim president, Jeanine Áñez, was
imprisoned. A report published by the
Interdisciplinary Group of Independent
Experts (GIEI) highlighted the justice
system's lack of independence and the
need to repeal an amnesty decree
facilitating impunity for human rights
violations. Indigenous peoples continued to
be harassed and attacked for defending
their territory and the environment. The
government failed to protect forests. The
country battled with a third wave of the
Covid-19 pandemic and health workers
denounced lack of pay and unsafe working
conditions.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

IMPUNITY

Following the start of the vaccination
campaign against the Covid-19 pandemic on
29 March, as of 7 November, 347,270
people had received a first vaccine dose and
265,501 were fully vaccinated. This
represented 3.64% of the population,
according to official figures. On 1 September,
the government made the vaccination
compulsory, notably for medical, paramedical
and pharmacist staff.

In February, Supreme Decree 4461 was
approved, granting an amnesty or pardon to
supporters of the government who were
detained for crimes allegedly committed
during the political crisis that started in
October 2019.
In August, the GIEI, under the auspices of
the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, published its report on human rights
violations during the 2019 post-election
crisis. The report highlighted serious failings
on the part of authorities to ensure the
autonomy and independence of the judicial
branch and the Attorney General's Office, as
well as obstacles to truth, justice and
reparation for the victims of grave human
rights violations during the post-election
crisis.
Following the release of the GIEI report,
authorities promised to repeal the amnesty
decree but continued to use the justice
system to target political opponents, ignoring
fair trial guarantees.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 21 January, the Constitutional Court
validated the withdrawal of Benin’s
declaration made under Article 34(6) of the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Establishment of
an African Court on Human and Peoples’
Rights, thus preventing NGOs and individuals
from having direct access to the Court.

BOLIVIA
Plurinational State of Bolivia
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto Arce
Catacora
Dozens of former government officials,
lawyers, judges and human rights defenders
were accused of staging a coup in 2019
and charged with vague offences and the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
From January to June, authorities and
members of the ruling political party charged
at least 41 officials of the former interim
government, human rights defenders,
lawyers and judges, with vaguely defined
offences including “terrorism”, “sedition” and
“conspiracy”. This was part of a wider

95

strategy of accusing opponents or critics of
helping to organize a coup in 2019.
Authorities imprisoned the former interim
president, Jeanine Áñez, on charges of
“terrorism”, “sedition” and “genocide” in
proceedings that international observers
criticized for lacking due process.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities stigmatized and harassed
several human rights defenders, including
Waldo and Franco Albarracín and Amparo
Carvajal, president of the Permanent
Assembly for Human Rights.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The findings of the GIEI report emphasized
that the violence of the post-election crisis of
2019 had racial and anti-Indigenous
elements to it. Indigenous peoples defending
their land and territory were subjected to
physical attacks, police repression and
invasions of their land.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the end of the year, 41% of Bolivia's
population had been fully vaccinated against
Covid-19. Thousands of health workers in
public institutions went for months without
being paid wages and many worked without
proper PPE.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Authorities passed regulations that
incentivized logging and the burning of
forests and other vegetation.

WOMEN'S RIGHTS
According to the Attorney General´s Office,
108 feminicides were reported in 2021,
compared to 113 in 2020. Civil society
groups emphasized the need for stronger
action on policies to prevent violence.

96

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Head of state: Rotating presidency − Milorad Dodik,
Željko Komšić, Šefik Džaferović
Head of government: Zoran Tegeltija
Many asylum seekers and migrants were
living in inhumane conditions. Independent
media and journalists were targeted by
politicians. Gender-based violence
increased during the Covid-19 pandemic.
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. Prosecution of war crimes
was further delayed.

BACKGROUND
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) experienced
the most serious political crisis since the end
of the war in 1995. The High
Representative’s decision in July to
criminalize public denial of genocide
triggered widespread boycotts of state
institutions by Republika Srpska’s (RS)
leaders, and months of heightened nationalist
rhetoric. In December, the RS National
Assembly adopted a resolution initiating the
process of RS’s withdrawal from BiH state
institutions, which could lead to the
unravelling of the BiH state and risk peace
and stability.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Close to 16,000 people trying to reach EU
countries transited BiH in 2021, with
thousands at a time remaining stranded in
the country, primarily in Una-Sana Canton.
The number of arrivals significantly
decreased in the second half of the year.
Between January and April, around 900
migrants and asylum seekers were living in
inhumane conditions and without access to
food, water or electricity in Lipa, a temporary
camp in Una-Sana Canton, after the
authorities failed to agree their relocation to
more suitable facilities in other parts of the
country.1 The vice-president of the European

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Commission, Josep Borrell, criticized the
authorities for creating a “grave humanitarian
situation”.
Between May and October, an estimated
2,000 people including families and children,
were sleeping rough, in abandoned homes,
factory halls and forests in Una-Sana Canton
as the reception facilities there were
insufficient or inaccessible at the time. In
November, with EU assistance, the
authorities opened a new 1,500-person
reception centre in Lipa.
Cantonal authorities restricted the delivery
of humanitarian and medical assistance to
people living outside reception centres, and
aid organizations and individuals were
harassed, threatened or prevented from
providing assistance.2 The measures
imposed by the Cantonal authorities in 2020
targeting asylum seekers and migrants,
including illegal restrictions to their freedom
of movement and a ban on gathering in
public places and using public transport,
remained in place.
The asylum system remained largely
ineffective due to persisting institutional gaps
and extremely low recognition rates, with only
three people awarded refugee status in 2021.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Media outlets and journalists reporting about
corruption, war crimes and migration
continued to operate in a hostile environment
and faced serious threats and intimidation,
including by public officials.
In May, the Chair of the BiH presidency,
Milorad Dodik, called Tanja Topić, a Banja
Luka-based journalist, a “proven quisling”
and a “German intelligence officer” after her
comments critical of Milorad Dodik and his
political party. Other journalists, including
Borka Rudić, president of the BiH Journalists
Association, were the target of an online
smear campaign by people close to the Party
of Democratic Action. Nidžara Ahmetašević,
a journalist and migration activist, was
arrested and held in police custody for
several hours for allegedly “disturbing public
peace and order” after she had asked two
police officers to wear face masks.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In September, the OSCE condemned the
“hate campaign” against media workers, and
urged the authorities to promptly investigate
and prosecute the perpetrators.
The BiH Journalists Association recorded
close to 300 defamation lawsuits pending
before various courts in the country, involving
claims against journalists – 80% initiated by
politicians – for disproportionate financial
damages.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Despite BiH having the highest Covid-19
death rate per million in the Balkans, the
authorities failed to act to secure vaccines
after they became available. A nationwide
vaccination programme was not launched
until April, after the country received a
modest supply of vaccines through the
COVAX initiative mechanism and other
donations. The vaccination rates were below
20% at the end of the year due to
widespread vaccine hesitancy and the
absence of effective campaigns to counter
misinformation.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Covid-19 and restrictive measures that were
in place until May exacerbated gender-based
violence and severely strained victims’ access
to shelters, legal aid and psychological
counselling.
There was almost no progress on
harmonizing legislation with the Council of
Europe Convention on combating and
preventing violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention),
which BiH ratified in 2013.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In August, the country’s second ever Pride
event took place in Sarajevo. There was tight
security, and no incidents.
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination in all walks of life, including
education, work and housing.
No progress was made in legalizing samesex unions.

97

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In September, the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture reported
widespread physical and psychological illtreatment of detainees by law enforcement
officials in the Federation of BiH, and called
for rigorous action to change the culture in
police forces.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In June, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in The
Hague confirmed the initial verdict from 2017
and sentenced Ratko Mladić, the
commander of the Bosnian Serb army, to life
imprisonment for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.3
Systemic deficiencies in the Prosecutor’s
Office and the unavailability of defendants
who fled to other countries continued to delay
the prosecution of war crimes cases. By the
end of 2021, close to 600 cases were
pending before various courts in BiH.
In July, the High Representative imposed
amendments to the BiH criminal code,
declaring the public denial or glorification of
genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes as a criminal offence punishable by
imprisonment. In protest, RS political leaders
began a boycott of state institutions.
In September, the authorities established a
working group to develop a plan for the
implementation of the 2019 UN Committee
against Torture decision, which found that
BiH failed to provide a victim of wartime rape
with adequate reparation and urged the
authorities to ensure immediate and
comprehensive support to all survivors of
wartime sexual violence. The plan had not
been adopted by the end of the year.
Over 7,200 people remained missing as a
result of the armed conflict. Political pressure
and lack of resources continued to impede
the work of the BiH Missing Persons Institute.
1. “Bosnia and Herzegovina: Long-term solutions needed to end
recurring humanitarian crisis”, 12 January
2. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Submission for EU Enlargement Package/
Opinion 2021 (EUR 63/4884/2021), 20 April

98

3. “Bosnia and Herzegovina: Mladić verdict ‘an historic day for
international justice’”, 8 June

BOTSWANA
Republic of Botswana
Head of state and government: Mokgweetsi Masisi
State of emergency legislation introduced in
response to Covid-19 was extended twice,
restricting the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly. Women
and girls suffered increasing rates of
gender-based violence. Asylum rights were
restricted. Licences for oil exploration
threatened the environment and livelihoods
of Indigenous peoples. Death by hanging
was maintained for crimes including
murder.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
In April, the president extended the state of
public emergency for the second time since
its introduction in April 2020. Regulations
under the Emergency Powers Act (EPA), also
introduced in 2020, continued to prohibit the
right to strike, and carried a maximum fiveyear prison sentence or a BWP100,553
(about US$9,250) fine for anyone publishing
information with “the intention to deceive”
the public about Covid-19.
In February the state amended the charge
sheet of opposition spokesperson Justice
Motlhabane and journalists Letsogile Barupi
and Oratile Dikologang, who were arrested,
detained and charged in April 2020 for
allegedly publishing false information about
Covid-19 on Facebook. They faced two
counts of publishing “with the intention to
deceive” under the EPA regulations, one
count of “publication of alarming statements”
under the penal code, and one count of
“offensive electronic communication” under
the cybercrime act.
In September, Reverend Thuso Tiego was
arrested under the Public Order Act after
holding a demonstration calling for the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

president’s resignation. Several others were
arrested when they demanded his release.

would have an adverse effect on Indigenous
peoples living in the area.

DISCRIMINATION

DEATH PENALTY

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In April, the Botswana GBV Prevention and
Support Centre (a local NGO) reported an
increase in violence against women and girls
during the Covid-19 pandemic.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The right to asylum continued to be severely
limited. Botswana hosted fewer refugees and
asylum seekers than most countries in Africa
(674 refugees and 58 asylum seekers as of
September). In April, UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, raised concerns after the
authorities deported 57 Zimbabwean
refugees who had lived in Botswana since
2008. The refugees failed to register for
voluntary repatriation, which led to their
forced removal in March.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In November, the Court of Appeal upheld a
High Court judgment that declared a law
criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual
relations unconstitutional.

Botswana was among a minority of Southern
African countries to impose the death
penalty.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
RIGHT TO HEALTH
There was a third wave of Covid-19 infections
during July and August. At its peak,
Botswana had a higher percentage rate of
infection than any other country in Africa,
with 668 positive cases per 100,000 people
(in a population of 2.3 million).
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In August, UNESCO’s World Heritage
Committee registered its concern about oil
exploration licences being granted in
environmentally sensitive areas in the
Okavango River basin to Canadian-based
mining company ReconAfrica. The
Committee urged the government to ensure
that any further steps to develop the oil
project be “subject to rigorous and critical
prior review, including a thorough
environmental impact assessment that
corresponds to international standards”.
There were concerns that such projects

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

BRAZIL
Federative Republic of Brazil
Head of state and government: Jair Messias Bolsonaro
Brazil continued to experience an extended
period of instability and crisis. The federal
government lacked the commitment to
coordinate effective responses in the
management of the Covid-19 pandemic,
impacting people’s human rights. Those
from groups who have historically
experienced discrimination were
disproportionately affected by the health
emergency, which exacerbated the
economic and social crisis, making their
living conditions more precarious. President
Jair Bolsonaro continued to promote
initiatives contrary to the needs of most of
the population and harmful to the
environment and climate justice. His
statements, which often vilified human
rights defenders and activists, also
undermined the Constitution and the
independence of the judiciary.

BACKGROUND
In April, the Senate established the
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry to
investigate the actions and omissions of the
Brazilian government in the management of
the Covid-19 pandemic. The investigation of
the mismanagement of the health crisis by
Jair Bolsonaro's administration included
instances of corruption, the collapse of the
public and private health systems, negligence
regarding vaccines and the damage caused
by the lack of effective public policies to
address the social crisis, which deepened in
2021.

99

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to
entrench structural and persistent
inequalities and to exacerbate the economic,
political, social and public health crises in the
country. The government did not ensure the
right to health or sufficient and adequate
public policies for the social protection of the
population, especially those belonging to
groups that have historically faced
discrimination, such as the Black population,
Indigenous peoples, Quilombola
communities, women, LGBTI people and
those living in favelas and disadvantaged
neighbourhoods on the outskirts of cities.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
As of December, more than 615,000 people
had died of Covid-19. According to the Alerta
group, a coalition of NGOs, 120,000 deaths
could have been avoided by March 2021 if
the government had not repeatedly ignored
scientific evidence and failed to coordinate
strategies to address the crisis.1
Testing and monitoring of infection rates,
medicines and hospital supplies, hospital
beds and intensive care units were
inadequate and insufficient, especially in
public health facilities. As a result of the lack
of oxygen in hospitals, people died in the
state of Amazonas in January.2 The shortage
of the medication necessary for the
intubation of the most severely ill subjected
patients, their families and healthcare
professionals to stress and suffering.
According to the Alerta group, the
government's neglect of socioeconomic and
territorial inequalities, which in Brazil are
related to racial inequalities, meant that
Black people and those living in poverty
experienced the highest death rates. They
were particularly affected by the shortage of
intensive care beds in public facilities and
many died in pre-hospital units waiting for
admission to specialist care units.
Investigations undertaken by the
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry
suggested that government actions during
Covid-19 vaccine negotiations and
implementation of the vaccine programme
lacked coordination, efficiency, and

100

commitment to follow scientific evidence. The
spread of disinformation about vaccines and
the authorities’ defence of drugs that were
proven to be ineffective violated the right to
accurate public health information. The
government's negligence in negotiations with
pharmaceutical companies and with the
COVAX initiative delayed the implementation
of an effective vaccination plan.
In addition to vaccine shortages, the lack of
coordination between national and state-level
planning led to delays and interruptions in
the vaccination roll-out throughout the year,
as well as inconsistencies in schedules,
deployments of vaccines and consensus on
the coverage of priority groups. By
December, 75% and 66% of Brazilians were
partially and fully vaccinated, respectively.
RIGHT TO FOOD
According to a study by the Brazilian Network
of Research on Sovereignty and Nutritional
Security, an independent national research
network, food insecurity had increased by
54% in Brazil since 2018. More than half of
the population did not have full and
permanent access to food. Severe food
insecurity, which refers to the situation of
hunger, affected 19 million people in 2021,
or 9% of the population. Among small family
farmers and Quilombola, Indigenous and
riverside communities, the proportion of
households affected rose to 12%.
Households headed by women and Black
people suffered most from the lack of food.
RIGHTS TO HOUSING, WATER AND SANITATION
A significant part of the population continued
to live in precarious situations, lacking
essential services. According to the Trata
Brasil Institute, nearly 35 million people did
not have access to clean water and 100
million had no sewage collection.
Those living in rural and traditional
territories and disadvantaged
neighbourhoods were most affected by the
non-existent or insufficient sanitation
infrastructure. A study by the NGO Criola
found that the percentage of the Black
population living in inadequate homes was
significantly higher than that of the white
population. In addition to the lack of basic

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

sanitation, overcrowding was greater in Black
homes. According to the Zero Eviction
campaign, over 23,500 families were evicted
from their homes between March 2020 and
October 2021 during the pandemic.
Following pressure from social mobilizations,
in October Congress approved legislation that
prohibited evictions throughout the country
until 31 December 2021.
RIGHTS TO WORK AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
The federal government used a false
dichotomy between the defence of the
economy and the defence of life to justify its
failure to promote measures to prevent
infection among workers who were unable to
work remotely during the pandemic.
Emergency aid was discontinued during the
first three months of 2021 and subsequently
reintroduced at a lower rate and for a more
restricted group of people. This led to
accelerated impoverishment of the
population impacted by the economic and
social crises aggravated by the pandemic. A
study by the University of São Paulo found
that in 2021, with the reduction in
emergency aid, more people began to live in
poverty. Black women were the most
affected: 38% and 12.3% were living in
poverty or extreme poverty, respectively.
Data from the Brazilian Institute of
Geography and Statistics indicated that, in
the first quarter of 2021, unemployment
reached its highest rate since 2012 (14.7%).
The proportion of Brazilians in the informal
economy without income security or social
protection reached 39.6% during the year.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
State education continued to be delivered
remotely in much of Brazil until May 2021.
Problems related to lack of access to the
internet and the electronic equipment
necessary to conduct remote activities were
among the reasons for increased school
dropout rates during 2021, especially among
students in state education, which serves the
most disadvantaged sections of the
population.
All states started vaccinating school staff in
June, as state schools were reopening. The
infrastructure of many schools, however, did

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

not ensure a safe return based on sanitary
protocols. Water supply and access to basic
sanitation and the internet were not a reality
in all state schools in Brazil. In 2021, the
National High School Exam, the main form of
admission to higher education institutions,
registered the lowest number of applicants in
13 years.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Throughout the pandemic, the state did not
adequately guarantee the right to information
for the population. Inaccurate or deliberately
misleading public statements about Covid-19
prevention, treatments and vaccines sought
to undermine scientific recommendations
and dissenting voices, fuelling misinformation
and reducing civic space.
Restrictions on civil society participation in
public debate intensified because of the
federal government's hostile approach to the
press, social movements, NGOs and other
critical voices.
In 2021, the organization Human Rights
Watch identified 176 accounts of journalists,
Congress members, influencers, media
outlets and NGOs, including Amnesty
International Brazil, blocked on President Jair
Bolsonaro's social media.
Federal authorities promoted speeches and
demonstrations that threatened the rule of
law. On several occasions, such as the official
celebration of Brazil's Independence Day,
President Jair Bolsonaro sought to
undermine the Supreme Court and called
into question the electoral system.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The logic and implementation of the “war on
drugs” that has structured public security
policies in Brazil for many years continued to
fuel the cycle of violence and killings in the
country.
In 2020, police killed 6,416 people. More
than half of the victims were young Black
men.
Although the Supreme Court ordered the
suspension of police operations in Rio de
Janeiro’s favelas in June 2020, a survey by
the Study Group on New Illegalisms found

101

that deaths caused by law enforcement
personnel increased by 185% in January and
February 2021, compared to the first four
months after the Court order. Police
operations using heavy weaponry resulted in
hours of intense shooting in the favelas and
other marginalized neighbourhoods.
The excessive use of force also took the
form of raids on homes, the destruction of
belongings, sexual violence, psychological
torture, restrictions on freedom of movement
and the suspension of essential services,
such as schools and health facilities.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 6 May, a police operation in the
Jacarezinho favela, Rio de Janeiro, resulted
in the death of 27 residents and one police
officer. The operation was launched based on
photographs of alleged suspects on social
media. Images and preliminary investigations
pointed to summary executions and evidence
tampering at the crime scenes. Investigations
into the deaths had not been concluded by
the end of the year.
On 8 June, Kathlen Romeu, who was four
months pregnant, died after being shot
during a Military Police operation in the
community of Lins de Vasconcelos in
northern Rio de Janeiro. The investigation
into the circumstances of her death was
continuing at the end of the year.
On 22 November, nine people were found
dead in circumstances suggesting they had
been summarily executed in the Complexo
do Salgueiro favela, Rio de Janeiro. On 20
November a policeman had been killed
during a police operation, and preliminary
investigations indicated that the nine killings
were an act of revenge. Investigations were
continuing at the end of the year.
IMPUNITY
In August, five police officers charged with
the killings of 13 people almost three
decades earlier in the 1994 massacre in the
Nova Brasília favela, Rio de Janeiro, were
acquitted for lack of evidence. In addition to
the fact that it took 27 years for the case to
be brought to trial, the result was considered
inadequate by the victims and human rights
organizations. The excessive and lethal use of

102

force by the police was not promptly and
effectively investigated in accordance with
international standards. At the time of the
killings, the police involved in the operation
were absolved of responsibility before the
proper investigations were carried out. The
acquittal represented an example of the
historical impunity that has perpetuated the
cycle of violence and human rights violations
by state agents, especially in favelas and
disadvantaged neighbourhoods. In 2017, the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights
condemned the Brazilian state for police
violence in the Nova Brasília case.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The killings of city councillor and human
rights defender Marielle Franco and her
driver Anderson Gomes in March 2018 had
yet to be resolved. The families and civil
society continued to press for justice. In July
2021, the Rio de Janeiro prosecutors who
had been in charge of the investigations
since 2018 asked to be removed from their
positions, raising concerns about the
progress and outcomes of the investigation
and the case. The two men charged with the
killings remained in prison and no date had
been set for a trial by the end of the year.
Those behind the killings remained
unidentified.
The NGO Global Witness reported that
Brazil was the country with the fourth highest
number of killings of environmental leaders
and land rights defenders in the world. In
January, activist and rural worker Fernando
dos Santos Araújo was killed in the state of
Pará. He was a survivor and one of the main
witnesses of the Pau D’Arco massacre in May
2017 in which 10 land rights activists were
killed by military and civil police officers.
In May, Lindolfo Kosmaski, a gender and
sexual diversity activist from the Landless
Workers Movement, was found shot dead in
a burnt-out car in the state of Paraná.

RIGHT TO A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT
According to the NGO Imazon, in August the
Brazilian Amazon had the highest
deforestation rate for the month of August in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

10 years. Between January and December,
10,362 km² of forest were cleared, 29%
more than 2020.
Fires also increased in the Amazon region
and other biodiversity-rich biomes as the
Brazilian state continued to dismantle
environmental protection agencies and
mechanisms. The Conservation and
Sustainable Use of Biodiversity and Natural
Resources Programme lost part of its funding
and investment fell in the prevention and
control of deforestation and fires in Brazilian
biomes.
Attacks on the right to a healthy
environment were also seen in legislative
initiatives. The Chamber of Deputies
approved Bill 3.729/2004. If approved by the
Senate, this Bill will facilitate the issuing of
environmental licences for exploration
activities. Bill 2.633/2020 also progressed
through the Chamber of Deputies and, if
approved, could allow land tenure
regularization for illegal occupations of public
lands.

RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES,
QUILOMBOLAS AND OTHER
TRADITIONAL COMMUNITIES
The rights of Indigenous peoples,
Quilombolas and other traditional
communities were systematically violated.
Deforestation and fires, often resulting from
the illegal appropriation of land by the
agribusiness, livestock, logging and mining
sectors, impacted the rights to land and
territory, to a healthy environment and to the
livelihoods of Indigenous peoples,
Quilombolas and other traditional
communities.
The latest data from the Pastoral Land
Commission indicated that the number of
conflicts in rural areas registered in 2020 was
the highest since 1985. Land invasions,
which took place despite legislation
regulating territories and rights, increased by
102% between 2019 and 2020; 71% of the
families affected were Indigenous. Between
January and November 2021, 26 people
were killed in the context of rural conflicts, a

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

30% increase over 2020; eight were
Indigenous people.
In August, the National Articulation of
Indigenous Peoples (APIB) movement filed a
complaint before the ICC against President
Jair Bolsonaro for the crime of genocide. Also
in August, 6,000 Indigenous people from 176
ethnic groups demonstrated in the country's
capital, Brasilia, to try to halt the antiIndigenous agenda being pursued in the
National Congress. They also reiterated their
opposition to the “Time Framework”
proposal, which was before the Supreme
Court, and, if approved, could threaten the
demarcation of Indigenous territories.
The government's inadequate management
of the Covid-19 pandemic continued to
impact the rights to life and health of
Indigenous peoples and Quilombola
communities, who in 2020 had appealed to
the Supreme Court for specialized and
priority support from the state. Despite a
decision in their favour from the Court, they
continued to report being denied the support
that would help them to cope with the
pandemic in 2021. Covid-19 continued to
spread among Indigenous peoples and
Quilombola communities because of the
authorities’ failure to establish sanitary
barriers, to promote the removal of people
who invaded their territories and to
implement adequate health, monitoring and
social assistance measures.
Indigenous peoples and Quilombola
communities reported several shortcomings
in the vaccination process, such as lack of
information; institutional racism;
discrimination against Indigenous people and
Quilombolas who live in urban areas or
outside officially designated territories; and
lack of coordination between state and
municipal planning and the National
Immunization Plan.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A lack of adequate assistance, social
protection and public policies left LGBTI
people even more at risk during the health
crisis. The National Association of
Transvestites and Transsexuals reported that

103

80 transgender people were killed in Brazil in
the first half of 2021 alone. In addition,
physical attacks, threats, discrimination and
social marginalization fuelled a cycle of
violence that prevented LGBTI people from
enjoying their rights in safety.

emergency epidemic situation introduced
during the Covid-19 pandemic, originally
declared by the government in May 2020,
remained in place throughout the year,
granting the government extensive powers.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

Media freedom continued to deteriorate, and
journalists and independent media outlets
who investigated crime and corruption faced
frequent threats and smear campaigns,
including by public officials.
In April, Dimitar Stoyanov, an investigative
journalist with the Bivol news portal, reported
receiving death threats from a businessman
he contacted for an interview about a
corruption case in which he was allegedly
implicated. The Prosecutor’s Office in Sofia
failed to investigate Dimitar Stoyanov’s
complaint and the police issued a notice of
warning instructing him to stop
communicating with the businessman.
In April, during a television programme,
member of parliament Toshko Yordanov
joked about cutting off a journalist’s limbs for
“lying” after the journalist unintentionally
mixed up the names of two political parties
during a live show. In May, minister of the
interior Boyko Rashkov questioned the
journalistic integrity of two television hosts
who interviewed him and suggested they
should be removed from their posts. Neither
official faced parliamentary sanctions.
The Covid-19 pandemic exacerbated the
already precarious working conditions of
media workers, resulting in salary cuts,
delayed payments and the undermining of
editorial independence. The government
reduced funding to several public media
outlets and the Council for Electronic Media,
the country’s media regulator.
In its Rule of Law Report in July, the
European Commission highlighted the lack of
transparency, the concentration of media
ownership and continued political
interference in the editorial policy of some
outlets. Bulgaria was downgraded from 111th
to 112th out of 180 countries on the World
Press Freedom Index and remained the EU

Brazil accounted for 75% of maternal deaths
due to Covid-19 worldwide. According to the
Covid-19 Obstetric Observatory, as of May,
maternal deaths of Black women were 77%
higher compared to those of white women.
According to the Brazilian Public Security
Forum, the number of rapes in the first six
months of 2021 was 8.3% higher than in the
same period in 2020. Between January and
June 2021, 666 women were the victims of
femicide, the highest number since records
began in 2017.
1. “Brazil: 1,000 days of Bolsonaro and Brazil’s grave human rights
crisis”, 20 October
2. Brazil: Lack of Oxygen to Treat Patients in Manaus (Index: AMR
19/3539/2021), 15 January

BULGARIA
Republic of Bulgaria
Head of state: Rumen Radev
Head of government: Kiril Petkov (replaced Stefan
Yanev in December, who replaced Boyko Borisov in
May)
Media freedom further deteriorated as
journalists were subjected to threats and
intimidation. Migrants and asylum seekers
faced pushbacks. Domestic violence
increased. LGBTI people were targeted by
groups hostile to minority rights. Roma
faced widespread discrimination. There was
systemic ill-treatment of residents in social
care institutions.

BACKGROUND
Bulgaria’s third parliamentary elections of the
year took place in November as no party was
able to form a government following previous
snap elections in April and July. The

104

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

member state with the lowest standard of
media freedom.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Bulgaria continued to carry out systematic
pushbacks of migrants and asylum seekers
at its borders. Over 1,100 pushbacks were
recorded by the end of the year, affecting at
least 13,000 people. In July, the European
Court of Human Rights found that Bulgaria
had violated the European Convention on
Human Rights by expelling a journalist to
Turkey in 2016 without examining the risks of
ill-treatment he faced on his return.
Reception conditions for asylum seekers
remained substandard. In August, the
Bulgarian Ombudsperson said that the
specially designated zone for unaccompanied
children in the Voenna Rampa reception
centre was severely overcrowded and that
children lived in extremely poor and
unhygienic conditions.
In August, the government announced
plans to reinforce police and military
presence on the borders with Turkey and
Greece because of concerns over arrivals of
Afghan asylum seekers after the Taliban’s
takeover of Afghanistan.
Bulgaria granted international protection to
up to 70 Afghan nationals, along with their
families, who worked for the Bulgarian
embassy and military in Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, the vast majority of Afghans
seeking asylum continued to be rejected in
accelerated procedures with their
applications treated as manifestly unfounded,
an ongoing practice ever since Bulgaria
declared Turkey a safe third country.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Cases of domestic violence, which surged
threefold during the Covid-19 pandemic,
continued to rise.
In January, the government submitted to the
parliament amendments to the Law on
Protection from Domestic Violence aimed at
further harmonizing domestic legislation with
international standards. Some of the
measures included in the amendments
envisage strengthening protective measures,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

a referral mechanism and the establishment
of a central register of acts of domestic
violence, victims and perpetrators. The
amendments had not been adopted by the
end of the year.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face threats and
abuse, including by political parties and
public officials.
In October, Rainbow Hub, a community
centre for LGBTI-related events in Sofia, was
attacked and vandalized by a group of people
led by Boyan Rassate, a Bulgarian National
Union party candidate in the November
presidential elections.1 After strong
condemnation by human rights activists,
political parties and numerous embassies in
Sofia, the Election Commission waived Boyan
Rassate’s political immunity and he was
detained and charged with hooliganism and
assault. Under the country’s Criminal Code,
homophobic violence is not yet recognized as
a hate crime.
The Bulgarian National Union party
frequently criticized LGBTI groups publicly
and accused them of spreading “gender
propaganda” and teaching “perversions” to
schoolchildren.
Leading up to the general elections in July,
LGBTI events in Sofia, Plovdiv and Burgas
were targeted by groups hostile to minority
rights. In July, the annual Pride event took
place in Sofia against a backdrop of
widespread anti-LGBTI protests.

DISCRIMINATION
Roma continued to face widespread social
exclusion and discrimination, including in
education, health, housing and employment.
Covid-19 and the resulting prolonged state of
emergency disproportionately affected the
Roma population.
Roma children continued to be significantly
less likely to complete any level of education
than the general population. Covid-19
increased the risk of early marriage for Roma
girls. The European Roma Rights Centre
found that Roma children were overrepresented in the state childcare system and

105

were more likely to be removed from their
families.
In June, the Supreme Administrative Court
found the leader of the Bulgarian National
Movement party, Krasimir Karakachanov,
guilty of discrimination over his controversial
statements following incidents in Voyvodinovo
in 2019, which triggered widespread antiRoma violence that resulted in the
destruction of homes and the forced eviction
of Roma families.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
The authorities failed to eradicate the
persistent physical ill-treatment of social care
residents and patients with psychiatric
disorders. In October, the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture
reported numerous cases of people being
slapped, punched, kicked or hit with sticks,
mechanically restrained or found abandoned
in unhygienic conditions. The Committee
called for urgent action to radically change
the country’s approach to mental and
institutional social care.
1. “Bulgaria: Presidential candidate must be investigated and held
accountable after attack on LGBTI centre”, 1 November

BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso
Head of state: Roch Marc Christian Kaboré
Head of government: Lassina Zerbo (replaced
Christophe Joseph Marie Dabiré in December)
Armed groups continued to launch deadly
attacks against civilians, including children.
The right to education and the right to
health were compromised and cases of
sexual violence were reported in the context
of the conflict. Impunity for serious human
rights violations and abuses remained
pervasive. Authorities threatened press
freedom.

106

BACKGROUND
President Kaboré, re-elected for a second
term in late 2020, adopted a policy of
dialogue and engagement with some of the
armed groups in Burkina Faso’s northern
region. Yet the armed conflict continued to
rage. Widespread demonstrations followed a
massacre of civilians in the town of Solhan in
June, leading to the sacking of the defence
minister. In December, following an attack
against a gendarmerie post in Inata which led
to protests over the security situation, the
government resigned and a new prime
minister was nominated.
The humanitarian situation remained
precarious; the number of internally
displaced people (IDPs) rose from about 1
million in January to 1,368,000 in July,
according to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
The conflict that raged in northern and
eastern Burkina Faso continued to affect the
lives of civilians and hinder their activities.
Some attacks by armed groups were carried
out indiscriminately and therefore may
constitute war crimes.
The town of Mansila, Yagha province,
remained under a blockade by the Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM)
throughout the year, leading to mass
displacement and food insecurity among the
population.
In April, a civilian-military convoy
documenting poaching in the Pama reserve,
Kompienga province, was ambushed by an
armed group. According to governmental
sources, three foreign journalists and one
Burkinabe national were killed.
In May, an armed group killed 30 villagers
during an attack in Kodyel, Komondyari
province.
In June, an unidentified armed group
attacked positions of the Volunteers for the
Defence of the Homeland, an auxiliary force
to the military, at the entrance of the town of
Solhan, Yagha province, before overrunning
the town and indiscriminately killing
residents. At least 132 people were killed in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the attack, 40 wounded and 707 households
displaced.1
In August, a military convoy between the
towns of Arbinda and Dori, which was
accompanied by civilians, was ambushed by
an armed group. The attack led to the deaths
of 65 people, including 59 civilians,
according to governmental sources.

along with 12,480 teachers (4,568 of whom
were women). The government, with the
support of UNICEF, developed alternative
education models such as teaching via radio,
benefiting 647,081 schoolchildren during the
year.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

In May, the government established a new
military unit, the Special Forces, whose
mandate included “counterterrorism
operations”, among other tasks. However, a
statute passed in June covering its legal
position states that Special Forces cannot be
pursued before the courts for any actions
taken during their operations. This immunity
clause violates the rights of victims to justice
and reparation.
In July, the French Council of State
assented to the extradition of François
Compaoré, the brother of former Burkinabe
president Blaise Compaoré, to Burkina Faso,
where he was sought for incitement to
murder in relation to the death of
investigative journalist Norbert Zongo in
1998. This decision was suspended by the
European Court of Human Rights in August,
pending examination of the challenge to the
decision made by François Compaoré.
In August, the first trials for terrorism-related
offences were held in the Ouagadougou
Higher Court. Two members of the armed
group Ansaroul Islam were sentenced to 20year prison terms for “criminal association
linked to a terrorist enterprise”, “illegal
possession of weapons and munitions of
war”, “complicity in terrorism” and “wilful
destruction of property” for the attack on and
destruction of a primary school in Bafina,
Sanmatenga province, in 2018. They were
also ordered to pay 4 million XOF (US$7,240)
each in damages.
At the end of the year, no significant
progress had been made in the investigation
into the unlawful killings of 50 people and the
enforced disappearance of 66 others
allegedly committed by the armed group
Koglweogo in the village of Yirgou,
Sanmatenga province, in January 2019.

In June, the NGO Doctors Without
Borders reported a rise in sexual violence in
the regions affected by the conflict.
Alleged cases of sex being exchanged for
food aid by local NGOs facilitating IDPs’
access to humanitarian aid were documented
by the media in the city of Kaya, Sanmatenga
province, the province hosting the largest
number of IDPs in Burkina Faso.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Dozens of children were killed in attacks by
armed groups against villages and towns.
UNICEF reported that at least 20 children
were killed during the attack on the town of
Solhan in June, and hundreds were
displaced with their families.
Armed groups including GSIM, and the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS)
continued to recruit and use children to
participate in hostilities, in violation of
international humanitarian law.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Armed groups including GSIM and ISGS
continued to prohibit so-called “Western”
education in Burkina Faso, while threats and
violence continued to deter teachers from
remaining in their official postings. In March,
323 students were forced to flee their school
following attacks by armed groups in the
Boucle du Mouhoun region. Between 21 and
28 June, eight schools were attacked by
armed groups in Manni department, Gnagna
province. School materials were stolen, and
property destroyed.
Since the beginning of the conflict, more
than 2,682 schools had been closed. By
May, 304,564 students were affected by
these closures (148,046 of whom were girls)

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

107

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities violated media freedom on several
occasions and failed to protect journalists. In
March, Ladji Bama, editor of the newspaper
Le Courrier confidentiel, was ordered to pay
damages of 2 million XOF (US$3,620), after
a complaint filed by the ruling party in
Burkina Faso for “defamation”. In November
2020, Ladji Bama’s car had been fired upon
outside Dori. In a subsequent Facebook post,
he had accused the ruling party of
involvement in the attack before filing a
complaint for “assassination attempt” against
unnamed persons. At the end of the year, no
judicial developments had been reported
following this complaint.
Following the attack against the town of
Solhan in June, the Higher Communications
Council suspended the Omega media group’s
radio and TV programmes for five days for
“misreporting” the attack after it claimed that
IDPs from Solhan were ambushed on the
road to Dori. In a letter, the Council also
threatened Radio France Internationale with
suspension for their coverage of the attack
and the government’s response to it.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Burkina Faso launched a national Covid-19
vaccination campaign in June, but failed to
meet its target of vaccinating 70% of the
population, the coverage being just 1.6% by
December. Access to vaccines in remote
regions and IDP settlements was limited
because of the conflict.
According to the ICRC, access to health in
the conflict-affected regions was hindered by
health personnel leaving because of the
violence.
1. Burkina Faso: In the Wake of the Solhan Massacre, the Priority Must
Be to Protect the People (Index: AFR 60/4249/2021), 7 June

108

BURUNDI
Republic of Burundi
Head of state: Evariste Ndayishimiye
Head of government: Alain Guillaume Bunyoni
The authorities failed to respond
appropriately to the Covid-19 pandemic and
to protect the right to health. Some
measures against human rights defenders,
activists and journalists were lifted –
including the release of prisoner of
conscience Germain Rukuki – but threats,
intimidation and politically motivated
prosecutions continued. Some returning
refugees faced intimidation. The authorities
failed to respect and protect women’s rights
and violated the right to privacy. Enforced
disappearances, unlawful killings, torture,
arbitrary arrests and detentions continued.
The Truth and Reconciliation Committee
(TRC) faced accusations of bias and the
judiciary’s independence was undermined.

BACKGROUND
There was a major shift in Burundi’s
relationships with international partners.
Political dialogue with the EU resumed and
relations with Rwanda improved.
In May, the AU Peace and Security Council
ended the mandate of its human rights
observer mission in Burundi, and the UN
closed the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi. In October,
the UN Human Rights Council terminated
the Commission of Inquiry on Burundi’s
mandate, which was replaced by a special
rapporteur. Burundi’s National Independent
Human Rights Commission regained its “A”
status in June, despite civil society concerns.
Security incidents increased, including
attacks on civilians in Bujumbura and the
capital, Gitega, in May and September, and
on road travellers in Muramvya province in
May and June.
Humanitarian assistance was required by
2.3 million people. Burundi remained one of
the 20 countries most vulnerable to climate
change. More than 52,000 people were

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

affected when Lake Tanganyika flooded,
destroying or damaging their homes.

released in October after serving a one-year
prison sentence.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

The government resumed cooperation with
the WHO, whose new representative arrived
in the country in April, but the Covid-19
pandemic response remained insufficient. In
July, the government authorized the World
Bank to provide vaccines, but refused to sign
any commitments to manage potential side
effects or offer compensation for them. The
first shipment of vaccines arrived in October.
Covid-19 cases resurged in the second half
of the year, with doctors reporting that official
figures were far below the actual numbers. In
September, weekday parties and ceremonies
of a social nature were banned. The
authorities introduced a health pass in
November for travellers from the commercial
capital, Bujumbura, to other provinces, to
prove that they had tested negative.

The conviction in their absence of five human
rights defenders and seven journalists who
had been involved in the 2015 protests was
announced in February, although the
Supreme Court ruled on the case in June
2020. They had been sentenced to life
imprisonment on charges of undermining
state authority, murder and damage to
property in connection to the 2015 attempted
coup. They had no legal representation
during the trial.1
Nestor Nibitanga, former regional observer
with the Association for the Protection of
Human Rights and Detained Persons
(APRODH), was released from prison in April,
after receiving a presidential pardon having
served four years of a five-year sentence. He
had been arrested in 2017 and convicted in
2018 on spurious charges of “threatening
internal state security”.
In June, the Ntahangwa Appeal Court
overturned human rights defender Germain
Rukuki’s conviction on charges of
“participation in an insurrectional
movement”, “threatening internal state
security”, and “attack on the authority of the
state”, but the court upheld his conviction for
“rebellion”. His 32-year prison sentence was
reduced to one year plus a fine of BIF50,000
(US$25). He was released on 30 June, after
almost four years in detention.2
Also in June, lawyer Tony Germain Nkina
was convicted by the High Court in Kayanza
of “collaboration with rebels who attacked
Burundi” and sentenced to five years in
prison and a fine of BIF1 million
(approximately US$500). He had been
arrested in October 2020 while working in
Kabarore commune, an area that had been
affected by armed attacks. Several elements
in the case strongly suggested that it was
motivated by his former work with civil
society, dating back more than six years. The
Ngozi Appeal Court upheld his conviction
and sentence in September.3

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In January, the president promised that his
government would promote a “free and
responsible press”, calling on the National
Communication Council to engage with
suspended media houses to enable them to
restart their work. Following his speech,
restrictions were lifted on several media
houses, including Bonesha FM, Isanganiro
TV and the BBC.
These moves were undermined in August,
however, when the president launched a
personal attack against journalist Esdras
Ndikumana for his reporting on the impact of
Covid-19, accusing him of “hating the
country in which he was raised”.
The conviction of former parliamentarians
Fabien Banciryanino in May and PierreCelestin Ndikumana (in his absence) in
August also called into question the
government’s stated commitment to the right
to freedom of expression and media freedom.
They had openly criticized the government’s
human rights record in the 2015-2020
legislature, which was rare among
parliamentarians. Fabien Banciryanino was

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

109

Civil society organization Words and Actions
for the Awakening of Consciences and the
Evolution of Mentalities (PARCEM) was
permitted to reopen in April, after being
suspended for nearly two years.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Burundian authorities continued to fail to
respect and protect women’s human rights. A
woman who was missing for three months
after leaving her husband was accused of
“family abandonment”, an offence
punishable by up to two months in prison.
Before going to the police, she had been in
hiding at a safe house run by a women’s
rights organization, which was in turn
accused of threatening state security.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
An evening curfew was imposed in Gishubi
commune in Gitega province to prevent
social mixing between men and women,
continuing a trend observed in other parts of
the country in recent years. New rules were
introduced whereby a woman found in a bar
after 7pm with a married man, not her
husband, would be fined BIF10,000 (US$5),
as would a girl found outside her family home
at that time. Men caught with women who
were not their wives would be fined
BIF20,000 (US$10) and the same fine would
be imposed on boys found with girls after
7pm.
In September, the minister of interior
ordered the suspension of all administrative
officials who were practising
“concubinage” (defined by law as a married
man living with one or more women as
though they were “wives” outside or within
the marital home) or were part of “illegal
unions”. The bans on cohabitation outside
marriage and on polygamy continued.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Arbitrary arrests and detention continued,
notably of members of the opposition party,
the National Congress for Freedom (CNL). In
September, the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi published a report which found that
in addition to police and intelligence service

110

officers, judicial and sometimes prison staff
were also responsible for cases of arbitrary
detention.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
New cases of enforced disappearances were
reported, including that of Elie Ngomirakiza,
a CNL representative from Bujumbura Rural
province, who was detained in July. Cases
from previous years remained unresolved
and there were more than 250 open cases
before the UN Working Group on Enforced
and Involuntary Disappearances. Despite
this, the national authorities sought to
minimize the issue. In July, the president told
media that there had been no
disappearances and referred instead to
criminals who fled to Rwanda. Later that
month, the Prosecutor General of the
Republic underplayed reports of enforced
disappearances, referring instead to people
who left to join armed groups without
informing their families, and criminal groups
that carried out abductions disguised as
security forces.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Dead bodies, often bearing signs of violence,
were regularly found near roads, lakes,
ditches and other public places. The human
rights organization Ligue Iteka reported that
269 bodies were discovered between January
and December; however, investigations were
rarely conducted before burials.
The police, National Intelligence Service
and members of the ruling party’s youth
wing, the Imbonerakure, were accused of
killing suspected opponents, including
through torture.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The TRC continued to conduct exhumations
of mass graves of victims of the 1972
massacres, which primarily targeted Hutu.
Focusing on the 1972 massacres without
investigating other atrocities, the TRC faced
accusations of bias and of working on behalf
of the ruling party. Separately, between April
and June, the senate organized a series of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

conferences to remember the 1972
massacres, risking pre-empting the TRC’s
conclusions.
In July, the President of the National
Assembly made threatening public remarks
about magistrates and undermined the
independence of the judiciary. The same
month, the Governor of Bujumbura province
proposed regular meetings between the
judiciary and his office to deliberate on
justice-related complaints brought by
residents. In August, President Ndayishimiye
spoke out about allegations of corruption
among judges but took no action to prevent
political interference in the justice system.
The ICC continued its investigation into the
Burundi situation (despite Burundi’s
withdrawal from the Rome Statute), with a
focus on “[a]lleged crimes against humanity
committed in Burundi or by nationals of
Burundi outside Burundi since 26 April 2015
until 26 October 2017”.

CAMBODIA

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

A government crackdown on independent
media, civil society organizations and political
opposition that began in 2017 continued
throughout 2021. The largest opposition
party, the Cambodia National Rescue Party
(CNRP), remained banned following its courtordered dissolution in 2017. The
government’s anti-drug campaign entered its
fifth year.

Between January and September, around 36
Burundians were reported to have arrived in
neighbouring countries as asylum seekers.
The numbers leaving Burundi had reduced
dramatically from March 2020 because of
Covid-19 restrictions on movement and some
border restrictions remained in place in
2021.
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, supported
more than 60,000 people in their return to
Burundi up to the end of October. In June,
Burundi’s Conference of Catholic Bishops
raised concerns about returnees not being
well received in certain areas and being
intimidated by those who were supposed to
support them to reintegrate into society.
1. Burundi: Genuine Reopening of Civic Space Requires Accountability
(Index: AFR 16/3806/2021), 11 March
2. “Burundi: Release of Germain Rukuki a victory for human rights”, 1
July; “Burundi: Germain Rukuki’s prison sentence cut from 32 years
to one”, 22 June
3. Burundi: Lawyer Gets 5-Year Prison Sentence: Tony Germain Nkina
(Index: AFR 16/4636/2021), 20 August

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Kingdom of Cambodia
Head of state: Norodom Sihamoni
Head of government: Hun Sen
New laws on internet use and in response to
the Covid-19 pandemic further extended
restrictions on civil and political rights.
Contraventions of Covid-19 regulations and
criticism of the government were met with
arrest and imprisonment. Members of the
banned opposition party were sentenced to
lengthy prison sentences after unfair mass
trials. Environmental activists were
especially targeted and Indigenous peoples
barred from conservation efforts. Severely
overcrowded prisons and drug detention
centres undermined the right to health of
detainees.

BACKGROUND

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 16 February, Hun Sen signed into law the
Sub-Decree on the Establishment of a
National Internet Gateway which undermined
the right to privacy and encouraged selfcensorship. The regulation required all
internet traffic to pass through a centralized
oversight body charged with monitoring
online activity and internet service providers
to verify the identities of internet users. It also
allowed for network connections “that affect
safety, national revenue, social order, dignity,
culture, tradition and customs” to be blocked
or disconnected.
Authorities continued to use the Covid-19
pandemic as a pretext to restrict freedom of
expression. In early March, Shen Kaidong, a

111

Chinese citizen and editor-in-chief of the
Chinese-language media outlet Angkor Today,
was deported for publishing a story about
vaccines deemed as “fake news” by the
authorities. The same month, the National
Assembly passed the Law on Measures to
Prevent the Spread of Covid-19 and other
Serious, Dangerous and Contagious Diseases
(Covid-19 law), which imposed severe
penalties for contravening Covid-19
restrictions, including prison sentences of up
to 20 years.
According to local NGO LICADHO, at least
258 people were arrested under the Covid-19
law between 10 and 25 April for disobeying
administrative measures. Among these, 83
individuals were prosecuted and jailed.
Dozens more were arrested for criticizing the
government’s Covid-19 response.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Members of the banned opposition party, the
CNRP, continued to face arbitrary arrests and
prosecutions as well as violent attacks by
unidentified assailants. In early January,
mass trials of approximately 150 CNRP
senior leaders and other party members and
supporters began.1 Many of the charges
related to the planned return of self-exiled
CNRP leaders to Cambodia in November
2019, which was characterized as a coup
attempt by the authorities. On 1 March, nine
senior party leaders were found guilty in their
absence of “attempting to commit a felony”
and “attack” under Articles 27 and 451
respectively of Cambodia’s Criminal Code.
Party co-founder Sam Rainsy was sentenced
to 25 years’ imprisonment and others to
between 20 and 22 years.
On 9 November, Veourn Veasna and
Voeung Samnang, both CNRP supporters
and UNHCR-recognized refugees, were
forcibly returned to Cambodia from Thailand
and detained on charges of incitement and
Covid-19 law violations. Hun Sen had
previously ordered Voeurn Veasna's arrest
after he published a poem criticizing him.
The two men remained in pretrial detention
at the end of the year.

112

The authorities failed to investigate physical
attacks against CNRP members and
supporters. In April, a 16-year-old CNRP
supporter was assaulted by two men and
hospitalized with a fractured skull. The
attackers were not found. On 24 June, the
same supporter was arrested and charged
with incitement and insulting public officials
in connection with comments made on the
messaging app Telegram that were critical of
the government. He was sentenced to eight
months in prison and released in November
after serving four and a half months. The
supporter’s father had been arrested in 2020
and was among dozens of CNRP members
facing trial.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Authorities used the judicial system to
unjustly arrest, prosecute and imprison
human rights defenders and environmental
activists. In August, trade union leader Rong
Chhun was convicted of “incitement to
commit a felony or cause social unrest” and
sentenced to two years’ imprisonment. The
trial followed public statements he made
alleging community land loss resulting from
the demarcation of the Cambodia-Viet Nam
border. Opposition activists Sar Kanika and
Ton Nimol were convicted of incitement and
sentenced to 20 months’ imprisonment after
calling for Rong Chhun’s release. Ten others
who also protested against Rong Chhun’s
imprisonment were arrested and charged
with incitement.
Environmental activists affiliated with the
campaign group Mother Nature Cambodia
(MNC) faced judicial harassment throughout
the year. In May, five MNC activists were
convicted of incitement and sentenced to
between 18 and 20 months’ imprisonment
(two were convicted in their absence). They
had been arrested after planning a protest
march against government plans to privatize,
fill and develop the largest remaining lake in
the capital, Phnom Penh.2 In June, three
other MNC activists were charged variously
with “plotting” and “insulting the King” (lèse
majesté), along with one other, again charged
in their absence. They had been arrested

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

while documenting river pollution levels in
Phnom Penh.3 The MNC members were
among 26 activists released in midNovember who also included Rong Chhun
and all those detained for protesting against
his arrest. All were released subject to various
conditions including limits to their rights to
freedom of movement, association and
peaceful assembly.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous peoples and grassroots forest
defenders were denied access to their
traditional lands for conservation activities. In
February, a request by the Prey Lang
Community Network (PLCN) to hold their
annual tree blessing ceremony in the Prey
Lang rainforest was rejected by the Ministry
of the Environment for the second year
running.4 PLCN members – most of whom
were Indigenous Kuy people – remained
banned from entering the Prey Lang Wildlife
Sanctuary to conduct community patrols. The
Prey Preah Roka Forest Community Network
were also prevented from engaging in forest
patrols in Prey Vihear province.
In September, PLCN member Chan Thoeun
was convicted of “intentional violence with
aggravating circumstances” and given a twoyear suspended prison sentence after a
confrontation with an alleged logger during a
forest patrol in 2020. In February, Ministry of
Environment officers arrested and arbitrarily
detained five environmental defenders for
investigating illegal logging in Prey Lang
forest. They were released three days later
after committing not to enter the forest
without permission from authorities.5
Deforestation rates increased by over 20% in
2021, which impacted severely on the
ancestral lands of Indigenous peoples.
Companies implicated in illegal logging
continued to operate with impunity.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, amid rising Covid-19 infection rates,
the authorities imposed severe lockdown
measures – some lasting several weeks – in
parts of the capital and other cities.6 People

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

in areas designated as “red zones” were
prohibited from leaving their homes for any
reason, which seriously impacted their
access to food, healthcare and other
essential goods and services. Humanitarian
NGOs were barred from distributing food and
other aid to at-risk residents in these areas.
Some individuals who posted concerns or
pleas for help on social media were
threatened and intimidated by local
authorities.
Severe overcrowding in prisons and drug
detention centres, exacerbated by the antidrug campaign, continued to violate
detainees’ right to health. Civil society
repeated calls for urgent action to curb the
spread of Covid-19 among detainees,
including through non-custodial alternatives
to detention, but government action was
limited and inadequate.7
1. “Cambodia: 150 opposition politicians and supporters face jail in
mass trials”, 14 January
2. “Cambodia: 'Outrageous' conviction of five environmental activists
must be overturned”, 6 May
3. “Cambodia: Assault on environmental defenders escalates as four
more charged”, 22 June
4. “Cambodia: Widespread illegal logging in Prey Lang rainforest amid
ban on community patrols”, 25 February
5. “Cambodia’s Prey Lang: how not to protect a vital forest”, 13 April
6. “Cambodia: Authorities must avert Covid-19 humanitarian crisis”,
30 April
7. Cambodia: Urgently Address Covid-19 Outbreak in Prisons (Index:
ASA 23/4172/2021), 24 May

CAMEROON
Republic of Cameroon
Head of state: Paul Biya
Head of government: Joseph Dion Ngute
In the Northwest and Southwest regions,
the army and armed separatist groups
committed serious human rights violations
and abuses. In the Far North region, armed
groups continued to carry out deadly raids
on villages. Dozens of opposition party
supporters and anglophone leaders
remained arbitrarily detained. The

113

authorities announced judicial inquiries
after alleged mismanagement of Covid-19
funds.

BACKGROUND
Fighting between armed separatist groups
and the army continued in the Northwest and
Southwest anglophone regions. The armed
conflict in the Far North region continued to
rage with the active presence of the armed
groups Boko Haram and Islamic State in
West Africa Province (ISWAP). As of 31
October, Cameroon hosted more than 1
million internally displaced people in the
Northwest, Southwest and Far North regions.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
According to Human Rights Watch, soldiers
killed at least nine people in the Southwest
region on 10 January and looted homes. On
8 and 9 June, Cameroonian security forces
also killed two people, raped a 53-year-old
woman, and destroyed and looted at least 33
homes, shops and a traditional leader’s
palace in the Northwest region.
Following an improvised explosive device
attack on a Rapid Intervention Battalion
convoy in Bamenda on 8 December,
elements of the army forces reportedly burnt
a large number of houses in the town.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
NORTHWEST AND SOUTHWEST REGIONS
Armed groups continued to commit grave
human rights abuses in the Northwest and
Southwest regions, targeting people,
healthcare facilities and schools.
From January to June,OCHA reported 29
attacks on healthcare facilities in the
Northwest region and seven in the Southwest
region; health workers and patients were
abducted and installations were burnt.
On 9 January, the head of a school in
Ossing, Southwest region, was reportedly
killed by unidentified men. According to the
OCHA, on 5 March unidentified armed men
abducted a student from a school in the
village of Batoke, Southwest region. On 6
March, armed men abducted two teachers
and a student from a school in Bamenda,

114

Southwest region. On 24 November,
unidentified gunmen attacked a school in
Ekondo Titi, Southwest region, killing four
students and a teacher.
On 27 February, suspected armed
separatists abducted a doctor in the
Northwest region, accusing him of not
supporting the separatist cause. He was
released after payment of a ransom. On 13
March, according to the National Union of
Journalists, a journalist at Cameroon Radio
Television was abducted from her home by
suspected armed separatists. She was
released after payment of a ransom. On 15
June, six civil servants were abducted in
Misore-Balue, Southwest region, and one of
them was executed, according to government
media and human rights organizations.
Traditional authorities were also targeted,
suspected of siding with the Cameroonian
government. On 13 February, armed men
abducted four traditional leaders in Fontem,
Southwest region. Three of them were
reportedly later found dead.
These human rights abuses happened in
the context of growing inter-communal
tensions. Between 22 and 26 February, at
least 4,200 people were displaced from
seven villages in Nwa subdivision, Northwest
region, after attacks by Fulani vigilante
groups, resulting in the deaths of at least
eight people.
On 5 March, armed men attacked Fulani
herdsmen in the lower Menchum valley in
Boyo, Northwest region, killing at least 10
people, after the herdsmen’s cattle had
allegedly destroyed a farmer’s crops.
According to the OCHA, two days later in the
same locality armed men attacked Fulani
people, killing six people, allegedly to avenge
the death of a woman burnt alive in her
house in Beneng village.
FAR NORTH REGION
Boko Haram and ISWAP continued to
commit serious human rights abuses in the
Far North region, including killings,
abductions, looting and burning of homes
and properties, mostly targeting farmers and
fishermen in remote areas.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

As of 24 October, at least 70 civilians had
been reportedly killed in at least 51 attacks.
On 8 January a female suicide bomber killed
at least 15 people in Mozogo.
According to reports, at least 15 fishermen
were abducted on 30 August in Blaram
village, and on 10 November four villagers
were killed in a village of Mokolo commune in
an attack attributed to Boko Haram.
DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Doctors Without Borders announced on 3
August that it had been forced to withdraw
teams from the Northwest region, after the
authorities suspended its activities in
December 2020, accusing it of supporting
local armed groups.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
The UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, in two Opinions adopted in August
2019 and May 2021, called for the release of
Mancho Bibixy Tse and Tsi Conrad. The two
men had led protests in the anglophone
regions in 2016 and 2017 and were
sentenced by a military court in Yaoundé to
15 years in prison, following their conviction
notably for “acts of terrorism, secession,
spreading false information, and contempt for
public bodies and officials”. Dozens of other
anglophone leaders remained in detention
after having been tried by military tribunals.
More than 100 Cameroon Renaissance
Movement (MRC) members and supporters
reportedly remained in arbitrary detention;
they were charged or sentenced by military
courts, for attempted revolution, rebellion,
aggravated assembly, or participation in the
organization of an undeclared public
meeting, in relation to their activism or their
participation in banned protests in
September 2020. Among them, Olivier Bibou
Nissack, the spokesperson of MRC leader
Maurice Kamto, and Alain Fogué Tedom,
national treasurer of the MRC,were
sentenced to seven years in prison.
On 31 December, after 15 months of
pretrial detention, four members of the Stand
Up for Cameroon movement were found
guilty of “insurrection” and sentenced to 16
months in prison by a military tribunal. They

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

had been arrested during a meeting ahead of
the September protests.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 21 July the authorities banned a
demonstration planned by the MRC for 25
July in Yaoundé, on the grounds of “risk of
serious disturbance to public order” and “risk
of the spread of Covid-19.” However, several
demonstrations in support of the ruling party
were authorized the same month.
On 26 August, the Ministry of Territorial
Administration gave “promoters and
representatives of foreign associations”
working in Cameroon one month to send
them information relating to their
headquarters and offices, and names and
contact details of staff as part of an “updating
operation”; otherwise they would not be
authorized to work in the country. Human
rights defenders and associations denounced
the move.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Civil servants complained in the media about
the lack of financial support by the
government to their establishment to fight
against Covid-19. On 19 May, a report by the
Supreme Court’s audit chamber was leaked
to social media. It revealed potential dubious
contracts, falsified accounts, and the alleged
misappropriation of billions of CFA francs by
government bodies from the Special National
Solidarity Fund – created in March 2020 by
President Paul Biya – for the fight against
Covid-19. On 28 May the authorities
announced judicial inquiries on the
management of Covid-19 funds. As of 28
December, only 1,020,007 Covid-19
vaccinations had been administered.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to be subjected to
human rights violations.
On 8 February, two transgender women
were arrested in a restaurant by gendarmes.
They said they were physically and verbally
assaulted before being transferred to New
Bell prison in Douala. Both were charged

115

with attempted homosexuality, affront to
public decency and non-possession of
identity cards, and were sentenced to five
years’ imprisonment and a fine of 200,000
FCFA (about US$345). They were released in
June pending appeal.
On 24 February, according to Human
Rights Watch, police forces raided the office
of Colibri, an HIV/AIDS prevention and
treatment group in Bafoussam, West region,
and arrested 13 people on charges of
homosexuality, before releasing them a few
days later. Those arrested said they were
forced to sign statements, were physically
and verbally assaulted, and were forced to
undergo HIV tests and anal examinations.
Article 347-1 of the Criminal Code punishes
with up to five years’ imprisonment “any
person who has sexual relations with a
person of his sex”.

CANADA
Canada
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Governor
General Mary May Simon (replaced Julie Payette in July)
Head of government: Justin Trudeau
There were concerns about government
responses to the Covid-19 pandemic and
inaction on the rights of Indigenous
peoples, Black and racialized communities,
women, refugees and migrants.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In April, the CERD Committee called on
Canada to investigate allegations of racist
violence against Mi’kmaw people.
In June, parliament passed a law
implementing the UN Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
INDIGENOUS CHILDREN
Between May and the end of the year, the
remains of more than 1,381 Indigenous
children buried at six former residential
schools were located. The Canadian
government established the schools, and
churches administered them.1

116

The authorities failed to fully implement and
share a public timeline for the 94 calls to
action of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission of Canada or to implement the
142 calls for action from the Public Inquiry
Commission on relations between Indigenous
peoples and public services in Quebec.
In September, the Federal Court upheld the
Canadian Human Rights Tribunal ruling
ordering Ottawa to pay Can$40,000
(approximately US$32,000) to each of the
approximately 50,000 First Nations children
forcibly separated from their families. At the
end of the year, the parties reached an
agreement-in-principle whereby Can$20
billion (approximately US$15.7 billion) will be
paid in compensation to First Nations
children who were removed from their homes
and approximately Can$20 billion over five
years will be spent on long-term reform of the
First Nations Child and Family Services
program.
JOYCE’S PRINCIPLE
In February, the minister of Indigenous
services announced Can$2 million
(approximately US$1.6 million) in funding to
the Conseil de la Nation Atikamekw (Council
of Atikamekw Nation) and the Conseil des
Atikamekw de Manawan (Atikamekw Council
of Manawan) to advance their advocacy for
the implementation of Joyce's Principle,
which aims to guarantee all Indigenous
people the right to equitable access to all
social and health services without
discrimination. The Principle was named
after Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman
who was subjected to racist taunts by
hospital staff before dying in a Quebec
hospital in September 2020.
In September, the Quebec provincial
government again denied the existence of
systemic racism in the province and
continued to refuse to adhere to Joyce’s
Principle. The coroner's report investigating
Joyce Echaquan’s death stated that the
province of Quebec's government must
acknowledge the existence of systemic
racism and commit to eliminating it.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO WATER, HEALTH AND HOUSING
Canada did not meet its commitment to
ensure access to safe, clean water in First
Nations communities by 31 March 2021. In
October, petroleum was discovered in
Iqaluit’s water supply, forcing residents to rely
on alternative sources.
Despite the prevalence of Covid-19,
Indigenous peoples continued to lack
healthcare facilities and services, and lived in
underfunded and overcrowded housing.

DISCRIMINATION
Racialized communities continued to
experience systemic racism, including in
interactions with police forces. In December
2020, Black federal employees launched a
landmark class-action lawsuit against the
federal government, alleging decades of
systemic and institutional racism in public
services. The case remained pending before
the Federal Court of Canada at the end of the
year.
In May, Indigenous leaders called for an
investigation of the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police on Vancouver Island after the shooting
of two Tla-o-qui-aht people in the first half of
2021 which left one dead and one seriously
injured. In July, the First Nations Leadership
Council renewed the same call following the
shooting of a Wet'suwet'en man in British
Columbia.
In August, the Commission des droits de la
personne et des droits de la jeunesse du
Quebec (Human Rights and Youth Rights
Commission of Quebec) published a report
indicating that racial profiling complaints had
increased by 87%, from 46 in 2018-2019 to
86 in 2020-2021.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Between 21 March 2020 and 21 June 2021,
444 people seeking asylum were pushed
back to the USA under measures to curb the
Covid-19 pandemic. These measures were
rescinded on 20 November 2021.
In April, the Federal Court of Appeal
overturned a decision that found the CanadaUS Safe Third Country Agreement
unconstitutional. In December, the Supreme

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Court of Canada granted leave to appeal
against that decision.
Immigration detention practices continued
to violate international human rights law,
including the rights of children and people
with disabilities.2

WOMENS’ RIGHTS
The 2021-2022 federal budget included a
commitment of over Can$27 billion
(approximately US$21 billion) over five years
to create a national affordable childcare
system.
In March, the Canadian Alliance for Sex
Work Law Reform launched a lawsuit to strike
down Canada’s laws criminalizing sex work
on the grounds that these laws violate sex
workers’ rights. The case was pending at the
end of the year.
In June, Canada launched a National Action
Plan to implement the 231 Calls for Justice
from the National Inquiry into Missing and
Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls, but
failed to outline accountability measures and
an implementation timeline.
In June, the Senate Standing Committee on
Human Rights released a report on forced
and coerced sterilization, a practice that
disproportionately impacts Indigenous
women, girls and two-spirit people.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A bill to criminalize “conversion therapy”, a
process that seeks to change a person’s
sexual orientation or suppress a person’s
gender identity or expression, became law on
8 December.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In January, Amazon factory staff reportedly
continued to work despite health and safety
concerns related to the pandemic. The
company opposed workers’ attempts to
unionize.
Canadian resource extraction companies
continued to operate extraterritorially with
little human rights or environmental oversight
from the Canadian or host-state
governments.

117

Developers of the Trans Mountain pipeline
did not obtain the free, prior, informed
consent of all Secwepemc communities
affected. In April, several men attacked
Secwepemc women land defenders at a
camp in Blue River, British Columbia, who
were protesting against the construction of
the company's industrial camps.
Between September and December, armed
Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers
arrested 36 peaceful land defenders opposed
to the construction of the Coastal Gaslink
pipeline in Wet’suwet’en traditional territory in
British Columbia, including three journalists
covering the protests.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Canada continued to subsidize the fossil fuel
industry, specifically exploration and
development projects, and exploitation and
transport of oil and gas.
In June, the federal government enacted
Canada﻿'s first climate accountability
legislation, the Canadian Carbon Neutrality
Accountability Act.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
Canada continued to transfer arms to
Colombia despite militarized repression of
demonstrations that resulted in human rights
violations. Canada continued to export arms
to Saudi Arabia, despite risk assessments of
the transfers that did not conform to the
Arms Trade Treaty.3
1. Canada: Justice for Indigenous Children (Index: AMR 20/4279/2021),
14 June
2. Canada: ﻿I ﻿Didn’t ﻿Feel L﻿ike a ﻿Human in ﻿There﻿: Immigration ﻿Detention
in Canada and its Impact on ﻿Mental ﻿Health (Index: AMR
20/4195/2021), 17 June
3. “Canada-Saudi arms deal flouts international law: Amnesty
International, Project Ploughshares report”, 11 August

118

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Central African Republic
Head of state: Faustin-Archange Touadéra
Head of government: Henri-Marie Dondra (replaced
Firmin Ngrébada in June)
Unlawful attacks, killings and other
violations and abuses, including war crimes,
continued in the framework of the armed
conflict. Civilians were killed, people were
summarily executed, humanitarian workers
faced attacks and cases of sexual violence
were documented. There was impunity for
the most serious crimes.

BACKGROUND
Several armed groups led by former
president François Bozizé forming the
Coalition of Patriots for Change (CPC)
launched an offensive in January on the
capital, Bangui, with the aim of preventing
the presidential elections from going ahead.
On 18 January, the Constitutional Court
officially declared that President Touadéra
had won a second term. Throughout the year,
national forces and their allies – Rwandan
soldiers and mercenaries – led a counteroffensive to retake territories controlled by
armed groups. According to the OCHA, at the
end of November there were 670,000
internally displaced people in the country,
with limited access to water, food, healthcare
and education.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Unlawful attacks, killings and other violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and
human rights law, some of which amount to
war crimes, were committed by all parties to
the conflict.
According to the UN, members of the CPC
attacked and looted health centres in
Mbomou prefecture in January. They also
attacked or occupied at least 37 schools from
January to June, preventing free access to
education for thousands of children.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In March in Ouaka prefecture, elements of
the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique
(affiliated with the CPC) tortured and killed
three traders for participating in the bylegislative election process. The victims’
bodies were found with their voter cards tied
around their necks.
The UN Working Group on the use of
mercenaries reported that in February,
following clashes in the town of Bambari,
national forces and their allies targeted a
mosque, killing 14 people including a woman
and a child. A health facility was also targeted
in contravention of international humanitarian
law. According to Médecins Sans Frontières,
36 war-wounded people, including eight
women and nine children aged 17 months to
17 years, were treated at the health centre in
Bambari.
According to the OCHA, in June, national
forces and their allies closed and burnt down
a camp for internally displaced people in
Bambari where some 8,500 people were
living.
According to the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), 228 civilians
were killed between June and October as a
result of the conflict.
The use of improvised explosive devices
was documented by the UN: in the west of
the country, in the first half of the year, at
least 15 civilians – including a child – were
killed, 24 were injured, and two
peacekeepers were also killed.
ATTACKS AGAINST HUMANITARIAN WORKERS
Attacks on humanitarian workers by armed
groups or unidentified individuals continued
as the security situation deteriorated.
According to the OCHA, as of December, 396
incidents affecting humanitarian workers
were recorded, compared to 424 in 2020.
Thefts, robberies, looting, threats and attacks
represented 65% of security incidents.
According to the UN Secretary-General's
report, three aid workers were killed and 23
others injured between June and October as
a result of explosive devices.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
In the context of the conflict, Central African
armed forces and their allies carried out
extrajudicial executions of people suspected
of belonging to or supporting the CPC.
According to the UN, on 3 January, six
people detained on suspicion of being
members of the CPC, including a young boy,
were executed in an army camp in Mbomou
prefecture. In February in Ouaka prefecture,
three men were executed by members of the
national forces and their allies. Between
March and June, the UN documented
executions by national forces and their allies
of at least 17 people, including civilians and a
minor, in the prefectures of BaminguiBangoran, Ouham Pendé and Nana Gribizi.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Cases of violence against women and girls
were reported by the UN. Six girls aged
between 14 and 16 were drugged and raped
daily by members of the rebel group Return,
Reclamation and Rehabilitation (known as
3R) at a base in the Nana Mambere area in
January. They eventually managed to escape.
According to MINUSCA, between January
and June, 131 cases of conflict-related
sexual violence, including 115 rapes, 12
attempted rapes, one case of sexual slavery
and three forced marriages, were
documented. The attacks were mostly
attributed to CPC members; 19 were
attributed to members of the national forces
and their allies. From July to October,
MINUSCA received 118 reports of conflictrelated sexual violence.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Despite the requirement under Central
African law that at least six criminal sessions
be held per year, none were held in 2021.
Hundreds of individuals were held in pretrial
detention, often after legal time limits had
expired.
Investigations by the Special Criminal Court
(SCC), the UN-backed hybrid court
mandated to investigate and prosecute
crimes under international law and other

119

serious human rights violations committed in
the country since 2003, were ongoing but no
cases were sent to trial. In December, an
appeal hearing before the special indictment
chamber was made public. It concerned
three men charged with crimes against
humanity for killings that took place in 2019
in the Paoua sous-prefecture. The SCC
announced that it had issued 25 arrest
warrants. Only one of them was executed,
leading to the arrest in November of Hassan
Bouba Ali, the minister for livestock and
animal health. He was released several days
later by defence and security forces without
any authorization from the judges.1
In May, the government set up a
Commission of Inquiry following allegations
by the UN of violations of international
humanitarian law committed by all parties
since the beginning of the CPC offensive. In
October the minister of justice presented the
results of this investigation, in which the
authorities acknowledged certain allegations
against national forces and its allies, and the
majority of allegations made against armed
groups. The report was not made public and
the next steps were not known.

RIGHT TO FOOD AND RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization, the number of people in the
country facing acute food insecurity
increased from 1.9 million to 2.29 million
during the first half of the year, exacerbated
by the deterioration in security. According to
UNICEF, in July at least 80,000 children
under five were at risk of acute malnutrition,
an increase of 29% from previous projections
for 2021, and nationwide 40% of children
under five were already chronically
malnourished.
According to the WHO and several NGOs,
health centres, especially outside the capital,
lacked qualified medical personnel as well as
essential medicines and equipment. Several
health centres were looted of drugs and other
goods during the offensive in January,
aggravating an already dire situation.
According to the WHO, despite a decline in
measles infections in 2021, the unavailability

120

of vaccines in certain areas was hindering the
fight against the disease.
As of 31 December, a total of 514,271
vaccine doses against Covid-19 had been
administered and 346,000 people were fully
vaccinated (of an estimated population of 5
million). Priority for vaccination was given to
health personnel and vulnerable people.
Vaccination was extended to the
administrative centres of prefectures from
August.
1. One Step Forward, Two Steps Backwards: Justice in the Central
African Republic (Index: AFR 19/5038/2021), 8 December

CHAD
Republic of Chad
Head of state: Mahamat Idriss Déby (replaced Idriss
Déby Itno in April)
Head of government: Albert Pahimi Padacké (position
created in April)
Repression of government critics continued;
the authorities arbitrarily detained human
rights defenders and civil society activists
and violated the right to freedom of
expression. Some protests were banned and
security forces used excessive force against
peaceful protesters defying the ban.
Violence and discrimination against women
and girls persisted. Access to food and
healthcare remained precarious for a large
part of the population.

BACKGROUND
In the run-up to the 11 April presidential
elections, a platform called Wakit Tama (“the
time has come”), made up of opposition
parties, unions and NGOs, mobilized to
protest against the electoral process, which
they considered to be non-transparent and
non-inclusive. From April a Chadian armed
group based in Libya – the Front pour
l'alternance et la concorde au Tchad (FACT)
– carried out several attacks in the north and
west of the country. Before the official
announcement by the electoral commission
of the re-election of President Idriss Déby

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Itno for a sixth term, he was killed during a
visit to the combat zone. His death led to the
establishment of a transitional military council
led by his son, Mahamat Idriss Déby.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In June, Baradine Berde Targuio, president of
the Chadian Organization for Human Rights,
was released on parole. He was serving a
three-year prison sentence, having been
arrested on 24 January 2020 following a
Facebook post alleging that President Idriss
Déby was ill. He spent nearly seven months
in incommunicado detention before being
charged in August 2020 with breaching
national security, illegal possession of
weapons, assault and battery. The conditions
of his release were not clarified.
Mahamat Nour Ibedou, the Secretary
General of the Chadian Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights, who joined the
Wakit Tama coalition in several
demonstrations against the regime, suffered
harassment from the judicial authorities.
They summoned him several times for his
participation in the demonstrations and he
was arrested in March during a protest
against Idriss Déby’s candidacy for a sixth
term. He was released without charge after
three days in detention. He was summoned
again in July following a complaint lodged by
the Ministry of Public Security in relation to a
statement he made denouncing the
conditions of detention of FACT members.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Between January and May, the Chadian
authorities denied people the right to
peaceful protest by systematically banning
gatherings on the grounds that they were
likely to disturb public order. These bans
were defied by demonstrators protesting first
against the electoral process and later the
establishment of the transitional government.
Security forces used excessive force to
disperse peaceful protests.
In February at least 14 demonstrators were
arrested in the capital, N’Djamena, and
charged with “assault and battery, disturbing

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

public order and destroying state property”.1
They were released after a few days. The
same month, the home of a political
opponent was attacked by the security forces
because he allegedly refused to respond to
several summons from the courts.2 According
to local human rights NGOs, this attack
resulted in the deaths of two of his relatives,
who were inside the house.
In April and May at least 16 demonstrators
were killed in N’Djamena and the southern
city of Moundou during protests organized by
the Wakit Tama coalition.3 Dozens more were
injured and at least 700 protesters were
arrested. Many of those arrested were
released immediately after the protests.
Several people testified that they were
targeted by law enforcement officers with
lethal weapons while demonstrating. The
authorities announced the opening of a
judicial investigation into these incidents. A
police officer who allegedly fired his weapon
was suspended. Information on the progress
of the investigation remained unavailable at
the end of the year.
In May, a demonstration in support of the
authorities was authorized by the transitional
government, while one organized by the
Wakit Tama platform was banned.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Widespread discrimination and violence
against women and girls continued. In June,
women protested in the streets against sexual
violence and a culture of impunity for
perpetrators, after the gang rape of a 15-yearold girl was filmed and shared on social
media.
Girls’ enrolment in secondary school
continued to fall, from 31% in 2017 to 12%
in 2021, according to the World Economic
Forum. (Boys’ enrolment in secondary
education in 2021 was 25%.) This was partly
due to nationwide school closures in 2020-21
because of the Covid-19 pandemic, a period
during which several organizations noted an
increased rate of early and forced marriage.

121

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, food
insecurity and malnutrition affected 5.5
million Chadians, including 1.7 million in its
severe form. The situation remained
precarious in the provinces where the
activities of armed groups disrupted harvests
and forced people to move. In addition, 1.7
million people were affected by health
emergencies, including children and
pregnant and breastfeeding women.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to the WHO and the Chadian
Ministry of Health, a measles epidemic broke
out in the country, with 264 confirmed cases
and 15 deaths. The southern provinces were
most affected and the low vaccination
coverage risked a further outbreak.
At least 350,000 cases of malaria were
confirmed during the year, resulting in 546
deaths, according to the National Epidemic
Control Committee. Hospitals were
overwhelmed by the number of cases and
were not able to treat all patients because of
a shortage of beds. The Ministry of Health
disinfected several districts of N’Djamena
and distributed impregnated mosquito nets.
As of December, Chad had recorded 6,185
cases of Covid-19 and 184 deaths. The
number of vaccinated amounted to 367,000
people but only 80,663 had completed the
vaccination schedule (for an estimated
population of 17 million). Chad benefited
from the COVAX initiative and launched its
vaccination campaign in June in N’Djamena,
Moundou and Abéché. In October, the WHO
had reported there were 63 vaccination sites
in the country.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In August, former president Hissène Habré
died in Senegal. On 27 April 2017, the
Chamber of Appeals of the Extraordinary
African Chambers in Dakar had confirmed
Hissène Habré’s conviction and life sentence
for crimes against humanity, war crimes and
torture, including sexual slavery, and ordered

122

him to pay approximately US$150 million in
compensation to victims. In addition, a Trust
Fund for Victims created by the AU was
mandated to locate, trace, freeze and seize
his property, as well as to solicit and obtain
voluntary contributions from states and other
stakeholders. Despite these encouraging
announcements, victims had yet to be
compensated by the end of the year.
A court order from 2015, which awarded
reparations to be paid jointly by the Chadian
state and 20 officers from Hissène Habré’s
regime convicted for murder and torture, had
yet to be implemented, according to the
victims’ lawyers.
1. “Chad: Opposition members and human rights activists banned from
freely protesting ahead of election”, 9 February
2. “Chad: Authorities must investigate raid and killings at presidential
contender’s house”, 1 March
3. “Chad: Deaths following violent crackdown on protests must be
investigated”, 28 April

CHILE
Republic of Chile
Head of state and government: Sebastián Piñera
Echenique
Protests continued during the year, mostly
demanding the release of people detained
in connection with mass protests in
2019-2020, many of whom were held in
unjustified pretrial detention. Excessive use
of force by the police persisted. The
humanitarian crisis faced by thousands of
people, mostly Venezuelans, trying to enter
Chile through the northern border was
exacerbated by mass expulsions.

BACKGROUND
The “state of catastrophe” and curfew
declared in response to the pandemic
remained in force for most of the year.
Covid-19 cases peaked between April and
June, particularly affecting poorer
communities. By the end of the year, the
number of cases had fallen, following a

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

successful vaccination programme, and
restrictions were relaxed.
In July, the Constitutional Convention began
work on drafting a new Constitution.
Presidential and congressional elections were
held at the end of the year; Gabriel Boric was
declared the winner of the presidential
election.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Protests continued, though on a reduced
scale due to the pandemic. Excessive use of
force by police continued; at least two further
cases of eye injuries were recorded.
In February, a street juggler was shot dead
by policemen in the town of Panguipulli. The
Prosecutor’s Office for the Los Ríos region
provided evidence that the fatal shot was
fired while the victim was on the ground and
immobilized. An officer was under
investigation at the end of the year.
In March, the National Human Rights
Institute reported that investigations into over
3,000 cases of human rights violations
committed during the 2019-2020 mass
protests had been halted. The National
Prosecutor’s Office stated that almost half of
its cases had been closed without charges
being brought. In May, the National
Prosecutor instructed all prosecutors to
review their cases and consider reopening
them if minimum investigative standards had
not been met.
Some investigations did make progress
during the year, including those relating to
the injuries sustained by Gustavo Gatica and
Fabiola Campillai1 and those into the deaths
of Manuel Rebolledo and Kevin Gómez.
At least six lawsuits filed against President
Piñera and other current and former
government officials for crimes against
humanity under Chilean law were being
investigated by the Valparaíso Regional
Prosecutor. In April, lawsuits were filed
against high-ranking police officers for failing
to take action to stop the pattern of injuries to
protesters.
At the end of the year, Congress was
debating several bills to simplify access to
civil reparations for victims and expressly

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

prohibit harmful police conduct, such as
sexual abuse during detention and use of
less lethal weapons when policing protests.
In June, President Piñera announced the
creation of a specialized human rights office
within the Prosecutor’s Office, but this had
not yet been established. The reform of the
Carabineros (Chilean police) announced in
2020 had not yet been implemented.
Victims of eye injuries told Amnesty
International that there were serious
shortcomings in the government’s
Comprehensive Programme for Eye
Reparation.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
After the 2019-2020 mass protests,
hundreds of people were detained and
charged with crimes allegedly committed
during protests. This triggered further
protests demanding their release. No state
institution provided a comprehensive list of
those detained, and Amnesty International
received evidence of several instances of
unjustified use of pretrial detention. In some
cases, people were held in pretrial detention
for around a year and were then acquitted or
the case was closed for lack of evidence.
A bill to pardon those charged in connection
with the mass protests was before Congress.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In March, the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights began examining the
admissibility of a petition submitted by three
Mapuche men, José Tralcal, Luis Tralcal and
José Peralino, convicted in an unfair trial in
connection with a fire in which two people
died.
In May, the Supreme Court confirmed the
sentences of seven former policemen and a
lawyer involved in the death of Camilo
Catrillanca, a young Mapuche man, and the
injuries sustained by a teenage boy who was
with him, and in obstructing the investigation
into the case. The two had been shot at by
police during a pursuit of suspects in a
robbery case, in which they were not
involved. Three of the former police officers
were set to serve prison terms.

123

In April, police shot and injured Mapuche
leader Alberto Curamil while detaining him
following a protest and then denied him
immediate treatment. The protest was in
support of Elena Paine, a Mapuche leader
whose house had been set on fire the day
before.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Congress rejected a bill which would have
decriminalized abortion in the first 14 weeks
of pregnancy. Legal abortion therefore
remained restricted to three specific
circumstances.
Chile reached a friendly settlement before
the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, admitting responsibility for the forced
sterilization of a woman with HIV in 2002,
and agreed to implement measures to ensure
informed consent and access to health
services without discrimination for people
with HIV.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A bill legalizing same-sex marriage was
approved and Congress continued to review
anti-discrimination legislation.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Harassment and attacks against
environmental defenders continued. For
example, death threats were made against
Verónica Vilches, an activist working to
defend the right to water in the Petorca
province, and against Marcela Nieto, a
member of the women’s movement
combating air and water pollution in the
Quintero-Puchuncaví sector, one of Chile’s
“sacrifice zones” (geographic areas
experiencing environmental damage or
economic disinvestment).
A proposed law to ensure recognition of
human right defenders was introduced into
Congress in November.

REFUGEES' AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Thousands of people, mostly Venezuelans,
tried to enter Chile on foot across the
northern border near the town of Colchane.
At least 20 people died amid a humanitarian

124

crisis intensified by the government’s inaction
in providing accommodation and assistance
to people seeking protection or providing
resources to support them.
In April, a new migration law entered into
force that severely restricts the ability of
migrants and individuals seeking protection
to regulate their status once in Chile.
Over 500 people were expelled without due
process in what could amount to collective
expulsions as a result of a government
deportation plan. In some cases, people were
informed late on a Friday that they would be
deported that weekend, making it harder to
challenge the expulsion. The National
Human Rights Institute reported that in one
case the police deceived Venezuelan
nationals to get them to sign expulsion
orders, telling them they were registration
papers.
1. “Chile: Amnesty International demands investigations into
Carabineros’ former and current Director Generals for human rights
violations”, 21 July

CHINA
People’s Republic of China
Head of state: Xi Jinping
Head of government : Li Keqiang
The human rights situation across China
continued to deteriorate. Human rights
lawyers and activists reported harassment
and intimidation; unfair trials; arbitrary,
incommunicado and lengthy detention; and
torture and other ill-treatment for simply
exercising their right to freedom of
expression and other human rights. The
government continued a campaign of
political indoctrination, arbitrary mass
detention, torture and forced cultural
assimilation against Muslims living in
Xinjiang. Thousands of Uyghur children
were separated from their parents. The
National Security Law for Hong Kong
enabled human rights violations which were
unprecedented since the establishment of
the Special Administrative Region. There

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

was limited progress in recognizing the
rights of LGBTI people in Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND
On 10 June the National People’s Congress
Standing Committee passed an antisanctions law to counter foreign sanctions
amid increasing international pressure
against grave human rights violations across
the country.
The government called for a reduction in
abortions that are not “medically necessary”
and promulgated a law allowing married
couples to have up to three children,
following a further decline in birth rates.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND
ACTIVISTS
Severe crackdowns on human rights
defenders continued. The authorities arrested
and detained many human rights defenders
and activists for lengthy periods under
unjustifiable, broadly defined and vaguely
worded charges. Without access to family
and to lawyers of their choosing, as well as
effective fair trial mechanisms, many human
rights defenders were reportedly subjected to
torture and other ill-treatment while in
detention. The authorities often continued to
monitor, harass and intimidate individuals
after their release and restrict their freedom
of movement.
Six years after the unprecedented “709
crackdown” against human rights defenders
and lawyers, which involved a series of
coordinated raids across China, many
lawyers remained in prison or under strict
surveillance.
Detained since January 2018 and
sentenced to four years’ imprisonment in
June 2020, prominent human rights lawyer
Yu Wensheng was finally permitted a visit at
Nanjing Prison on 9 May from his wife and
son. According to his wife, he appeared to be
malnourished and in deteriorating health.1
Legal scholar Xu Zhiyong and former
human rights lawyer Ding Jiaxi were
permitted to speak to their lawyers in January
following lengthy incommunicado detention.
Both men revealed that they had been

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

tortured by being bound to an iron “tiger
chair” with their limbs contorted for more
than 10 hours per day for many days. They
were indicted for “subversion of state power”
in October.2
Xu Zhiyong’s partner, the human rights
defender Li Qiaochu, was again detained on
6 February. On 15 March, she was charged
with “inciting subversion of state power” for
demanding Xu Zhiyong’s release and better
treatment. Her mental health deteriorated
during her detention.3
Formally arrested in 2017, human rights
lawyer Li Yuhan, who defended other human
rights lawyers, stood trial on 20 October
charged with “fraud” and “picking quarrels
and provoking trouble”.
Former prisoner of conscience and human
rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng, who was a vital
voice for the vulnerable for many years,
remained missing, his exact location and
condition unclear since August 2017.
Human rights defender Yang Maodong (pen
name Guo Feixiong) went missing on 29
January, the morning after he began a
hunger strike at Shanghai’s Pudong
International Airport to protest against the
authorities preventing him from leaving the
country to visit his critically ill wife in the
USA.4
Human rights lawyer Chang Weiping was
officially charged with “subversion of state
power” on 16 April, six months after police
officers detained him for publicly detailing
torture he experienced when detained in
January 2020. At the end of the year, he was
being held incommunicado at Feng County
Detention Centre.5
Yang Hengjun, a writer and government
critic, stood trial behind closed doors in May.
A verdict had not been released by the end of
the year. Detained for more than 36 months,
he continued to deny all allegations of
espionage and had endured hundreds of
hours of interrogation and ill-treatment.
In August, Cheng Yuan, Liu Yongze and Wu
Gejianxiong, the founder and staff members
of the NGO Changsha Funeng, were
sentenced to between two and five years in
prison in a secret trial for advocating for the

125

rights of marginalized groups and vulnerable
people.
On 5 November, family members of labour
activist Wang Jianbing and #MeToo activist
Sophia Huang Xueqin received arrest notices
from the Guangzhou Security Bureau stating
that they had been detained for “inciting
subversion of state power”.

ETHNIC AUTONOMOUS REGIONS
The government took extreme measures to
prevent free communications, independent
investigations and accurate reporting from
the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region
(Xinjiang) and Tibet Autonomous Region
(Tibet). With a few exceptions for stateorchestrated trips, access and travel to and
from ethnic minority regions remained highly
restricted, particularly for journalists and
human rights organizations. The UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights continued
to request visits with no tangible progress.
XINJIANG
The government continued to implement farreaching policies that severely restricted the
freedoms of Muslims in Xinjiang. These
policies violated multiple human rights,
including the rights to liberty and security of
person; privacy; freedom of movement,
opinion and expression, thought, conscience,
religion and belief; participation in cultural
life; and to equality and non-discrimination.
These violations were carried out in a
widespread and systematic manner to the
extent that they became an inexorable aspect
of daily life for millions of Uyghurs, Kazakhs
and other predominantly Muslim ethnic
minorities in Xinjiang.
Since 2017, under the guise of a campaign
against “terrorism”, the government carried
out massive and systematic abuses against
Muslims living in Xinjiang. Far from a
legitimate response to the purported terrorist
threat, the campaign evinced a clear intent to
target parts of Xinjiang’s population
collectively on the basis of religion and
ethnicity and to use severe violence,
intimidation and arbitrary mass detention to
root out Islamic religious beliefs and Turkic
Muslim ethno-cultural practices. Hundreds of

126

thousands of men and women from
predominantly Muslim ethnic groups were
imprisoned. Hundreds of thousands more, by
some estimates more than 1 million, were
held in internment camps, which the
government called “training” or “education”
centres. Here, detainees endured ceaseless
forced indoctrination, physical and
psychological torture and other ill-treatment.
Torture methods used during interrogations
and as punishment included beatings,
electric shocks, stress positions, the unlawful
use of restraints, including being locked in a
“tiger chair”, sleep deprivation, being hung
from a wall, extremely cold temperatures and
solitary confinement.
Despite a government announcement in
December 2019 that internment camps had
been closed and all residents had “returned
to society”, there remained credible evidence
that many people interned in Xinjiang were
transferred and remained in detention. Large
numbers of families continued to report their
relatives missing, believed to be detained.6
Between October 2019 and May 2021
Amnesty International gathered conclusive
evidence that the Chinese government had
committed at least the following crimes
against humanity: imprisonment or other
severe deprivation of physical liberty, torture
and persecution.
The government prevented millions of
Xinjiang residents from communicating freely.
People living abroad were often unable to
obtain information about family members in
Xinjiang. The mass detention campaign
combined with the systematic repression
prevented Uyghur parents who were studying
or working abroad from returning to care for
their children. It remained almost impossible
for these children to leave China to reunite
with their parents abroad. Some parents
reported that their children had been taken to
“orphan camps”, where they were barred
from speaking in their mother tongues or
communicating with their families.
In February, former women detainees spoke
out about being subjected to or witnessing
sexual violence, including rape, in “reeducation centres” in Xinjiang. The Chinese

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

authorities did not share details of any
investigation into the allegations. Instead, a
foreign ministry spokesperson accused the
women of lying, of having an “inferior
character” and a “chaotic private life”, of
being “lazy”, of committing adultery and of
having sexually transmitted diseases. The
government also shared the women’s private
medical data at a press conference.
Uyghur tech entrepreneur Ekpar Asat was
convicted without any known trial on charges
of “inciting ethnic hatred and ethnic
discrimination” and sentenced to 15 years in
prison. According to information shared with
his family, he had been held in solitary
confinement since January 2019 in
conditions which caused his health to
deteriorate.7
Weilina Muhatai, an ethnic Kazakh woman
living in Xinjiang, and her two sons, Muheyati
Haliyoula and Parisati Haliyoula, remained
missing since August 2020. They may have
been detained for their activism on behalf of
their imprisoned husband and father,
Haliyoula Tuerxun. Following their
disappearance, other relatives were informed
that Haliyoula Tuerxun died in detention in
December 2020.
Following a stay in hospital, Uyghur woman
Mahira Yakub was returned to Yining
Detention Centre in Xinjiang in late November
2020, where she remained without access to
her family or a lawyer of her choosing. She
went missing in April 2019 and was indicted
in January 2020 for “giving material support
to terrorist activity” after transferring money
to her parents in Australia to buy a house.8
The Chinese authorities continued to
pressure other governments to return
Uyghurs living abroad back to China. Idris
Hasan was arrested at Casablanca airport on
19 July after flying to Morocco from Turkey.
Detained for more than five months, Idris
Hasan remained at risk of extradition to
China where he could face lengthy arbitrary
detention and torture and other ill-treatment.
TIBET
Tibetan monk Rinchen Tsultrim was
sentenced to four years and six months’
imprisonment in a secret trial for “inciting

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

secession” after expressing political views on
his social media account. Held
incommunicado since 1 August 2019, his
family members only learned of his trial,
alleged crime and whereabouts through a
response from the Chinese authorities to UN
human rights experts in August 2021.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Tight controls and restrictions on online
freedom of expression continued. On 8
February, the Chinese authorities blocked
Clubhouse, an audio app used by thousands
of people across China and elsewhere to
discuss topics including Xinjiang and Hong
Kong. The Personal Information Protection
Law took effect on 1 November, further
regulating cyberspace and enforcing
localization of data. Microsoft-owned social
network site LinkedIn closed its localized
Chinese version due to the “significantly
more challenging operating environment and
greater compliance requirements in China”.
Human rights defenders, activists and
citizen journalists risked their lives reporting
on the Covid-19 outbreak and were a vital
source of uncensored first-hand information.
The government subjected them to
harassment and reprisals, including
detention. Former lawyer Zhang Zhan, who
was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment in
December 2020 for reporting on the
Covid-19 outbreak in the city of Wuhan
earlier that year, began a partial hunger strike
to protest against her incarceration. Her
health deteriorated and her life was at risk.
Citizen journalist Chen Qiushi was released
more than 600 days after being detained in
February 2020. The whereabouts of citizen
journalist Fang Bin, who went missing in
February 2020 after reporting on the
Covid-19 outbreak, remained unclear.

DEATH PENALTY
China remained the world’s leading
executioner, although figures on executions
and death sentences remained a state secret,
preventing independent scrutiny.
On 10 August, Robert Schellenberg, a
Canadian national convicted of drug

127

trafficking, had his prison sentence increased
to a death sentence during a one-day retrial.
The trial coincided with a diplomatic dispute
between Canada and China.
As in previous years, Amnesty
International’s monitoring suggested that the
death penalty was mostly used to punish
murder and drug-related offences, out of the
46 offences for which it remained applicable.
Among these were many non-violent acts that
do not meet the threshold of the “most
serious crimes” under international law and
standards. Two Uyghur ex-government
officials were sentenced to death in Xinjiang,
where the death penalty was known to have
been used secretively after grossly unfair
proceedings in previous years.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The National Radio and Television
Administration, China’s main television
regulator, ordered broadcasters to ban all socalled “sissy” (effeminate) men from
television, a continuation of a nationwide
campaign to “clean” the internet of LGBTI
representation. The new rules included
shutting down content considered “harmful”
to young people and encouraging “extreme”
fan culture. In July, dozens of LGBTI
organizations’ social media accounts were
shut down by the authorities. In an
announcement issued by the National Radio
and Television Administration in September,
non-traditional gender roles and LGBTI
people were described as “abnormal” and
“vulgar”.

HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
REGION
Throughout the year the authorities rapidly
expanded the national security legal regime
in Hong Kong, further extending the
application of the overly broad definition of
“endangering national security” to
disproportionately restrict human rights. In
March, mainland China’s legislature passed a
decision to reduce directly elected seats in
the Legislative Council elections in Hong
Kong and allow national security police to vet
all candidates before they run for elections.

128

In October the Legislative Council passed a
law allowing the government to censor films
deemed to “endanger national security”.
NATIONAL SECURITY LAW
The National Security Law (NSL) introduced
in 2020 enabled human rights violations that
were unprecedented since the establishment
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region in 1997. There was a rapid
deterioration of freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association, and other
human rights in Hong Kong after the
enactment of the law.9 At least 61 civil society
organizations disbanded in response to the
threat generated by the law, including Hong
Kong’s largest professional union and
organizers of major peaceful protests. The
political opposition in Hong Kong was
effectively obliterated following the arrest of
55 people, mainly pro-democracy lawmakers
and activists, under the NSL on 6 January.
There was clear evidence that the human
rights safeguards set out in the NSL were
effectively useless. Peaceful political
expression was disproportionately restricted
and even criminalized under the NSL. The
prosecution used incidents preceding
enactment of the law as evidence when
pressing NSL charges, contradicting the legal
principle of non-retroactivity. Article 42 of the
NSL stipulates that individuals suspected of
violating the NSL are to be denied bail
“unless the judge has sufficient grounds for
believing that they will not continue to
commit acts endangering national security”.
This effective reversal of the presumption of
bail violates core principles of the rights to a
fair trial and to liberty and security of person.
Between 1 July 2020 and the end of 2021,
police arrested or ordered the arrest of at
least 161 people in relation to the NSL. At
least 82 people were formally charged, of
whom 60 were in pretrial detention at the end
of the year.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
The authorities used other repressive laws,
such as the Public Order Ordinance, to
prosecute and imprison activists for taking
part in peaceful assemblies and exercising
their right to freedom of expression. Police

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

continued to use Covid-19 as a pretext to
arbitrarily ban peaceful assemblies.
During the year, 24 activists were sentenced
to between four and 16 months in prison for
“unauthorized assembly” for their
participation in Hong Kong’s annual vigil to
commemorate the Tiananmen Square
crackdown of 4 June 1989. Human rights
lawyer and activist Chow Hang-tung was
charged with “inciting others to knowingly
participate in a banned rally” after publishing
a social media post asking people to
commemorate the date in a private manner.
Despite allowing other large-scale open-air
events to take place, police banned the June
4th candlelight vigil for the second year
running.
The national security police used extensive
powers granted by the NSL to investigate
activists and civil society organizations. From
August onwards, they sent letters to civil
society organizations demanding information,
including the personal details of their
members, staff and partner organizations, as
well as their finances and activities. Members
of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of
Patriotic Democratic Movements of China
(the Alliance) and the Civil Human Rights
Front (CHRF) were charged under the NSL
after they refused to comply with these
requests.
The authorities targeted those civil society
groups which had broad support and the
capacity to mobilize people. The city’s largest
teachers’ union, the Hong Kong Professional
Teachers’ Union, and the largest prodemocracy labour rights group, the Hong
Kong Confederation of Trade Unions, ceased
operation in August and September
respectively in the face of “enormous
pressure” from the authorities. The police
accused the Alliance and the CHRF of “being
a foreign agent” and “colluding with foreign
forces”. The police used the annual June 4th
candlelight vigil as evidence of the Alliance
“endangering national security”. On 6
September, the Alliance and four of its
recently resigned committee members were
charged with inciting subversion. The police
also froze the assets of the Alliance. In

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

October, Hong Kong’s Chief Executive
ordered the Alliance to be struck off the
Company Registry on the grounds that the
group’s goal to end one-party leadership in
China threatened national security.
On 25 October, Amnesty International
announced the closure of its two offices in
Hong Kong because of risks and restrictions
posed by the NSL.10
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Hong Kong government further tightened
controls over freedom of expression in the
media, online and in schools and universities.
From January onwards, the authorities
ordered internet service providers to sever
access to websites that allegedly “endanger
national security”. In July, police arrested five
speech therapists for conspiracy to distribute
seditious materials after they published
children’s books depicting the government’s
crackdown since 2019. The government later
revoked the registration of the speech
therapists’ union. In August, four university
students were charged with “advocating
terrorism” after passing a motion at a student
union council meeting to mourn a man who
stabbed a police officer before killing himself.
The authorities continued to arrest, charge
and imprison individuals solely for their
legitimate peaceful expression and
association. On 6 January, police arrested 55
members of the political opposition under the
NSL in relation to their organization and
participation in self-organized “primaries” in
2020 for the subsequently postponed
Legislative Council election. Forty-seven of
them were later charged with “conspiracy to
subversion”. Under the NSL, the High Court
and District Court imposed heavy sentences
on individuals peacefully exercising their right
to freedom of expression. Activist Ma Chunman was convicted of “inciting subversion”
and sentenced to five years and nine months’
imprisonment for chanting slogans, posting
on social media and giving interviews.
Student activist Tony Chung was sentenced
to three years and seven months’
imprisonment for trumped-up charges of
sedition and money laundering.

129

MEDIA RESTRICTIONS
Apple Daily, the only pro-democracy daily
newspaper in Hong Kong, was forced to
cease operation on 24 June after police
arrested the paper’s founder Jimmy Lai, five
senior executives and two editorial staff under
the NSL. Police accused the newspaper of
“colluding with foreign forces” by publishing
articles relating to sanctions imposed on
Chinese and Hong Kong government officials
by foreign governments. The authorities
subsequently froze HK$18 million (US$2.32
million) of assets owned by companies linked
to Apple Daily. On 29 December, senior
executives and board members of Stand
News were arrested for “seditious
publications”, an archaic colonial-era
provision last amended in the 1970s.
National security police officers raided the
online news outlet and authorities confirmed
that they froze more than HK$61 million
(approximately US$7.8 million) in assets.
Stand News ceased operation on the same
day.
The government heavily restructured public
broadcaster Radio Television Hong Kong
(RTHK), removing all the videos in its online
archive, dismissing hosts who were critical of
the government, and cancelling shows that
did not follow official lines.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The government failed to grant same-sex
couples in Hong Kong equal rights and
continued to recognize same-sex partnership
rights in a piecemeal manner. In March, a
gay widower filed a judicial review against the
government after he was not recognized as
the next-of-kin of his late husband,
preventing him from identifying his spouse’s
body or making funeral arrangements. He
later withdrew the legal challenge as the
government clarified that there was no
distinction between same-sex couples and
heterosexual couples in policies related to
such matters. In June the High Court ruled
that the subsidized housing policy constitutes
discrimination on grounds of sexual
orientation, and that same-sex couples
should be allowed to own subsidized
housing.

130

Despite setting up an inter-departmental
working group on gender recognition in 2014
and carrying out a consultation in 2017, the
Hong Kong government made no progress
towards drafting a gender-recognition law.
The Taiwan Gay Sports and Movement
Association decided to not send any teams to
join the Gay Games to be held in Hong Kong
in 2023 because of the risks posed by the
NSL.
1. China: Further Information: Transferred 1,000km from family,
medical care needed: Yu Wensheng (Index: ASA 17/3729/2021), 22
February
2. China: Further Information: Prominent Legal Scholar Indicted for
Subversion – Xu Zhiyong (Index: ASA 17/4912/2021), 24 October
3. ﻿China: Activist detained for reporting torture: Li Qiaochu (Index: ASA
17/3784/2021), 4 March
4. China: Activist on Hunger Strike After Travel Ban – Yang Maodong
(Index: ASA 17/3599/2021), 1 February
5. China: Further Information: Lawyer Faces Charges for Reporting
Torture – Chang Weiping (Index: ASA 17/4023/2021), 28 April
6. China: "Like We Were Enemies in a War”: China’s Mass Internment,
Torture and Persecution of Muslims in Xinjiang (Index: ASA
17/4137/2021), 10 June
7. China: Further Information: Uyghur Held in Solitary Confinement for
Two Years – Ekpar Asat (Index: ASA 17/4022/2021), 26 April
8. China: Further Information: Uyghur Again Detained Incommunicado –
Mahira Yakub (Index: ASA 17/3491/2021), 7 January
9. Hong Kong: In the Name of National Security (Index: ASA
17/4197/2021), 29 June
10. “Amnesty International to close its Hong Kong offices”, 25 October

COLOMBIA
Republic of Colombia
Head of state and government: Iván Duque Márquez
Crimes under international law and human
rights violations in the context of the
ongoing armed conflict increased in the
departments of Chocó, Cauca, Valle del
Cauca, Nariño and Norte de Santander.
Eight children were killed by the security
forces targeting the armed groups the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC-EP) and the National Liberation
Army (ELN) in Chocó, Guaviare, and
Caquetá departments. Killings of former
FARC-EP combatants increased. At least

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

100,000 people were forcibly displaced or
confined as a result of the ongoing conflict,
particularly affecting the rights of
Indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants.
In the context of the National Strike, there
were numerous reports of excessive use of
force by the security forces against peaceful
protesters, particularly in Cali. Police
arbitrarily detained and tortured protesters
and there were reports of sexual and
gender-based violence against women and
LGBTI people. At least 100 people
sustained eye trauma due to the unlawful
and excessive use of less lethal weapons by
members of the Mobile Anti-Riot Squad
(ESMAD). Killings and threats against
human rights defenders reached alarming
levels.

BACKGROUND
More than 28 million people were fully
vaccinated against Covid-19 between
February and 31 December, according to the
Ministry of Health. As of 31 December, there
had been 129,942 Covid-19 deaths during
the year.
Thousands of people peacefully protested
as part of the National Strike, which began on
28 April. The protests were initially triggered
by proposed tax reforms, which the
government sought to impose during a social
crisis exacerbated by the Covid-19
pandemic. The tax proposal was withdrawn
following pressure from the mass
mobilizations. However, the social upheaval
continued and encompassed broader social
demands, calls for justice for human rights
violations, and protests about the slow
implementation of the 2016 Peace
Agreement and the continuing violence in
various regions of the country.
The UN Security Council extended the
mandate of the UN Verification Mission in
Colombia to 2022.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In October, the Constitutional Court extended
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s
mandate to 27 June 2022.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Compliance with the 2016 Peace
Agreement between the FARC-EP and the
Colombian state remained slow, according to
the Kroc Institute, which monitors
compliance with the Agreement. There were
concerns about the significantly slower
progress on comprehensive rural reform
(point 1), the ending of the armed conflict
(point 3) and solving the problem of illicit
drugs (point 4).
In the first half of 2021, two meetings of the
National Commission for Security Guarantees
were held. The mandate of this Commission,
established by the Peace Agreement and
involving the participation of civil society, is to
create a public policy for dismantling armed
groups. No further meetings were held
despite civil society members’ request for
progress.
Forty-one cases of homicide or enforced
disappearance of former combatants were
reported between January and November,
according to the civil society organization
Indepaz.
Progress on the voluntary substitution of
crops for illicit use was hampered by the
complex security situation and the
resumption of aerial spraying with glyphosate.
In August, 16 special peace districts for
victims were created in compliance with the
Peace Agreement.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
According to the Foundation for Press
Freedom (FLIP), illegal profiling was carried
out against people who reported police
violence on social media during the National
Strike. Military intelligence capabilities were
aimed at profiling at least 57 journalists by
collecting data such as geographic location
and social media activity.
The Ministry of Defence promoted a
campaign, “The truth in a sea of lies”,
disseminating publications claiming that
reports of police violence were “false news”
and “digital terrorism”.
The FLIP reported 402 attacks on press
workers documenting social demonstrations
between April and November; 170 people

131

received threats and 20 were arbitrarily
detained in the context of protests.
José Alberto Tejada, a journalist
documenting the National Strike in Cali, was
the victim of more than 14 security
incidents.1 On 31 August, he was granted
provisional measures by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR).
Journalist Claudia Julieta Duque reported
that the National Protection Unit of the
Ministry of the Interior had collected sensitive
data on her movements between February
and August without her authorization.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
Decree 575, which provided for the
deployment of the military in public order
operations in eight departments, was issued
on 28 May and temporarily suspended by the
Council of State in July.
Between 28 April and 30 June, 84 people
died in the context of protests; 1,790 people
were injured, and 298 human rights
defenders were attacked. Of those injured,
103 sustained eye trauma.2
In June, Michelle Bachelet, UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights, expressed
her deep concern over reports of serious
human rights violations by state security
forces in Colombia. In December her office
published a report stating that they had
verified 46 deaths (44 civilians and two police
officers) in the context of the protests, mainly
in the city of Cali, as well as 60 reports of
sexual violence. Of these, the OHCHR
verified 16 cases of sexual violence allegedly
committed by members of the National
Police.
Cali was the epicentre of the police
repression of social protest.3 “Operation
Siloé”, a joint incursion by members of the
National Police, the ESMAD and the Special
Operations Group (GOES) in which lethal
weapons were used against peaceful
protesters, began on 3 May. Kevin Agudelo
was shot during a vigil for victims of police
violence and died. On 9 and 28 May, the
National Police and armed civilians attacked

132

protesters in Cali, constituting manifestations
of urban paramilitarism.
Following multiple complaints about the
militarized response and police repression of
demonstrations, the IACHR undertook a
working visit to Colombia between 8 and 10
June. In its observations and
recommendations it called for, among other
things, the immediate cessation of the
disproportionate use of force by the security
forces and the removal of the National Police,
including the ESMAD, from the Ministry of
Defence in order to ensure that their actions
were consistent above all with a civilian rather
than a military approach.
Police violence against protesters continued
during August, September and October,
leading 25 civil society organizations to
request that the IACHR activate the Special
Monitoring Mechanism for Human Rights in
Colombia provided for in its report on its
working visit.
As of 27 May, the National Working Group
on Enforced Disappearances had reported
775 enforced disappearances in the context
of the National Strike; the fate of 327 people
remained unknown.
On 5 June, 17-year-old Duván Felipe Barros
Gómez disappeared in the context of
demonstrations in the capital, Bogotá. After a
month-long search by his family, his body
was found in the morgue of the forensic
facility.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND TORTURE
According to the NGO Campaign Defending
Freedom, 3,275 people were arbitrarily
detained in the context of demonstrations
between 28 April and 30 June.
On 28 May, Álvaro Herrera, Noé Muñoz,
and Sebastián Mejía were beaten and
detained by armed civilians and
subsequently detained for 24 hours by the
National Police in Cali. Álvaro Herrera and
Sebastián Mejía reported that they were
subjected to torture and other cruel and
inhuman treatment during their detention.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

On 9 May, in the context of the National
Strike, the Minga Indígena was attacked by
armed civilians, with the acquiescence of the
National Police.4 Ten Indigenous people were
seriously injured, including the Indigenous
human rights defender, Daniela Soto.
In June, Hermilda Benítez Domico, from the
Río Murindó Indigenous Reserve, and Oracio
Carupia, an Embera Eyábida Indigenous
person, died as a result of landmine
explosions in Dabeiba municipality, Antioquia
department.
On 28 September, the Ombudsperson’s
Office issued Early Warning 022 in response
to the risk of forced recruitment of
Indigenous children and adolescents in the
town of La Pedrera, Amazonas department,
by FARC-EP dissidents.

In November, the Constitutional Court failed
to issue a ruling on a lawsuit filed in 2020 by
the civil society network Causa Justa to
decriminalize abortion. A ruling was expected
in January 2022.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

The Black Communities Process reported
that between 28 April and July there were at
least 15 cases of gender-based violence
against Black women in the context of
protests in Cali. In addition, the NGO
Temblores reported that 491 women
experienced police violence in the context of
demonstrations and 35 were victims of sexual
violence by state officials.
In July, the Cinco Claves civil society
network presented a report to the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP), requesting that
a national case be opened into sexual
violence, reproductive violence and violence
motivated by the sexual orientation and/or
gender identity of the victims in the context of
the armed conflict. In addition, the National
Association of Displaced Afro-Colombians
presented a report that documented 109
cases of sexual violence committed in the
context of the armed conflict against AfroColombian women and girls.
On 18 October, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights issued a historical ruling in the
case of journalist Jineth Bedoya against
Colombia, declaring the state responsible for
her physical, sexual and psychological torture
in 2000.

According to the Centre for Research and
Popular Education, eight Indigenous human
rights defenders were killed in the
departments of Cauca, Nariño, Putumayo
and La Guajira during the first half of the
year: Carmen Ofelia Cumbalaza, a precandidate for the Municipal Council of the
Movement of Indigenous Authorities of
Colombia; María Bernarda Juajibioy; Gilberto
Findicué; Aura Esther García; Fernando
Esneider Lozada; Geovanny Cabezas, youth
leader and Indigenous guard of the Kwe’sx
Kiwe Nasa Reserve; and Oneida Argenis
Yatacué and her husband Marcelino Yatacué.
Between January and 31 October, the
OHCHR received 180 allegations of
homicides of human rights defenders, of
which it verified 67. The highest number of
reported killings of human rights defenders
were in the departments of Valle del Cauca
(31), Cauca (10) and Antioquia (six).
According to the NGO Programa Somos
Defensores, between January and September
there were 501 threats, 86 killings and 72
attempted killings targeting human rights
defenders, 41.6% of which occurred in the
context of the National Strike.
The environmentalist Jani Silva was forced
to move from her residence in Puerto Asís,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
According to the NGO Caribe Afirmativo, five
LGBTI people were victims of police violence
in the context of protests between 28 April
and 10 June.
On 21 May, a young gay man participating
in a protest was arbitrarily detained and
sexually assaulted at a police station in
Soledad, Atlántico department. A guard
reportedly incited inmates to sexually abuse
him when they learned of his sexual
orientation.

133

Putumayo department on 23 July when a
plan to assassinate her came to light.5
On 14 December, Temblores denounced
alleged monitoring and interception orders
against its members by the Attorney
General’s Office. The human rights
organization documented police violence and
represented victims of human rights
violations in the context of protests.

municipality, Norte de Santander
department, by armed actors who exercise
territorial control in the area.
As of 31 October, the OHCHR confirmed
that there had been 43 massacres (the killing
of three or more people at the same time and
place and by the same alleged perpetrator)
and a further 36 were being verified.

FORCED DISPLACEMENT AND
CONFINEMENT

On 28 January, the JEP charged eight
members of the former FARC-EP Secretariat
with crimes against humanity and war
crimes.
In July, in two separate decisions, the JEP
charged 25 former army officials in
connection with 127 extrajudicial executions
in the Catatumbo region on the northern
Caribbean coast between 2002 and 2003,
and 120 similar executions between 2007
and 2008. The killings had been falsely
presented as rebels killed in combat (known
as “false positives”).
Also in July, the Constitutional Court
decided to transfer the case of Dilan Cruz, an
18-year-old protester who died at the hands
of police in 2019, from the military courts to
the civilian justice system.
On 28 October, the ICC prosecutor closed
the preliminary examination into Colombia for
war crimes and crimes against humanity and
signed a cooperation agreement with the
government.

According to the UN Office for Humanitarian
Affairs, 60,751 people were forcibly
displaced, mainly in Chocó, Cauca, Nariño
and Norte de Santander departments, and
50,969 people were forcibly confined,
meaning they were forced to stay in territories
with limited access to food, drinking water
and basic services because of the armed
conflict. The overwhelming majority of those
affected (95%) were Indigenous people or
members of Afro-descendant communities.
In July, 4,099 people were forcibly
displaced in the town of Ituango, Antioquia
department, due to the territorial dispute
between FARC-EP dissidents and the
Gaitanista Self-Defence Forces of Colombia, a
paramilitary group.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Crimes under international law and human
rights violations and abuses in the context of
the internal armed conflict continued to claim
victims, particularly in rural areas. According
to the NGO Dejusticia, on 2 March, three
minors were killed when the armed forces
bombed a FARC-EP dissident camp in
Guaviare department. On 5 July, 17-year-old
Yeison Stiven Yule Pequi, from the Altamira
Indigenous Reserve, died following a
bombing raid by the National Army on a
FARC-EP dissident camp in Caquetá
department. On 16 September, four minors
were killed in a bombing raid by the army on
an ELN camp in Chocó department.
On 9 October, two Venezuelan minors were
killed, one of them belonging to the binational Wayuu Indigenous people, in Tibú

134

IMPUNITY

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 8 February, the government announced
the creation of the Temporary Protection
Statute for Venezuelan migrants and refugees
to allow their status to be regularized for a
period of 10 years.
According to the Regional Inter-Agency
Coordination Platform for Refugees and
Migrants from Venezuela, as of August,
1,842,390 migrants and refugees from
Venezuela remained in Colombia, of whom
1,182,059 had begun their migration
regularization process.
On 30 March, the Ombudsperson’s Office
reported a humanitarian crisis in the
department of Arauca due to the arrival of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

more than 4,000 people from Venezuela in
need of international protection following
military operations between the Venezuelan
army and armed groups along the border.
In October, between 15,000 and 20,000
migrants and asylum seekers from countries
including Haiti, Senegal and Ghana remained
stranded in the municipality of Necoclí,
Antioquia department, a key transit point for
people seeking to cross to Panama. Three
people were found dead on 12 October after
a boat sank en route from Necoclí to San
Blas in Panama.
1. Colombia: Protect Journalist at Risk (Index: AMR 23/4654/2021), 27
August
2. Colombia: Amnesty International, PAIIS and Temblores, Shoots on
Sight: Eye Trauma in the Context of the National Strike (Index: AMR
23/5005/2021), 26 November
3. Colombia: Cali: In the Epicenter of Repression: Human Rights
Violations During the 2021 National Strike in Cali (Index: AMR
23/4405/2021), 30 July
4. “Colombia: Urgent call for a cease to violence against Indigenous
Peoples in the context of the National Strike”, 9 May
5. “Colombia: Amnesty International publishes a ‘Letter from the world’
demanding protection for defender Jani Silva”, 22 April

CONGO (THE)
The Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Denis Sassou Nguesso
Head of government: Anatole Collinet Makosso
(replaced Clément Mouamba in May)
Repression of critical voices continued, with
violations of the right to freedom of
expression, and arbitrary detention of
human rights defenders and civil society
activists. Women remained underrepresented in decision-making bodies.
Insufficient efforts were made to guarantee
the accessibility, availability and quality of
healthcare and facilities. Environmental
damage was caused by mining activities.

BACKGROUND
President Sassou Nguesso was re-elected in
March with 88.5% of the vote for a fourth
successive term, and after 36 years in power
over two separate periods. The integrity of the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

electoral process was contested by the
opposition and civil society organizations.
The economic and social situation
continued to deteriorate, due to the decline in
oil revenue, public debt amounting to US$10
billion, and the Covid-19 pandemic. There
were ongoing court cases about charges of
corruption involving people close to the
president.
In November, the state of emergency was
extended for the 27th time since March
2020, imposing restrictive measures to fight
the Covid-19 pandemic.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Civil society activists who were critical of the
electoral process or who denounced human
rights violations faced judicial harassment.
Alexandre Ibacka Dzabana, coordinator of
the Congolese Platform of Human Rights and
Democracy NGOs, and Chryst Dongui, vicepresident of the association Ras le Bol, were
both arrested outside their houses by
unidentified men, on 11 March and 25
March respectively. The day before his arrest,
Chryst Dongui had attended a press
conference to denounce alleged irregularities
in the electoral process. Alexandre Ibacka
Dzabana had helped to organize a
demonstration scheduled for 6 March to call
for an inclusive national dialogue between the
government, opposition parties and civil
society organizations, and the release of
political prisoners. The demonstration was
banned by the authorities. The men, both
human rights activists, were not brought
before a prosecutor until 9 April, in
contravention of Congolese law, and charged
with breach of the state security. They were
then sent to Brazzaville central prison where
they were held until their release on 13 July,
pending trial. During his detention the health
of Alexandre Ibacka Dzabana, aged 77,
seriously deteriorated but he was denied
access to a doctor.
Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, former
candidate for the 2016 presidential election,
returned to prison in October after having
spent a year in the military hospital of
Brazzaville. He was sentenced in 2018 to 20

135

years in prison for “breach of State security"
and “illegal possession of weapons and
ammunition of war”. The UN Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention considered his
detention as arbitrary.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
MOVEMENT
Raymond Malonga, director of the satirical
newspaper Sel-Piment, was arrested on 2
February while in hospital, on defamation
charges for publishing an article which
reported that someone close to President
Sassou Nguesso had been accused of
corruption. On 3 May, after three months in
detention, he was sentenced to six months in
prison and a fine of €45,000 for “defaming a
member of the presidential family”. He was
released in August.
On 11 December, Paulin Makaya, a political
opponent who needed to receive medical
treatment abroad, was prevented from
leaving the country and his passport was
confiscated. The authorities did not explain
their decision. He was finally allowed to leave
the country on 21 December.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women remained under-represented in
decision-making bodies, in violation of Article
17 of the 2015 Constitution, which
“guarantees parity and ensures the
promotion as well as the representativeness
of women in all political, elective and
administrative functions”.
On the occasion of International Women’s
Day, 8 March, the Ministry of Health,
Population, Promotion of Women, and
Integration of Women in Development
regretted that women represented only 33%
of the members of the Constitutional Court,
20% of elected officials in the senate and
11% in the national assembly. In August, the
Consultative Council for Women called on the
authorities to adopt the Parity Law, planned
since 2016, as recommended by the CEDAW
Committee in November 2018. The law is
meant to guarantee parity and ensure the
promotion and representativeness of women

136

in all political, elective and administrative
functions.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities made insufficient efforts to
guarantee the accessibility, availability, and
quality of healthcare and facilities.
The health budget was reduced to €290
million from the 2020 figure of €325 million.
Hospitals, including the Brazzaville University
and Hospital Centre, faced many difficulties,
including shortages of water and electricity
and the lack of proper facilities and
equipment to administrate the needed care.1
In August, the government made changes to
the management of the Brazzaville University
and Hospital Centre, noting major
malfunctions. Several health facilities outside
the capital city, Brazzaville, also experienced
frequent drug shortages.
Health personnel continued to complain of
a lack of PPE against Covid-19, as they had
since the beginning of the pandemic. As of
31 December, 767,398 doses of vaccines
against Covid-19 had been administered, but
only 560,880 people had completed the
vaccination schedule (in an estimated
population of 5.5 million).
On 18 June, health workers from Edith
Lucie Bongo Ondimba General Hospital in
the town of Oyo went on strike, demanding
the payment of at least seven months of
salary arrears. This was in addition to the
many strikes held by health workers to
denounce salary arrears and malfunctions in
health facilities in recent years, a situation
which has led many health workers to leave
the public sector to work in the private sector
or to work abroad. According to the National
Health Development Plan 2018-2022, more
than 150 Congolese doctors were said to be
practising outside the country.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Local populations in the department of
Sangha denounced the pollution of rivers and
deforestation caused by more than 10 years
of gold mining. According to the Rainforest
Journalism Fund, the companies responsible
failed to respect environmental laws, and the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

authorities failed to take action to bring them
to account.
1. Congo: On the Back of the Crisis. Violations of the Right to Health
and Repression of Economic and Social Rights Defenders in the
Republic of Congo (Index: AFR 22/3887/2021), 19 April

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire
Head of state: Alassane Dramane Ouattara
Head of government: Patrick Achi (replaced Hamed
Bakayoko in March)
The authorities prevented peaceful
gatherings from going ahead. Hundreds of
protesters who were arrested in the context
of the 2020 presidential elections were
released, and investigations took place into
violence during that period. The right to
food was compromised as the price of basic
necessities increased by 8.8%. The houses
of thousands of people were demolished
without alternative housing being provided.
The government took measures to boost
Covid-19 vaccination numbers. The
National Assembly approved a law to
remove the requirement for survivors of
gender-based violence to pay for a medical
certificate to file a complaint.

BACKGROUND
Between 21 January and 28 February, the
government imposed a state of emergency to
combat the Covid-19 pandemic. It was
renewed in March until June, then extended
in July until 30 September.
Parliamentary elections were held on 6
March, more than four months after the
presidential elections in which Alassane
Ouattara was re-elected president for a third
term. In June, former prime minister
Guillaume Soro was sentenced in his
absence to life imprisonment for undermining
national security.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 17 June, the day former president
Laurent Gbagbo returned to Côte d’Ivoire

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

after the ICC acquitted him on charges of
crimes against humanity (see below, Right to
truth, justice and reparation), the police used
tear gas to disperse groups of his supporters
throughout the day.
The police prevented a peaceful protest
from going ahead on 21 July, basing its
decision, in part, on health and safety issues
related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The
protest was organized by Initiative Citoyenne
contre la Cherté de la Vie, a movement which
had denounced the high cost of living.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In January, five women opposition members,
who were arbitrarily arrested during a
peaceful demonstration in August 2020
against president Ouattara’s candidacy, were
released unconditionally after more than four
months in detention.
In April, Pulchérie Edith Gbalet, president of
the social justice organization Alternative
Citoyenne Ivoirienne and her three
colleagues, Gédéon Junior Gbaou, Aimé
César Kouakou N’Goran and Cyrille Djehi Bi,
were released from MACA central prison in
Abidjan. The case against Pulchérie Edith
Gbalet was pending at the end of the year.
She was arbitrarily arrested on 15 August
2020 by masked men after she had called for
peaceful demonstrations, and was charged
with “compromising public order,
participation in an insurrectionary movement,
undermining the state’s authority, wilful
destruction of public property and provoking
a gathering”. About 100 others, also arrested
during 2020 protests, were freed in April
under interim release orders or under judicial
supervision. The detainees had been held in
appalling conditions with limited access to
lawyers.1
On 17 June, tens of Laurent Gbagbo
supporters were arbitrarily arrested for
compromising public order when they
gathered to welcome the former president
back to the country. They were all
subsequently released.
In August, on the eve of Independence Day,
President Ouattara announced the
conditional or provisional release of 69 more

137

people and pardoned nine others who had
opposed his candidacy.

vaccination campaign in Abidjan for 10 days
in light of the Omicron variant.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

RIGHT TO FOOD

In January, the authorities began field
investigations into the electoral violence
committed between August and November
2020. In December, the public prosecutor
presented the final report of the Special
Investigations Unit which said that 273
people were suspected of committing crimes;
233 of them had already been apprehended,
most of whom were provisionally released or
subjected to judicial supervision, while 11
remained in pretrial detention.
In March, the ICC acquitted Laurent
Gbagbo and the former minister of youth
Charles Blé Goudé of all charges of crimes
against humanity. They had been tried in
connection with alleged crimes committed
during the 2010-2011 post-election violence.
In July, the ICC lifted an arrest warrant
against the former first lady, Simone Gbagbo,
issued in connection with charges of crimes
against humanity allegedly carried out during
the same period.
On 15 April, an Abidjan court found former
militia leader Amadé Ouérémi guilty of crimes
against humanity for acts committed during
the 2011 post-electoral violence.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government began its Covid-19
vaccination programme in March. It
responded to the low vaccination take-up
with an awareness-raising campaign, and in
July set up 12 mobile clinics in Abidjan to
boost access to vaccines. On 8 September,
the government announced that it would
permit the use of a mixture of Covid-19
vaccinations in order to increase vaccination
rates after it ran out of AstraZeneca supplies.
In the same month, it also announced a
campaign to boost vaccinations in the Grand
Abidjan region for those most at risk,
including people over 60, people with
underlying health problems, health workers,
defence and security forces, and teachers. In
December, the government renewed a

138

In July, Ivorians used social media to
denounce the high cost of living and a surge
in the price of basic necessities, including
food, which caused hardship for large
sections of the population. The National
Institute for Statistics reported that the price
of food and non-alcoholic drinks increased by
8.8% between August 2020 and August
2021. The prime minister met various people
involved in the consumer goods supply chain
to find a solution to rising prices, and
announced that the activities of the National
Committee Against the High Cost of Living
would be strengthened in order to control
market prices.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In October, the homes of thousands of people
were demolished in Banco Nord Extension 2
on orders from the municipal authorities in
Yopougon, a suburb of Abidjan, without their
being provided with alternative housing. The
demolitions occurred days after the
community began legal procedures to stop
their eviction. The government had relocated
them to the area over 30 years earlier.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In October, the General and Institutional
Affairs Committee of the National Assembly
unanimously adopted a law specifying that
survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence do not need to provide a medical
certificate as proof of abuse when making a
complaint. Under the law, if the police or
prosecutor require such proof, the victim will
not bear the prohibitive cost of certificates
which had previously prevented survivors
from seeking justice.
1. “Côte d’Ivoire: Hundreds arrested languishing in detention following
presidential election unrest”, 26 March

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CROATIA
Republic of Croatia
Head of state: Zoran Milanović
Head of government: Andrej Plenković
Asylum seekers were denied access to
asylum; the police pushed back and abused
people entering irregularly. The legal
framework on gender-based violence was
further improved, but cases continued to
rise. Access to abortion remained severely
constrained. Same-sex couples were
granted the right to adopt children.
Defamation lawsuits threatened the work of
journalists and the media.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Croatia continued to deny access to asylum
to thousands of potential asylum seekers. Aid
organizations documented around 10,000
cases of pushbacks and collective
expulsions, and numerous instances of
violence and abuse. In February, the Danish
Refugee Council reported that two women
were sexually abused, forced to strip naked,
held at gunpoint and threatened with rape by
Croatian police officers. The Ministry of the
Interior denied the reports.
The Council of Europe Human Rights
Commissioner said that the consistent
allegations pointed to an established practice
of collective expulsions and ill-treatment of
migrants and a lack of prompt investigations.
In July, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants also acknowledged
reports of widespread pushbacks from
Croatian territory along with reports of theft,
destruction of property, physical abuse and
assault.
In April, the Constitutional Court found that
Croatia violated an Afghan family’s right to
asylum by forcibly returning them to Serbia in
2018 without adequately assessing the risks
of such a return. In November, the European
Court of Human Rights ruled that Croatia
violated the European Convention on Human
Rights when the same family was pushed
back to Serbia in 2017. On that occasion

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Madina Hussiny, a six-year-old Afghan girl,
was killed by a train. In December, the High
Misdemeanour Court in Zagreb confirmed a
lower court decision finding an Are You
Syrious volunteer – who had helped the
Afghan family to seek asylum – guilty of
“assisting migrants in illegal crossing of the
border” and ordered him to pay a fine of
60,000 HRK (around €8,000) plus court
fees.
Courts in Italy and Austria also found that
the chain expulsions of asylum seekers from
those countries to Slovenia and further on to
Croatia based on bilateral agreements were in
breach of international law and subjected the
victims to degrading treatment at the hands
of the Croatian police.
In June, the authorities established a
monitoring mechanism to investigate reports
of human rights violations on Croatia’s
borders. However, human rights
organizations warned that the body lacked
independence and a robust mandate to
effectively address the violations.1
In October, a group of European media
outlets published an investigative report
showing footage of Croatian special police
beating unarmed asylum seekers before
pushing them back into Bosnia and
Herzegovina.2 The report prompted an
internal investigation that resulted in the
suspension of the police officers involved.
The authorities considered it an isolated
incident, but NGOs maintained that violent
pushbacks from the country’s borders are
widespread and systemic.
In December, the Council of Europe’s
Committee for the Prevention of Torture said
that it found numerous credible reports of
serious ill-treatment of migrants and asylum
seekers by Croatian police during their earlier
visit to the border.3
Recognition rates of asylum seekers
remained low, with only 42 people granted
international protection by the end of the
year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
There were notable improvements in
strengthening the fight against gender-based

139

violence. The criminal code was amended to
allow ex officio prosecution of gender-based
violence where the victim is unable or
unwilling to press charges, to criminalize
“revenge porn” and to broaden the definition
of “intimate partner” to include both former
and current partners, in line with the
standards in the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention).
The authorities, however, reported a
continued increase in gender-based violence,
including rape and domestic violence. The
Ombudsperson for Gender Equality urged the
authorities to further strengthen prevention
and education programmes.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to sexual and reproductive services
was restricted by the widespread refusal of
individual doctors and some clinics to
perform abortions on grounds of conscience,
the prohibitively high costs of services and
poor regional coverage of authorized
providers. This had a disproportionate effect
on those with limited resources.

alleging that the clinic favoured fathers in
custody disputes even when the fathers have
been found unfit. The authorities distanced
themselves from the court decision.
The Croatian Journalists’ Association
reported that there were over 900 active
criminal defamation lawsuits against
journalists and media. The majority of the
lawsuits were filed by politicians, public
officials and even the public broadcaster
itself. The Association warned that these
lawsuits have an intimidating effect and pose
a particular threat to smaller media outlets
and independent journalists. The European
Federation of Journalists urged the
authorities to decriminalize defamation and
ensure it is treated as a civil matter, and to
put in place a framework to prevent
defamation lawsuits that are simply intended
to silence criticism.
1. Croatia/EU: Strengthen Border Monitoring System – Effective
Mechanism Needed: Independent, Broad Mandate, Adequate
Resources (Index: EUR 64/4546/2021), 3 August
2. “EU: New evidence of systematic unlawful pushbacks and violence at
borders”, 6 October
3. “Croatia: Damning new report slams systemic police abuses at
country’s borders”, 3 December

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In April, a court in the capital, Zagreb,
backed the right of same-sex couples to
adopt children.
For the first time in over a decade, the
annual Pride event in Zagreb in July was
marked by a series of physical and verbal
homophobic attacks and the burning of a
rainbow LGBTI flag. A journalist covering
Pride was among those attacked. Several
people were detained.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists continued to be the target of
threats and intimidation, both online and
offline, and faced gagging orders and
frequent lawsuits.
In September, a court in Zagreb issued a
temporary injunction against the news
website H-alter, barring all reporting on a
local childcare clinic and its director; the
website had published a series of articles

140

CUBA
Republic of Cuba
Head of state and government: Miguel Díaz-Canel
In the wake of historic protests in July,
Cuban authorities imprisoned many
hundreds of protesters, almost 700 of
whom remained in prison at the end of the
year. The authorities ramped up their
machinery of control over freedom of
expression and assembly with physical
surveillance of human rights activists,
artists and journalists, and by subjecting
them to house arrest, arbitrary detention,
violations of due process and, in some
cases, ill-treatment, while also disrupting
the internet. The economic situation
continued to deteriorate and the US

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

authorities again failed to lift the economic
embargo.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Thousands of people took to the streets on
11 July to peacefully protest over the
economy, shortages of medicines, the
government’s response to Covid-19 and
harsh restrictions on the rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly, in one of
the largest demonstrations seen in decades.1
In response to the protests, the Cuban
authorities detained many hundreds of
protesters, of whom almost 700 remained in
prison at the end of the year, according to
NGO Cubalex. Authorities also subjected
activists and journalists to house arrest and
arbitrary detention, violated due process
rights and, in some instances, ill-treated
detainees, all while disrupting the internet.2
The majority of those detained were
charged with crimes historically used to
silence dissent and often inconsistent with
international human rights law and
standards. These included “public disorder”,
“resistance”, “contempt”, “incitement to
commit a crime” and “damages”.
Following the protests, many of those
released from prison were formally put under
house arrest pending their trial. Cuban
authorities also subjected activists and
journalists to physical surveillance by
positioning security officials permanently
outside their homes and threatening them
with arrest if they left, amounting to arbitrary
detention.
Relatives of those detained, and detainees
who were later released, widely reported a
range of violations of due process rights and
incommunicado detention. While the
Prosecutor General’s Office denied that
detainees lacked access to legal assistance
or had been held incommunicado,
testimonies indicated otherwise.
The mass detentions also resulted in
widespread reports of ill-treatment, including
against women, and authorities subjected
women journalists and activists to house
arrest, surveillance and harassment. The
authorities denied human rights violations

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

were committed in the wake of the
crackdown and, using their monopoly over
the media, broadcast selected footage of
incidents of violence during the protests to
wrongly characterize them as violent overall.
The President of the Supreme Court insisted
that the justice system and judges operated
with independence and indicated that the
media was publishing false information
distributed by “enemies of institutional order
and the Cuban Revolution”. Meanwhile,
during the period of protests, the authorities
disrupted the internet and regularly blocked
instant messaging apps such as WhatsApp,
Telegram and Signal.
In November, the government refused
requests by civil society to hold a Civic March
for Change, once again demonstrating its
intolerance of protest.3

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
During the year, the government imprisoned
numerous artists, journalists and political
activists.
In April, authorities detained prisoners of
conscience Esteban Rodríguez, an
independent journalist for ADN Cuba, and
Thais Mailén Franco Benítez, a human rights
activist, in Old Havana, along with some 12
other people, for peacefully protesting in
support of Cuban artist Luis Manuel Otero
Alcántara, who at the time was on hunger
strike in protest at constant police
surveillance outside his home.4 Thais Mailén
Franco Benítez was later released to
complete her sentence under house arrest,
but Esteban Rodríguez remained imprisoned
at the end of the year.
In May, authorities also detained prisoner of
conscience Maykel Castillo Pérez, one of the
authors of “Patria y Vida”, a song critical of
the Cuban government which was adopted as
a protest anthem and for which he and other
artists won “song of the year” at the Latin
Grammys in November.5 He was charged
with “assault”, “resistance”, “evasion of
prisoners and detainees” and “public
disorder”. In June, authorities imprisoned
graphic artist Hamlet Lavastida, a former
prisoner of conscience, allegedly for

141

proposing an artistic performance in a private
messaging conversation that in the end never
took place. He was later released on
condition that he left Cuba.
On 11 July, the day of nationwide protests,
authorities detained prisoner of conscience
Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara, a member of
the San Isidro Movement which mobilized
initially in opposition to a law that would
censor artists, just after he announced on
social media that he intended to join the
protests. Later in the year, he contracted
Covid-19 in prison and went on hunger strike
in protest at his continued imprisonment. He
remained in prison at the end of the year.
Similarly, state security officials detained
José Daniel Ferrer García, activist and leader
of the unofficial political opposition group
Patriotic Union of Cuba, as he tried to attend
the demonstrations in Santiago de Cuba with
his son. Authorities later concealed his
whereabouts, potentially amounting to an
enforced disappearance. Despite the
authorities' ongoing repressive policy,
throughout the year artists and activists
continued to collaborate and innovate in
solidarity. Artist Erik Ravelo launched “The
Eternal Flame”, a digital conceptual memorial
in support of artistic freedom of expression in
Cuba.6

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The economic situation continued to
deteriorate, with media reports of significant
shortages of food, essential medicines and
other basic items. In May, the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights expressed
concern over “acute and persistent food
shortages in Cuba”, especially in the context
of the Covid-19 pandemic. Throughout the
year there were electricity outages.
At various moments in the year there were
reports of hospitals being overwhelmed with
Covid-19 cases. However, by the middle of
the year the authorities had scaled up their
vaccination programme.
The authorities continued to place the
blame for shortages exclusively on the
economic embargo. Although the embargo

142

violates economic, social and cultural rights
in Cuba, it does not negate Cuba’s obligations
to guarantee these rights to the maximum of
its available resources.
1. “Cuba: Massive protests are a desperate cry to a government that
doesn’t listen”, 12 July
2. “Cuba: Amnesty International names prisoners of conscience amidst
crackdown on protesters”, 19 August
3. “Cuba: Rejection of request to protest is yet another example of
intolerance of freedom of expression”, 22 October
4. “Cuba: Amnesty International names Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara of
the San Isidro Movement a prisoner of conscience”, 21 May
5. “Cuba: Amnesty International launches a holidays solidarity action in
support of prisoners of conscience”, 17 December
6. “Cuba: Amnesty International and artist Erik Ravelo launch ‘The
Eternal Flame’, a digital conceptual memorial in support of San
Isidro Movement and freedom of expression”, 29 April

CYPRUS
Republic of Cyprus
Head of state and government: Nicos Anastasiades
Allegations of pushbacks of refugees and
migrants continued. A leading anti-racism
association was threatened with dissolution.
Police used excessive force against anticorruption protesters.

BACKGROUND
No progress was made during talks between
Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders in April in
Geneva for the resumption of formal
negotiations in relation to the settlement of
the Cyprus problem (the continuing dispute
over the administration of the island).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
There were continued reports of pushbacks
at sea of refugees and migrants to Lebanon,
which since 2019 has regularly returned
Syrians to Syria, where their safety was at
risk. In August, reports emerged that the
authorities intercepted two boats carrying 89
people and pushed the passengers back to
Syria, except for two people with health
needs who were separated from their families
and transferred to Cyprus.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Human rights bodies and others expressed
concerns about the living conditions in
reception facilities, including the restrictions
imposed in response to the Covid-19
pandemic.
In November, the president requested
emergency support from the EU for the
management of migration, including the
temporary suspension of new asylum
applications.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION

CZECH REPUBLIC

The leading anti-racism organization KISA
continued to face dissolution proceedings as
a result of a 2020 legislative change, which
led to the organization’s removal from the
registry of associations in December 2020
due to a minor delay in their complying with
the new requirements. KISA appealed before
the country’s Supreme Court. Meanwhile, the
organization was operating with serious
limitations.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In September, the Cyprus Supreme Court
heard an appeal by a young British woman
against a district court ruling which found her
guilty of making false claims when she
reported she was gang-raped in July 2019.
Serious concerns existed about the reported
shortcomings of the police investigation into
the case and the fairness of her first instance
trial.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In February, police reportedly used unlawful
force against peaceful protesters during an
anti-corruption demonstration in Nicosia. An
investigation was started by the Independent
Authority for the Investigation of Complaints
against the Police. Although the investigation
was reportedly completed, the outcome was
not known by the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Cypriot authorities kept in place an
unlawful and disproportionate blanket ban on
all demonstrations, introduced as part of
Covid-19 related restrictions in March 2020.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

During the year, the remains of 1,023
missing people (732 Greek Cypriots and 291
Turkish Cypriots) were identified by the
Committee of Missing Persons in Cyprus in
its mission to establish the fate of individuals
who were forcibly disappeared during the
inter-communal fighting of 1963-1964 and
the events of 1974.

Czech Republic
Head of state: Miloš Zeman
Head of government: Petr Fiala (replaced Andrej Babiš
in December)
There were concerns over the independence
of public broadcasting media. Parliament
voted for a bill to compensate thousands of
Romawomen who were unlawfully sterilized
in the past. Authorities denied that police
officers were responsible for the death of a
Roma man during a police intervention
against him.

BACKGROUND
Throughout the year, the government
adopted socio-economic measures to support
individuals affected by the Covid-19
pandemic. They included 14 days’
compensation of wages for those undertaking
compulsory quarantine.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities restricted the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly in response to Covid-19.
In December 2020, Parliament announced a
state of emergency which lasted until 11
April. During this period, gatherings were
restricted to a maximum of 500 people. The
decision led to protests in January under the
slogan “Let’s open the Czech Republic”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
There were concerns over the independence
of public broadcasting media. In March, the
European Broadcasting Union stated that it
had observed increasing politicization of the

143

governing body of Czech Television. In May,
Reporters Without Borders expressed
concerns about the risk of increased political
pressure on the public broadcaster following
the election of new members of the Czech
Television Council.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA
Roma children continued to experience
discriminatory segregation in schools.
A Roma man, Stanislav Tomáš, died during
a police intervention against him in the town
of Teplice on 19 June. According to video
footage from the arrest, published by the
news server Romea.cz, three police officers
used force against him. The video showed
Stanislav Tomáš lying on the ground while
one of the officers knelt on his neck during
the entire intervention.1 On 26 July, the
Police Inspectorate informed Amnesty
International that the police intervened
because of Stanislav Tomáš‘s “aggressive
behaviour that escalated and turned against
the intervening police officer.” The minister of
interior stated in July that the autopsy
identified drug overdose as a possible cause
of death, and that the police did not restrict
breathing or blood flow. In December, the
deputy Public Defender of Rights published
her investigation into the case, which found
that police officers made significant errors
during the intervention. In particular, she
noted that the police failed to ensure that
their coercive methods did not cause
disproportionate harm.
In July, the Senate voted for a bill to
compensate thousands of Roma women who
were unlawfully sterilized by the authorities
between 1966 and 2012.2 Survivors of
unlawful sterilizations will each be eligible for
compensation of 300,000 CZK (€11,800),
which must be applied for through the
Ministry of Health within three years of 1
January 2022, when the law enters into
force.
In August, the Constitutional Court set aside
an amendment to the law on welfare benefits
on the grounds that it would be
discriminatory and exclude certain categories

144

of residents. The amendment allowed
municipalities to declare zones of “socially
pathological behaviour”, residents of which
were barred from claiming some housing
benefits. NGOs had criticized the
amendment in the past as disproportionately
targeting Roma and poor people.
LGBTI PEOPLE
In January, the Constitutional Court rejected a
regional court’s proposal to amend a law that
prevents recognition of adoptions from
abroad by same-sex couples who live in the
Czech Republic. The law permits adoptions
by married couples only.
In April, the lower chamber of the
parliament approved the first reading of a bill
allowing same-sex marriage. The parliament
did not further discuss the bill before the
October elections.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Five years after signing the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention), the Czech
Republic had yet to ratify it. In March, the
government plenipotentiary for human rights
stated that, following the October
parliamentary elections, the new government
will decide whether to propose ratification to
the parliament.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, the government accepted 170
Afghans as part of the Czech Republic’s
evacuation operations from Afghanistan. Also
in August, the Minister of Interior stated that
the government’s priority was to ensure that
the tension in Afghanistan “would not lead to
another migration wave” and to prevent a
“crisis on the external EU borders”.
In September, during the parliamentary
election campaign, then prime minister
Andrej Babiš used billboards with antiimmigration messages stating “I will defend
you from illegal migrants. To my dying
breath.”
The government continued to refuse to
participate in any relocation efforts within the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

EU and the resettlement programme
remained “frozen”.
1. Czech Republic: Concerns Over Possible Unlawful Killing by the Police
(Index: EUR 71/4329/2021), 23 June
2. “Czech Republic: Hard won justice for women survivors of unlawful
sterilization”, 22 July

DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo
Head of government: Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde
Kyenge (replaced Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba in
February)
Continuing armed conflict and violence
claimed thousands of lives, large-scale
displacement and widespread sexual
violence. At least 10 cases of crimes under
international law were prosecuted by
military courts, but impunity remained
widespread. Economic, social, and
humanitarian crises persisted, exacerbated
by Covid-19 and other outbreaks. The use
of arbitrary arrests and unlawful detentions
was prevalent across the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC). Prison
conditions remained inhumane. Rallies and
protests organized by opposition parties or
civil society deemed to be critical of the
government were often banned or violently
suppressed. Human rights defenders and
journalists continued to be targeted with
attacks and threats; at least three
journalists were killed. Mining projects led
to serious pollution with a considerable
human rights impact. Children’s education
was interrupted by teachers’ strikes over
poor pay and working conditions.

BACKGROUND
President Tshisekedi appointed Jean-Michel
Sama Lukonde Kyenge as prime minister in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

February, having ended the two-year coalition
with his predecessor Joseph Kabila. In April,
a new government was formed with a
parliamentary majority.
Tensions emerged over the elections
planned for 2023, particularly in relation to
the organization, functioning and leadership
of the Independent National Electoral
Commission.
In North Kivu and Ituri, a state of siege was
declared in May allowing the army and police
to take over political leadership, public
administration, and the criminal justice
system in the two provinces.
Rampant violence continued in the Kasaï
region. South Kivu, Tanganyika and Maniema
provinces also experienced continued and
significant levels of violence.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Indiscriminate attacks against civilian
populations, looting and destruction of
homes, crops, and other objects
indispensable for the survival of the civilian
population, as well as attacks on
infrastructure, continued particularly in the
east and south; some of these acts
constituted war crimes.
In North Kivu and Ituri provinces, attacks
and other violations and abuses against
civilians by armed groups and government
forces increased by 10% between May and
November according to the UN. According to
the Kivu Security Tracker, at least 1,137
civilians were unlawfully killed in the two
provinces between 6 May (when the state of
siege was declared) and 15 November. For
instance, at least 55 civilians were killed
during indiscriminate attacks by combatants
of the Cooperative for Development of the
Congo (CODECO), an alliance of militia
groups, in the villages of Boga and Tchabi, in
Ituri province, on 30 May. In the same
province, the Congolese army killed seven
civilians in Nongo village on 2 May and eight
civilians in the villages of Banikasowa,
Ndenge I and Ndenge II on 15 May. There
were multiple abductions and 300,000
people fled their villages. Armed groups
including combatants of the Allied

145

Democratic Forces (ADF), an armed group
operating in the DRC and Uganda, also
carried out attacks targeting schools, health
facilities, public markets, churches, UN
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors. For
example, alleged ADF combatants attacked
the Kisunga village health centre and the
surrounding area, in the territory of Beni in
North Kivu, overnight on 11 and 12
November, resulting in the killing of at least
48 civilians including health workers and
patients, according to local human rights
organizations.
In South Kivu province, the long-standing
conflict involving local and foreign armed
groups in the highlands of Uvira and Fizi
claimed at least 70 civilian lives and forced
thousands to flee their villages, according to
the UN. The Congolese army committed
human rights violations against civilians,
including unlawful killings, rape, looting and
destruction of homes, on a par with the
armed groups it was deployed to fight.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Conflict-related sexual violence remained
widespread, especially in the provinces of
North and South Kivu, Ituri, Tanganyika and
Kasaï-Central, despite some encouraging
efforts by the authorities to hold perpetrators
to account. According to the UN, between
January and September, at least 1,100
women were raped in North Kivu and Ituri
alone.
Several initiatives which aimed to establish a
reparations fund for victims of conflict-related
sexual violence were undertaken with the
involvement of President Tshisekedi and the
First Lady, although they had not come to
fruition by the end of the year.

LACK OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
Five million people remained internally
displaced at the end of the year, 1.5 million
of whom were forced to leave their homes to
flee from violence in 2021 alone, according
to the UN. Most of them lived in dire
conditions without access to humanitarian
assistance.

146

In March and April, inter-communal conflict
between Luba and Kuba ethnic groups in
Bakwakenge, in the Kasaï-Central province,
caused the destruction of 190 houses and
the displacement of 21,000 people,
according to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency. In the territory of Beni, repeated
attacks, allegedly by members of the ADF
and local Mayi-Mayi groups, forced 10
humanitarian organizations to halt their aid
work, leaving 116,000 internally displaced
people (IDPs) without vital assistance,
according to the UN. The UN also reported
that alleged CODECO combatants carried out
several attacks on IDP sites, killing dozens of
people and burning down settlements,
resulting in the further displacement of
50,000 IDPs in Ituri province.
According to the UN, over 19.6 million
people were in dire need of humanitarian
assistance, half of whom were children. More
than 26 million people faced high levels of
acute food insecurity. Despite this, according
to UN humanitarian coordinator David
McLachlan-Karr in October, financial support
to alleviate the DRC crisis continued to
decline, and only 25% of the US$1.98 billion
needed was raised in 2021.

IMPUNITY
Most perpetrators of crimes under
international law, including rape and other
gender-based violence, enjoyed impunity.
There was some progress, however, with at
least 10 cases of serious crimes prosecuted.
At least 80 army and police officers were
prosecuted in North Kivu, South Kivu, Ituri,
Tanganyika and Kasaï provinces for serious
crimes including sexual violence. In the Kasaï
region, investigations into serious human
rights violations committed in Mulombodi,
Nganza and Tshisuku in 2017 and 2018
were completed, with the assistance of a
team of investigators deployed by
the OHCHR. The trials were yet to start.
The trial of the alleged perpetrators of the
murders of two UN experts in February 2017
was ongoing. Defendants and victims’
lawyers continued to complain about its slow
progress, and intimidation of some witnesses.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The cause of death of one of the defendants
in October was unclear. He was the third
defendant to die since the trial began.
Former Congolese warlord Roger Lumbala,
who was arrested in France in December
2020 over war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in the DRC, remained in
custody.
There were no meaningful developments
regarding the situation in the DRC before the
ICC.
In April, following calls from human rights
organizations including Amnesty
International, the government started to
develop a comprehensive strategy to deal
with serious crimes committed over the last
three decades, in collaboration with the UN
and representatives of Congolese civil society
organizations.1

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The frequent use of arbitrary arrests and
unlawful detentions persisted throughout
DRC. The situation was particularly serious in
the North Kivu and Ituri provinces, where the
state of siege gave excessive powers to the
army and police, as well as to the military
justice system. The security forces arrested
and detained hundreds of civilians without
due process, many for non-criminal acts
such as debt or land disputes.
In February, three activists from the citizens’
movement “Jicho la Raiya” (Eye of the
People) were arrested in North Kivu for
organizing a peaceful sit-in to protest against
alleged illegal taxes on roads and alleged
mismanagement of a local healthcare
administration. They remained in arbitrary
detention in Goma city at the end of the year.
Two activists from civil society movement
Lutte pour le Changement (LUCHA) were
arrested in Goma in July and September,
respectively, for saying that local authorities
and staff of the Denise Nyakeru Tshisekedi
Foundation, established by the First Lady,
diverted humanitarian aid intended for
survivors displaced by a volcanic eruption
near Goma in May. Following a defamation
complaint to the military justice prosecutor by
the Foundation, they were held in arbitrary

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

detention for several months. They were
released on bail in November, but the
fabricated charges against them were not
dropped. Thirteen other LUCHA activists
were arrested and illegally detained in Beni in
November for staging a peaceful
demonstration against the state of siege.
Dozens of other activists were also held in
arbitrary detention nationwide for exercising
their human rights.
In Ituri province, hundreds of people were
unlawfully detained for several months in the
territories of Aru, Djugu, Mahagi, Mambasa,
Irumu, and in the town of Bunia, due to a
shortage of magistrates to handle their cases.
In September, Hubert Berocan, a provincial
member of parliament (MP), was sentenced
to 12 months in prison after an unfair trial at
a military court in Bunia, solely for
challenging the local executive about the
unfair distribution of computers to schools. In
June, another local MP had been unlawfully
detained for 48 hours by a military prosecutor
after he criticized the president for failing to
restore peace and fulfil his commitments.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
According to local human rights groups, at
least 220 people died in detention due to
overcrowding, poor conditions and
healthcare, and lack of food, among other
factors which could amount to torture or
other ill-treatment by the state. Some prisons
and detention centres held up to 500% over
their intended capacity, as a result of
dysfunction in the criminal justice system,
especially in North Kivu and Ituri where the
capacity of military courts, which took over
the criminal jurisdiction over civilians under
the state of siege, became even more limited
in terms of geographical access and staffing.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Bans on, or other suppression of, peaceful
demonstrations were common once again.
The authorities frequently banned rallies and
protests organized by opposition leaders and
activists, trade unions and civil society
groups, while security forces violently
suppressed those that went ahead. In April,

147

demonstrations against civilian killings in
North Kivu, including a peaceful sit-in by
schoolchildren and a women’s march in
Beni, were violently dispersed by the army
and police. Similar tactics were also used in
other areas, in particular against peaceful
demonstrations by University of Kinshasa
students in July and August; a peaceful
assembly convened by opposition platform
Lamuka in September; and, from October,
student/teacher protests in support of the
teachers’ strike (see below, Right to
education). In almost all cases, those
responsible for illegally banning or
suppressing the demonstrations were not
held to account.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders and whistle-blowers
continued to be the target of attacks and
threats by public institutions which were
supposed to protect them. Dozens of prodemocracy and anti-corruption activists,
environmental activists, trade union leaders
and Indigenous peoples’ rights defenders
were arbitrarily detained, harassed and even
sentenced by courts following unfair trials.
The draft law on the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders, first proposed in 2017,
made no progress during 2021.
In March, two whistle-blowers were
sentenced to death in their absence after
they revealed financial transactions made for
the benefit of individuals and entities under
international sanctions. After they fled the
country, their colleagues and family members
were harassed by the authorities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
At least three journalists were killed during
the state of siege period in North Kivu and
Ituri, apparently in connection with their
reporting, according to journalists’ rights
organization Journaliste En Danger. At least
11 journalists were arbitrarily detained,
sometimes violently, while they tried to carry
out their work. Several journalists were
threatened or intimidated by state agents,
political leaders, and members of armed
groups. At least three media outlets were

148

arbitrarily banned, including two in Equateur
province and one in Mai-Ndombe province.
Once again, most human rights violations
against media outlets and journalists were not
prosecuted.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In August, there was extensive pollution to
the Tshikapa and Kasaï rivers and their
tributaries in southern DRC, which, according
to the Congolese government, was caused by
a spillage upstream from a diamond mining
and processing company based in northern
Angola. The DRC government said the
disaster led to at least 40 deaths, hundreds
of cases of severe diarrhoea, and wiped out
aquatic life. The authorities’ response was
slow and ineffective. A joint DRC/Angolan
investigation into the causes and
environmental consequences was
announced by the DRC authorities, but no
further communication had been made about
its progress or possible reparations or
guarantees of measures to avoid similar
catastrophes in the future.
Other cases of serious environmental
pollution were reported at and around gold
mines in Ituri, Haut-Uele, South Kivu and
Maniema provinces, and copper and cobalt
mines in Haut-Katanga and Lualaba
provinces. Illegal logging in the Congo Basin
forests continued, while the development of
oil and other energy projects potentially
harmful to the environment continued in or
around the Virunga, Maiko, Upemba and
Kundelungu national parks.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 death toll peaked between July
and August, with the emergence of the Delta
variant causing an exponential increase in
deaths in several cities. In March, the first
batch of 1.7 million AstraZeneca doses was
received through the COVAX initiative.
However, delays in the vaccination roll-out
due to vaccine hesitancy and poor planning
resulted in 1.3 million doses being returned
and redistributed to other African countries
according to the Global Alliance for Vaccines
and Immunizations. The DRC received an

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

additional 2 million doses between May and
October and, by the end of the year, had fully
vaccinated 131,000 people, representing
0.1% of the population according to the
WHO.2
The DRC’s 13th Ebola outbreak was
declared in North Kivu in October. Other
epidemics, including malaria, cholera,
measles and bubonic fever claimed
thousands of lives nationwide, especially
among the young, despite efforts by the
government and the international community
to contain the outbreaks. Health actors on
the response frontline continued to work
without adequate or regular salaries,
prompting demonstrations that were often
violently dispersed by the police. Nurses and
doctors countrywide went on strike for several
months to demand better working conditions,
pay and recognition of their professional
status. International funding provision for the
health sector was adversely affected because
of inefficiency due to poor involvement,
transparency and accountability from, as well
as coordination by, national and international
stakeholders.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Implementation of President Tshisekedi's
flagship free primary education programme
was severely undermined at the start of the
school year in October when teachers went
on strike. They demanded better salaries and
working conditions, including sufficient fit-forpurpose and well equipped school buildings
to address overcrowding in classrooms and in
some cases an absence of classrooms.
Teachers and thousands of students took to
the streets to protest at the programme’s
shortcomings, which included poor planning
by education authorities, late salary
payments, and inequality of resources which
favoured urban over rural schools. Public
schools were closed for several weeks and
reopened in late November following an
agreement between the government and the
main teachers’ trade unions.
1. “DRC: Prioritize justice for serious crimes”, 29 April

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

2. East Africa: “Address the access issue and the pandemic will be
managed tomorrow”: Global vaccine inequity’s impact in east Africa
(Index: AFR 04/5084/2021), 14 December

DENMARK
Kingdom of Denmark
Head of state: Margrethe II
Head of government: Mette Frederiksen
People with “non-western” backgrounds
continued to face discrimination in social
housing. Refugees’ right to family life
continued to be violated and laws on
returns and externalizing the processing of
asylum and residency applications were
passed. Initiatives on sexuality education
and corporate accountability continued to
be delayed. Freedom of expression and
privacy were compromised by a pending
legislative proposal on data retention.

DISCRIMINATION
In May, a petition signed by 55,913 people to
repeal the discriminatory law “L38” on social
housing was discussed in parliament, but the
law remained in force.
During its UPR, Denmark accepted
recommendations in May to review its social
housing policies, but only committed to a
cosmetic removal of the term “ghetto” from
government documents. Policies aiming to
limit the number of residents with a “nonwestern background” continued, alongside
new discriminatory initiatives that no
neighbourhood would house more than 30%
of residents with “non-western backgrounds”
by 2030.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the European Court of Human Rights
ruled against Denmark’s mandatory threeyear waiting period for family reunification,
which would affect around 4,000 Syrian
refugees, stating that this violated the right to
family life.
In June, parliament passed a law enabling
Denmark to externalize the processing of
people seeking asylum and refugee
residence permits to non-European

149

countries. No agreement with a host country
exists, but from 2020 to 2021 the Danish
government approached authorities in Egypt,
Morocco, Rwanda and Tunisia. In December,
Denmark entered negotiations with Kosovo
on outsourcing prison cells for 300 people
convicted of crimes and awaiting expulsion
from Denmark as part of their sentence.
In May, Parliament approved a new Return
Bill with new rules, such as offering money to
asylum seekers to refrain from appealing to
the Refugee Appeals Board if their claims are
rejected.
In August, the government officially paused
deportations to Afghanistan. At the end of the
year, 19 Afghan citizens remained in return
centres, without access to work or education
and with limited access to healthcare.
In February, the Danish Immigration Service
and Danish Refugee Appeals Board stated
that Damascus in Syria and its surrounding
rural area were “safe” for returns. As of 19
December, at least 151 Syrians had their
residence permits revoked or not extended,
or had their asylum application rejected.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In March, the CEDAW Committee
recommended that Denmark include
education about relationships, sexual
autonomy and consent in compulsory
sexuality education programmes in primary
and secondary schools, and introduce a
compulsory module on sexuality education
for training teachers. This was not
implemented in 2021.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In October, a legal proposal on data retention
was sent for discussion in parliament. The
proposal was strongly criticized for its
potential impact on the rights to freedom of
expression and privacy.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In October, the government stated that
Denmark would adopt a legal framework
requiring businesses to exercise human
rights due diligence in their operations,
including the possibility for victims to seek

150

judicial remedies. By the end of the year,
however, no such proposal had been
presented to parliament.

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
Dominican Republic
Head of state and government: Luis Rodolfo Abinader
Corona
Gender-based violence remained common.
Lawmakers failed to pass a revised Criminal
Code that would decriminalize abortion and
provide protections against violence, torture
and discrimination on the grounds of sexual
orientation or gender identity. The
authorities extended access to Covid-19
vaccines to Dominicans of Haitian descent
and migrants, who were previously
excluded.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Between January and September, 111
women were killed, 61 of whom were victims
of femicides, according to preliminary
statistics published by the General
Prosecutor's Office. Between January and
October, the same office reported having
received over 63,000 reports of gender-based
and intra-family violence and more than
6,300 reports of sexual offences. The
authorities continued to fail to develop a
national protocol for the investigation of
torture, in line with the Manual on Effective
Investigation and Documentation of Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (Istanbul Protocol).
This was despite evidence presented to the
authorities in 2019 that the police routinely
raped, beat and humiliated cisgender and
transgender women engaged in sex work in
acts that may amount to torture or other illtreatment.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The Dominican Republic remained one of the
few countries in the region that continued to

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

criminalize girls or women who sought to
terminate a pregnancy. This total ban on
abortion continued to cause the deaths of
women and girls.
In March, hundreds of human rights
activists camped outside the National Palace
demanding that Congress vote in favour of
decriminalizing abortion on three grounds –
when the pregnancy poses a risk to the life of
the pregnant woman or girl, when the fetus
cannot survive outside the uterus, and when
the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest.1
However, in June, the Chamber of Deputies
voted against decriminalization on the three
grounds, risking the life and health of
thousands of girls and women.2
In December, Congress again failed to pass
a revised Criminal Code that decriminalizes
abortion and provides protections against
torture, violence and discrimination on the
grounds of sexual orientation and gender
identity.
Legislators also failed to pass
comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation
which had been demanded by civil society
organizations for almost a decade.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
Thousands of people born to foreign parents
who were registered as Dominicans at birth
but later unrecognized as nationals,
remained unable to obtain Dominican identity
documents, which continued to leave them
stateless.
In February, President Luis Abinader
announced Covid-19 vaccination plans that
would have left many Dominicans of Haitian
descent and migrants without access to
vaccines.3 However, following advocacy from
civil society actors, Dominican authorities
extended the vaccination programme to all
residents.
1. “Dominican Republic: Chamber of Deputies puts life and health of
millions of women and girls at risk”, 30 June
2. Dominican Republic: Threat to Sexual and Reproductive Rights
(Index: AMR 27/4778/2021), 24 September

ECUADOR
Republic of Ecuador
Head of state and government: Guillermo Alberto
Santiago Lasso Mendoza (replaced Lenín Boltaire
Moreno Garcés in May)
Indigenous peoples affected by the 7 April
2020 oil spill in the Amazon were denied
truth, justice and reparations. Detainees
faced risks to their rights to life, integrity
and security. The Constitutional Court
decriminalized abortion on grounds of rape.

BACKGROUND
Protests erupted after the first round of the
presidential election in February amid claims
of fraud. In the second round of the election
in April, Guillermo Lasso emerged as the
winner, defeating Andrés Arauz.
There were protests during the year by
Indigenous peoples, farmers, transport
workers and students, among others, against
government policies related to extractive
projects and austerity measures.
By 31 December, more than 70% of
Ecuador’s population had been fully
vaccinated against Covid-19. As of 31
December, the Ministry of Health reported
551,620 confirmed cases of Covid-19 and
33,682 related deaths since 29 February
2020.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In March, the Orellana Provincial Court
rejected an appeal submitted by
communities affected by the 2020 oil spill in
the Coca and Napo rivers. In May, the
Constitutional Court agreed to review rulings
in the case and in June it agreed to review a
request to protect their human rights.
Indigenous peoples continued to be at
higher risk from the pandemic due to longstanding inequalities and discrimination
resulting in lack of access to drinking water,
food, medical supplies, health services and
Covid-19 tests.

3. Vaccines in the Americas: Ten Human Rights Musts to Ensure Health
for All (Index: AMR 01/3797/2021), 25 March

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

151

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
By the end of the year, authorities had yet to
design and implement a national policy for
the protection of human rights defenders at
risk.
Human rights defenders, including Carlos
Jipa, María Espinosa, Vivian Idrovo and
Xavier Solis, continued to face criminal
proceedings for allegedly endangering the
physical integrity of a judge and his family.
The proceedings followed a criminal
complaint by the judge who, on 1 September
2020, had rejected a petition for
precautionary measures submitted by the
human rights defenders on behalf of
Indigenous peoples affected by the 2020 oil
spill. The defenders had complained that the
judge had not ensured due process
guarantees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
While investigations continued into the
human rights violations committed during
October 2019 protests, no law enforcement
officials had been charged or prosecuted by
the end of the year.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
At least 316 people deprived of their liberty
were killed in prisons in clashes between rival
gangs, including 79 people on 26 February,
119 people on 28 September, and 62 people
between 12 and 13 November. Among them
was environmental activist Víctor Guaillas,
sentenced to five years in prison for
“sabotage” in connection with the October
2019 protests. The deaths occurred in a
context of overcrowding, neglect and a failure
to ensure the prison population’s human
rights.1

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In April, following campaigns and legal
proceedings initiated by Ecuadorian human
rights and feminist groups, the Constitutional
Court decriminalized abortion where the
pregnancy is the result of rape.2

152

1. “Ecuador: Authorities must be held accountable for 79 deaths in
prisons”, 24 February
2. Ecuador: Amicus Curiae sobre despenalización del aborto por
violación (Index: AMR 28/4043/2021), 27 April (Spanish only)

EGYPT
Arab Republic of Egypt
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Sisi
Head of government: Moustafa Madbouly
The rights to freedom of expression and
association were severely repressed.
Authorities targeted human rights
defenders, opposition politicians and other
activists through unlawful summons,
coercive questioning, extrajudicial probation
measures, criminal investigations, unfair
prosecutions and inclusion on a “list of
terrorists”. Thousands of people, including
human rights defenders, journalists,
students, opposition politicians, business
owners and peaceful protesters, remained
arbitrarily detained. Dozens were convicted
after grossly unfair trials or were tried by
emergency courts on charges stemming
from the peaceful exercise of their human
rights. Enforced disappearances and torture
continued unabated. Conditions of
detention remained cruel and inhuman, and
prisoners were denied adequate healthcare,
which led or contributed to at least 56
deaths in custody. Death sentences were
handed down after grossly unfair trials and
executions were carried out, including for
drug offences. Authorities failed to
adequately investigate or punish sexual and
gender-based violence, and introduced
legislation further undermining women’s
rights and autonomy. LGBTI individuals
were arrested, prosecuted and sentenced to
long prison terms on the basis of their
sexual orientation or gender identity.
Authorities clamped down on labour strikes,
independent unions and workers expressing
grievances or criticism. The Covid-19
vaccine roll-out was marred by delays in
vaccinating those most at risk, among other
things. Residents of informal settlements

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

were forcibly evicted and detained for
protesting. Authorities discriminated
against Christians in law and practice, and
prosecuted members of religious minorities
and those espousing religious opinions not
sanctioned by the state. Refugees and
migrants were arbitrarily detained
indefinitely for crossing borders irregularly,
and forcibly expelled without due process or
access to asylum procedures.

BACKGROUND
In October, the president lifted the nationwide
state of emergency in place since April 2017.
Within days, parliament approved legislative
changes expanding the jurisdiction of military
courts over civilians, eroding fair trial
guarantees and criminalizing reporting on the
military.
Sporadic attacks by armed groups in North
Sinai continued. The military, which
announced fatalities in its ranks and the
killing of 122 militants in clashes, released a
video in August depicting the unlawful killing
of two unarmed men by the military. In
October, the president granted the defence
minister exceptional powers to impose
curfews, close schools and evacuate North
Sinai residents.
A national budget adopted in June failed to
meet the constitutionally mandated allocation
of 3% and 6% of GDP to health and
education, respectively, and reduced
spending on health insurance and medicine.
In March, 32 states condemned human
rights violations in Egypt at the UN Human
Rights Council.
In September, authorities launched a fiveyear national human rights strategy praising
the legal framework and overlooking
concerns over past and ongoing human
rights violations.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to severely repress the
right to freedom of expression and clamp
down on critical voices offline and online.
Security forces arbitrarily arrested at least
six journalists for their work or critical views.
On 19 July, they arrested journalist

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Abdelnasser Salama after he called for the
president’s resignation. He and 24 other
journalists remained in prison following
convictions or pending investigations into
accusations of “misusing social media”,
“spreading false news” and "terrorism".
In May Hossam Shaaban, a doctor involved
in relief work, was arrested after he criticized
the authorities’ ban on solidarity protests
during the Israeli offensive on Gaza. He
remained detained pending investigations
into “terrorism” accusations.
Authorities continued to block at least 600
news, human rights and other websites,
according to rights groups.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Officers at the National Security Agency
(NSA), a special police force, intimidated
human rights defenders and political activists
by unlawfully summoning and subjecting
them to coercive questioning and
extrajudicial police probation measures.1
Authorities arbitrarily detained and unfairly
prosecuted tens of human rights defenders
and opposition politicians on unfounded
charges of “terrorism” and “spreading false
news”. In July, Hossam Bahgat, director of a
prominent NGO, was convicted and fined for
peacefully expressing his views on Egypt's
2020 elections. Investigative judges
interrogated at least five NGO directors in
July and revived investigations into tax
evasion by NGOs as part of the politically
motivated decade-long criminal investigation
into the activities and funding of human
rights organizations known as Case 173.
Authorities dropped investigations against 12
NGOs but continued to subject their directors
and staff to travel bans and asset freezes. At
least 15 others remained under investigation
and subject to similar restrictions.
Authorities arbitrarily added 408 people,
including activists and opposition politicians,
to the “list of terrorists”, effectively banning
them from engaging in civic or political work
and travelling abroad for five years. In
November, the Supreme Administrative Court
upheld a decision to disbar six lawyers on the
“list of terrorists”.

153

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Authorities released 13 human rights
defenders, journalists and politicians who
had been held in pretrial detention for years,
but thousands remained detained arbitrarily
solely for exercising their human rights or
after grossly unfair trials or without legal
basis. Security forces arbitrarily arrested
hundreds of actual or perceived government
critics.
In February, authorities arbitrarily detained
leading businessman Seif Thabet, two
months after his father, Safwan Thabet, was
arrested, because of their refusal to hand
over assets of their successful company
Juhayna. Both remained detained in
prolonged solitary confinement without trial or
formal charge.
Prosecutors and judges renewed the pretrial
detention of thousands of individuals held
pending investigations into unfounded
terrorism-related charges without allowing
them to challenge its lawfulness. In October,
the Ministry of Justice issued a decree
allowing for the renewal of pretrial detention
remotely without guaranteeing respect of due
process.
The Supreme State Security Prosecution
(SSSP), a special branch of the Public
Prosecution responsible for investigating
security threats, continued to bypass release
orders by judges or prosecutors for
individuals in prolonged pretrial detention,
including those detained beyond the two-year
legal limit, by issuing new detention orders
over similar charges based on secret NSA
investigations – a practice known as
“rotation”. Similar tactics were employed to
keep convicted prisoners in detention after
they had served their sentences. On 15 June,
the SSSP ordered the detention of human
rights lawyer Mohamed Ramadan pending
investigations into a new case, days after a
court ordered his release from his three-year
pretrial detention.
The SSSP referred at least 28 arbitrarily
detained human rights defenders, opposition
politicians and activists to trial by emergency
courts.2 Proceedings in these courts are

154

inherently unfair and defendants are denied
the right to have their convictions and
sentences reviewed by higher courts.
Security forces prevented lawyers from
meeting their clients in private.
In August, the SSSP referred to emergency
courts human rights NGO founder Ezzat
Ghoneim and lawyer Hoda Abdelmoneim on
charges of “spreading false news” or
“terrorism” solely for their peaceful human
rights or political work.
Between June and December, emergency
courts convicted student Ahmed Samir
Santawy; opposition politicians Zyad elElaimy, Hossam Moanis and Hisham Fouad;
activist Alaa Abdel Fattah, lawyer and NGO
founder Mohamed Baker and blogger
Mohamed Ibrahim, known as “Oxygen”, of
“spreading false news” and sentenced them
to between three and five years’
imprisonment for criticizing Egypt’s human
rights record, economic policy and living
standards.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Authorities subjected hundreds of detainees
to enforced disappearance in NSA premises,
police stations and other unknown locations.
The NSA removed prisoners of conscience
and others held for political reasons from
their habitual places of detention following
court release orders and concealed their fate
and whereabouts for up to three months.
No investigations were ordered into the 23month enforced disappearance of Manar
Adel Abu el-Naga with her toddler son
preceding her February questioning on
terrorism-related charges by the SSSP. Her
husband, Omar Abdelhamid, remained
forcibly disappeared since March 2019.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security forces tortured and otherwise illtreated detainees, including through
beatings, electric shocks, suspension in
contorted positions and indefinite solitary
confinement in dire conditions. At least 56
detainees died in custody following medical
complications and four others died following
reports of torture. Authorities failed to

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

investigate the causes and circumstances of
these deaths.
In March, prosecutors failed to investigate
claims that a police officer beat Mohamed
Abdelaziz to death in his workplace in Shebin
el-Qanater in Qalyubia governorate.
Conditions in prisons and other detention
facilities remained cruel and inhuman,3 with
prisoners reporting overcrowding, poor
ventilation, and lack of hygiene and access to
sanitation facilities and adequate food,
drinking water, fresh air and exercise.
Authorities continued to restrict or ban
family visits and correspondence and deny
prisoners access to adequate healthcare, in
some cases deliberately with the apparent
purpose of punishing dissent.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts, including terrorism circuits of criminal
courts and emergency courts, handed down
death sentences after grossly unfair trials.
On 29 July, an emergency court, whose
convictions and sentences are not subject to
appeal, sentenced 16 men to death following
a grossly unfair trial in a case relating to
deadly attacks.4
Executions were carried out, often in secret
and without final family visits. On 26 April,
the authorities executed 82-year-old Abd
alRahim Jibril and eight others convicted of
killing police officers in August 2013. Their
mass trial was marred by torture-tainted
“confessions”. In other cases, several men
were executed for offences not meeting the
threshold of most serious crimes, including
drug trafficking.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice.
In February, the cabinet referred a new draft
personal status law to parliament, which
retained discriminatory provisions against
women in relation to marriage, divorce, child
custody and education, and granted powers
to male guardians to judicially annul women’s
marriage without their consent. In April,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

parliament toughened penalties for female
genital mutilation.
In October, 98 women became State
Council judges, but women remained underrepresented or excluded from most judicial
and prosecutorial bodies.
Authorities continued to prosecute women
social media influencers for how they acted,
dressed and earned money on social media
apps. In June, Hanin Hossam and Mawada
el-Adham were sentenced to 10 and six years
in prison respectively, for inciting “indecent”
content and “human trafficking”. At least
seven women social media influencers
remained imprisoned on morality-related or
other bogus charges.
Authorities failed to prevent and investigate
widespread violence against women and
girls. In May, authorities released all suspects
due to “lack of evidence” in a case
concerning a gang rape at a Cairo hotel in
2014. At least two witnesses reported being
pressured by security agents to change their
testimonies.
Authorities continued to arrest and
prosecute individuals on the basis of their
real or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity. In August, a court convicted four
men of engaging in same-sex sexual relations
and sentenced them to prison terms ranging
from six to nine years.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Authorities repressed workers’ right to strike
and form independent trade unions, and
penalized workers for expressing their
opinions or demands. They failed to protect
dozens of workers unfairly dismissed,
punished and harassed by private companies
for their involvement in peaceful strikes.5
In September, a court in Alexandria
sanctioned the dismissal without
compensation of a public sector company
worker for “publicly expressing his political
opinions”. The same month, authorities
arbitrarily detained three Universal Company
workers for two days for exercising their right
to strike.
In August, the president ratified a new law,
allowing for the unfair, automatic dismissal of

155

public sector employees included on the “list
of terrorists”. This followed official statements
calling for the dismissal of railway workers
affiliated to the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood
group, blamed for frequent fatal train
crashes.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The health system continued to struggle with
Covid-19 outbreaks, and the government
failed to address concerns raised by health
workers over their unsafe working conditions,
including inadequate healthcare facilities,
training and protection equipment. In
November, the president ratified a law
criminalizing the publication of information
on pandemics, using vaguely worded
grounds.
A national Covid-19 vaccine programme
was announced in January, but less than
22% of the population had been fully
vaccinated by the end of the year. The rollout was marred by lack of transparency,
delays in vaccinating health workers and
other at-risk groups, and failure to prioritize
marginalized people and carry out awareness
raising in remote rural and poor urban areas
to tackle vaccine hesitancy.6
Some prisoners held for political reasons
were excluded from the prison vaccine rollout. Authorities refused requests by detained
69-year-old ailing opposition politician
Abdelmonim Aboulfotoh to be vaccinated. At
least eight detainees died in custody after
displaying Covid-19 symptoms.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Authorities carried out forced evictions in
informal settlements and arbitrarily detained
dozens of people for protesting against home
demolitions.
On 4 June, security forces used tear gas to
disperse a protest in Ezbet Nady al-Seid, a
neighbourhood in Alexandria, against plans
to relocate its residents without consultation
or adequate compensation. At least 40
protesters were arrested and detained at a
riot police camp. They were released nine
days later, but 13 were tried on charges of
“participating in unauthorized protests”,

156

“thuggery” and “sabotaging a public facility”
by an emergency court, which acquitted
them in December.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Christians continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. Their right to worship
remained restricted by a discriminatory 2016
law on building and repairing churches
requiring approval from security agencies
and other state bodies, through lengthy,
complicated and opaque procedures.
According to the Egyptian Initiative for
Personal Rights, since the enactment of the
law, fewer than 20% of applicants were
granted full registration and at least 25
churches remained closed on the grounds of
their illegal status or on the pretext of
avoiding sectarian tensions.
Authorities failed to protect Christians in
North Sinai from violence by armed groups.
In April, the organization Sinai Province, an
affiliate of the armed group Islamic State,
released a video showing the execution-style
shooting of Nabil Habashy, a Christian, in
reprisal for his involvement in establishing a
local church. Authorities failed to secure the
safe return of his family and hundreds of
other Christians forcibly displaced from North
Sinai following violent attacks in 2017 or to
provide them with any compensation for lost
property and livelihoods.
Members of religious minorities and
Muslims not espousing state-sanctioned
religious beliefs were prosecuted and
imprisoned on “defamation of religion” and
other bogus charges. In November, an
emergency court sentenced lawyer Ahmed
Maher to five years in prison for “defamation
of religion” for his book on Islamic
jurisprudence.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to arbitrarily arrest
dozens of refugees and migrants and detain
them indefinitely in cruel and inhuman
conditions for irregularly entering or
attempting to leave Egypt. Some had been
held for years without access to asylum
procedures or due process.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

From October to the end of the year,
authorities forcibly returned 40 Eritrean
nationals, detained since October 2019, to
Eritrea without allowing them to challenge the
decision to remove them or access asylum
procedures.

5. “Egypt: Authorities fail to protect striking workers from reprisals”, 25
November

In September, Bitcoin, one of the world's
most popular cryptocurrencies, was adopted
as legal tender without any public
consultation. The same month, the
Constitutional Chamber of El Salvador's
Supreme Court issued a ruling allowing the
country's presidents to stand for immediate
re-election, giving the green light to the
current president, Nayib Bukele, to stand for
a possible second term.
There were mass demonstrations against a
variety of state policies from September
onwards. In response, in September,
President Bukele sought to publicly discredit
the demonstrations and threatened that tear
gas could be used against demonstrators in
future.

6. “Egypt: Haphazard and flawed Covid-19 vaccine roll-out fails to
prioritize most at-risk", 29 June

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

1. Egypt: “This Will Only End When You Die”: National Security Agency
Harassment of Activists in Egypt (Index: MDE 12/4665/2021), 16
September
2. “Egypt: Stop trials by emergency courts", 31 October
3. Egypt: “What Do I Care if You Die?”: Negligence and Denial of Health
Care in Egyptian Prisons (Index: MDE 12/3538/2021), 25 January
4. “Egypt: Retry 36 men facing execution following unfair trials by
emergency courts”, 8 November

EL SALVADOR
Republic of El Salvador
Head of state and government: Nayib Armando Bukele
Ortez
The erosion of human rights in El Salvador
intensified. An upsurge of attacks and
obstacles targeting the independent media
was reported and human rights
organizations were publicly stigmatized by
high-ranking government officials, including
the president. The rights of the victims of
crimes under international law committed
during the internal armed conflict
(1980-1992) remained unfulfilled. A total
ban on abortion remained in place.

BACKGROUND
The ruling party and its allies secured a
majority of seats in the Legislative Assembly
in elections held in February.
An OAS Electoral Observation Mission
reported the use of state institutions to
publicly promote the government's
administration even during the period of
electoral silence provided for in law. The
Mission also received complaints about the
use of public resources to influence voters.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Journalists and media outlets reported further
attacks on media freedom, including an
upsurge in public unfounded accusations
against them; obstacles in carrying out their
work, including in accessing public
information; and the refusal of high-ranking
officials to answer questions.1
In February, the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights (IACHR) granted
precautionary measures in favour of 34 staff
members of the digital newspaper El Faro.
The IACHR stated that the information
received suggested that the harassment,
threats and intimidation they reported
experiencing were intended not only to
intimidate them but also to prevent them
from going about their work as journalists.
In June, the minister of justice and public
security stated that some media publications
were apologists for crime and said that the
authorities were “following up on many
journalists”. According to media reports, in
October the vice-president stated publicly
that some journalists should be prosecuted
for slander.
During September, the Roundtable for the
Protection of Journalists reported that
employees of the Legislative Assembly, highlevel public officials and even President
Bukele had intensified their attacks, threats
and smears against journalists. In addition,

157

they reported that the main legal adviser to
the President's Office had threatened the
media outlet GatoEncerrado to try to force it
to reveal its sources for an investigation
related to the adviser. Meanwhile, in
November, it was reported that NSO Group’s
Pegasus spyware technology was used in El
Salvador for the surveillance of journalists
and civil society members.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
In May, the new Legislative Assembly
removed the magistrates of the Constitutional
Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice
and the Attorney General of the Republic, an
act considered by various sectors to be an
attack on the rights to access justice and to
judicial independence.2
At the end of August, the Legislative
Assembly approved a set of reforms that
reduced the length of time judges can serve
from 35 to 30 years and set the maximum
age for magistrates at 60. The IACHR
rejected the reforms and called on the
authorities to respect judicial independence.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Impunity for the El Mozote massacre,
committed in 1981 during the armed conflict,
persisted. In March, victims of the massacre
reported to the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights that the authorities had
refused to provide information on the case,
especially that contained in military archives,
and that the Office of the Attorney General
had not made significant progress in the
investigation of any of the dozens of cases
filed by victims.
In September, local organizations stated that
major changes affecting the judiciary
resulting from the legal reforms would also
have an impact on the reopened cases of
victims of the armed conflict.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
High-ranking government officials publicly
stigmatized and disparaged human rights
defenders and their organizations, and

158

accused them of being part of the political
opposition.
Spaces for regular and effective dialogue
between government bodies and human
rights organizations to contribute to the
design of public policies were closed or
virtually non-existent.
In May, a Legislative Assembly commission
shelved the draft Law on the Comprehensive
Recognition and Protection of Human Rights
Defenders and the Guarantee of the Right to
Defend Human Rights, presented to the
Assembly several years earlier. Human rights
organizations warned that this could
perpetuate the context of hostility faced by
human rights defenders.
In September, the IACHR granted
precautionary measures in favour of Bertha
Deleón, a human rights defender, observing
that a situation of animosity and hostility had
been generated that could translate into a
situation of risk to her life and safety.
In November, the Ministry of the Interior
and Territorial Development presented a draft
Law on Foreign Agents before the Legislative
Assembly. If passed, the law would affect the
funding, operations and freedom of
association of those working to defend
human rights in the country.3

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The total ban on abortion remained in place
and by December at least 11 women
remained in jail on charges related to
obstetric emergencies.
In May, a proposal to reform the Criminal
Code to decriminalize abortion on four
grounds, presented several years earlier, was
shelved by a Legislative Assembly
commission. Additionally, the president
publicly stated that he would not propose any
constitutional reform that includes the
decriminalization of abortion.
During October, the Legislative Assembly
shelved a new proposal presented by
women's rights groups for the
decriminalization of abortion in certain
circumstances.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

1. “El Salvador: Nayib Bukele’s recipe for limiting the exercise of human
rights”, 19 July
2. “El Salvador: Human rights in danger”, 2 May
3. El Salvador: Law initiative endangers NGOs, HRDs and media (Index:
AMR 29/5041/2021), 24 November

EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
Republic of Equatorial Guinea
Head of state and government: Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo
Freedom of expression was severely
restricted and harassment of human rights
defenders and social media activists
continued. The right to a fair trial was
violated. The death penalty remained
despite renewed commitment for its
abolition. The right to health was restricted,
mainly due to shortage of medicines.

BACKGROUND
After more than 40 years under President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and several years
of economic recession, Equatorial Guinea’s
foreign relations were marred by corruption
cases. On 22 July, the country closed its
embassy in London after the UK applied
sanctions against Teodoro Nguema Obiang
Mangue, vice-president and son of the
president, over corruption allegations. On 28
July, the French Court of Cassation upheld
his conviction on charges of embezzlement of
public funds.
Throughout 2021, restrictive measures to
address Covid-19 were reviewed and applied
differently in the regions according to
infection rates.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In its 2021 report, Reporters Without Borders
ranked Equatorial Guinea at 164 among 180
countries in its press freedom index, citing
strict censorship of media and journalists.
On 29 July, social activist Noelia Asama was
arrested without warrant by six plain-clothed

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

members of the security forces at her home
in the capital, Malabo, and held in a cell with
dozens of men at the Judicial Police station.
A regular user of social media to denounce
the situation of women in the country, in the
months before her arrest Noelia Asama also
made Facebook posts highlighting
insalubrious conditions at the central food
market and corruption in the main trade port.
When released the following day, she was
questioned by officials about posting videos
to social networks as well as about her social
media calls for President Obiang to step
down.
Noelia Asama called for a demonstration to
take place on 16 October against the
extension of the curfew to fight against
Covid-19. The demonstration was not
authorized by the authorities and she
received an official letter requiring her to
present herself at the government regional
delegation on 19 October. From there she
was taken to a police station and detained for
five hours before being released and told to
wait for further notifications and not leave the
country.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Harassment and intimidation of human rights
defenders and activists continued.
On 26 May, at a meeting in Malabo with
opposition members, President Obiang
accused Tutu Alicante, Executive Director of
EG Justice and member of the
Equatoguinean Commission of Jurists, of
receiving funds from US oil companies to
destabilize the country.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS
On 14 September a Health Ministry
representative ordered six health workers at
the Campo Yaunde Health Centre in Malabo
to attend a police station to answer questions
regarding a complaint about Covid-19
vaccines being sold at the health centre to
vaccinate foreigners. They were detained for
a week without access to a lawyer before a
judge released them for lack of formal
charges and no convincing proof of the
accusation. The daughter of one of the health

159

workers was also detained for several days for
posting information on their situation on
social media.

treatments for people living in extreme
poverty.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL

The first National Assembly on Women in
Equatorial Guinea took place on 19 June.
Despite such initiatives to empower women,
pregnant girls continued to be banned from
school following a 2016 order issued by the
Ministry of Education as a purported means
to reduce adolescent pregnancies.

Explosions at the Nkoantoma military base in
Bata on 7 March left at least 100 people
dead and more than 600 others injured.
Lieutenant Colonel Valentín Nzang Nga
Bindang, the head of the military base, and
Corporal José Antonio Obama Nsue were
found guilty of homicide and negligence and
sentenced respectively to 32 and 50 years’
imprisonment by the military court of Bata.
The sentences were made public on 2 July.
Some national and international NGOs
expressed concerns about the military
procedure, which hindered the rights of the
defendants and did not allow the victims and
their families to participate in the
proceedings.

DEATH PENALTY
In response to the stated aim of the president
of Cabo Verde and interim president of the
Community of Portuguese Language
Countries (CPLP) that Equatorial Guinea
should make “quicker” progress towards
abolition of the death penalty, the
ambassador for Equatorial Guinea in
Portugal, Tito Mba Ada, said on 13 July that
his country would enact the new Criminal
Code, which would abolish the death penalty
“very soon”. No such steps had been taken
by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In August, according to Ministry of Health
data, around 144,000 Equatorial Guineans
were fully vaccinated against Covid-19, out of
a total population of about 1.4 million.
Vaccination was obligatory from July for
soldiers, health workers and teachers.
According to the French newspaper Le
Monde, the country faced a shortage of
medicines, including essential ones, due to
alleged lack of investment by the Ministry of
Health in the purchase of drugs. This led to
increased prices, thus preventing access to

160

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

ERITREA
State of Eritrea
Head of state and government: Isaias Afwerki
The arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearance of hundreds of individuals
continued. Conscripts to mandatory national
service were forced to serve for indefinite
periods. Eritrea did not provide a Covid-19
vaccination programme.

BACKGROUND
Since November 2020, the Eritrean Defence
Forces (EDF) fought alongside Ethiopian
government forces against the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front (TPLF) in the Tigray region of
Ethiopia. During the conflict, members of the
EDF, as well as Ethiopian security forces and
militia, committed serious human rights
violations, including sexual violence against
women and extrajudicial killings of civilians,
that could amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity (see Ethiopia entry).

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
The Eritrean authorities continued to subject
hundreds of individuals to arbitrary detention
and enforced disappearance. Journalists,
former politicians and practitioners of
unauthorized religions remained in detention
without charge or access to lawyers or family
members. The whereabouts of 11 politicians
and 17 journalists arrested and detained 20
years ago for criticizing the president’s rule
remained unknown.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Among those forcibly disappeared were
Swedish journalist Dawit Isaak, Berhane
Abrehe, a former finance minister who
published a book criticizing the president in
2018, and Ciham Ali. An Eritrean/US
national, Ciham Ali was arrested in December
2012 at the Sudan border as she tried to flee
Eritrea when she was 15. Shortly before the
authorities took her, her father, then a
minister of information in the Eritrean
government, had gone into exile.

FORCED LABOUR
The government continued to conscript highschool students to the mandatory national
service programme. Conscripts were forced
to serve for indefinite periods and beyond the
legal limit of 18 months. Thousands of
individuals remained in indefinite
conscription, sometimes having served for 10
years or more.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government response to Covid-19 was
inadequate and there was no vaccination
programme in place by the end of the year.

ESTONIA
Republic of Estonia
Head of state: Alar Karis (replaced Kersti Kaljulaid in
October)
Head of government: Kaja Kallas (replaced Jüri Ratas
in January)
There continued to be no legal bar on
discrimination on grounds of religion, age,
sexual orientation or gender identity. Gaps
remained in the rights of people with
disabilities, as well as the protection of
women from violence. Police and Border
Guards Board (PGBG) did not follow due
process when assessing asylum claims.
Same-sex couples still struggled to enforce
their rights under the Registered
Partnership Act 2016.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION
The legislative framework did not include
religion/belief, age, sexuality, sexual
orientation or gender identity as grounds for
discrimination, other than in the context of
employment, resulting in gaps in protection
in relation to housing, healthcare, social
welfare, education and claiming damages.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
The UN Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities identified gaps in the rights of
people with disabilities including access to
justice, education, healthcare and sexual and
reproductive rights, in particular for women
and girls, and noted the disproportionate
impact of the pandemic on people with
disabilities.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The definition of rape still failed to comply
with the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (Istanbul
Convention), being based on violence, with
other non-consensual sexual acts carrying
less weight. Women applying for restraining
orders had to face the alleged perpetrator in
the courtroom. Domestic violence was not
always considered in custody proceedings.
Estonia had the highest gender pay gap in
the EU.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Deficiencies were reported in the procedures
followed by the PGBG when assessing
asylum claims. In some cases, they
reportedly refused to accept applications and
tried to persuade asylum seekers to return to
their country of origin. The Estonian Human
Rights Centre (EHRC) noted the frequent
reversal of PGBG decisions by the courts.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
An EHRC survey documented a significant
shift in attitudes towards LGBTI people, with
64% of the population supporting the
Registered Partnership Act 2016 allowing
same-sex couples to register. By the end of
the year, however, the Act had still not been

161

implemented and court proceedings
remained the only way to enforce the rights
guaranteed by the Act. In September, the
Supreme Court declared the Aliens Act
unconstitutional insofar as it did not allow the
granting of residence permits to registered
partners of same-sex couples.

ESWATINI
Kingdom of Eswatini
Head of state: Mswati III
Head of government : Cleopas Dlamini (replaced
Themba Nhlanganiso Masuku in July)
The government launched a brutal
crackdown on human rights in response to
pro-democracy and anti-police brutality
protests. Repressive laws were used to
silence dissent and crack down on peaceful
protesters, including children. Violence
against women and girls increased under
Covid-19 restrictions. Consensual samesexual conduct remained a criminal
offence. Hundreds of families remained at
risk of forced eviction.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In May, the government launched a brutal
crackdown on human rights in response to
ongoing protests demanding an end to police
brutality and calling for democratic reform.
The protests were sparked by the suspicious
death of 25-year-old law student Thabani
Nkomonye, allegedly at the hands of Royal
Eswatini Police Service officers. They were
led by young activists, human rights
defenders, and civil society and political
groups who demanded an end to years of
political repression.1
The authorities used repressive laws,
including the 1938 Sedition and Subversive
Activities Act and the 2008 Suppression of
Terrorism Act, to silence critics. Journalists,
human rights defenders and political activists
were prosecuted and jailed; they lived in fear
of reprisals for speaking out against
repression. By October, over 1,000 people,

162

including 38 children, had been arbitrarily
arrested. MPs Mduduzi Bacede Mabuza and
Mthandeni Dube were arrested on 25 July,
since when they have been held on trumpedup charges and denied bail.2
The Eswatini Communications Commission
ordered network providers and
telecommunications to shut down the
internet on 29 July and again on 15 October.3

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Thousands of peaceful protesters were
violently dispersed by army and police
personnel who used live ammunition, rubber
bullets and tear gas (see above, Freedom of
expression and assembly). More than 80
people had been killed by October and over
200 people were injured, some severely.
Dozens of those injured during June and
July were left with permanent disabilities,
compounding the already dire economic,
social and cultural situation of many
EmaSwati people. Hospitals were
overwhelmed by the surge in demand and
there were widespread reports of police and
army officers coercing medical staff to hand
over evidence such as bullets removed from
protesters’ bodies.

DISCRIMINATION
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Incidents of gender-based violence persisted
and one in three women had experienced
such abuse by the age of 18; 48% of women
reported having experienced some form of
sexual violence. The 2018 Sexual Offences
and Domestic Violence Act was not enough
on its own to combat violence against women
and girls, especially when economic
conditions and social and cultural norms
posed a continual barrier to justice and
largely enabled perpetrators to act with
impunity. Covid-19 lockdown measures
hindered survivors’ access to support
services and justice mechanisms and
increased the risk of violence.
Girls were particularly affected due to school
closures resulting in rising numbers of
teenage pregnancies.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual same-sex sexual conduct
remained a criminal offence.
The High Court failed to issue its judgment
more than one year after hearing a petition
from the Eswatini Sexual and Gender
Minorities advocacy group which challenged
the Registrar of Companies’ 2019 decision to
refuse its application to register as an
organization. In rejecting the application, the
Registrar had argued that consensual samesex sexual acts were “unlawful” and
“unnatural”.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
FORCED EVICTIONS
Forced evictions, instigated by landowners
who were taking steps to regain their land,
continued to threaten the right to adequate
housing of hundreds of EmaSwati families.
Marginalized groups such as widows, or
families where households were headed by
children or women, were the most affected;
they were more likely to have insufficient
means to challenge evictions.
Those under threat of imminent eviction
were particularly disadvantaged by the deeply
flawed land governance system. Residents’
legal challenges to evictions had been
ongoing since 2014 in Gege and 2019 in
Sigombeni; they were continually shuffled
between ministries, chiefdoms and courts,
delaying justice. In July and September,
communities in Velezizweni and in Ntontonzi,
respectively, were threatened with eviction,
affecting 130 families.
1. Eswatini: Authorities Launch Brutal Assault on Human Rights with
Crackdown on Dissent (Index: AFR 55/4247/2021), 7 June
2. “Eswatini: Authorities must drop trumped-up charges against MPs
and release them immediately and unconditionally”, 29 July
3. “Eswatini: Detained MPs must be immediately released and all
charges against them dropped”, 19 October

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ETHIOPIA
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Head of state: Sahle-Work Zewde
Head of government: Abiy Ahmed Ali
All parties to the armed conflict committed
serious human rights violations and abuses,
including extrajudicial executions and
sexual violence against women and girls,
and millions of people were internally
displaced. Humanitarian aid was denied to
millions of people in Tigray. Ethnic violence
claimed at least 1,500 lives. Police carried
out arbitrary arrests and detentions in the
context of the state of emergency.
Vaccination rates against Covid-19
remained low.

BACKGROUND
The armed conflict in Tigray continued
throughout 2021 and spread to the
neighbouring regions of Afar and Amhara in
July. Armed violence also erupted in the
Benishangul-Gumuz, Amhara, Oromia, Afar
and Somali regions. In November, the
government adopted a state of emergency
law with sweeping restrictions on human
rights.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
All parties to the armed conflict perpetrated
violations of international humanitarian law
that amounted to war crimes, some of which
may have amounted to crimes against
humanity. The conflict resulted in thousands
of civilian deaths mainly based on ethnic
identity, destruction and looting of property,
and displacement of communities. According
to the UN, millions of people were internally
displaced and more than 70,000 fled to
Sudan. Amnesty International documented
extrajudicial executions of hundreds of
people, rape, indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, blockades
on humanitarian assistance, and arrests and
detentions based on ethnic profiling.1

163

TARGETED ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS
On 8 January, following fighting between the
Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF)
and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front
(TPLF) on the outskirts of Bora town in Tigray,
ENDF soldiers raided houses in the town and
killed at least 40 civilians including farmers,
civil servants and students. Families of those
killed were not allowed to collect and bury the
dead. On 9 January, after the ENDF unit
commander in the town held a meeting with
residents, ENDF soldiers collected the bodies
on a truck and took them to the nearby
graveyard at Abune Aregawi church. They
were buried unceremoniously without a
funeral requiem or observation of other
rituals. Families were present, but the
soldiers warned them not to cry during the
funeral.
In Edaga Berhe, a town near Axum, ENDF
soldiers killed at least 30 civilians on 5
February, two days after nearby fighting with
TPLF members. Witnesses identified the
ENDF by their uniforms and their use of the
Amharic language.
On 17 January in Adi-Goshu town, Western
Tigray, the Amhara Police Special Force and
Fano, an informal Amhara militia group,
killed at least 50 residents in a reprisal attack
following fighting between the Amhara Police
Special Force and TPLF forces near the River
Tekezie bridge the previous night. The
Amhara Police Special Force and Fano
seized the victims from their houses and the
surrounding area and took them to the town’s
police station before driving them to the River
Tekezie bridge on a truck and executing
them.
INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS
On 22 June, an airstrike by the ENDF on the
Edaga Selus village market in Tigray killed
more than 50 and wounded many others
among the civilian population. Survivors told
Amnesty International that the attack took
place around noon on market day while there
was no known military target nearby.
On 19 August, in Debre Tabor town in
Amhara region, an artillery attack on a
residential area, allegedly by TPLF forces,
killed six people – five of them from the same

164

family, including a four-month-old baby – and
wounded one more. According to survivors
and other witnesses, there was no military
target in the vicinity.
SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Troops fighting in support of the federal
government committed widespread rape
against hundreds of women and girls in
Tigray, although access difficulties and underreporting obscured the actual figures which
were likely to be much higher. These
violations included gang rape, used against
women and girls as a weapon of war in this
conflict. This was accompanied by shocking
levels of brutality, including beatings, death
threats and ethnic slurs. The perpetrators
included members of the Eritrean Defence
Forces (see Eritrea entry), the ENDF, the
Amhara Police Special Forces and Fano.2
TPLF fighters also raped women in Nifas
Mewcha town, in the South Gondar zone of
Amhara region, while they were controlling
the town between 12 and 21 August as part
of their offensive into parts of the Amhara
and Afar regions.3
Given the context, scale, and gravity of the
sexual violence committed against women
and girls in Tigray and Amhara, the violations
amounted to war crimes and may have
amounted to crimes against humanity.
Survivors of sexual violence in Amhara and
Tigray faced multiple difficulties. Support
services were severely limited and survivors
were unable to access adequate medical,
psycho-social and economic assistance to
meet their needs. Medical facilities, for
example, had been destroyed or looted
during the conflict. This was further
compounded by restrictions on humanitarian
and medical assistance in Tigray.
DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
According to the UN, following the withdrawal
of Ethiopian forces from Tigray in July, the
Ethiopian federal government allowed only
10% of the humanitarian aid intended for
Tigray to enter the region, resulting in
starvation. The UN estimated that there were
400,000 people in famine-like conditions and
more than 5 million people in need of
emergency food assistance. All medicine was

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

blocked from entering the region from July.
This led to an alarming deterioration in the
health of the population as a result of
depleted anti-HIV, cancer and diabetes
medication, as well as starvation. The last aid
convoy allowed into Tigray was on 25
November, and it was not carrying medicine.

Dawud Ibsa, the chairman of the Oromo
Liberation Front, an Ethiopian opposition
political party, remained under house arrest
in Addis Ababa. Since his arrest on 3 May,
the police have not allowed anyone to leave
or enter the compound of his residence.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS

The Ministry of Health reported close to
400,000 cases of Covid-19 and 6,531 deaths
as a result of the virus, by December. Political
gatherings including indoor meetings,
continued. The ministry administered almost
5 million Covid-19 vaccine doses, received
from donor countries. According to the WHO
Regional Office for Africa, as of 2 December,
Ethiopia had fully vaccinated only 1.23% of
its population.

Ethnic violence claimed at least 1,500 lives in
the Oromia, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz,
Afar and Somali regions.
Territorial disputes between the Somali and
Afar regions triggered repeated armed
violence. In January, an attack by the Somali
Issa militia in Adaytu village killed at least 40
members of the Afar and federal police. On 6
April, at least 30 people were killed during
armed violence between Afar and Somali
people. On 24 July, hundreds of residents
were killed in an armed attack by Afar people
on Gerba Isse town. Following the attack, at
least three women were gang raped.
On 19 March, several days of violence
broke out in Ataye town in the North Shewa
Zone, Amhara region, and spread to
neighbouring areas of the Oromia Special
Zone, resulting in hundreds of deaths, and
destruction and looting of property.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Police in the capital, Addis Ababa, and other
cities arbitrarily arrested and detained
thousands of Tigrayans. The arrests appeared
to be ethnically motivated and the police
checked identity documents before arresting
and taking people to detention centres.
Tigrayan activists, journalists and media
workers at media outlets Awlo Media and
Ethio Forum, who reported on the situation in
Tigray region, were among those arrested.
The use of arbitrary detention against
Tigrayans increased after the government
declared a state of emergency on 2
November. The measure allowed the
authorities to arrest, without a warrant,
anyone if there was “reasonable suspicion”
that they had cooperated with “terrorist
groups”, and to detain them without judicial
review indefinitely.4

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO HEALTH

1. “Ethiopia: End arbitrary detentions of Tigrayans, activists and
journalists in Addis Ababa and reveal whereabouts of unaccounted
detainees”, 16 July
2. “I Don’t Know if They Realized I Was a Person”: Rape and Sexual
Violence in the Conflict in Tigray, Ethiopia (Index: AFR 25/4569/2021),
11 August
3. “Ethiopia: Survivors of TPLF attack in Amhara describe gang rape,
looting and physical assaults”, 9 November
4. “Ethiopia: Tigrayans targeted in fresh wave of ethnically motivated
detentions in Addis Ababa”, 12 November

FIJI
Republic of Fiji
Head of state: Wiliame Maivalili Katonivere (replaced
Jioji Konrote in November)
Head of government: Josaia Voreqe “Frank”
Bainimarama
Repressive laws were used to silence critics
and the right to peaceful assembly was
restricted. The government introduced
oppressive measures in response to the
Covid-19 pandemic including harsh
lockdowns and fines that disproportionately
affected people living in informal
settlements.

BACKGROUND
In September, the government declared a
climate emergency and passed a Climate

165

Change Act aimed at fulfilling commitments
to reduce emissions under the Paris
Agreement. In November, Fiji called for
stronger international carbon reduction
commitments by 2030 at the global COP26
meeting but failed to increase its own targets.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities deported the vicechancellor of the
University of South Pacific (USP) in February
after he exposed the misuse of funds at the
university in 2020. The government
subsequently withdrew funding to the USP
after it reinstated the vice-chancellor to work
from the university’s Samoa campus.
The Public Order Act and other laws were
used to target and silence government critics.
A former doctor and a politician were
arrested in August after criticizing the
government’s Covid-19 pandemic response
on social media.
In May, the authorities denied trade unions
permission to hold a Labour Day march for
the sixth consecutive year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
More than 730 people, including health
workers, died from Covid-19. These deaths
were mainly attributed to the inadequately
resourced healthcare system. Hospitals
turned away thousands of other patients due
to bed shortages.
In August, the government imposed a
mandatory Covid-19 vaccination policy which
required all employees and people on social
welfare to be vaccinated or lose their jobs or
benefits.1
A survey conducted by the Fiji Women’s
Rights Movement found that 42.3% of
women were hesitant about having the
vaccine. The government nevertheless failed
to prioritize health education and public
engagement on its vaccination policies.
Hundreds of fines were issued to private
businesses and individuals between May and
September for breaches of curfew and maskwearing regulations. People living in informal
settlements were disproportionately affected
by stay-at-home orders. The police and other

166

security forces monitored movement in and
out of such settlements and there were
complaints about the excessive use of force.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women in parliament, including the minister
for women, children and poverty alleviation,
were subjected to misogynistic and sexist
remarks by parliamentary colleagues and
online bullying and harassment.
Women’s rights organizations highlighted
the increased prevalence of gender-based
violence and unemployment among women
as a result of the pandemic.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In July, the parliament passed amendments
to the iTaukei Land Trust Act without
adequate public consultation. The amended
law removed the requirement for consent by
the iTaukei Land Trust Board for mortgages
and leases issued on land owned by
Indigenous peoples. More than a dozen
people were arrested for voicing their
opposition to the amendments, including two
former prime ministers and the leaders of
three major opposition parties.
1. Fiji: Blanket Mandatory Vaccine Policy Not Justified (Index: ASA
18/4662/2021), 1 September

FINLAND
Republic of Finland
Head of state: Sauli Niinistö
Head of government: Sanna Marin
Social security benefits were inadequate,
with particular impact on those most at risk
of discrimination. Sexual offences
increased. Family reunification of refugees
remained difficult. Legislation around
gender recognition was found wanting.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
Inadequate provision of social security
benefits meant some people went without
sufficient food, medicine or healthcare
because of a lack of financial resources. The

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Covid-19 pandemic exacerbated economic
distress for those at risk and had a negative
impact especially on the income of young
women.
There were calls for the provision of social
security to be raised to a level that ensures
the realization of human rights and for
human rights to be placed at the heart of
proposed reforms, with a focus on the rights
of people most at risk of facing
discrimination, in particular women, Sámi
people, LGBTI people, Roma people, and
people with disabilities.1

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The number of sexual offences recorded by
the police increased by more than 20%. New
Sexual Assault Support Centres opened in
Kokkola and Seinäjoki in June and in Vaasa
in November.
The response to gender-based violence
remained systematically under-resourced. In
April, the government decided to prepare a
new model for financing the work of NGOs.
In July, new legislation on health and social
services came into force but did not include
specific provisions on the prevention of
violence against women.
A bill establishing the post of a Rapporteur
on Violence against Women was adopted by
the parliament in October.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In April, the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed concern that the amended gender
recognition legislation would not apply to
minors.
In June, the government appointed a
working group to propose legislative changes
to strengthen the realization of transgender
and intersex people’s rights. In November,
parliament began to consider an initiative to
reform the law on gender recognition.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Family reunification remained difficult. In
April, the UN Human Rights Committee
recommended that Finland should remove
obstacles to family reunification. In
September, the Ministry of the Interior

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

published draft legislation aimed at removing
some of the obstacles.
In July, the European Court of Human
Rights annulled its 2019 judgment that
Finland had violated the European
Convention on Human Rights when it
returned an Iraqi asylum seeker without
adequately assessing the risks.
In August, legal changes improving asylum
seekers’ right to due process came into force.
Concerns about the process remained,
including limitations on lodging an appeal to
the Supreme Administrative Court and on
subsequent applications.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
In January, the Court of Appeal overturned
the convictions of three conscientious
objectors sentenced for the second time for
refusing non-military service. In November,
parliament adopted a legislative reform,
meaning that those acquitted would no
longer be required to serve. The length of the
alternative to military service remained
punitive and discriminatory.
1. Finland: “I Live under Constant Duress and in a State of Emergency”:
Inadequate Social Security in Finland (Index: EUR 20/4804/2021), 31
August

FRANCE
French Republic
Head of state: Emmanuel Macron
Head of government: Jean Castex
The laws on “global security” and
“strengthening republican principles” raised
concerns in relation to mass surveillance as
well as the rights to freedom of expression
and freedom of association. The authorities
continued to use vague and overly broad
criminal provisions to arrest and prosecute
peaceful protesters and used dangerous
weapons for policing public assemblies. In
June, police used excessive force to
disperse hundreds of people who had
peacefully gathered for a music festival. In
July, a coalition of organizations filed a

167

class action lawsuit arguing that the
government had failed to take measures to
prevent racial profiling and systemic racial
discrimination by police. Transgender
people continued to be excluded from
access to in-vitro fertilization. The
authorities forcibly returned ethnic
Chechens to Russia despite the high risk of
their suffering serious human rights
violations in the country. In February, an
administrative court ruled for the first time
ever that the authorities’ inaction in
response to the climate emergency was
illegal.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, parliament passed a “global
security” law, which included a provision
restricting the right to share images that
identified police officers. Concerns were
raised that press and human rights defenders
could be prevented from sharing information
in the public interest on abuses allegedly
committed by police. In May, the
Constitutional Court ruled that this provision
was unconstitutional.
In July, parliament passed a law aimed at
“strengthening republican principles”, which
entered into force in August. The law
criminalized the publication of information on
the private or professional life of anyone,
including law enforcement officials, where it
could result in direct threats against them or
members of their families. While the law
included a specific provision for the press, it
raised concerns over disproportionate
restrictions on freedom of expression.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to use vague and
overly broad criminal provisions to arrest and
prosecute peaceful protesters, including in
the context of public assemblies opposing the
new “global security” bill. In May, a court
acquitted Frédéric Vuillaume, a trade unionist
who had peacefully protested against the bill
in December 2020. Authorities had charged
him for participating in a public assembly
that they deemed to threaten public order.

168

In June, police used excessive force to
disperse hundreds of people who had
peacefully gathered for a music festival in
Redon, Brittany. The police fired weapons,
including tear gas and stun grenades, mostly
during the night. Serious injuries occurred
during the police operation, including the loss
of a man’s hand. The incident amounted to a
breach of both national and international law,
which require the use of force to be
necessary and proportionate. At the end of
the year, the authorities had failed to launch
an effective and independent investigation
into the dispersal operation.
In September, President Macron
announced measures to ensure
accountability for human rights violations
committed by police, including parliamentary
oversight. However, these fell short of
establishing a fully independent oversight
mechanism.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In August, the law on “republican principles”
introduced controversial new grounds for
dissolving organizations. These included, for
example, incitement to discrimination or
violence by any member of an organization
where the organization’s leaders failed to
prevent the incitement. Even prior to this law,
the government had been able to dissolve an
organization on vague grounds and without
requiring prior judicial scrutiny.
The new law also introduced a requirement
for organizations seeking public funds to sign
a “republican contract” through which they
committed to “principles of liberty, equality,
fraternity and respect for human dignity”.
Making funding subject to these vague
principles risked disproportionate restrictions
of the rights to freedom of association and
freedom of expression.

DISCRIMINATION
RACIAL, ETHNIC AND RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Civil society organizations continued to report
allegations of racial profiling by police. In
June, the Paris Appeal Court found that three
high-school students from ethnic minority
backgrounds had been discriminated against

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

in 2017 when police stopped them to check
their identities as they returned from a school
trip. In July, a coalition of organizations filed a
class action lawsuit to the Council of State
arguing that the government had failed to
take measures to prevent racial profiling and
systemic racial discrimination by police.
Public officials expressed stereotypical
views and prejudices against Muslims during
public debates on the “republican principles”
legislation. Aiming to protect neutrality and
“secularism”, the law strengthened the ban
on manifesting religion or belief in the public
sector, including by non-employee
contributers to a public service. Under
international human rights law, these were
not legitimate aims justifying restrictions to
the right to freedom of religion or belief.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, parliament passed a law on
bioethics allowing access to in-vitro
fertilization (IVF) irrespective of a person’s
sexual orientation or marital status. However,
IVF continued to be unavailable to
transgender people.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to forcibly return
ethnic Chechens to Russia despite high risks
of their suffering serious human rights
violations there. In April, Chechen police
abducted Magomed Gadaev – a refugee and
key witness in a high-profile torture
investigation against Chechen authorities –
two days after his deportation from France to
Russia. Magomed Gadaev’s forced return
took place despite a ruling by the national
asylum court in March against this course of
action.
In September, the National Consultative
Commission on Human Rights (CNCDH)
raised concerns regarding a speech that
President Emmanuel Macron had made
during the Taliban’s takeover of Afghanistan.
President Macron emphasized the need to
ensure protection of asylum seekers while
countering “irregular migration” from
Afghanistan. The CNCDH called on the
government to facilitate the establishment of
a European mechanism to ensure shared

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

responsibility for protecting Afghan nationals
fleeing to Europe and the suspension of
forcible returns to Afghanistan. Following the
fall of Kabul on 15 August, France continued
to issue deportation orders to Afghan
nationals. In September, the Ministry of
Interior confirmed that at least 20 Afghans
had been sent to other EU countries under
the Dublin regulation since the Taliban took
power in Afghanistan. On 29 September, four
Afghan men were deported to Bulgaria. The
Bulgarian government continued to treat
applications of Afghan asylum seekers as
unfounded, refusing to consider them.
Migrants and asylum seekers continued to
experience degrading treatment, particularly
in Calais where police and local authorities
restricted their access to humanitarian
assistance and subjected them to
harassment, but also in Menton and
Briançon where migrants were denied the
right to apply for asylum. On 24 November, at
least 27 people drowned attempting to reach
the UK by boat from Calais. Attempted
crossings continued to increase in the
absence of effective access to asylum
procedures in France as well as in the
context of barriers to family reunification and
no other safe and legal routes to claim
asylum in the UK.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In September, a court convicted a police
officer who had physically assaulted Tom
Ciotkowsky, a human rights defender, in
Calais in 2018. In the same month, an
appeal court acquitted seven human rights
defenders who had been convicted for
facilitating entry and circulation of irregular
migrants in Briançon in 2018.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
In April, the law on “global security”
extended the use of CCTV and included a
provision allowing authorities to make use of
drones to video-record people in a wide
range of circumstances, with few exceptions
and without any independent oversight. In
May, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
latter provision was unconstitutional.

169

In July, the government proposed a new bill
on criminal responsibility and national
security, which again included a provision
allowing video recordings by drones in a wide
range of circumstances. While the provision
explicitly ruled out the use of facial
recognition technologies, it fell short of
subjecting the use of drones to an
independent oversight mechanism. At the
end of the year, the bill was still pending
before parliament.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
In May, the Riom Appeal Court confirmed the
administrative control measures in place
against Kamel Daoudi and his conviction for
missing a curfew in 2020, having agreed in
February to release him on bail while reexamining his case. Kamel Daoudi had been
subject to administrative control measures
restricting his rights to freedom of movement
and private life since 2008.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In June, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture (CPT) raised concerns
over violence and abuse suffered by people
in pre-charge detention, including alleged
racist and homophobic insults by police.
The CPT also expressed concerns over
overcrowding and other conditions in French
prisons, as well as the detention of mentally
ill people in regular prisons due to a lack of
suitable facilities.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In September, civil society organizations
launched court proceedings to ensure
transparency and access to information on
arms transfers from France to Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates, which had a
substantial risk of being used to commit or
facilitate serious violations of international
human rights or humanitarian law in the
conflict in Yemen. The government and
parliament failed to reach an agreement to
establish a parliamentary oversight
mechanism on arms transfers.

170

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In September, the Senate adopted an
amendment to the bill on “trust in the judicial
system” to give commercial courts
competence to hear disputes over the
corporate duty of vigilance – a legal duty
obliging larger companies to publish annual
vigilance plans to address any adverse
impacts of their activities on human rights
and the environment. Civil society
organizations expressed concern as they had
called for civil courts to have competence on
these matters. On 21 October, a joint
committee rejected the Senate’s amendment,
thereby ensuring that companies’ human
rights and environmental impacts would be
adjudicated in the Paris civil court. In
December, a Court of Cassation ruling
recognized the jurisdiction of civil courts in
the first legal action brought under the duty
of vigilance law.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In February, an administrative court ruled for
the first time ever that the authorities’
inaction in failing to tackle the climate
emergency was illegal and that the
government could be held responsible for not
fulfilling its commitments.

GAMBIA
Republic of the Gambia
Head of state and government: Adama Barrow
People were arbitrarily arrested in Sanyang,
and protests continued to be restricted. The
Access to Information bill was signed into
law. The long-awaited report by the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations Commission
was submitted to the government. Fishmeal
factories had a negative economic and
environmental impact on local populations.
Women and LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. The torture bill was still
pending at the end of the year and death
sentences continued to be handed down by
courts.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

BACKGROUND
Gambia held a presidential election in
December, which was won by Adama
Barrow. The Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission report made public
in December recommended prosecution of
former president Yahya Jammeh for crimes
committed during his presidency.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 15 March, violent protests erupted in
Sanyang after a Senegalese national killed a
local Gambian man. The police arrested at
least 50 people over the course of the
following seven days. Most were released
without charge, and 22 were initially charged
with criminal offences including arson, rioters
demolishing buildings, unlawful assembly
and conspiracy to commit felony. At the end
of the year, 19 people still had charges
pending against them, including 14 charged
with conspiracy to commit misdemeanour,
unlawful assembly and riot, and five charged
with going armed in public, shop breaking,
theft, arson, damage to property, conspiracy
to commit arson, unlawful assembly and riot.
In May, the Attorney General dropped the
charges pending against leaders of the Three
Years Jotna protest which the police violently
repressed in 2020. The protest called for
President Adama Barrow to honour his
promise to step down after three years in
power.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Section 5 of the Public Order Act requiring
permission to protest remained in force. The
provision was used to deny permission to
organize protests. In June, the inspector
general of police denied permission to the
organization Gambia For Five Years and
Peace Building to protest against a decision
by the electoral commission to allow the
mayor of Banjul to issue attestations for the
purposes of voter registration.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND RIGHT
TO INFORMATION
In July, parliament enacted the Access to
Information bill, which the president signed

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

into law on 25 August. The bill was the result
of a collaborative effort between civil society
and the government, and allowed the public
and journalists to access information from
public institutions.
At the end of the year, bills modifying
provisions of the Criminal Code and the
Information and Communications Act which
restricted the right to freedom of expression
were still pending. As a result, sedition
against the president and administration of
justice was still criminalized, with stiff
penalties including imprisonment.
Investigating authorities and the Public
Utilities Regulatory Authority retained the
power to intercept communications for
surveillance purposes without effective
judicial oversight.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission (TRRC), which was launched in
October 2018 to look into alleged human
rights violations during the 22-year rule of
former president Yahya Jammeh, held its last
public session on 28 May. The TRRC
submitted its final report to the government
on 25 November. On 24 December, the
minister of justice made the report public.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Local populations complained about the
environmental and economic impacts of
fishmeal factories in coastal regions,
including in Gunjur and Sanyang.
Fishmeal factories led to overfishing, and
the government remained unable to control
illegal fishing by foreign boats due to limited
sea surveillance capacity. The resulting
scarcity of fish led to a rise in fish prices. In
June, Greenpeace published a report
highlighting the impact of fishmeal and the
fish oil industry in the region. The people
most affected were women selling smoked
fish, artisanal fishermen and the people who
depended on fish for their protein intake. The
report concluded that the practice threatened
food security in the region.

171

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Violence against women persisted. In July,
the minister of women, children and social
welfare stated that the Network against
Gender-based Violence had recorded 251
cases of gender-based violence, 240 of these
against women, over the last 12 months.
Women remained under-represented in
public offices. According to UN Women, as of
February 2021 only 8.6% of the parliament’s
seats were held by women.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people still lived under the threat of
oppressive laws, which created an unsafe
environment. Section 144 of the Criminal
Code provided for a 14-year prison sentence
for anyone who has “carnal knowledge of any
person against the order of nature […] or
permits any person to have carnal knowledge
of him or her against the natural order.”
Section 147 criminalized an “act of gross
indecency” between two people of the same
sex with five years in prison. Section 144A
created the crime of “aggravated
homosexuality” for “serial offenders” and
those living with HIV, punishable by life
imprisonment.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture bill
was still pending at the National Assembly.
As such, at the end of the year there were no
national laws defining torture and
establishing it as an offence.

DEATH PENALTY
Despite the establishment of an official
moratorium on executions, and the country’s
accession to the Second Optional Protocol to
the ICCPR aiming at the abolition of the
death penalty, courts continued to hand
down death sentences. On 14 July, the High
Court in Banjul found Yankuba Touray,
former junta member and ally of former
president Yahya Jammeh, guilty of the
murder of Ousman Koro Ceesay, former
minister of finance. He was sentenced to
death by hanging. Two other men – one in

172

July and one in October – were sentenced to
death for murder.

GEORGIA
Georgia
Head of state: Salome Zurabishvili
Head of government: Irakli Garibashvili
Members of the opposition, media critical
of the government and NGOs were attacked,
intimidated and wiretapped amid an
atmosphere of impunity. Concerns persisted
over a lack of judicial independence,
selective justice and politically motivated
prosecution of government opponents.
Construction of the controversial
Namakhvani hydropower plant was halted
following protests. Labour rights abuses and
violations were widespread and amplified by
Covid-19 related restrictions. Violations in
the breakaway territories of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region included
restrictions on freedom of movement and
torture and other ill-treatment.

BACKGROUND
The political crisis continued. In July, the
ruling party withdrew from an April deal
brokered by the EU to resolve a stand-off with
the opposition. The deal had proposed
electoral and judicial reforms and to address
perceptions of politicized justice.
The ruling party won local elections in
October amidst widespread reports of
electoral irregularities. The opposition called
for renewed protests from November against
the election results and the arrest of Georgia’s
former president Mikheil Saakashvili.
The ruling party increasingly undermined
the independence of the institutions ensuring
human rights and government accountability.
In December, parliament hastily
disestablished the State Inspector’s Service,
which investigated police abuses, and passed
amendments undermining judicial
independence.
In September, the government backtracked
on its commitment to end politicized

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

appointments to the judiciary, thereby
forfeiting half of the EU’s €150 million loan to
help with the Covid-19 pandemic.
Covid-19 infections and related deaths
spiked in August-September and November.
Vaccination roll-out was slow as anti-vaccine
attitudes remained strong, influenced by the
Georgian Orthodox Church.
The breakaway regions of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region remained
under Russian occupation and overall
control.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Members of the opposition, civic activists and
journalists critical of the government were
threatened and attacked. The authorities at
times made statements condoning such
violence, fostering the sense of impunity.
On 5 July, the planned Tbilisi Pride march
was cancelled after police failed to protect
the organizers from violent counterprotesters. The same day, a violent
homophobic mob ransacked the building
housing the Tbilisi Pride office and forced the
organizers to flee. Around 50 journalists at
the site were attacked and injured. One of
those severely beaten, TV Pirveli’s camera
operator Lekso Lashkarava, was found dead
in his house six days after the incident. The
authorities denied responsibility, blaming the
Pride organizers for effectively provoking the
violence, and published extensive CCTV
footage of Lekso Lashkarava’s last day,
insinuating that he might have procured
drugs. The authorities failed to identify the
organizers of the mass violence or ensure an
effective investigation of the violent events by
the year’s end.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
On 12 September, thousands of files
revealing widespread surveillance and
wiretaps by the State Security Service of
Georgia were leaked to the media and the
internet, featuring details about the personal
lives of journalists, civil activists, politicians,
clerics and diplomats. An investigation into

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the alleged illegal surveillance had produced
no result by the year’s end.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Concerns grew regarding government
influence over the judiciary, the use of
selective justice and the politically motivated
prosecution of political opponents and critical
media.
Two cartographers detained on questionable
charges of “violating the country’s territorial
integrity” in October 2020 were released on
bail on 28 January, but the criminal case
against them remained open.
On 23 February, police arrested opposition
party chair and parliamentarian Nika Melia
for purported incitement of violence during
2019 anti-government protests. He was
released on 10 May after the EU posted his
bail, seeking to ease government-opposition
tensions.
The trial continued of the director and cofounder of the pro-opposition TV channel
Mtavari on unfounded charges of abuse of
power and embezzlement. Giorgi Rurua, one
of the channel’s main shareholders, was
pardoned and released in April from a fouryear sentence imposed in 2020.
On 1 October, Georgia’s former president
Mikheil Saakashvili was arrested on his return
from exile to serve a six-year sentence
passed in his absence. Following a five-week
hunger strike, he was forcibly transferred to a
prison hospital without adequate healthcare
facilities where he faced threats and insults
from other inmates and degrading treatment
by the prison authorities. On 20 November
he was transferred to a military hospital in a
critical condition, but transferred back to
prison on 30 December. His doctors reported
that his health had been seriously damaged
as a result of ill-treatment. An investigation by
the State Inspector’s Service into the
allegations was halted after the institution was
disestablished. Mikheil Saakashvili’s request
for a retrial was denied.
In November, the EU ambassador criticized
the Georgian authorities’ “setbacks in the
area of the judiciary and rule of law”,
including politicized, “non-transparent and

173

non-competitive” appointments of judges to
the Supreme Court and the High Council of
Justice, and the failure to adopt promised
constitutional amendments on the process of
appointing the Prosecutor General.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In September, following year-long protests,
construction of the controversial Namakhvani
hydropower plant in western Georgia was
cancelled. Throughout the year, protesters
challenging the construction of the plant over
environmental safety concerns were on
several occasions detained by the police and
prevented from assembling near the
construction site.

WORKERS' RIGHTS
Labour rights abuses and violations were
widespread as companies laid off employees
without due process and reduced or refused
to pay wages, including those of essential
workers, due to restrictions related to the
Covid-19 pandemic.
In March, dozens of employees of a regional
food delivery company had their employment
contracts terminated in retaliation for
collective protests over wage cuts and
worsening working conditions. In August,
Tbilisi municipal rubbish collectors reported
receiving threats and wage cuts in retaliation
for holding a three-day strike demanding
better working conditions.

ABKHAZIA AND SOUTH OSSETIA/
TSKHINVALI REGION
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There remained no effective investigation into
the death of Inal Dzhabiev from the
breakaway South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region,
who died in custody in Tskhinvali after being
severely beaten following detention in August
2020.
Anri Ateiba, from the breakaway Abkhazia
region, died on 14 September after he was
found unconscious in the temporary
detention centre in Gagra on 12 August. The
investigation into his death remained
pending.

174

The health of Irakli Bebua, an ethnic
Georgian resident of Gali serving nine years’
imprisonment for burning the Abkhaz flag,
reportedly deteriorated due to chronic
diseases and lack of adequate healthcare in
detention.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The de facto authorities in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region continued to
detain civilians and restrict movement in and
out of government-controlled territory,
including through additional pandemicrelated quarantine restrictions, which
impacted a range of human rights including
economic and social.

GERMANY
Federal Republic of Germany
Head of state: Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Head of government: Olaf Scholz (replaced Angela
Merkel in December)
The number of hate crimes increased, but
the authorities failed to develop a
comprehensive strategy against violence
rooted in discrimination. The law to protect
children born with variations of sex
characteristics came into force. A law on
freedom of assembly in North RhineWestphalia disproportionately restricted the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
Authorities promised humanitarian visas to
the most vulnerable Afghans and their
families. Amendments to the intelligence
law allowed authorities to install
surveillance technology to monitor
encrypted communication. Germany
opposed a proposed waiver to the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) aimed
at increasing international distribution of
Covid-19 vaccines. In a landmark court
ruling, the Federal Climate Protection Act
was found partially unconstitutional.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION
In May, the Federal Ministry of the Interior
reported a 19% rise in hate crimes compared
with the previous year.
In the same month, the government
adopted a package of 89 measures against
racist crimes. While the measures provided
more support for civil society, they fell short
of addressing institutional racism and of
setting out an overall strategy against racist
violence.
Accountability for discriminatory abuses by
police continued to be hampered by the lack
of an independent complaints mechanism to
effectively investigate allegations at the
federal and state levels, as well as the police
in six federal states and at the federal level
not being required to wear identification
badges.
LGBTI PEOPLE
In March, the federal government adopted an
LGBTI inclusion strategy that had been
developed in close cooperation with civil
society organizations and aims to integrate
the protection of the human rights of LGBTI
people into foreign policy and development
cooperation.
In May, the law to protect children born with
variations of sex characteristics came into
force. Although the law tackled human rights
violations against intersex people concerning
unnecessary medical procedures, it failed to
introduce further measures to end the
pathologization of intersex people and to
include reparations for people who
underwent unnecessary and irreversible
medical treatment.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In December, the parliament of the federal
state of North Rhine-Westphalia adopted a
law that disproportionately restricted the right
to freedom of peaceful assembly by imposing
a series of administrative requirements and
unduly extending state surveillance and
control powers, for example through the
setting up of checkpoints. It also provided for
criminal penalties for organizers who failed to
submit prior notification, with the exception of
spontaneous assemblies.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

According to Reporters without Borders,
journalists were not sufficiently protected by
the police when reporting on demonstrations.
The organization reported dozens of cases of
journalists who had been physically attacked
and verbally abused at protests, especially
those against Covid-19 measures.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, the Koblenz Higher Regional
Court convicted one of the two defendants in
the first criminal trial addressing violations by
officials of the Syrian General Intelligence
Directorate. The defendant was sentenced to
four and a half years in prison for his role in
acts of torture and deprivation of liberty. The
trial of the main defendant was continuing at
the end of the year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In violation of the principle of nonrefoulement (forcible return), 167 men were
deported to Afghanistan before deportations
were temporarily suspended on 11 August.
Following the Taliban seizure of power in
Afghanistan in August, the federal
government promised humanitarian visas for
2,600 of the most vulnerable Afghans and
their family members in September. The new
government announced a humanitarian
admission programme for Afghans.
Under the EU voluntary humanitarian
admission scheme of the EU-Turkey
statement, 2,192 Syrian refugees arrived and
at least 2,211 refugees were resettled under
the UNHCR resettlement programme.
Delays in family reunification procedures
raised concerns regarding the right to family
life. Applicants from Afghanistan, Eritrea and
Syria waited for more than a year to receive
their first appointment at German embassies
to start the procedure to reunite with their
family members in Germany.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In March, the Act on the Federal Intelligence
Service was amended following a 2020
Federal Constitutional Court ruling. The
revised Act allows for mass surveillance of

175

foreign communications and for surveillance
of communication networks without oversight
when the declared aim is to determine the
usefulness of information for specific
investigative purposes.
In June, the Federal Parliament passed
further amendments to intelligence laws
allowing German intelligence services to
install surveillance technology (“state
trojans”) on devices to monitor even
encrypted communications. The intelligence
services can require that internet service
providers assist in this process and can
exploit critical computer security
vulnerabilities when installing the surveillance
software (so-called “zero-day exploits”).
Following the global Pegasus investigations,
the German government admitted to the
purchase and use of NSO Group’s Pegasus
spyware. While the Ministry of the Interior
noted that it was only used in accordance
with German law for targeted surveillance,
concerns remained because NSO Group’s
spyware had been documented as facilitating
human rights violations around the world.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Germany contributed €2.2 billion to the ACTAccelerator and delivered 84 million Covid-19
vaccine doses to the COVAX initiative. The
federal government opposed the TRIPS
waiver proposed by the WHO and failed to
put pressure on BioNTech to join the WHO
Covid-19 Technology Access Pool or mRNA
vaccine technology transfer hub to share its
knowledge and technology, and scale up
global manufacturing.
Civil society organizations continued to raise
concerns over the fact that abortion is
regulated through criminal law.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In June, the Federal Parliament passed the
Act on Corporate Due Diligence in Supply
Chains, which requires corporations based in
Germany with at least 3,000 employees to
conduct human rights and environmental
due diligence from 2023. Concerns remained
regarding the limited scope of the law
because it only applies to large companies

176

and does not impose due diligence
obligations throughout the whole value chain.
The law also failed to improve the right to
compensation for people who experience
abuses as a result of a lack of due diligence
by corporations.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In March, the German Constitutional Court
ruled that the Federal Climate Protection Act
was partially unconstitutional. The Court
found that the Act violated the rights of future
generations by imposing on them the undue
burden of later drastic restrictions to
compensate for current insufficient measures
to tackle the climate crisis.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
An arms export moratorium on Saudi Arabia,
extended in December 2020, remained in
place until the end of 2021. As in previous
years, it only covered Saudi Arabia, not other
countries involved in the conflict in Yemen.
The export of German parts and components
for joint European arms projects destined for
Saudi Arabia remained permitted.

GHANA
Republic of Ghana
Head of state and government: Nana Addo Dankwa
Akufo-Addo
Cases of excessive use of force were
reported. Prisons remained overcrowded.
Women continued to suffer discrimination
and gender-based violence. Attacks against
LGBTI people intensified. Efforts were
made to begin vaccinating at-risk people
and essential workers against Covid-19.
Forced evictions left some people homeless.

BACKGROUND
In January, President Akufo-Addo was sworn
in for a second term. In May, variations of the
hashtag #FixTheCountry started being used
on social media by young Ghanaians calling
for social and economic reforms.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
There were several incidents of excessive and
unnecessary use of force by the security
forces.
Various media reported that National
Security operatives assaulted journalist Peter
Tabiri on 7 May as he reported on a casino
raid. The operatives allegedly kicked, slapped
and poured water on him, injuring his right
ear.
On 11 May, National Security operatives
arrested and allegedly assaulted reporter
Caleb Kudah from Citi FM after they found
him filming abandoned state-funded vehicles
within their premises. They then stormed Citi
FM’s office and arrested Caleb Kudah’s
colleague, Zoe Abu-Baidoo. Both were
released without charge.
On 29 June, police and military forces shot
dead two protesters and wounded four others
during a protest in Ejura Sekyedumase in the
Ashanti Region. A three-member Ministerial
Committee commissioned to conduct a
public inquiry into the incident submitted its
report to the government in July.
On 1 July in Wa, in the Upper West Region,
military officers went on a rampage, beating
people over a suspected stolen phone. The
Military High Command tasked a fourmember committee to investigate the
incident. Three officers from the Wa Barracks
were demoted while eight others were tried
and jailed for 30 days by a disciplinary board.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 14 January, a police officer arrested
Selorm Gborbidzi, a reporter from the Accrabased newspaper The Finder, after he started
filming a scuffle between the officer and the
driver of a commercial vehicle. He was
released after four hours and charged with
obstruction of justice, illegally filming a police
officer on duty and insulting a police officer.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Prison overcrowding continued. According to
the Director General of the Prisons Services,
as of 24 June the total prison population was
13,200, despite an authorized capacity of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

9,945. Food given to prison inmates was
inadequate due to the insufficient feeding
grant of GHC1.80 (US$0.30) a day per
inmate.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
At the end of the year, the Affirmative Action
bill was still pending.
In March, UNFPA Ghana in partnership
with the government launched the Orange
Support Centre and the Boame mobile
phone app to report cases of domestic
violence.
“Witch” camps remained open, despite the
government’s promise to close them. Older
women accused of witchcraft were at risk of
being banished to such camps. A
commemorative forum was held on 23 July, a
year after a mob lynched an elderly woman,
to call on parliament to criminalize the
labelling of people as witches. In December,
various media reported that youths beat to
death an elderly woman in Nalerigu in the
North East Region because they suspected
her of being a witch.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination against LGBTI people
intensified. In February, police officers
searched and closed the recently
inaugurated office of LGBT+ Rights Ghana, a
non-profit organization. On 20 May, police
arrested 21 LGBTI activists for unlawful
assembly during a training session. They
were released on bail in June and their
charges were dismissed on 5 August.
In June, the Promotion of Proper Human
Sexual Rights and Ghanaian Family Values
bill was introduced in parliament. The bill
further criminalized LGBTI people and
introduced prison sentences for anyone
expressing support or “sympathy” towards
LGBTI people. The bill also encouraged
conversion therapy and gender “realignment”
for children.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
On 1 February, the Ghana Medical
Association declared an increase in doctors

177

contracting Covid-19, and the deaths of two
doctors from the disease during January.
In March, Covid-19 vaccinations began for
people at risk and essential workers, with
drones being used to deliver vaccines to rural
communities. On 7 May, the vice president,
Mahamudu Bawumia, stated that 2,161
prison officers and 1,136 inmates with
underlying health conditions had been
vaccinated. By mid-December, less than
10% of the population were fully vaccinated.

FORCED EVICTIONS
The Greater Accra Regional Minister’s “Let’s
Make Accra Work” campaign involved
demolishing illegal structures. As part of the
campaign, on 5 July, authorities demolished
homes of people living in the Railway
Quarters along Graphic Road in Accra,
making them homeless. Former residents
told the media they were not given adequate
notice. In the same month, about 3,000
woodworkers at Kaase-Angola in the Asokwa
Municipality, who had been operating in the
area for decades, were requested to vacate
the area after the government allegedly sold
the land to a private company. The
woodworkers stated that it would deprive
them of an adequate place to work, affecting
their livelihood.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In February, three global manufacturing
companies expressed concern over the
impact of bauxite mining on the people and
wildlife of the Atewa forest, and stated that
they would not use this supply chain.
In May, the defence minister announced
that 561 military officers had been deployed
during a four-day operation on the Birim,
Offin and Oda rivers of the Eastern and
Ashanti Regions as part of Operation Halt to
counter illegal mining which was polluting
water bodies. On 27 May, the government
announced another deployment of 401
military officers to halt operations on the river
Ankobra.

178

GREECE
Hellenic Republic
Head of state: Katerina Sakellaropoulou
Head of government: Kyriakos Mitsotakis
Reports of unlawful use of force against
peaceful protesters persisted. A Roma man
was fatally shot during a police chase.
Pushbacks and human rights abuses
against refugees and migrants continued,
despite systematic denials by the
authorities. The authorities’ crackdown
against NGOs and those working to help
refugees continued. Violations of the rights
of conscientious objectors to military
service persisted. As violence against
women escalated, a controversial childcustody bill that would put victims of
domestic violence in greater danger was
passed by parliament.

BACKGROUND
Greece faced an ecological disaster after
wildfires destroyed over 900,000 hectares of
forest and farmland.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of unnecessary and excessive use of
force by the police against peaceful
protesters and others persisted. In March,
footage showing the unlawful use of force
against a young man by a police officer
during a Covid-19 document check caused
public outrage and prompted many
demonstrations. A disciplinary inquiry was
ordered and a police officer was suspended
from his duties while an Athens prosecutor
ordered a criminal investigation. Two
protesters who participated in one of the
demonstrations in March reported being
tortured by police in the General Attika Police
Directorate during their questioning and filed
a criminal complaint.
In April, an Athens court found police
responsible for the life-threatening injuries
sustained by protester Yiannis Kafkas in May
2011 and awarded him compensation. In

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

September, the authorities lodged an appeal
against the decision.

RIGHT TO LIFE
In October, an Athens court resumed the
hearing of the case of two individuals and
four police officers indicted for the death of
LGBTI activist Zak Kostopoulos in September
2018.
During the same month, Nikos Sambanis,
an unarmed 18-year-old Roma man died
following a fatal shooting by police. A 16year-old Roma boy, also unarmed, sustained
serious injuries. Seven police officers were
charged with homicide with possible intent.
Calls were made for the authorities to
conduct thorough disciplinary and criminal
investigations, including into possible racist
motives.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
PUSHBACKS
Pushbacks and human rights abuses against
refugees and migrants at land and sea
borders continued, despite systematic
denials by the Greek authorities.
In June, through the testimonies of 16
victims, Amnesty International reported 21
incidents of group pushbacks to Turkey in
20201, conducted by individuals appearing to
belong to law enforcement and individuals in
civilian or unmarked clothing. The incidents
were estimated to have affected around
1,000 people. Many victims experienced
arbitrary detention and ill-treatment, in some
cases amounting to torture. None of those
interviewed had the opportunity to seek
asylum or to challenge their return. The
research, consistent with evidence from other
reputable actors, showed that pushbacks
were Greece’s de facto policy of border
management. More pushbacks were
documented in the second half of the year.
In August, the European Commission
declared that the release of additional
funding for border control activities in Greece
would be conditional on the establishment by
the country of an independent border
monitoring mechanism. While a new
mechanism had not yet been created to this

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

end, the government identified the National
Transparency Authority as competent to
investigate pushbacks incidents. NGOs,
however, contested the independence of this
body.
Several cases of pushbacks remained
pending before the European Court of
Human Rights and the UN Human Rights
Committee.
ACCESS TO ASYLUM
In June, the government designated Turkey
as a “safe country” for asylum seekers from
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh and
Somalia, as was already the case for Syrians
under the EU-Turkey migration statement.
The designation means that asylum
applications to Greece from these
nationalities could now be considered
inadmissible and applicants returned to
Turkey. This decision disregarded the fact
that Turkey had been refusing to accept
returns under the EU-Turkey statement since
March 2020. It also failed to consider the
difficulties facing asylum seekers and
migrants in Turkey, including unlawful returns
and obstacles in accessing protection.
RECEPTION CONDITIONS
Sea arrivals continued to decline sharply
compared to previous years, leading to
reduced numbers of refugees and migrants
on the Aegean islands. During the year, at
least 86 people who attempted to cross the
Aegean were reported dead or missing. After
fires destroyed Moria camp in 2020, work
began to replace open camps with “closedcontrolled island facilities” (KEDN), funded
by the EU. From November, on the island of
Samos, authorities illegally detained some of
the residents of the KEDN by preventing
them from exiting the facility. The decision
affected asylum seekers without a valid
registration document (“asylum card”),
including newcomers yet to be issued with
one and people with unsuccessful asylum
applications.
In December, ruling in the case of an
Afghan resident of the facility, a local court
found the prohibition of exit to be illegal and
ordered for it to be lifted. At the end of the
year, however, KEDN residents without a valid

179

card continued to be generally prevented
from exiting. The reception conditions in the
temporary camp of Mavrovouni on Lesvos,
where the displaced residents of Moria had
been living since the fires, remained a cause
for concern.
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In January, the European Committee of Social
Rights found Greece to be in violation of
several provisions of the European Social
Charter. The decision focused on the
inappropriate accommodation provided for
accompanied and unaccompanied migrant
and asylum-seeking children and the failure
to ensure their protection from harm. The
committee also found violations in relation to
Greece’s guardianship system, the detention
of unaccompanied migrant children in
“protective custody”, the failure to provide
formal education to children on the
islands and the right to health.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
NGOs campaigning for the opening of access
to Covid-19 vaccines for undocumented
people reported persisting challenges. A legal
provision adopted in October expanded the
possibilities for undocumented migrants to
register for Covid-19 vaccination and obtain
the relevant certificate, and introduced
safeguards against deportation. In December,
a Ministerial Decision allowed civil society
actors to administer Covid-19 vaccines to
vulnerable people including those who are
undocumented.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In March, three UN Special Rapporteurs
expressed concerns over new restrictive
registration requirements introduced in 2020
for NGOs working with migrants and
refugees.
In November, years after their initial arrest
and release on bail in 2018, human rights
defenders Sarah Mardini and Séan Binder
together with 22 other members of the NGO
Emergency Response Centre International,
faced trial in Lesvos on some of the charges
brought against them. These included
charges of espionage, unlawful use of radio
frequencies and forgery arising from their

180

work rescuing and assisting refugees. The
trial was adjourned and the matter referred to
a higher court; the investigation into the
remaining charges against the group
remained pending.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Greek authorities failed to facilitate, and
continued to unlawfully interfere with, the
right to freedom of peaceful assembly.2 In
late January, the head of police introduced a
blanket ban on public outdoor assemblies of
more than 100 people citing public health
grounds. Several peaceful assemblies were
dispersed by the Greek police throughout the
year.

DISCRIMINATION
In April, the Racist Violence Recording
Network reported 107 incidents of racist
violence as recorded in 2020. Between
August and October, hate crimes by
members of far-right groups and other
individuals against migrants, students and
members of political parties were reported in
Crete, Athens and Thessaloniki.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
Serious violations of the rights of
conscientious objectors to military service
continued, including repeated prosecutions,
fines and arrests. Appeals to the Supreme
Administrative Court against the
discriminatory rejection of applications for
conscientious objector status were pending at
the end of the year. The UN Human Rights
Committee raised questions over the rights of
conscientious objectors – and the punitive
and discriminatory “alternative service” – to
be considered in the next periodic report of
Greece. Greece also received
recommendations on the issue in the context
of the UPR.
In a landmark ruling in December, the UN
Human Rights Committee found multiple
violations of the ICCPR in the case of
conscientious objector Lazaros Petromelidis.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
During the year, 17 women were murdered
by their partners or former partners. Their
murders highlighted the problem of domestic
violence and brought renewed calls by
women’s rights groups for the term
“femicide” to be used in public debate and
legislation. From January, the Greek #MeToo
movement shed light on tens of reports of
rape and sexual harassment in the areas of
sport and culture where many women spoke
publicly about their abuse.
Between March and May, women’s and
human rights groups called for the
withdrawal of a bill on child custody that
would place domestic violence victims at
greater risk and breach the principle of the
best interests of the child. The controversial
bill, which became law in May, risked giving
perpetrators of violence and abuse access to
their victims, and for an extended period of
time.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In early November, as Greece reported the
highest daily average of Covid-19 infections
since the beginning of the pandemic, health
workers’ unions called for more funding and
the recruitment of many more permanent
staff to strengthen the weakened National
Health System.
Concerns were raised about the punitive
and discriminatory nature of a fine of €100
per month imposed on people over 60 if they
did not comply with compulsory vaccination
for Covid-19, following the adoption of a legal
provision by the parliament in early
December.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In January, Dimitris Koufondinas, a member
of armed group Revolutionary Organization
17 November, began a hunger strike to
protest against the government’s decision to
transfer him to Domokos prison and not to
Korydallos prison in accordance with national
legislation. Despite a significant deterioration
in his health, the authorities refused to
accept his request. In March, Dimitris
Koufondinas ended his hunger strike.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In late August, the Initiative for Prisoners’
Rights expressed concerns over a reported
increase in Covid-19 cases in prisons, limited
numbers of healthcare staff, and
overcrowded conditions.
1. Greece: Violence, Lies, and Pushbacks - Refugees and Migrants Still
Denied Safety and Asylum at Europe’s Borders (Index: EUR
25/4307/2021), 23 June
2. Greece: Freedom of Assembly at Risk and Unlawful Use of Force in the
Era of COVID-19 (Index: EUR 25/4399/2021), 14 July

GUATEMALA
Republic of Guatemala
Head of state and government: Alejandro Giammattei
Falla
Increased criminalization was used as a
strategy to intimidate those working in the
administration of justice. A law that
threatens the right to defend human rights
entered into force. Guatemala recorded the
lowest percentage of people fully vaccinated
against Covid-19 in Latin America amid
corruption allegations.

BACKGROUND
US vice-president Kamala Harris visited
Guatemala in June and agreed with President
Giammattei to address the root causes of
migration, including inequality, corruption
and the flawed rule of law. In July, the
dismissal of the head of the Special
Prosecutor’s Office Against Impunity sparked
nationwide protests against corruption,
economic inequality and the government’s
response to Covid-19.

IMPUNITY
Those working in the administration of justice
with key roles in the fight against impunity in
cases of serious human rights violations and
corruption were removed from or prevented
from taking up their posts and faced threats,
criminal prosecution and smear campaigns.1
In April, magistrate Gloria Porras, a
prominent supporter of human rights and
anti-corruption efforts in recent years, who

181

had been re-elected to Guatemala's
Constitutional Court, left the country after
Congress blocked her swearing-in ceremony
and refused to let her take up the
appointment.
In June, four judges from high-risk criminal
courts who had been granted precautionary
measures by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights, reported to the Public
Prosecutor’s Office that they were the targets
of harassment and threats. One month later,
the Attorney General dismissed Juan
Francisco Sandoval, head of the Special
Prosecutor’s Office Against Impunity, who
fled the country amid concerns over his
safety. In October, she also transferred the
head of the Special Prosecutor’s Office on
Human Rights, who had helped bring the
former military president Efraín Ríos Montt to
justice.

lead to NGOs being shut down or targeted in
other ways. The appeals were pending at the
end of the year.
Court hearings continued in the case of
prisoner of conscience Bernardo Caal Xol,
imprisoned since January 2018 for defending
the rights of Q'eqchi' Maya communities
affected by the construction of the OXEC
hydroelectric dam project.2 In August, the
Supreme Court rejected a cassation appeal
for his release presented by his lawyers. In
October, police agents violently repressed
Q'eqchi' Maya people who had been
peacefully protesting for three weeks against
a mining company operating in their territory
in El Estor, as well as other demonstrators
and journalists. Following the incident, the
President decreed a state of emergency in
the municipality.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

Guatemalans continued to flee violence,
poverty, inequality and climate change.
Hundreds of Guatemalans were deported
and pushed back by Mexican authorities,
together with other people from Central
America and Haiti, to remote areas at the
border where they were left without proper
assistance.
Security forces beat and used tear gas
against a caravan of migrants and asylum
seekers attempting to enter the country in
January, on the pretext of enforcing Covid-19
protocols.3

The Unit for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders in Guatemala (UDEFEGUA)
recorded 839 attacks against human rights
defenders between January and November.
Guatemala once again had the fourth highest
rate of killings worldwide of land and
environmental defenders per capita; 13 were
killed in 2020, according to the NGO Global
Witness.
Despite this, by the end of the year
Guatemala had yet to ratify the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(Escazú Agreement), which includes
provisions for the protection of environmental
human rights defenders.
In May, the new members of the
Constitutional Court rejected legal challenges
filed by civil society organizations against the
controversial NGO Law and it entered into
force on 21 June. At least three appeals were
subsequently filed before the Constitutional
Court in relation to elements of the law that
could allow for serious violations of the rights
to freedom of expression and association,
including vaguely worded clauses that could

182

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Guatemala had the lowest percentage of
people fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in
Latin America, at just 25.7%, amid
corruption allegations in connection with the
purchase of vaccines and the handling of the
pandemic.
Although a detailed national vaccination
plan was published, it did not include a
protocol for Indigenous peoples.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In March, after two decades of struggle for
justice by the family of María Isabel Veliz
Franco, a 15-year-old girl killed in 2001

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

whose body showed signs of sexual violence,
a national court sentenced a man to 30
years’ imprisonment for her murder.
Guatemala had been condemned by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights in
2014 for failing to diligently investigate her
death and prevent violations of her rights.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In December, Congress started discussing a
legislative initiative (5940) which, if passed,
would violate the rights of transgender
children and adolescents.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In May, the security forces arrested 11 retired
military and police officers suspected of
involvement in abductions, enforced
disappearances, extrajudicial executions and
other crimes under international law and
human rights violations against at least 183
people considered political opponents
between 1983 and 1985 in the case known
as “Diario Militar”. At least eight were
detained awaiting trial at the end of the year.
1. “Guatemala: International organizations demand end to
criminalization of justice officials and human rights defenders”, 8
June
2. “Guatemala: Amnesty International delivers 27,957 signatures
demanding release of Bernardo Caal”, 7 July
3. “Guatemala: La pandemia no puede ser un pretexto para negar
protección internacional”, 30 March

GUINEA
Republic of Guinea
Head of state: Mamadi Doumbouya (replaced Alpha
Condé in October)
Head of government: Mohamed Béavogui (replaced
Ibrahima Kassory Fofana in October)
Dozens of people arbitrarily arrested in the
context of the 2020 protests against former
president Alpha Condé’s candidacy and reelection for a third term were released.
Several people were killed during protests
on issues around mining exploitation. No

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

one was brought to justice for the 28
September 2009 massacre. Sexual violence
persisted.

BACKGROUND
Following the arrest of Alpha Condé on 5
September after an assault led by the
Guinean special forces, the National
Committee of Reconciliation and
Development (CNRD) led by Mamadi
Doumbouya dismissed the Constitution and
the government. A Transition Charter was
issued on 27 September, announcing the
elaboration of a new Constitution and the
organization of elections. Mamadi
Doumbouya was sworn in as president before
the Supreme Court on 1 October. After 12
weeks in detention without official charge,
Alpha Condé was allowed to reside at his
spouse’s house.
The Ebola outbreak that emerged in midFebruary was declared over in June. The
curfew imposed to combat the Covid-19
pandemic was lifted on 21 October.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
After several months in arbitrary detention,
dozens of opposition members and
supporters and civil society activists who
denounced the candidacy and/or the reelection of former president Alpha Condé for
a third term were released.
On 8 May, more than 40 people who called
for or participated in 2020 demonstrations to
denounce Alpha Condé’s candidacy or reelection for a third term were released after
charges were dropped. On 7 September,
following orders by the CNRD, 79 activists
and opposition members and supporters who
had also been arrested were released.
Among them, Oumar Sylla, one of the leaders
of the National Front for the Defence of the
Constitution, was sentenced on 28 January to
11 months in prison for “participating in a
prohibited assembly likely to disturb public
order.” He had been held in Conakry's main
prison since his arrest on 29 September
2020 while mobilizing against Alpha Condé’s
candidacy for a third term. In another case,
on 10 June Conakry’s Court of Appeal

183

sentenced Oumar Sylla to three years’
imprisonment for ‘‘communication and
dissemination of false information, threats of
violence and death” after he denounced
arbitrary arrests on the radio.
Amadou Diouldé Diallo, a reporter for stateowned radio and TV broadcaster Radio
Télévision Guinéenne, spent nearly three
months in pretrial detention on charges of
insulting former president Alpha Condé. He
was freed on 19 May after a court in Conakry
fined him 5 million Guinean francs (€420) for
“insulting the head of state”.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Several people were reportedly killed by
defence and security forces in at least three
localities during demonstrations, some of
which turned violent, around issues related to
mining exploitation.
On 22 April at least two people were shot
dead by defence and security forces and
several wounded in Kouroussa town, Kankan
region, after a mob attacked the town hall
and the Prefect’s residence; there had been a
conflict looming between small-scale gold
miners and a mining company over the
exploitation of a gold mining site.
In Gaoual town, Boké region, on 22 June, at
least two people were killed and several
wounded when the army was deployed
during demonstrations and riots against the
alleged involvement of members of the
defence and security forces in the
management of small-scale gold mines.
According to witnesses, soldiers intentionally
knocked one of the two victims off a bridge.
In July, in Siguiri region, suspected Donzo
hunters shot at gendarmes who had come to
enforce a court order about a dispute
between two villages over the operation of a
small-scale mine. Thirteen gendarmes were
injured, according to the authorities.
On 17 August, in Foulata town, Kankan
region, defence and security forces allegedly
shot and wounded several people and burnt
down homes and stores, following protests
against a mining company for allegedly not

184

honouring its commitments to employ local
inhabitants.
On 11 September, all demonstrations were
forbidden by the CNRD until further notice.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Mamadou Oury Barry, who had been in
pretrial detention in Conakry’s main prison
since 5 August 2020 for “assault and
battery”, died on 16 January. According to
the Ministry of Justice, he died “a natural
death linked to a bowel obstruction and
anaemia” in hospital. The public prosecutor
did not allow the body to be returned to the
family until 2 February, after a request was
made by a lawyer on 19 January. In the
weeks before, three other detainees,
including supporters of the opposition party
the Union of Democratic Forces of Guinea,
died, soon after one of them had been
released and the two others had been
hospitalized in very poor health. The
authorities attributed the deaths to natural
causes without carrying out thorough
investigations. Families of the detainees had
not been able to visit them in prison or
hospital.

DEATH PENALTY
Although the death penalty was removed
from the Criminal Code in 2016, several
prisoners were still under sentence of death,
including some of those sentenced in 2011
after inter-communal clashes in Galakpaye
town, N’Zérékoré region.

IMPUNITY
Despite several announcements of
investigations into the killings of protesters in
2019 and 2020 during demonstrations
against the change of Constitution and the
election of former president Alpha Condé for
a third term, very little information was made
available. The minister of justice reported in
June that due to lack of evidence the Court of
First Instance of Mamou had acquitted those
accused of the killing of a 20-year-old man in
Kégnéko town, Mamou region, on 22 March
2020. On 23 October, a delegation from the
CNRD met with families of those killed by

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

defence and security forces during Alpha
Condé’s rule, telling them they would receive
justice.
Twelve years after 157 people were killed by
defence and security forces at a stadium in
Conakry on 28 September 2009 and over
100 were victims of sexual violence, the trial
had still not opened, even though the
investigation ended in November 2017.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Office for the Protection of Gender,
Childhood and Morals recorded 331 cases of
rape by mid-December, against 393 cases in
2019 and 374 in 2020. Despite the
authorities’ and NGOs’ efforts in recent years
to promote access to justice for victims of
sexual violence, the practice of negotiating
out-of-court settlements between the
suspected perpetrator and the victim
continued to hinder prosecutions.1

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The vaccination campaign against Covid-19
was launched on 5 March, targeting primarily
health workers, people over 60, people with
strategic jobs, and religious leaders.
On 10 August, President Alpha Condé
ordered the government to ensure that all
civil servants were vaccinated against
Covid-19. As of 29 December, according to
the National Agency of Health Security,
1,983,124 people had received their first
vaccination, and 911,780 had received their
second one (out of an estimated population
of around 13 million).
1. “Guinea: Horrific cases of rape and murder of girls must urge
authorities to strengthen their efforts to prevent and combat sexual
violence”, 15 December

HAITI
Republic of Haiti
Head of state and government: Ariel Henry (acting,
replaced Jovenel Moïse in July)
The political and economic situation
continued to deteriorate, facilitating

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

massive human rights violations, abductions
and generalized violence. Human rights
defenders and journalists were at
heightened risk, impunity remained
endemic and tens of thousands of Haitians
sought international protection.

BACKGROUND
The killing in July of Haitian president
Jovenel Moïse was a shocking indicator of the
massive human rights violations and violence
that Haiti has been facing for years.1
Following an earthquake in August, the UN
estimated that some 800,000 people needed
assistance. As of August, the US State
Department advised against all travel to Haiti
due to “kidnapping, crime, civil unrest, and
COVID-19”.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND
JOURNALISTS
Human rights defenders and journalists were
increasingly at risk of attack and human
rights violations.
There was little progress in the investigation
into the killing of journalist Diego Charles, a
reporter for Radio Vision 2000 and cofounder of the website Larepiblik Magazine,
and Antoinette Duclaire, a political and
human rights activist, vocal government critic
and co-founder of Larepiblik Magazine. They
were murdered just a week before President
Moïse. The authorities failed to protect their
families, who were subjected to death threats
and intimidation.2

IMPUNITY
Civil society organizations continued to raise
concerns about chronic impunity and judicial
dysfunction in Haiti.
In April, the Observatoire Haïtien des
Crimes contre l’humanité and Harvard Law
School’s International Human Rights Clinic
issued a report alleging Haitian government
complicity in three massacres targeting
impoverished neighbourhoods between 2018
and 2020. The report pointed to evidence
that the attacks, carried out by gangs, were
supported by state actors and alleged these

185

acts could amount to crimes against
humanity.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
During the year, tens of thousands of Haitians
made their way overland, often taking
dangerous routes, including through the
Darien Gap jungle, to reach Mexico and the
USA. However, both countries implemented
policies and practices that limited access to
international protection, and continued mass
detentions and unlawful forced returns to
Haiti, Mexico and Guatemala, placing the
lives and physical integrity of thousands of
Haitians at risk.3 In September, images
emerged of US border authorities on
horseback abusing and taunting Haitians,
which provoked widespread condemnation.4
However, between 19 September and 10
November alone the US government sent
nearly 9,000 Haitian migrants and asylum
seekers to Haiti, largely without providing
access to the US asylum system or protection
screenings, exacerbating the crisis.5
In September, UN agencies also jointly
called on states across the Americas to adopt
a comprehensive regional approach for
Haitians on the move and to provide them
with protection measures including asylum
“or other legal stay arrangements for more
effective access to regular migration
pathways”.
In October, a resolution adopted by the
Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights addressed the regional need to
increase the protection of Haitans on the
move. Despite this, during the year, states
across the region largely failed to shield
Haitians from a range of human rights
violations in host countries, including
detention and unlawful pushbacks, extortion,
anti-Black racism, gender-based violence by
armed groups, and destitution, leaving many
Haitians with restricted access to protection
measures including asylum6 and nowhere
safe to go.7
1. “Haiti: Investigation urged into killing of Haitian president and grave
human rights violations under his watch”, 7 July

186

2. “Haiti: Authorities must protect relatives of murdered journalist and
activist from death threats”, 6 August
3. Mexico: Mass Deportations Must Stop (Index: AMR 41/4790/2021), 30
September
4. USA: Stop US Abuses against Haitian People (Index: AMR
51/4773/2021), 23 September
5. Haiti: Stop US Deportations and Abuse against Haitians on the Move:
An Urgent Step Towards Creating Just Policies for Haitians (Index:
AMR 36/5101/2021), 15 December
6. Haiti: Not Safe Anywhere: Haitians on the Move Need Urgent
International Protection (Index: AMR 36/4920/2021), 28 October
7. “Where do you go when nowhere will welcome you?: States must
protect thousands of Haitians on the move. This is how”, 16
December

HONDURAS
Republic of Honduras
Head of state and government: Juan Orlando
Hernández
Human rights defenders continued to face
attacks and unfounded criminal
proceedings. Authorities blocked access to
safe abortions and same-sex marriage.
Impunity for excessive use of force by law
enforcement persisted.

BACKGROUND
General elections were held on 28 November
and the newly elected president Xiomara
Castro was due to take office in January
2022. The creation of Employment and
Economic Development Zones, which
benefited from tax exemptions and special
security arrangements, sparked protests over
the lack of free, prior and informed consent
of Indigenous peoples and Afro-descendant
communities. Thousands of Hondurans
affected by hurricanes Eta and Iota, violence
and poverty were forced to leave the country
and headed north.

IMPUNITY AND EXCESSIVE USE OF
FORCE
Keyla Martínez died of asphyxia in February
in police custody after being arrested for
breaking the curfew imposed to curb the
spread of Covid-19. There were reports of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

police repression of the protests over her
death.1
Victims of the 2017-2018 crackdown on
post-electoral protests faced ongoing criminal
proceedings, including Jhony Salgado,2
Edwin Espinal and Raúl Álvarez. However,
state agents were not held accountable for
the human rights violations committed by
security forces during the protests.
Several prosecutors of the Specialized
Prosecutorial Unit Against Corruption
Networks were subjected to disciplinary and
criminal proceedings that could be aimed at
hindering their work.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

1. “Honduras: Death of Keyla Martínez demands prompt, exhaustive and
impartial investigation”, 9 February

Honduras ranked second in the world
regarding the number of killings of land and
environmental defenders per capita,
according to the NGO Global Witness.
Nevertheless, Honduras had yet to sign the
Regional Agreement on Access to
Information, Public Participation and Justice
in Environmental Matters in Latin America
and the Caribbean (Escazú Agreement).
In July, David Castillo, former manager of
the company Desarrollos Energéticos and
chief of the Agua Zarca hydroelectric project,
was convicted of being co-author of the
killing in 2016 of Berta Cáceres. He was
awaiting sentencing at the end of the year.3
The whereabouts of four Indigenous
Garifuna members of the Black Fraternal
Organization of Honduras (OFRANEH)
forcibly disappeared in July 2020 remained
unknown.4
Defenders of the land, territory and
environment continued to face unfounded
criminal charges. Eight members of the
Municipal Committee for the Defence of
Common and Public Assets detained in 2018
and 2019 remained in prison at the end of
2021.5
In October, Congress approved a number of
reforms that could restrict the exercise of
freedom of assembly and association, human
rights defence, guarantees of transparency,
access to information and the effective
investigation and prosecution of corruption.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In January, Congress passed a constitutional
reform making it harder to remove the bans
on abortion and same-sex marriage.6 A
constitutional action challenging the total ban
on abortion was pending before the Supreme
Court at the end of the year.
In June, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights found that Honduras had violated the
rights to life and personal integrity of Vicky
Hernández, a transgender woman, sex
worker and activist killed during the 2009
coup.

2. “Honduras: Prosecutor Óscar Chinchilla must drop the charges
against Jhony Salgado Fuentes”, 9 August
3. “Honduras: Conviction of David Castillo is a step towards justice, but
full truth must be uncovered”, 5 July
4. Honduras: Further information: Indigenous Activists Still
Missing (Index: AMR 37./4671/2021), 2 September
5. “Honduras: Amnesty International urges authorities to immediately
release eight prisoners of conscience”, 9 December
6. Honduras: Attack on Sexual and Reproductive Rights (Index: AMR
37/3594/2021), 28 January

HUNGARY
Hungary
Head of state: János Áder
Head of government: Viktor Orbán
In June, parliament adopted a homophobic
and transphobic law. Hungary was involved
in the Pegasus spyware scandal. The
European Court of Human Rights ruled
against Hungary’s placement of asylum
seekers in transit zones and its practice of
pushbacks. The right to freedom of peaceful
assembly was restricted until 23 May and
an existing state of emergency was
extended until 1 June 2022. The
government resisted putting in place
effective measures to protect judges’
freedom of expression and other rights from
undue interference.

187

BACKGROUND
Hungary’s Constitutional Court upheld a sixmonth ban on assemblies and
demonstrations in a retrospective decision
made in July. A new restrictive asylum
system was introduced under the state of
emergency. The Equal Treatment Authority,
an established human rights protection body,
was abolished in January without
consultation and its functions transferred to
the Office of the Commissioner for
Fundamental Rights. In September, the
Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions recommended downgrading the
status of the Commissioner from “A” to “B”,
in accordance with the Paris Principles, as
the office had not engaged with or addressed
all human rights issues in Hungary. Hungary
took over the Presidency of the Council of
Europe’s Committee of Ministers in May for
six months.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
Hungary adopted a homophobic and
transphobic law in June 2021, banning
access by those under 18 to material that
promotes or portrays “divergence from selfidentity corresponding to sex at birth … or
homosexuality”. The new law violated the
rights to freedom of expression, nondiscrimination and education.1 The European
Commission launched an infringement
procedure against Hungary in July.
WOMEN
The government was still reluctant to ratify
the Council of Europe Convention on
preventing and combating violence against
women and domestic violence (Istanbul
Convention) that it signed in 2014, alleging
that the convention promoted “gender
ideology” and “illegal migration”.2
Women continued to experience
widespread gender-based discrimination.
Many government policies and
communications actively reinforced gender
stereotyping, promoting women’s domestic
roles while downplaying the importance of
gender equality.

188

The reluctance of employers to provide
flexible working arrangements, combined
with the traditional allocation of care duties
within the family to women, exacerbated the
negative impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on
gender equality.
ROMA
Discrimination against Roma persisted.
Children from Roma families living in poverty
continued to be separated from their families
and placed in long-term state care, even
though this practice is forbidden by the
Hungarian Child Protection Act.
Alarm about the prevalence of racist hate
speech against Roma and other minorities
and about hate crimes was raised by the
Human Rights Council Working Group that
met from 1 to 12 November.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
More than 300 Hungarian nationals were
identified as possible targets for the Pegasus
spyware produced by surveillance technology
firm NSO Group. Media groups identified the
Hungarian authorities as a potential client of
the company. Experts from Amnesty
International were able to confirm, through
technical evidence, several cases where the
spyware was successfully installed on
phones, some of them belonging to
journalists. The Hungarian National Security
Services Act remained in violation of Article 8
of the European Convention on Human
Rights, according to a European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) judgment in the case
of Szabó and Vissy v. Hungary in 2016.
In a unanimous ruling in July in the case of
Vig v. Hungary, the ECtHR found that
enhanced police checks used in 2013 when
Dávid Vig – then a lawyer and academic –
was stopped and searched under the
provisions of the Police Act, were in violation
of the right to privacy.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The European Border and Coast Guard
Agency (Frontex) suspended its operations in
Hungary in January after the government
failed to address a December 2020 ruling by
the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) against

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

its asylum law and practices. The court ruled
that large-scale pushbacks introduced by
legislation in 2016 violated Hungary’s
obligation to ensure effective access to
international protection for asylum seekers. In
2021, more than 71,000 pushbacks took
place at the Serbian-Hungarian border.
In March, the ECtHR ruled that detaining
asylum seekers in areas known as “transit
zones” qualified as unlawful detention. The
case concerned an Iranian-Afghan family of
five (including a pregnant mother with three
minors) who were held in the Röszke transit
zone in unsuitable conditions without food or
proper medical treatment, which amounted
to inhuman and degrading treatment. This,
combined with the lack of a statutory basis
for detention and its duration, also amounted
to unlawful detention. After an initial rejection
of their asylum application, the applicants
were recognized as beneficiaries of
subsidiary protection.
In July, the ECtHR ruled on pushbacks for
the first time in the case of Shahzad v.
Hungary, concerning the denial of access to
the asylum procedure and the violent
deportation of a Pakistani national by
Hungarian police officers in 2016. The court
found that Hungary violated the prohibition of
collective expulsion and the right to an
effective remedy. The practice nevertheless
continued.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The law on “the transparency of civil society
organizations capable of influencing public
life” (the new LexNGO) came into force on 1
July, leading to further control and
stigmatization of NGOs.3 New legislation had
been needed following a June 2020 CJEU
ruling that the 2017 law on NGO
transparency introduced discriminatory and
unjustified restrictions to freedom of
association. However, while repealing the
previous law, parliament introduced new
regulations that once again unduly restricted
the right to freedom of association. The law
prescribed annual audits of NGOs whose
total assets exceeded HUF20,000,000

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

(€55,000). NGOs expressed concern that
these new provisions could lead to arbitrarily
selective and intimidatory audits by the
authorities.
In its decision on 16 November 2021 about
the LexNGO 2018 (“Stop Soros”), the CJEU
found that Hungary had violated both the
Procedures and Reception Directives of the
EU by introducing an inadmissibility ground
to quasi automatically reject the asylum
applications of those arriving in Hungary
through a “safe transit country”. The court
also found that Hungary had unlawfully
criminalized the activities of those who
provided assistance to asylum seekers.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Despite a 2016 ECtHR judgment that the
dismissal of the president of the former
Hungarian Supreme Court, András Baka,
violated the right to a fair trial and the right to
freedom of expression, Hungary continued to
fail to implement the decision or take general
measures to protect judges’ right to freedom
of expression and other rights from undue
interference. Hungary failed to submit an
updated action plan by December 2021.
In a more positive development, Hungary’s
Constitutional Court ruled in March that the
provision allowing for unlimited pretrial
detention pending a first decision was
unconstitutional as it violated the right to
liberty, and that pretrial detention should
have an absolute limit. The provision was
accordingly repealed in September.
The European Commission’s annual Rule of
Law report identified problems severely
threatening the rule of law in Hungary. The
Commission was not able to identify any
substantial improvements as compared to the
findings of the 2020 report. Hungary’s system
of checks and balances, as well as the
transparency and quality of the legislative
process, remained a source of concern.
1. Hungary: The Russian-style Propaganda Law Violates Human Rights
and Threatens LGBTI People (Index: EUR 27/4492/2021), 22 July
2. “Open Letter: Human rights violations in Hungary ahead of its
Presidency of the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers”, 20 May

189

3. Hungary Repeals Controversial Laws Restricting the Right to
Association but Concerns Remain (Index: EUR 27/4526/2021), 29 July

INDIA
Republic of India
Head of state: Ram Nath Kovind
Head of government: Narendra Modi
The authorities used repressive laws to
silence critics by curbing freedom of
expression both offline and online. Human
rights defenders, including activists,
journalists, students, lawyers and actors,
continued to face intimidation and
harassment. Independent investigations
revealed a massive unlawful surveillance
apparatus being used by the government
against human rights defenders, violating
their rights to privacy, non-discrimination
and data protection. The foreign
contribution law was misused to crack down
on human rights NGOs. Police and security
forces used excessive force against
members of minority communities and
farmers protesting peacefully against laws
on farming. Courts undermined the right to
a fair trial and delayed hearing crucial cases
involving violations of human rights. In the
context of Covid-19, lack of transparency
over the distribution of funds increased and
the right to health was undermined.
Significant sectors of the population
suffered from shortages of hospital beds
and oxygen during the second wave of
Covid-19 infections. Caste-based
discrimination and violence against Dalits
and Adivasis continued unabated. Vigilante
cow protection groups attacked minority
communities, adversely affecting their
livelihoods.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Unlawful and politically motivated restrictions
were placed on freedom of expression and
assembly. Outspoken journalists, media
outlets, actors and human rights activists

190

were threatened and intimidated through the
misuse of over-broad financial laws.
On 28 July, multiple offices of the Dainik
Bhaskar group, a Hindi-language news daily,
were raided by tax authorities. Dainik
Bhaskar had reported on the mass dumping
of bodies of Covid-19 victims along the river
Ganges due to high cremation costs.
Between 10 and 16 September, the offices of
media outlets NewsClick and Newslaundry,
as well as the house of actor-philanthropist
Sonu Sood and the offices of human rights
activist Harsh Mander, were raided on
alleged charges of tax evasion and diversion
of funds for “religious conversion”.
The Foreign Contribution Regulation Act
(FCRA) was misused by government
agencies to silence NGOs. In June, the
Ministry of Home Affairs suspended the
FCRA licence of the Commonwealth Human
Rights Initiative, a human rights organization
working on access to information and justice.
The Ministry also cancelled the registration of
10 international NGOs working on
environment, climate change and child
labour issues, and placed more than 80
philanthropic and human rights agencies on
a “Prior Reference Category” list without
citing any reason. Funds are only disbursed
to or from the organizations on this list after
clearance from the Ministry of Home Affairs,
seriously curtailing their work.
In July the Pegasus Project, an international
investigative journalism initiative, exposed the
unlawful and arbitrary surveillance of Indian
citizens through the government’s alleged use
of Pegasus spyware. At least 300 telephone
numbers of human rights defenders,
journalists, lawyers, government officials and
opposition politicians were potentially
compromised. The spyware, as examined by
Amnesty International, enabled government
agencies to monitor all phone activity,
including emails, files, contact lists, location
information and chat messages. It also
enabled governments to secretly record audio
and video using a phone’s built-in
microphone and camera. The ruling
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) stalled all
attempts by opposition leaders in parliament

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

to initiate an investigation into the allegations.
On 27 October, the Supreme Court ordered
the formation of a three-member committee
to conduct an independent investigation into
the use of Pegasus spyware for unlawful
surveillance.
The names of many human rights
defenders, including lawyers and academics,
were added to the government’s Union War
Book as “enemies of state” requiring
“surveillance at all times”. The book is a
colonial-era document which compiles
information related to security threats.
In May, the government enforced the
Information Technology (Intermediary
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code)
Rules without the necessary public
consultation and despite pending litigation in
various courts. The Rules regulate so-called
Over-the-Top (OTT) platforms such as
television streaming services, as well as news
media platforms. They allow for the blocking
and censoring of content without any
legislative backing. The introduction of the
Rules also mandated the identification of the
originator of certain information on social
media, effectively breaking end-to-end
encryption and violating the right to privacy.
India witnessed 38 government-mandated
internet shutdowns during the year.
Residents of Jammu and Kashmir suffered
the longest internet shutdown on record from
4 August 2019 to 5 February 2021. The
region continued to suffer repeated internet
shutdowns over concerns for national
security and public order. The shutdowns
caused economic loss and adversely
impacted education and other service
provision. They also put human rights
defenders at heightened risk of surveillance
by government agencies.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Fourteen human rights activists continued to
be detained under the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act (UAPA) anti-terror
legislation. They were academics Anand
Teltumbde, Shoma Sen and Hany Babu;
tribal rights activist Mahesh Raut; poet Sudhir
Dhawale; lawyers Surendra Gadling and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Sudha Bharadwaj; writer Gautam Navlakha;
activists Rona Wilson, Arun Ferreira, Vernon
Gonsalves and Sagar Gorkhe; and two
members of the cultural group Kabir Kala
Manch: Ramesh Gaichor and Jyoti Jagtap.
They were arrested between 2018 and 2020
by the National Investigation Agency (NIA),
India’s main counterterrorism agency, for
their alleged involvement in violence during
the Bhima Koregaon celebrations near the
city of Pune in 2018.
The government cracked down on social
media and internet use by resorting to
arbitrary arrests. In February, climate activist
Disha Ravi was arrested for “sedition” and
“spreading disharmony between
communities” for sharing a social media
toolkit intended to help farmers protest
against three contentious farming laws. More
than 183 people were arrested for protesting
against the three laws, which were passed by
parliament in 2020 with minimal
consultation. The laws were repealed in
December.
On 9 March, Hidme Markam, a human
rights activist from the Adivasi Indigenous
community, was arrested under the UAPA for
highlighting sexual violence against women
by state security forces. On 8 April, various
UN Special Rapporteurs wrote to the Indian
government questioning the charges against
her. The government refused to share the
legal basis for her arrest.
On 21 September, Aakar Patel, a human
rights activist and Chair of Amnesty
International India, was arrested and charged
with “creating communal disharmony” after
tweeting about hostility towards the Ghanchi
Muslim community, including from the ruling
BJP. The complaint was filed by a sitting
member of the legislative assembly who was
affiliated to the BJP.
Hundreds of members of the Muslim
Tablighi Jamaat movement, who were
arbitrarily arrested by 11 state governments
for allegedly violating visa terms and
intentionally disregarding Covid-19
guidelines, were acquitted by the courts. The
court judgments called the prosecution
“malicious” and held that the state

191

governments abused their power and tried to
make “scapegoats” of the accused.
In October, several opposition politicians
were arbitrarily detained or put under house
arrest by the Uttar Pradesh Police for
showing their support for four protesting
farmers who were killed by a speeding car
owned by the junior home minister.

CASTE-BASED DISCRIMINATION AND
HATE CRIMES
Dalits and Adivasis continued to face
widespread abuses. According to official
statistics released in September, more than
50,000 crimes against members of
Scheduled Castes and 8,272 crimes against
Scheduled Tribes were reported in 2020.
Dalit and Adivasi women faced sexual
violence by men from dominant classes.
Many faced discrimination in accessing
public services.
In June, a 17-year-old Dalit boy was shot
dead by dominant-caste men in the city of
Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. The victim had
previously lodged a complaint with local
police after the men objected to him entering
a temple, but the police had not taken any
action.
In August, a nine-year-old Dalit girl was
allegedly raped and murdered by four men
including a Hindu priest in a Delhi
crematorium, and then cremated without her
family’s consent.
In September, Arbaaz Aftab was murdered,
allegedly at the behest of his Hindu
girlfriend’s parents, who opposed their
daughter’s interfaith relationship.
Despite legislation in various states
criminalizing acts of lynching, Dalit and
Muslim men were assaulted or beaten to
death by vigilante cow protection groups in
Assam, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir,
Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Tripura
and Uttar Pradesh.

IMPUNITY
Enforced disappearances and torture and
other ill-treatment were committed with
impunity on a widespread and systematic
basis.

192

In July, an 84-year-old Jesuit priest, Father
Stan Swamy, died after being repeatedly
denied bail despite suffering from Parkinson’s
disease and contracting Covid-19 in jail. He
had been arrested in October 2020 by the
NIA for his alleged involvement in violence
during the Bhima Koregaon celebrations near
the city of Pune in 2018. Father Swamy had
been a vocal supporter of tribal peoples.
At least 28 people were killed in targeted
attacks in Jammu and Kashmir by members
of armed groups. The Indian government
failed to address the human rights and safety
concerns of the people of Jammu and
Kashmir.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
There were numerous incidents of excessive
use of force by police and security officers. In
August, Haryana Police charged on
peacefully protesting farmers in the city of
Karnal, Haryana, beating them with lathis
(batons), and seriously injuring at least 10
farmers. Prior to the lathi-charge, the subdivisional magistrate of Karnal was seen
ordering police officers to “break the heads of
protesters” in a video shared on social media.
In September, Assam Police
indiscriminately fired on members of the
Bengali Muslim community in a forced
eviction drive in the village of Sipajhar,
Assam, killing a man and a 12-year-old boy.
A photojournalist was seen stamping on the
body of the murdered man in the presence of
police officers who did not prevent the act, in
a video shared on social media. After intense
public outrage, the photojournalist was
arrested.
In October, the central government
extended the jurisdiction of the Border
Security Force in states sharing international
borders, and gave them increased powers of
search, seizure and arrest. In the past, the
Border Security Force has been accused of
grave human rights violations including
unlawful use of force, extrajudicial killings,
and torture and other ill-treatment.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF

In June, the Supreme Court granted bail to
students and human rights activists Natasha
Narwal, Devangana Kalita and Asif Iqbal
Tanha, who were arrested under the UAPA
for allegedly orchestrating the 2020 Delhi
riots. However, it barred this judgment from
being used as a precedent in similar cases,
effectively preventing courts from granting
bail to other students and human rights
activists languishing in jail for peacefully
protesting against the Citizenship
Amendment Act. The Supreme Court also
delayed hearing crucial cases related to the
constitutional validity of the Citizenship
Amendment Act as well as to sedition and
the abrogation of Article 370 of the
Constitution. It also delayed hearing the
challenges to the three laws on farming that
were passed with minimal consultation in
2020 and resulted in long-standing protests
by farmers.

In April, stringent amendments were made to
an anti-conversion law in the state of Gujarat.
The amendments punish religious conversion
with up to 10 years in prison, and nullify the
marriages of those who have converted. The
burden of proof is reversed, and the woman’s
testimony that she converted of her own
volition is insufficient. Her husband and his
family must prove that she was not coerced
to change her religion. In the past, similar
laws were enacted in Uttarakhand, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh. In August, the Gujarat High Court
suspended certain provisions of the law,
holding them to be unconstitutional.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In 2020, the government set up the PM
CARES Fund to deal with emergency
situations including the Covid-19 pandemic.
However, there was a lack of transparency
over the distribution of huge grants collected
by the fund. The central government
exempted the fund from audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor General, calling it a
“public charitable trust”.
Despite the high number of reported
Covid-19 cases, the central government
allowed religious congregations like the
Kumbh Mela and election rallies to go ahead.
Prime Minister Modi personally appealed to
citizens to attend. It later emerged that these
events contributed to a second wave of
Covid-19 infections, during which there was
an acute shortage of hospital beds and
oxygen to treat patients.
Community health workers, including the
all-female Accredited Social Health Activists
(ASHA workers) who operate in rural areas,
were not given adequate wages or PPE.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION
In June, the BJP-led state government in
Assam introduced a two-child policy, which
barred those with larger families of more than
two children from contesting local elections,
applying for government jobs and getting
subsidies from government welfare schemes.
The BJP-led government in the state of Uttar
Pradesh introduced a similar draft law.

INDONESIA
Republic of Indonesia
Head of state and government: Joko Widodo
Human rights defenders, academics,
journalists and students were among those
prosecuted and harassed for their legitimate
activities. The Electronic Information and
Transaction Law was widely used to restrict
the right to freedom of expression online.
Political and labour rights activists and
Indigenous peoples were among those
arrested and prosecuted, including for
participating in peaceful protests, and
excessive force was used to disperse
protesters. At least 28 prisoners of
conscience remained imprisoned. Security
forces committed unlawful killings in Papua
and West Papua, largely with impunity.
There was a continued pattern of

193

discrimination against members of the
Ahmadiyya religious community.

disrupted by spam intrusions and other
digital interruptions.2

BACKGROUND

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

A sharp increase in Covid-19 infections in
mid-2021 threatened access to healthcare,
with many hospitals unable to provide beds
or oxygen for treatment. Economic challenges
and dissatisfaction with the government’s
response to the pandemic contributed to
growing discontent and increased public
protest.

There was an ongoing pattern of violence and
intimidation throughout 2021 towards
Indigenous peoples seeking to protect their
lands and traditions from commercial
activities.
On 27 February, three leaders of the Dayak
Modang Long Wai Indigenous people in East
Kalimantan province were arrested during a
protest against a palm oil plantation company
that was operating on their customary lands.
In April, members of the Sakai Indigenous
people in Riau province were met with
violence when attempting to stop eucalyptus
trees being planted on their lands by private
security officers employed by a timber
company with which they had a longstanding
dispute over land rights. Community
members attempting to block the operation
were pushed, dragged and thrown to the
ground by the security officers.
In a similar incident in May, members of the
Huta Natumingka Indigenous people in North
Sumatra province were violently assaulted
when protesting against the arrival of
hundreds of private security officers sent by a
pulp and paper company to plant eucalyptus
trees on the land they inhabited. Dozens of
community members suffered injuries in the
two incidents.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
At least 158 physical assaults, digital attacks,
threats and other forms of attack against 367
human rights defenders were reported during
the year.
In February, father and son Syamsul Bahri
and Samsir from the Nipah Farmer
community in North Sumatra province were
accused of assault, arrested, and detained
for 14 days following an incident in
December 2020 when Syamsul Bahri, the
community chairman, questioned two people
who were taking photographs of them
working on a mangrove rehabilitation project
in the area. Local NGOs believed that the
assault charges were linked to the men’s
activities to conserve and defend access to
their community lands. They were convicted
on 31 May and sentenced to two months’
suspended prison sentence and four months’
probation. On 18 August, the Medan High
Court upheld the ruling after an appeal by the
prosecutor seeking the imprisonment of
Syamsul Bahri and Samsir.1 They remained
under probation at year’s end.
On 17 May, following their public criticism
of the dismissal of 75 employees of
Indonesia’s Corruption Eradication
Commission (KPK), Busyro Muqoddas and
Bambang Widjojanto, both former KPK
commissioners, and at least six members of
the NGO Indonesian Corruption Watch (ICW),
reported that unidentified parties had hacked
their messaging app accounts. The hacks
occurred ahead of an ICW press conference
criticizing the dismissals, which was also

194

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to limit the right to
freedom of expression both online and
offline. The Electronic Information and
Transaction (EIT) Law was used against
individuals for their legitimate criticisms of
official policies or actions in at least 91 cases
involving 106 victims. These included Saiful
Mahdi, a lecturer at the Syiah Kuala
University in Aceh province, who began a
three-month prison sentence on 2 September
after being found guilty of criticizing the
university’s hiring process in a WhatsApp
group in 2019. He was released on 12
October after being granted an amnesty by
the president.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

On 22 September, the coordinating minister
for maritime and investment affairs accused
Haris Azhar and Fatia Maulidiyanti of
“spreading false information” in connection
with a YouTube video they hosted in August
2020 in which they reported allegations that
the minister and members of the military
were involved in the mining industry in
Papua. The two video hosts were sent
subpoenas on 26 August and 2 September
by the minister under the EIT Law and faced
criminal investigation.
In August, the police interrogated several
individuals suspected of making murals and
posters featuring messages critical of the
government that appeared in several cities.3
On 13 September, at least seven students of
Universitas Sebelas Maret in Surakarta in
Central Java were arrested after unfurling
posters during a visit to the campus by
President Widodo. The posters contained
appeals to the president to support local
farmers, address corruption and prioritize
public health during the pandemic.4

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to arbitrarily arrest and
detain political activists in the regions of
Papua and Maluku where there was a history
of pro-independence movements. At year’s
end, at least 15 Papuan prisoners of
conscience and 11 from Maluku were still
imprisoned. All were charged with or found
guilty of makar (rebellion) provisions of
Indonesia’s Criminal Code.
On 9 May authorities in Jayapura, the
capital of Papua, arrested Papuan proindependence activist Victor Yeimo who was
peacefully protesting against racial
discrimination. He was charged with violating
Article 106 on treason and Article 110 on
conspiracy to commit treason under the
Criminal Code. His trial was pending at the
end of the year.
Individuals supporting workers’ rights were
detained. On 22 February, Aan Aminah, the
head of the Militant Trade Unions Federation,
was detained on charges of assault, which
carries a prison sentence of up to two years

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

and eight months. The charge related to an
incident in June 2020 when Aan Aminah had
been attempting to speak to company bosses
about the termination of contracts of several
workers when she defended herself against
forcible removal by security guards.5 She was
acquitted on 6 July, but the prosecutor
appealed against the decision. No decision
had been made on the appeal by the end of
the year.
On 1 May, police arrested dozens of
students who were participating in peaceful
protests to mark International Labour Day in
the capital, Jakarta, and the city of Medan.
The police reportedly claimed that only
manual workers were permitted to take part
in Labour Day events.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Peaceful protests against the renewal of and
revisions to the Special Autonomy Law for
Papua, passed by Indonesia’s House of
Representatives on 15 July, were met with
disproportionate force including beatings,
water cannon and baton rounds.
Protests took place in Jakarta and Papua
against the extension of the special autonomy
status of Papua, and against new provisions
introducing additional central government
powers over Papuan affairs and removing the
right of Papuans to form political parties. On
14 July, at least four students were injured in
Jayapura after clashes with security forces.
Police reportedly beat protesters using their
fists, guns and rubber batons.
On 15 July, police dispersed protesters in
front of the House of Representatives
building in Jakarta. At least 50 people were
arrested. One protester described being
beaten, punched, stamped on and racially
abused by members of the security forces
before being pulled into a truck and taken to
the Jakarta police headquarters. On 16
August, during another protest in Jayapura,
security forces used water cannons, rubber
batons, and baton rounds to disperse
protesters.

195

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
There were reports of 11 incidents of
suspected unlawful killings by security forces
involving 15 victims during the year. All took
place in Papua. Five involved members of the
Indonesian military, two were attributed to the
police, and four implicated both military and
police officers. Authorities claimed that they
had initiated investigations into four of the 11
incidents, but no one had been brought to
justice in connection with any of the killings
by the end of 2021.
On 4 June, Denis Tabuni and Eliur Kogoya
were shot by a member of the military in a
market in the town of Wamena in Jayawijaya
Regency. Denis Tabuni died and Eliur Kogoya
sustained a gunshot wound to his leg.
Instead of an investigation, a “peace
agreement” was signed between the alleged
perpetrator and Eliur Kogoya’s family.6
On 16 August, police shot dead Ferianus
Asso who was participating in a protest in
Yahukimo Regency, Papua, to demand the
release of Papuan pro-independence activist
Victor Yeimo.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The disbursement of incentive payments to
health workers in recognition of their work
during the Covid-19 pandemic was delayed
by data inconsistencies and bureaucratic
hurdles. The incentive system was
introduced in March but as of July at least
21,424 health workers across 21 provinces
had experienced delays or even cuts to
payments to which they were entitled.
According to LaporCovid-19, an independent
citizen-based reporting platform, many health
workers had to go in person to the Ministry of
Health in Jakarta to ensure that their data
was accurately recorded; this was not always
possible, especially for those working in more
remote areas.7
A former volunteer health worker at the
Wisma Atlet Emergency Hospital in Jakarta
was subjected to intimidation by the security
forces after planning a press conference to
publicize delays in the delivery of incentive
payments. She said that she was interrogated
for approximately five hours by security

196

forces on 7 May in a hospital committee
room.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The Ahmadiyya religious community
continued to face discrimination and its
members were denied the right to carry out
religious activities in several provinces. In
Sintang Regency, West Kalimantan province,
local authorities issued a “Joint Agreement
Letter” on 29 April forbidding the local
Ahmadiyya community from practising their
religion. On 13 August the Ahmadiyya
mosque was closed down following pressure
from a local Islamist group. The following
month, a group of unidentified assailants
attacked the mosque and burnt down an
adjacent building. Authorities who were
present took no action to prevent the attack.8
On 6 May, police officers stopped
construction work on an Ahmadiyya mosque
in Garut Regency, West Java province, and
sealed off the site. The action was reportedly
taken under an order from the Garut Regent
following protests from local residents.9
Ahmadiyya community representatives were
excluded from discussions between the local
leaders and residents prior to the work on the
mosque being halted. Their request to
discuss the issue with the police was also
rejected.
1. Indonesia: Further information: Environmental Human Rights
Defenders Free: Syamsul Bahri and Samsir (ASA 21/4871/2021), 12
October
2. “Indonesia: Hacking the accounts of anti-corruption activists is a
form of stifling freedom of expression”, 18 May (Indonesian only)
3. “Indonesia: Freedom of expression: 404 not found”, 20 August
(Indonesian only)
4. “Indonesia: Excessive, police action arrests poster bearers”, 14
September (Indonesian only)
5. “Indonesia: Bandung - Free the head of Sebumi Federation Aan
Aminah”, 25 February (Indonesian only)
6. “Indonesia: Unlawful killings cannot be solved only by peace
agreement”, 25 June (Indonesian only)
7. “Indonesia: Ensure health workers are paid on time and in full as
Covid crisis continues”, 6 August
8. “Indonesia: The state must protect Ahmadiyya citizens in Sintang”, 3
September (Indonesian only)

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

9. “Indonesia: Repeal joint ministerial decree and protect Ahmadiyya’s
rights”, 7 May (Indonesian only)

IRAN
Islamic Republic of Iran
Head of state: Ali Khamenei (Supreme Leader)
Head of government: Ebrahim Raisi (President,
replaced Hassan Rouhani in August)
Thousands of people were interrogated,
unfairly prosecuted and/or arbitrarily
detained solely for peacefully exercising
their human rights, and hundreds remained
unjustly imprisoned. Security forces
unlawfully used lethal force and birdshot to
crush protests. Women, LGBTI people and
ethnic and religious minorities faced
entrenched discrimination and violence.
Legislative developments further
undermined sexual and reproductive rights,
the right to freedom of religion and belief,
and access to the internet. Torture and
other ill-treatment, including denying
prisoners adequate medical care, remained
widespread and systematic. Authorities
failed to ensure timely and equitable access
to Covid-19 vaccines. Judicial punishments
of floggings, amputations and blinding were
imposed. The death penalty was used
widely, including as a weapon of repression.
Executions were carried out after unfair
trials. Systemic impunity prevailed for past
and ongoing crimes against humanity
related to prison massacres in 1988 and
other crimes under international law.

BACKGROUND
The former head of Iran’s judiciary, Ebrahim
Raisi, rose to the presidency in June instead
of being investigated for crimes against
humanity related to the mass enforced
disappearances and extrajudicial executions
of 1988, reflecting systemic impunity in Iran.1
Presidential elections were held in a
repressive environment with a markedly low
turnout. Authorities barred women, members
of religious minorities and critics from

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

running, and threatened to prosecute anyone
encouraging election boycott.
Ongoing US sanctions, Covid-19 and
corruption deepened Iran’s economic crisis,
characterized by high inflation, job losses and
low or unpaid wages. Strikes and rallies
punctuated the year as authorities failed to
prioritize adequate wages, housing,
healthcare, food security and education in
public budgets.
Environmental experts criticized the
authorities’ failure to address Iran’s
environmental crisis, marked by loss of lakes,
rivers and wetlands; deforestation; water
pollution from raw sewage and industrial
waste; and land sinking.
Iran continued to provide military support to
government forces in the armed conflict in
Syria (see Syria entry).
In February, a Belgian court sentenced
Iranian diplomat Assadollah Asadi to 20
years’ imprisonment for his role in a thwarted
bomb attack against a rally by an exiled
Iranian opposition group in France in 2018.
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on Iran. The authorities denied
him, other UN experts and independent
observers entry to Iran.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to heavily suppress
the rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly. They banned
independent political parties, trade unions
and civil society organizations, censored
media and jammed satellite television
channels.
In January, the authorities added Signal to
the list of blocked social media platforms,
which included Facebook, Telegram, Twitter
and YouTube. Security and intelligence
officials carried out arbitrary arrests for social
media postings deemed “counterrevolutionary” or “un-Islamic”.
The authorities imposed internet shutdowns
during protests, hiding the scale of violations
by security forces. In July, parliament fasttracked preparations for a bill that is

197

expected to be adopted in 2022 and which
would criminalize the production and
distribution of censorship circumvention tools
and intensify surveillance.
Several thousand men, women and children
were interrogated, unfairly prosecuted and/or
arbitrarily detained solely for peacefully
exercising their rights to freedom of
expression, association and assembly.
Among them were protesters, journalists,
dissidents, artists, writers, teachers and dual
nationals. Also among them were human
rights defenders, including lawyers; women’s
rights defenders; defenders of LGBTI
people’s rights, labour rights and minority
rights; environmentalists; anti-death penalty
campaigners; and bereaved relatives
demanding accountability, including for mass
executions and enforced disappearances in
the 1980s. Hundreds remained unjustly
imprisoned at the end of the year.
The decade-long arbitrary house arrest of
former presidential candidates Mehdi
Karroubi and Mir Hossein Mousavi, and the
latter’s wife, Zahra Rahnavard, continued.
Dissidents and journalists based abroad
faced intensified threats, and their families in
Iran were interrogated and/or arbitrarily
detained in reprisal for their work.2 In July,
US prosecution authorities charged four
Iranian agents for conspiring to abduct
Iranian-US journalist Masih Alinejad from US
soil. In August, intelligence officials
interrogated the relatives of exiled Kurdish
human rights defender Arsalan Yarahmadi
and threatened him with death. IranianSwedish dissident Habib Chaab and IranianGerman dissident Jamshid Sharmahd, who
had previously been abducted abroad and
returned to Iran, remained at risk of the
death penalty.
Security forces deployed unlawful force,
including live ammunition and birdshot, to
crush mostly peaceful protests. In July, at
least 11 people were shot dead during
protests over water shortages in Khuzestan
and Lorestan provinces and scores were
injured.3 On 26 November, security forces
fired metal pellets to disperse protests over
water mismanagement in Esfahan, leading to

198

scores of people, including children, being
blinded or sustaining other serious eye
injuries.
Over 700 petrochemical workers were
unjustly dismissed for participating in
nationwide strikes in June.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread and systematic, especially during
interrogation. Torture-tainted “confessions”
were broadcast on state television and
consistently used to issue convictions.
Prison and prosecution authorities, working
under the judiciary, held prisoners in cruel
and inhuman conditions characterized by
overcrowding, poor sanitation, inadequate
food and water, insufficient beds, poor
ventilation and insect infestation, and denied
many of them adequate medical care,
placing them at greater risk of Covid-19.
Increasingly, the authorities transferred
women prisoners of conscience to squalid
conditions in prisons far from their families in
reprisal for continuing to denounce human
rights violations while imprisoned.
Leaked surveillance footage from Tehran’s
Evin prison in August showed prison officials
beating, sexually harassing and otherwise
torturing or ill-treating prisoners.4
At least 24 prisoners died in suspicious
circumstances involving allegations of torture
or other ill-treatment, including the denial of
adequate medical care.5
The Penal Code retained punishments
violating the prohibition of torture and other
ill-treatment, including flogging, blinding,
amputation, crucifixion and stoning. In
February, Hadi Rostami was flogged 60 times
in Urumieh prison in reprisal for his hunger
strikes against repeated threats that his
amputation sentence would be implemented.
Hadi Atazadeh died in Ahar prison in
September after being flogged.
In October, a court in Tehran sentenced a
man to be blinded in one eye under the
principle of “retribution-in-kind” (qesas) for
assault.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

At least 152 people were sentenced to
flogging, according to the Abdorrahman
Boroumand Center.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women faced discrimination in law and
practice, including in relation to marriage,
divorce, employment, inheritance and
political office.
Discriminatory compulsory veiling laws led
to daily harassment, arbitrary detention,
torture and other ill-treatment, and denial of
access to education, employment and public
spaces. At least six women’s rights defenders
remained imprisoned for campaigning
against compulsory veiling.
Parliament further undermined the right to
sexual and reproductive health by adopting
the bill “Youthful population and protection of
the family” in November which, among other
things, bans state-funded facilities from
providing birth control free of charge;
requires pharmacies to sell contraception
only with a prescription; bans vasectomy and
tubectomy except when pregnancy would
endanger a woman’s life or lead to serious
physical harm or unbearable hardship during
pregnancy or after labour; and suppresses
access to prenatal screening tests.
The parliamentary Social Commission
approved the long-standing bill “Defending
dignity and protecting women against
violence” in July after regressive
amendments by the judiciary. The bill, which
awaited final approval, contains welcome
provisions, including the establishment of
special police units, safe houses and a
national working group to devise strategies to
tackle violence against women and girls.
However, it fails to define domestic violence
as a separate offence, criminalize marital
rape and child marriage, or ensure men who
murder their wives or daughters face
proportionate punishments. In cases of
domestic violence, the bill prioritizes
reconciliation over accountability.
The legal age of marriage for girls stayed at
13, and fathers could obtain judicial
permission for their daughters to be married

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

at a younger age. According to official figures,
between March 2020 and March 2021, the
marriages of 31,379 girls aged between 10
and 14 were registered, representing a
10.5% increase over the previous year.
LGBTI PEOPLE
The murder in May of Alireza Fazeli
Monfared, who self-identified as a non-binary
gay man, highlighted how the criminalization
of consensual same-sex sexual conduct and
gender non-conformity with punishments
ranging from flogging to the death penalty
perpetuated violence and discrimination
against LGBTI people.6
State-endorsed “conversion therapies”
amounting to torture or other ill-treatment
remained prevalent, including against
children.
Gender non-conforming individuals risked
criminalization unless they sought a legal
gender change, which required gender
reassignment surgery and sterilization.
The military continued to characterize
homosexuality as a “perversion”. Military
exemption cards issued to gay and
transgender individuals indirectly disclosed
their sexual orientation or gender identity
without their consent, putting them at risk of
violence.
ETHNIC MINORITIES
Ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs,
Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen, faced discrimination, curtailing
their access to education, employment and
political office. Despite repeated calls for
linguistic diversity, Persian remained the sole
language of instruction in primary and
secondary education.
Ethnic minorities remained
disproportionately affected by death
sentences imposed for vague charges such
as “enmity against God”. The authorities
secretly executed those convicted of such
charges and refused to return their bodies to
their families, as in the cases of four Ahwazi
Arab men in March and a Kurdish man,
Heidar Ghorbani, in December.7 At least 20
Kurdish men remained on death row after
being convicted of such charges.

199

The authorities refused to cease and
provide accountability for the unlawful killing
of scores of unarmed Kurdish cross-border
couriers (kulbars) between the Kurdistan
regions of Iran and Iraq, and of unarmed
Baluchi fuel porters (soukhtbar) in Sistan and
Baluchestan province.8
More than 200 Kurds, including dissidents
and civil society activists, were swept up in
two waves of arbitrary arrests in January and
July-August.9 Most were released after weeks
or months of being forcibly disappeared or
detained incommunicado, while several
remained in prison and several others were
sentenced to imprisonment.
RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Religious minorities, including Baha’is,
Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews,
Yaresan and Sunni Muslims, suffered
discrimination in law and practice, including
in access to education, employment, child
adoption, political office and places of
worship, as well as arbitrary detention, and
torture and other ill-treatment for professing
or practising their faith.
People born to parents classified as Muslim
by the authorities remained at risk of arbitrary
detention, torture or the death penalty for
“apostasy” if they adopted other religions or
atheist beliefs.
Members of the Baha’i minority suffered
widespread and systematic violations,
including arbitrary detention, torture and
other ill-treatment, enforced disappearance,
forcible closure of businesses, confiscation of
property, house demolitions, destruction of
cemeteries, and hate speech by officials and
state media, and were banned from higher
education. In April, authorities prevented
Baha’is from burying their loved ones in
empty plots at a cemetery near Tehran,
insisting they bury them between existing
graves or at the nearby Khavaran mass grave
site related to the 1988 prison massacres;
authorities lifted the ban after a public
outcry.10 In June, security forces demolished
around 50 Baha’i homes in the village of Ivel
in Mazandaran province as part of a longstanding campaign to expel them from the
region.

200

In January, parliament further undermined
the right to freedom of religion and belief by
introducing two articles to the Penal Code
that prescribe up to five years’ imprisonment
and/or a fine for “insulting Iranian ethnicities,
divine religions or Islamic denominations” or
for engaging in “deviant educational or
proselytizing activity contradicting … Islam”.
In July, three Christian converts were
sentenced to lengthy imprisonment on this
basis.
Several Gonabadi Dervishes remained
unjustly imprisoned, including in connection
with a peaceful protest that authorities
violently quashed in 2018. One of them,
Behnam Mahjoubi, died in custody on 21
February following months of torture and
other ill-treatment, including deliberate denial
of adequate medical care.
Authorities continued to raid house
churches.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities’ response to Covid-19 was
marked by a lack of transparency and failure
to address shortages of vaccines, hospital
beds, oxygen supplies and nurses.
Iran launched its Covid-19 vaccination
programme in February, but given the
Supreme Leader’s January decision to ban
vaccines produced in the UK and USA, by
August less than 6% of the population had
been vaccinated. The ban was lifted in
August and over 80% of the population had
received the first dose of the vaccine by the
end of the year.
The authorities failed to devise a national
strategy to ensure timely and equitable
access to Covid-19 vaccines for thousands of
undocumented Afghan nationals, with local
officials in some provinces establishing
special vaccination centres for this group
from October.
In some cities, mobile vaccination teams
were dispatched to informal settlements and
areas where people experiencing
homelessness were living, but outreach
remained uneven nationally.
The vaccination of prisoners did not start
until August.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Six people were arbitrarily arrested in
August and tried on spurious national
security charges in October solely for meeting
to discuss possible legal action over the
authorities’ failure to ensure access to
Covid-19 vaccines.

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty was imposed after unfair
trials, including for offences not meeting the
threshold of the “most serious crimes” such
as drug-trafficking and financial corruption,
and for acts not internationally recognized as
crimes. Death sentences were used as a
weapon of repression against protesters,
dissidents and ethnic minorities.
Yousef Mehrdad and Saadollah Fazeli in
Arak were sentenced to death for “insulting
the Prophet”.
Sajad Sanjari, arrested when aged 15, and
Arman Abdolali, arrested when aged 17,
were executed in August and November,
respectively. Over 80 people remained on
death row for offences that occurred when
they were children.

IMPUNITY
The authorities continued to cover up the
number of those killed during November
2019 protests, dismissed complaints by
victims’ families, and praised security forces
for the crackdown. Throughout the year,
security forces dispersed peaceful gatherings
of relatives seeking justice and beat and
temporarily detained them. Manouchehr
Bakhtiari, the father of a killed protester, was
detained in April and sentenced to
imprisonment in July for denouncing
impunity.
The trial of Hamid Nouri, arrested in
Sweden for alleged involvement in prison
massacres in 1988, began in August under
the principle of universal jurisdiction.
Consistent with long-standing patterns of
denial and distortion, Iran’s foreign affairs
ministry described the trial as a “plot”
concocted by “terrorists” that relied on “fake
documentation and witnesses”.
The authorities continued to conceal the
truth surrounding the January 2020 shooting

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

down of Flight 752 by the Revolutionary
Guards, which killed 176 people, and
harassed, arbitrarily detained, tortured or
otherwise ill-treated bereaved relatives for
seeking justice. In November, the
prosecution of 10 low-ranking officials before
a military court in Tehran started behind
closed doors amid grievances by victims’
relatives about the impunity afforded to top
military and executive officials.
1. “Iran: Ebrahim Raisi must be investigated for crimes against
humanity”, 19 June
2. Iran: Rights Groups: Iranian Dissidents Remain at Risk Worldwide
Without International Action (Index: MDE 13/4480/2021), 19 July
3. “Iran: Security forces use live ammunition and birdshot to crush
Khuzestan protests”, 23 July; “﻿Iran: Security forces use ruthless force,
mass arrests and torture to crush peaceful protests”, 11 August
4. “Iran: Leaked video footage from Evin prison offers rare glimpse of
cruelty against prisoners”, 25 August
5. “Iran: A decade of deaths in custody unpunished amid systemic
impunity for torture”, 15 September
6. Iran: Murder of 20-year-old Gay Man Highlights Urgent Need to
Protect LGBTI Rights (Index: MDE 13/4129/2021), 17 May
7. Iran: Four Ahwazi Arab men secretly executed (Index: MDE
13/3864/2021), 18 March
8. “Iran: Unlawful killings of destitute fuel porters must be
independently investigated”, 2 March
9. Iran: Joint Statement: Urgent International Action Needed to Secure
Release of Kurdish Activists and Others Arbitrarily Detained in Iran
(Index: MDE 13/3624/2021), 3 February
10. “Iran: Stop destruction of mass grave site and allow dignified burials
of persecuted Baha’is”, 29 April

IRAQ
Republic of Iraq
Head of state: Barham Ahmed Salih
Head of government: Mustafa Al-Kadhimi
State-affiliated armed actors targeted,
threatened, abducted and extrajudicially
executed dissidents and activists as well as
their families, leading survivors to flee into
hiding. Iraqi authorities arrested and
prosecuted individuals for some of these
attacks, but tens of people remained
disappeared. The Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) cracked down on dissent
and sentenced activists and journalists

201

under national security and cybercrime laws
for acts related to freedom of expression.
KRG security and intelligence forces
violently dispersed and arrested protesters.
Measures to contain Covid-19, coupled with
droughts, adversely affected the economic
welfare of Iraqis. Armed actors continued to
obstruct internally displaced people from
accessing their human rights, and Iraqi
authorities closed all but two camps and
subjected thousands to secondary
displacement and collective punishment.
Gender-based violence increased
dramatically during the pandemic, and
central and regional authorities failed to
address protection of women and girls in
the home. The armed group Islamic State
continued to target and kill civilians and
members of Iraqi security forces in northern
and central Iraq. Courts in Iraq continued to
hand down death sentences for a range of
criminal acts and carried out executions.

BACKGROUND
Humanitarian actors reported significant
community transmission of Covid-19
throughout the country, but Iraqi authorities
opted for restrictive measures such as
curfews, restricted hours and closing
shopping centres instead of full lockdowns
due to the adverse impact on the economic
welfare of Iraqis.
The initial results of parliamentary elections
on 10 October were disputed after factions of
the Popular Mobilization Units (PMU) militias
– which are affiliated to the central authorities
and were designated as part of the Iraqi
armed forces in 2016 – disputed the results
in which they lost 48 seats. They cited voter
fraud, vote tampering, “foreign interference”
and made threats of violence against election
committee staff and independent monitors.
On 24 October, at least 1,500 supporters of
these factions attempted to storm the
International Zone (Green Zone) in the capital
Baghdad but were stopped by Iraqi security
forces. In response, a manual recount of
votes was conducted. On 5 November,
supporters of the factions again attempted to
storm the Green Zone and clashed with

202

security forces, leaving at least two people
dead and over 100 injured. In apparent
retaliation, three drone attacks were carried
out on Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi’s
home on 7 November; no one was killed.
Iraq’s Supreme Court upheld the election
results on 27 December but a new
government had not been formed by the end
of the year.
In Erbil, capital of the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq (KR-I), rocket attacks on the airport
where US personnel are based, and on the
US embassy in Baghdad’s Green Zone, were
attributed to PMU factions.
Hundreds of families returned to Iraq from
Syria; they had fled the country during the
conflict involving Islamic State.
Turkey increased air attacks on areas in the
KR-I, mainly in Duhok and Erbil
governorates, targeting the Kurdistan Workers
Party.
In November and December, heavy rainfall
caused flash floods, destroying at least
hundreds of homes in Erbil, displacing
thousands of people and killing at least
seven.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In several southern governorates, armed
actors, including PMU members,
extrajudicially killed or attempted to kill tens
of activists who rose to prominence during
protests that began in October 2019 against
government corruption and for improved job
opportunities and public services. Most
victims were killed late at night, often as they
were returning home from protests, mainly by
armed men on motorcycles or in vehicles
with blacked-out side windows. Shots were
usually fired at the head or chest.
In July, the authorities announced the arrest
of one suspected perpetrator of these killings
but no further information was provided. In
October and November, relying on the 2005
Anti-Terrorism Law, courts sentenced to
death individuals who had been convicted of
targeting and killing activists and journalists
in Baghdad and Basra in 2019 and 2020.
However, beyond the limited information

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

provided on these cases, no further
information was given, including as to
whether any steps were taken to provide
redress to any of the victims’ families.
PMU members also threatened activists and
their families with violence and in some cases
extrajudicially executed people. Jaseb
Hattab, the father of human rights lawyer Ali
Jaseb who was forcibly disappeared by a
PMU faction in Amarah city in south-east
Iraq in October 2019, was killed in March in
retaliation for his campaign for justice for his
son.
Members of security forces and PMU
factions threatened activists and their families
with violence in Baghdad and the southern
cities of Basra, Nasriya and Diwaniya, forcing
tens of individuals to flee into hiding. A local
monitoring group reported that in Basra,
security forces had tortured at least three
activists to death in detention in July and
August.
The fate of tens of activists and protesters
abducted by unidentified gunmen and PMU
members in 2019 and 2020 remained
unknown.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The KRG used national security reasons to
justify systematically targeting critics,
journalists, human rights defenders and other
civil society activists through prosecutions.
KRG security forces arbitrarily arrested tens
of people for social media posts, news
articles or reporting on demonstrations.
In February, a court in Erbil sentenced five
activists and journalists to six years’
imprisonment each for acts related to their
use of social media and journalistic work,
deeming these to be prejudicial to the
security and sovereignty of the KR-I. All were
charged under laws – including National
Security Law 2003, the Law to Prevent the
Misuse of Telecommunications Equipment
and Articles 430-433 of the Penal Code –
that criminalize vaguely defined actions that
are not internationally recognized as crimes.
The trial was marred by serious violations of
fair trial standards, including convictions
based on statements or “confessions”

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

extracted under duress, failure to provide in a
timely manner the case documents to
defence lawyers, and failure to order
investigations into the defendants’ claims of
torture. The KRG denied in a letter to
Amnesty International that the convictions
were related to the individuals’ work as
journalists, but Amnesty International’s review
of the evidence on which they were convicted
found that it consisted entirely of social
media messaging for journalistic work.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Protests continued throughout 2021 even
though the Covid-19 pandemic interrupted
and subdued many of them.
By April, KRG security forces had arrested
over 100 individuals in the Badinan area in
north-west Duhok governorate for taking part
in protests against government corruption
and non-payment of civil servants’ salaries,
including those of teachers and health
workers. Many were released shortly after
arrest, but dozens remained detained at the
end of the year. KRG authorities also issued
arrest warrants for relatives of activists and
critics, leading many to flee their home towns
with their families. Between late November
and early December, security forces in
Sulaimaniya governorate in the KR-I
responded to student protesters with tear
gas, water cannons, rubber bullets and live
ammunition, killing at least eight protesters.
In February, KRG security forces and
Parastin intelligence forces (a branch of the
security forces under the sole command of
the leading political party in the KRG)
arrested dozens of people protesting outside
the UN office in Erbil to demand the release
of their relatives. All of those arrested were
held for seven to 10 hours in crowded cells
with no access to food or water.1
Between January and May, Iraqi security
forces in Nasriya, Babylon and Najaf used
excessive force, including tear gas and live
ammunition, to disperse protesters
demanding the release of activists and justice
for others who were killed and injured in the
context of the protests.

203

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Iraq ranked among the countries worst hit by
the Covid-19 pandemic, registering over 2
million cases by the end of the year. In
March, the country rolled out its national
vaccination plan, which identified priority
groups including health workers, front line
security forces, older people and the
internally displaced. However, execution of
the plan was slow and badly organized,
except in relation to internally displaced
people as this was overseen by humanitarian
organizations. This, combined with vaccine
hesitancy and some people paying for
vaccines outside the plan, led to fluctuating
rates of vaccination. By the end of the year,
just over 20% of the population had received
two doses of the vaccine.
Measures to contain Covid-19 such as
movement restrictions and lockdowns
adversely impacted the economic welfare of
families, including increased levels of
unemployment and acute poverty. The
pandemic also compounded the effects of
the lowest rainfall witnessed in Iraq in four
decades that, together with extended
electricity blackouts, especially in Erbil,
Baghdad and several towns and cities in the
south of Iraq, increased food insecurity and
shortages of drinking water, triggering further
protests in these areas.
Fires broke out in the Covid-19 wing of a
hospital in Baghdad in April and in a hospital
in the southern city of Nasiriya in July,
leading to tens of deaths and injuries in both
hospitals. The fires were attributed to
mismanagement of oxygen tanks that
exploded, and were followed by protests
demanding an end to corruption.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
By the end of March, Iraqi authorities had
closed and consolidated all camps for the
internally displaced, leaving only one
operating in Ninewa and one in Anbar, while
26 camps remained open in the KR-I. The
move by the central authorities rendered
thousands of internally displaced women,

204

men and children homeless or in secondary
displacement, and without access to housing
and essential services such as healthcare
and education. At the end of the year, over 1
million people remained displaced.
In the last pushes to close camps in
February and March, Iraqi security forces
threatened and forced internally displaced
people to evacuate camps in Ninewa without
specifying where they should go, while
banning their return to anywhere outside
their home governorate. Internally displaced
people returning to their home areas
continued to face blocks, evictions and
confiscation and destruction of their homes
due to their perceived affiliation to Islamic
State. Security forces deliberately denied
them the right to access civil status
documents, vital for freedom of movement as
well as access to healthcare and educational
services.
PMU fighters prevented thousands of
internally displaced people from returning to
their areas of origin in Jurf al-Sakhr, south of
Baghdad, citing alleged “Islamic State
sympathizing” as a reason. Notably, in May, a
PMU leader in Diyala governorate called for
the forced displacement of Sunni returnees
following several Islamic State attacks.
In late October, Iraqi authorities reported
that at least 227 families had been displaced
from their village in Diyala governorate. This
took place after individuals in cars marked
with PMU insignia attacked the village,
setting several buildings on fire in what
appeared to be retaliation for an Islamic State
attack earlier in the month that killed at least
11 people. Iraqi authorities allocated financial
aid to the affected families, but this did not
lead to returns. By the first week of
November, the number of displaced families
had reached 300 as PMU commanders
called for the implementation of “the Jurf alSakhr example”.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence in the domestic and
public spheres increased, according to
international and national NGOs. In March, a
women’s rights international NGO estimated

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

that during Covid-19 lockdowns, the
prevalence of gender-based violence
increased by at least 75% across Iraq. There
was also a rise in child marriages precipitated
by the deteriorating economic situation.
While central Iraqi and KRG authorities
arrested some men who had killed or abused
their female relatives, both authorities failed
to take adequate steps to address the full
scale of the violations, or the sharp rise in
gender-based domestic violence during
lockdowns. The Iraqi parliament also failed to
prioritize passing a law to combat domestic
violence despite mounting pressure and
advocacy from civil society.
Unknown assailants subjected female
candidates running for Iraq’s parliamentary
elections in October to smear campaigns and
threats of violence, and destroyed and
defaced their campaign materials with
impunity.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Throughout the year, Islamic State carried out
serious human rights abuses in several
governorates, notably Kirkuk, Diyala, Salah
al-Din, Ninewa and Anbar. These included
deliberate attacks on civilians, abductions
and summary killings of captives, use of
improvised explosive devices and rocketpropelled grenades to target civilians, firing at
civilians, and setting agricultural land on fire.
Iraqi authorities completed the excavation of
a mass grave in Anbar governorate and
identified the victims as individuals who
Islamic State had summarily killed in 2014.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences in cases of individuals suspected
of links to Islamic State or of extrajudicially
killing activists, and for offences related to the
use and distribution of prohibited
substances, kidnappings and assassinations.
1. Kurdistan Region of Iraq: Authorities Must End Protests-Related
Repression (Index: MDE 14/4233/2021), 15 June

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

IRELAND
Ireland
Head of state: Michael D. Higgins
Head of government: Micheál Martin
The state failed to secure truth, justice and
reparation for survivors of human rights
abuses in “mother and baby homes”. There
were concerns over the adequacy and
affordability of housing, barriers to
accessing abortion services, and
criminalization of sex workers. The
government proposed a human rightscompliant accommodation system for
asylum seekers.

IMPUNITY
In January, the final report of the Commission
of Investigation into Mother and Baby Homes
– established by the government in 2015
following years of campaigning by survivors
and their allies – was published. It confirmed
long-standing reports of ill-treatment of
women and children in these state-funded
institutions, which, from the 1920s to the
1990s, were operated by religious orders as a
facility where “unmarried mothers” were sent
to give birth. Findings included high child
mortality rates, poor conditions, physical and
emotional abuse, adoptions without women’s
informed consent, and vaccine trials on
children without adherence to regulatory or
ethical requirements.
However, there were many serious gaps in
the information, findings and analysis
presented by the Commission. For example,
no findings were made of forced or illegal
adoptions, arbitrary detention or forced
labour, despite evidence from survivors’
testimonies. Proposals made by the
government on assessing redress for
survivors were severely deficient.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
A report published in September by the
Irish Human Rights and Equality
Commission and Economic and Social
Research Institute found “persistent

205

problems in relation to housing access”. The
report found that some groups, including
lone parents, people with a disability and
migrants, were particularly impacted by
housing quality, overcrowding or affordability
issues, while housing affordability also
disproportionately impacted children and
young people. It found “significant
disadvantage in terms of adequate housing”,
including cultural adequacy, for the Traveller
community.
A constitutional referendum on housing
promised in the 2020 Programme for
Government was not scheduled. It also
remained unclear whether the government
would propose a constitutional right to
housing in line with international human
rights standards, as recommended in 2014
by a government-established Constitutional
Convention.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In September, the Abortion Rights Campaign
published research into users’ experiences of
abortion services in Ireland since access was
expanded in 2019. It found negative impacts
of the mandatory three-day waiting period for
access to services on request up to 12 weeks
of pregnancy, and barriers to access on
lawful grounds in later pregnancy. It revealed
lack of access in cases of severe
fetal impairment, which the law permits only
where the fetus will die before 28 days postbirth. It found uneven availability of abortion
services around the country, difficulties in
accessing information about abortion care,
and negative attitudes and obstruction from
some healthcare providers.
Despite government commitments made in
2018, and reports of ongoing intimidation
and harassment outside maternity hospitals
and clinics providing abortion services,
legislation was not introduced to create safety
zones to protect the rights of people seeking
abortion care.

criminalize sex workers directly and
indirectly. Of particular concern was the
offence of “brothel-keeping”, whereby two or
more sex workers risked prosecution if
working together in a premises for safety, as
this was considered a “brothel”. A
government-commissioned review of the
operation of the law, launched in 2020, was
not completed by the end of the year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, the government published a
White Paper in which it proposed replacing
the widely criticized “direct provision” system
of accommodating asylum seekers with a
human rights-compliant model by 2024. It
conceded that the current system did not
respect the dignity and human rights of
individuals. A detailed implementation plan
was not published, however. Also unclear
was how the rights and welfare of people
remaining in this system would be
safeguarded during the transition.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Public inquiries recommended in 2020 by a
parliamentary committee set up to review the
government’s handling of the Covid-19
pandemic – including an inquiry into the high
level of deaths of older people in nursing
homes – were not established. The
government stated that its own review of its
efforts would not take place until the
pandemic ended.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Legislation enacted in 2017 that retained
offences and doubled criminal penalties for
aspects of sex work continued to

206

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ISRAEL AND THE
OCCUPIED
PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES
State of Israel
Head of state: Isaac Herzog (replaced Reuven Rivlin in
July)
Head of government: Naftali Bennett (replaced
Benjamin Netanyahu in June)
Armed conflict between Israel and
Palestinian armed groups in the Gaza Strip
in May entailed apparent war crimes and
possible crimes against humanity.
Disproportionate and reckless strikes by
Israeli forces killed 242 Palestinians in
Gaza. Unlawful attacks by Israel included
targeted strikes on medical facilities and
personnel. Israel maintained its illegal
blockade on the Gaza Strip, inflicting
collective punishment on residents and
exacerbating the humanitarian crisis there,
and Palestinians’ freedom of movement was
arbitrarily restricted in the West Bank.
Israeli authorities subjected Palestinians to
forced evictions, arbitrary detention, torture
and other ill-treatment, all committed with
almost total impunity. Israel’s
discriminatory system of governing
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories (OPT) constituted
apartheid, a crime under international law.
The Ministry of Defense labelled six
Palestinian civil society organizations as
“terrorist” in October. Conscientious
objectors to military service were
imprisoned. Divorce and other personal
status laws governed by religious courts
continued to discriminate against women,
and domestic violence rose during the
Covid-19 pandemic. The authorities denied
asylum seekers access to a fair and prompt
refugee status determination process, and
to economic support. While Israel

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

transferred 5,000 Covid-19 doses to the
Palestinian authorities, it sent thousands of
doses to diplomatic allies.

BACKGROUND
Prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu lost
parliamentary elections on 23 March after 12
years in office marred by corruption. A new
coalition government was approved on 13
June, bringing to power Jewish supremacist,
centrist and left-wing parties in alliance with
an Islamist party.
Armed conflict erupted between Israel and
Palestinian armed groups in the Gaza Strip
between 10 and 21 May. It was the fifth
Israel-Gaza conflict in 15 years. In Israeli
towns where both Jewish and Palestinian
citizens live, inter-ethnic violence led to
killings, clashes and damage to property.
The murder rate involving Palestinian
citizens of Israel was proportionally 25 times
higher than cases involving Jewish citizens of
Israel, who constitute about 80% of the
population. According to the NGO Aman,
criminals killed 110 Palestinian citizens of
Israel in 2021, the highest number in
decades.
The housing ministry promoted plans for
construction of illegal settlements south-west
of Bethlehem, east of Jerusalem and south of
Ramallah in the OPT.
Climate change adaptation policies were in
place but not fairly distributed between
Jewish and Palestinian citizens of Israel. An
unprecedented heatwave in August caused
extensive forest fires.
In July, authorities visited the offices of NSO
Group in response to the Pegasus Project
investigation that revealed that the company’s
spyware had been used to target human
rights workers and journalists around the
world.1

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
ISRAEL-GAZA ARMED CONFLICT
During the armed conflict in May, Israel
committed apparent war crimes and possible
crimes against humanity in the Gaza Strip.2
According to the OHCHR and the WHO, 242
Palestinians were killed, including 63

207

children, and some 9,000 were injured. More
than 74,000 Palestinians were displaced.
According to the World Bank, the housing
needs of 4,000 families, including 7,000
children, whose homes were damaged or
destroyed had not been met by December.
On 10 May, Israel bombed the seawater
desalination plant in north Gaza, cutting
water supplies to more than 250,000 people
until it was temporarily repaired on 23 May.
Around midnight on 14 May, Israeli air
strikes hit the al-Atar family’s building in Beit
Lahia city, killing Lamya al-Atar and her three
children aged between eight months and
seven years.
On 12 May, Israel banned foreign reporters
from entering Gaza, impeding independent
coverage. On 15 May, an Israeli missile
struck the building housing the Associated
Press and Al Jazeera; journalists had been
given 60 minutes to evacuate. Israel said
there was a combatant command centre in
the basement, which the media organizations
denied.
Israeli missiles hit medical facilities and
killed medical personnel. On 16 May, attacks
launched without warning on al-Wehda
district of Gaza City killed Dr Ayman Abu alOuf, director of the Covid-19 response and
head of internal medicine at Al-Shifa hospital,
Gaza’s main hospital; Dr Mooein al-Aloul, a
psychiatric neurologist; and at least 33 other
civilians. Israel said they were unintended
casualties of an attack on an underground
military objective. On 17 May, an Israeli
attack hit Al-Rimal clinic, the central
laboratory for Covid-19 in Gaza, badly
affecting testing and vaccination
programmes. The WHO reported that 30
health facilities were damaged in the conflict.
WEST BANK
In the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, Israeli forces killed 75 and injured
14,679 Palestinians, according to the UN
OCHA-OPT, some during arrests in
Palestinian homes, others during protests
that were mainly against Jewish Israeli settler
activities.

208

Israeli settlers committed acts of violence
with impunity. There were 118 settler attacks
on Palestinians in 2021, up from 84 in 2020.
On 17 August, settlers threw stones at six
Palestinian boys having a picnic in Silat alDaher, a village near Jenin city in the West
Bank. They then rammed their car into 15year-old Tareq Zbeidi and, according to his
testimony to Israeli human rights organization
B’Tselem, beat him and tied him to the car’s
bonnet. Israeli soldiers arrived and
transferred the unconscious boy to a
Palestinian ambulance that his family had
called. No arrests were made.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 3 March, ICC Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda
initiated an investigation into the situation in
Palestine, including events since mid-June
2014 in the OPT. Israel stated that the ICC
had no authority and that it would not engage
with the investigation.
On 27 May, the UN Human Rights Council
established an international commission of
inquiry into violations in the OPT and Israel.
The Israeli representative to the UN
immediately announced that Israel would not
cooperate.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
Israeli authorities arbitrarily restricted
Palestinians’ freedom of movement.
GAZA STRIP
The blockade continued to impose collective
punishment, as it had since 2007, by
preventing the movement of people and
goods.
During the May conflict, Israel heavily
restricted entry of trucks carrying
humanitarian supplies. Only five fuel tankers
were allowed to enter and no fuel was
allowed through the Israeli-controlled Kerem
Shalom pipeline for Gaza’s power plant.
Israel’s Erez passenger crossing remained
closed. Around 600 patients could not
receive treatment outside Gaza in May. Israel
allowed 25,630 truckloads of construction
material into Gaza, down from 45,359 in
2020.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

WEST BANK
In the West Bank, 175 permanent military
checkpoints and other roadblocks, as well as
scores of temporary irregular barriers,
continued to prevent Palestinians’ access to
essential services while Israelis could use the
same roads freely. Israel’s fence/wall in the
West Bank continued to impact agricultural
livelihoods of 150 Palestinian communities. It
also trapped more than 11,000 Palestinians
outside the fence/wall while accommodating
Israeli settlements.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Israeli authorities demolished buildings in the
OPT, including East Jerusalem, making more
than 1,000 Palestinian residents homeless in
areas designated for Israeli settlers. Among
those forcibly evicted, women were
disproportionately affected as their homes
also served as their places of work and
income generation, especially in shepherding
communities. Israel’s army demolished
Humsa village in the Jordan Valley in the OPT
in February and July, destroying or
confiscating animal pens, residential shelters,
water cisterns and food reserves.
In August, the Israeli Supreme Court
adjudicated on the eviction of seven
Palestinian families from their homes in
Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood in occupied
East Jerusalem. This followed several years of
eviction attempts, harassment by Israeli
settlers and use of excessive force by Israeli
police. Seven families in Silwan, another
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, also
remained at risk of forced eviction.3
In the Negev/Naqab in southern Israel,
authorities repeatedly demolished buildings
in seven villages, affecting 100 Palestinian
citizens of Israel. On 2 September, police
demolished the village of al-‘Araqib. The
village had been demolished more than 150
times since July 2010. Al-‘Araqib is one of 35
excluded, officially unrecognized, Bedouin
villages in the area.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ARBITRARY DETENTION, AND TORTURE
AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Palestinian prisoners were subjected to unfair
trials before military courts, prolonged solitary
confinement and inadequate medical
treatment, and illegal transfer from the OPT
to prisons in Israel. According to Addameer, a
Palestinian prisoner support organization,
500 were administratively detained without
charge or trial at the end of 2021, and 170
children were incarcerated. A survey by Save
the Children found that officers beat over
80% of child detainees, and denied access to
a lawyer to 47%.
Zakaria Zubeidi suffered broken ribs and
jaw while in handcuffs, and Mohammed AlArida was beaten on the head, after their
capture by Israeli police on 11 September,
according to the men’s lawyers. The men had
escaped from Gilboa Prison in northern Israel
five days earlier.

DISCRIMINATION
Israel’s system of governing Palestinians
through oppression and domination
constituted apartheid, a crime under
international law. Palestinians faced routine
and systematic discrimination, and therefore
human rights violations, in the context of their
rights to nationality, freedom of movement,
the highest attainable standard of health,
family life, education, work and participation
in public life.
Palestinian citizens of Israel were
prosecuted under incitement laws, but
politicians and groups of Jewish
supremacists continued to incite racially
motivated violence with almost total impunity.
Police used excessive force against
Palestinian citizens of Israel demonstrating
against evictions in East Jerusalem and
military strikes on Gaza, and carried out mass
arrests of organizers and participants of
protests. Most of those arrested were charged
with misdemeanours unrelated to violence.
On 12 May, special forces in a Nazareth
police station beat at least eight bound
Palestinian detainees who had been arrested
at a protest.4

209

The Citizenship and Entry into Israel law
(temporary amendment), which since 2003
had forbidden family unification of
Palestinian spouses with different legal
statuses, was not renewed in July. However,
the interior minister maintained the policy.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Laith Abu Zeyad, an Amnesty International
campaigner, was banned from travelling
outside the West Bank. The reason for the
ban, imposed in October 2019, remained
secret.5
Shatha Odeh, director of the Palestinian
Health Work Committees, was arrested on 7
July and remained in military detention.
Charges against her alleged her support for
the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, a political party with a military wing
that Israel has banned.
On 13 October, Druze leader Salman
Awwad was arrested after peacefully
demonstrating against the Israeli occupation
of the Golan Heights. He was charged with
organizing an illegal demonstration, closing a
road and inciting violence.
On 19 October, the Israeli government
declared six Palestinian civil society
organizations in the OPT “terrorist
organizations”.6 Two days earlier, the human
rights NGO Front Line Defenders had found
that the mobile phones of six human rights
defenders from these organizations had been
hacked using Pegasus spyware.7 On 18
October, the Israeli minister of interior notified
French-Palestinian lawyer Salah Hammouri,
one of the six, of the revocation of his
Jerusalem residency and deportation on the
basis of alleged “breach of allegiance to the
State of Israel”.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
Conscientious objectors to military service
were imprisoned. Among them were
teenagers Shahar Perets and Eran
Aviv, who served 88 and 114 days
respectively in military prison for refusing to
serve in the Israeli army.

210

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Divorce and other personal status laws
governed by religious courts continued to
discriminate against women. According to
Mavoi Satum, an Israeli women’s rights
organization, courts forced some 1,700
women to remain in abusive marriages every
year.
On 30 June, the State Comptroller reported
insufficient funding and inadequate policies
for protecting at-risk women and families.
Sixteen women were killed in domestic
violence, according to the Israel Observatory
on Femicide.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 11 July, the Supreme Court ruled in
favour of equality in same-sex couples’ and
single men’s access to assisted reproduction
services, bringing their access in line with
that for heterosexual couples and single
women.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, Irael hosted some 41,327 refugees
and asylum seekers. Most were Eritrean and
Sudanese nationals from conflict areas. Only
1% were granted refugee status. Asylum
seekers had no access to prompt and fair
status determination procedures, nor means
of economic support.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Israel purchased some 30 million doses of
Covid-19 vaccines and vaccinated 64% of
citizens of Israel, residents of East Jerusalem,
migrant workers and Palestinian prisoners
with two doses by October; administered
third doses to more than 4 million citizens;
and started vaccinating five-year-olds in
November, according to Israel’s health
ministry. Israel transferred 5,000 doses to the
Palestinian Authority in March and April,
while it had sent thousands of doses to
diplomatic allies Guatemala, Honduras and
the Czech Republic in February, according to
press reports.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

1. “Massive data leak reveals Israeli NSO Group’s spyware used to
target activists, journalists, and political leaders globally”, 18 July
2. “Israel/OPT: Pattern of Israeli attacks on residential homes in Gaza
must be investigated as war crimes”, 17 May
3. “Israel/OPT: Scrap plans to forcibly evict Palestinian families in
Silwan”, 25 May
4. “Israeli police targeted Palestinians with discriminatory arrests,
torture and unlawful force”, 24 June
5. “Israel/OPT: ‘Chilling repercussions’ of travel ban on Amnesty
campaigner must be a wake-up call for all”, 6 April
6. “Israel/OPT: Designation of Palestinian civil society groups as
terrorists a brazen attack on human rights”, 22 October
7. “Devices of Palestinian human rights defenders hacked with NSO
Group’s Pegasus spyware”, 8 November

ITALY
Italian Republic
Head of state: Sergio Mattarella
Head of government: Mario Draghi (replaced Giuseppe
Conte in February)
Employers silenced health and care workers
who raised concerns about working
conditions in care homes during the
Covid-19 pandemic. Older people in care
homes were denied meaningful contact with
the outside world. Violence against women
persisted and obstacles to accessing
abortion were not addressed. Parliament
failed to extend protection against hate
crimes to people attacked because of their
gender, gender identity or sexual
orientation. Migrants with an irregular
status remained vulnerable to exploitation
and abuses. Cooperation with Libya on
migration continued, despite abuses. The
authorities continued to criminalize
solidarity with refugees and migrants at
borders. Torture remained a concern.

BACKGROUND
In July, the government extended the state of
emergency to combat the Covid-19
pandemic until the end of the year. In
September, it also made it obligatory to have
a “Covid-19 green pass” showing proof of
vaccination, recovery from Covid-19 or a
negative test result in order to access public

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

and private workplaces. The measure
sparked demonstrations in some cities. In
Rome, protests turned violent when
hundreds of people led by the leaders of a
far-right party ransacked the national
headquarters of the main left-wing trade
union.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Health and care workers who raised
concerns about poor and unsafe working
conditions in care homes during the Covid-19
pandemic were subjected to unfair
disciplinary proceedings and feared reprisals
from their employers. Instead of addressing
their concerns over the use of PPE and the
true number of Covid-19 cases in care
homes, employers used unfair dismissals and
anti-union measures to silence them.1
In May, an employment tribunal in Milan
ruled as unfair the dismissal of an outsourced
worker who had reported health and safety
violations in March 2020 in a private care
home. The court acknowledged his
revelations were of public interest to prevent
deaths.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The rights of care homes’ older residents to a
private and family life continued to be
violated, with prolonged isolation causing a
deterioration in residents’ physical and
mental health. Although visits by family
members holding a Covid-19 certificate were
allowed to resume in May, and the so-called
“green pass” legislation in September
recognized the right to daily visits, many
private and public care homes continued to
deny older people meaningful contacts with
the outside world.
A commission of inquiry on the authorities’
response to Covid-19 in care homes had not
been established by the end of the year.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Levels of violence against women remained
high. A total of 102 women were killed in
domestic violence incidents, 70 of whom by
partners or ex-partners. In December, the
government approved a bill to strengthen

211

measures to prevent violence against women
and domestic violence. These included
access to early provisional compensation
during criminal investigations for victims who
report the abuse and broader powers for the
authorities to adopt surveillance and coercive
measures against perpetrators.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to abortion continued to be
obstructed due to a persistently high number
of doctors and other healthcare providers
refusing to provide abortion care.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In October, the Senate blocked a bill aimed at
combatting discrimination and violence
based on sex/gender, sexual orientation,
gender identity and disability. The bill would
have extended to LGBTI people, women and
people with disabilities the same protections
available to victims of hate speech and hate
crimes based on racist, religious, ethnic and
nationalist motives.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, it was estimated that
at least 300,000 migrants remained without
documentation, making it hard for them to
enjoy their rights and leaving them vulnerable
to abuses. The regularization measure
launched in 2020, aimed at ensuring people
with irregular status could obtain residence
and work permits and access health services
during the pandemic, achieved limited
results; according to the latest data available
at the end of the year. As of August about
60,000 people had obtained some
documentation, about a quarter of the
230,000 who applied, while tens of
thousands of applications remained pending.
In May, a grassroots trade union called a
national strike of migrant agricultural workers
to protest about the inadequacy of the
regularization measure.
Many people with an irregular status
remained unvaccinated, despite some
authorities’ measures to reach out to them. In
September, the government announced a
plan to vaccinate, voluntarily, refugees and

212

migrants on arrival in hotspots and reception
centres.
Thousands of migrants continued to work in
exploitative conditions and to live in
inadequate conditions in informal
settlements. They were also vulnerable to
racist and xenophobic attacks. In April, three
African workers driving near their homes in
Rignano, Foggia, were shot at by people in
another car. Two of them were injured, one
seriously. The authorities opened an
investigation. In October, following a visit, the
UN Working Group on Business and Human
Rights noted that migrant workers employed
in agriculture and the garment and logistics
industries were trapped in a cycle of
exploitation, debt bondage and human rights
abuses.
In January, the Rome Civil Tribunal declared
illegitimate the expulsion of a Pakistani
national to Slovenia and later to Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The judge found
the practice of so-called “informal
readmissions”, carried out on the basis of a
bilateral agreement with Slovenia, to be in
breach of national and international human
rights law.
Following the seizure of power by the
Taliban in Afghanistan, Italy evacuated 4,890
Afghan nationals.
In April, the National Guarantor for the
Rights of Persons Detained or Deprived of
Liberty published a damning report on his
visits to 10 centres for repatriation between
2019 and 2020. The Guarantor criticized
legislative and regulatory gaps hindering the
protection of people and the gravely
inadequate detention conditions.
In May, Moussa Balde from Guinea killed
himself while detained in the repatriation
centre of Turin – the sixth death in such
centres since June 2019. The authorities
prioritized his expulsion procedure over his
health, notwithstanding the fact that he had
just survived a violent attack by three Italian
nationals. The isolation ward where he was
held was closed in September on the
recommendation of the Guarantor.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

COOPERATION WITH LIBYA
By the end of the year, 32,425 refugees and
migrants had been captured at sea by Libyan
coastguards, supported by Italy and the EU,
and returned to Libya, by far the highest
figure on record. Italy continued to support
the Libyan authorities in containing refugees
and migrants in Libya, despite widespread
evidence of continuing abuses against them.
Italy’s evacuation programmes from Libya
continued to benefit very few asylum seekers,
with 45 people transferred to Italy in June
and 93 in November.
The deployment of Italian military and
civilian personnel in Libya to assist Libyan
border control authorities was extended for
another year in July. The Italian authorities
continued to provide Libya with resources
instrumental to maritime interceptions,
including a new maritime coordination centre
delivered in December.
Despite this, by the end of the year, 67,477
people (including 9,699 unaccompanied
children) had reached Italy by sea, mostly
from Libya and Tunisia, an increase over the
34,154 arrivals in 2020. Deaths at sea of
refugees and migrants in the Mediterranean
also increased, reaching 1,553 by the end of
the year, compared with 999 in 2020.
In October, a court in Naples sentenced the
captain of the Asso Ventotto, a merchant
ship, to one year’s imprisonment. In 2018, he
had rescued over 100 people, including
children, and unlawfully returned them to the
Libyan coastguard.
In December, the Cassation Court
overturned the conviction of two African men
who had protested against an attempt by the
crew of the Vos Thalassa, the merchant
vessel that had rescued them, to return them
to Libya. The court ruled that their behaviour
was justified by the need to protect
themselves and the other 65 people rescued.
CRIMINALIZATION OF SOLIDARITY
The authorities continued to suppress the
activities of individuals and organizations that
assist refugees and migrants at borders,
using both criminal law and administrative
measures.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In September, Mimmo Lucano, former
mayor of Riace, Calabria, was sentenced by
the Locri tribunal to 13 years and two
months’ imprisonment for maladministration
and embezzlement, notwithstanding
prosecutors acknowledging he did not profit
from his conduct. For many years, he had
organized a welcoming reception system for
refugees, asylum seekers and migrants. The
sentence was nearly double that requested
by the prosecutors.
Court cases against rescue NGOs continued
in Sicily. Prosecutors indicted 21 people
belonging to the crews of Iuventa and of
Médecins Sans Frontières and Save the
Children’s ships for “facilitation of irregular
migration” in connection with rescue
operations conducted in 2016 and 2017.2
The authorities continued to use Port State
Control powers to hinder rescue NGOs’
activities and seize their ships.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Concerns about torture and other illtreatment of people in prison and police
custody persisted and several judicial
proceedings against suspected perpetrators
were ongoing.
In September, prosecutors laid charges of
torture and other ill-treatment against 120
prison officers and senior prison
administration officials for a mass beating in
the prison of Santa Maria Capua Vetere,
Campania, in April 2020, which affected 177
detainees and led to the death of one of
them.
1. Italy: Muzzled and Unheard in the Pandemic: Urgent Need to Address
Concerns of Care and Health Workers in Italy (Index: EUR
30/4875/2021), 22 October
2. Italy: A Slippery Slope for Human Rights: The Iuventa Case (Index:
EUR 30/4475/2021), 4 August

213

JAPAN
Japan
Head of government: Fumio Kishida (replaced
Yoshihide Suga in October)
Ethnic minorities and LGBTI people
continued to experience stigma and
discrimination. Legislation allowing for the
indefinite detention of undocumented
foreign nationals remained in place.
Detainees were denied the right to adequate
medical care.

BACKGROUND
Japan hosted the delayed Olympic Summer
Games 2020 against a background of rising
numbers of Covid-19 cases and hostile
public opinion. On 3 September Yoshihide
Suga announced his resignation as prime
minister amid public anger at the
government’s handling of the pandemic.

DISCRIMINATION
Long-standing discrimination continued
towards Japan’s ethnic Korean minority,
especially those deemed to be aligned with
North Korea. In July, the Supreme Court
dismissed a claim for damages filed by a
Pyongyang-related school and some of its
graduates over the government’s decision to
exclude such Pyongyang-related Korean
schools from a programme to provide tuition
subsidies for high schools. Four cases on the
same issue had previously been rejected by
other courts.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, after intense negotiation between the
ruling and opposition parties, a statement
that “discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity is
unacceptable” was added to the ruling
Liberal Democratic Party’s (LDP) proposed
bill to promote public awareness of sexual
orientation and gender identity. However,
during the LDP’s internal process of
approving the cross-party bill, many
discriminatory remarks were made by

214

conservative LDP lawmakers about the
proposed addition. Following a public outcry
at the remarks, an executive member of the
LDP announced that they would not submit
the bill to Japan’s National Diet. It was still
pending at the end of the year.1
The government took no steps towards the
legal recognition of same-sex marriage.
However, in March, the Sapporo District
Court ruled in a lawsuit brought by three
same-sex couples that the government’s
failure to recognize same-sex marriage was
unconstitutional. The plaintiffs were among
13 couples who had filed similar lawsuits on
Valentine’s Day in 2019.2 A total of 141 local
municipalities had introduced ordinances or
guidelines that acknowledged same-sex
unions by the end of the year.
Pressure increased from civil society to
reform the Act on Gender Identity Disorder by
removing requirements that contravene rights
under international law for individuals
seeking to change their legal gender. Under
the Act, anyone wishing to change their legal
gender was required to be unmarried, aged
over 20, without minor children, and
sterilized or otherwise unable to reproduce.
They were also obliged to undergo surgery so
that their genitalia more closely resembled
that of their new legal gender and were
required to undergo psychiatric assessment
and receive a diagnosis.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to subject asylum
seekers and irregular migrants to indefinite
detention and ill-treatment including
inadequate medical care in immigration
detention facilities. In March, a 33-year-old
Sri Lankan woman, Ratnayake Liyanage
Wishma Sandamali, died while in immigration
detention. An investigative report released by
the government’s Immigration Services
Agency in August admitted flaws in the
medical care system.
Authorities continued to use the
Immigration Control and Refugee Recognition
Act to indefinitely detain undocumented
foreign nationals, including irregular migrants
and asylum seekers, until their deportation.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In February, the government submitted an
amendment bill to the Act. The bill
maintained the presumption of detention,
and proposed amendments did not provide
for maximum periods of detention and
continued to deny due process to individuals
by failing to allow for judicial review of
detention orders. Moreover, despite very low
rates of acceptance of asylum applications –
under 1% annually since 2012 – the bill
included provisions that allowed the
authorities to deport detained asylum seekers
after a limited appeals procedure. The
government withdrew the bill in May following
domestic criticism and international pressure.
In September, the Tokyo High Court found
that a decision to deport two Sri Lankan men
the day after their asylum claims were
rejected was unconstitutional. It ruled that
the immigration authorities had essentially
deprived the men of the right to appeal and
ordered the state to pay ¥600,000
(approximately US$5,300) in compensation.

3. “Japan: Abhorrent executions crush hopes of progress under new
prime minister”, 21 December

DEATH PENALTY

BACKGROUND

Three death row inmates – Yasutaka
Fujishiro, Mitsunori Onogawa and Tomoaki
Takanezawa – were hanged on 21 December,
in the first executions since 2019. All three
men had been found guilty of murder.
Yasutaka Fujishiro suffered from a personality
disorder. Mitsunori Onogawa and Tomoaki
Takanezawa were waiting for the results of
requests for retrial at the time of their
execution.3
Iwao Hakamada, who spent 47 years on
death row and endured long periods of
solitary confinement having been found guilty
of murder in 1968, remained out of prison on
temporary release awaiting a retrial following
a Supreme Court decision in 2020. His case
and original trial highlighted ongoing
concerns about the use of torture by the
police to extract “confessions”.

Jordan began its Covid-19 vaccine roll-out in
January and, according to UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, was one of the first countries
to offer free vaccinations to all, including
refugees and asylum seekers.
In April, former crown prince Hamzah bin
al-Hussein was placed under house arrest,
accused of planning a coup, which he
denied.
In June, King Abdallah ordered the
formation of a 92-member royal committee to
“modernize the legislative system”.
Jordan’s economic situation continued to
deteriorate, partly due to the impact of
Covid-19 measures. In September, the
government reopened the country, but
maintained the sweeping emergency law
enacted at the start of the pandemic in 2020.

1. “Japan: Government must deliver an LGBTI bill that ensures zero
tolerance of discrimination”, 1 June
2. “Japan: Judicial ruling marks groundbreaking step towards equality”,
17 March

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

JORDAN
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Head of state: Abdullah II bin al-Hussein
Head of government: Bisher al-Khasawneh
Freedom of peaceful assembly continued to
be curtailed, including under sweeping
emergency legislation introduced in 2020.
The authorities also restricted freedom of
expression, both online and offline. Genderbased violence increased in the context of
worsening economic conditions and
Covid-19 restrictions, as well as due to the
continuing lack of legal protection against
such crimes. Jordan continued to host over
2.7 million refugees, all of whom were
eligible for free Covid-19 vaccinations, but
food insecurity among refugees rose sharply.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to curtail freedom
of peaceful assembly, including by arbitrarily
arresting people protesting against the
government’s Covid-19 measures.

215

In March, protests erupted in the cities of
Irbid, Salt, Aqaba and Karak after at least 10
Covid-19 patients died because of a shortage
of oxygen in a government hospital in Salt.
Protesters demanded accountability for the
deaths and a halt to Covid-19 restrictions
such as night curfews that they criticized as
ineffective. In December, five individuals
were sentenced to three years in prison after
being found responsible for the patients’
deaths. The protesters also blamed the
government for worsening economic
conditions and called for an end to the
emergency law, known as the defence law,
which was used to limit civil and political
rights. Security forces met demonstrators
with force, including heavy use of tear gas.
To mark the 10th anniversary of the 24
March Movement, a 2011 youth-led
movement calling for reform, protests were
set to happen in Amman and the northern
cities of Irbid, Mafraq and Ramtha to call for
the end of the defence law and the cabinet’s
resignation. However, security forces
prevented individuals from joining the
protests and arrested dozens of others. The
interior minister stated that the government
“would not tolerate protests that would
worsen the health crisis.” All those arrested
were released shortly afterwards.
May witnessed several days of protests in
solidarity with Palestinians in East
Jerusalem’s Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood.
On 14 May, Jordanian riot police used tear
gas and fired live ammunition in the air to
disperse protesters near the King Hussein
Bridge in the Jordan Valley.
On 30 June, authorities arrested members
of the teachers’ trade union, including its
head Nasser al-Nawasrah, hours before a
planned march in solidarity with teachers
forced into early retirement. Authorities had
also arrested teachers protesting about the
same issue in early January. All those
detained were released soon after arrest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Civic space continued to shrink as authorities
tightened arbitrary restrictions on online and
offline expression.

216

On 25 March, authorities effectively banned
Clubhouse, a social media audio app used to
discuss topics, including civil and political
rights. In response, several human rights
organizations published tips on using specific
virtual private networks (VPNs) to access the
app, which the authorities subsequently
blocked.
Several human rights organizations and
workers told Amnesty International about
internet disruptions in March, including
banning Facebook Live to limit coverage of
protests.
In April, in the aftermath of the alleged
planned coup, a two-day internet shutdown
affected parts of western Amman. Several
organizations reported to Amnesty
International that this adversely affected the
vaccination programme and businesses. On
6 April, the public prosecutor issued a
gagging order on traditional and social media
regarding investigations into the alleged
planned coup. The gagging order remained
in force at the end of the year.
Between 24 June and 15 July, the
Telecommunications Regulatory Commission,
in coordination with the Ministry of
Education, disrupted messaging apps to
“preserve the integrity” of examinations
taking place.
On 1 July, Ahmad Tabanjieh Kinani was
released on bail after being held for almost a
year for peacefully showing solidarity with the
teachers’ syndicate. He had been detained in
August 2020, accused of acts criminalized by
the Counter Terrorism Law.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The economic crisis led to an unprecedented
spike in unemployment, rising to 25% in the
first quarter and up to 50% for young people.
A total of 146 teachers were forced into
early retirement in 2021, including several
members and/or board members of the
teachers’ syndicate, a development widely
believed to be retribution for their
participation in protests in 2019 and 2020.
Early retirement pushed families already
under strain because of Covid-19 measures
further into poverty.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

On 28 March, the prime minister issued
Defence Order 28 ending the practice of
imprisoning individuals for debt and
providing for a travel ban instead. Thousands
of people fled Jordan fearing imprisonment
for debt. On 14 July, minister of justice
Ahmad al-Zeyadat submitted a draft law
offering indebted individuals more flexibility
in paying off their debts, but the law had not
been enacted by the end of 2021.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Gender-based violence continued, with legal
protections and accountability for such
crimes remaining weak.
In the first half of 2021, several women’s
rights organizations, as well as the UN,
reported that incidents of gender-based
violence had increased by over 50%
compared to the previous year. By the end of
September, 14 women had been killed due to
domestic violence according to the
Sisterhood is Global Institute in Amman.
Gender-based violence increased in the
context of worsening economic conditions
largely exacerbated by Covid-19 measures.
However, the gradual reopening of services
and the removal of movement restrictions
improved survivors’ access to gender-based
violence specialized services. Gender-based
violence agencies continued to provide their
services remotely and in person, and
increased the capacity of their hotlines.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
As of 30 September, according to UNHCR,
Jordan was hosting 670,637 Syrian, 66,665
Iraqi, 12,866 Yemeni, 6,013 Sudanese and
696 Somali refugees. It was also hosting
1,453 refugees from 52 other countries
registered with UNHCR, in addition to over
2 million Palestinian refugees registered with
the UN Relief and Works Agency.
In March, at least four Yemeni asylum
seekers were deported to Yemen without due
process; they had applied for work permits
and were detained for over a month before
their deportation. As of April, eight others
faced deportation orders. Humanitarian
workers reported that asylum seekers faced

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

deportation if they did not give up their
asylum-seeking certificate before applying for
work permits. In November, Syrian journalist
Ibrahim Awad was arbitrarily arrested and
subsequently detained in the al Azraq
refugee camp 100km east of Amman.
In May, the government announced it would
allow all refugees with expired documents to
renew their papers at UNHCR until the end
of the year, and that expired documents
would not prevent their access to services,
including healthcare and schooling.
By June, according to UNHCR, more than
half of eligible refugees in Jordan had
received at least one Covid-19 vaccination.
In July, the World Food Programme
announced that 21,000 Syrian refugees in
Jordan would no longer receive food
assistance due to a shortage of funds, and
that food insecurity among refugees had
doubled in the past year to reach 25%.
Nearly two in three refugees were on the
brink of food insecurity.

DEATH PENALTY
Authorities continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were carried out.

KAZAKHSTAN
Republic of Kazakhstan
Head of state: Kassym-Jomart Tokayev
Head of government: Askar Mamin
The rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly remained severely
limited and human rights organizations and
trade unions faced restrictions. Torture and
other ill-treatment remained widespread.
People with disabilities continued to face
challenges in claiming their basic human
rights. LGBTI people faced high levels of
discrimination and abuse. Asylum seekers
fleeing human rights abuses in China faced
imprisonment and discrimination.

BACKGROUND
In parliamentary elections held on 10
January, the ruling Nur Otan party won 71%

217

of the vote. The OSCE election monitoring
mission found that voter choice was limited
by “undue restrictions on fundamental
freedoms of association, peaceful assembly
and expression”.
On 10 June, President Tokayev published a
Plan of Priority Measures for Human Rights
which specifically mentioned the rights of
people with disabilities, elimination of
discrimination against women and the rights
to freedom of association and expression but
omitted the right to freedom of peaceful
assembly.
According to the WHO, by December there
had been 1,060,125 confirmed cases of
Covid-19 and 17,972 deaths, and
16,813,018 vaccine doses had been
administered. On 6 September, compulsory
vaccination was introduced for workers in
retail, sport, culture, health and local
government organizations. Those not
vaccinated were required to take weekly
tests.
On 14 October, Kazakhstan was elected to
the UN Human Rights Council.
On 29 December, President Tokayev signed
off a law abolishing the death penalty and
thus fulfilling the requirements for ratification
of the Second Optional Protocol to the
ICCPR.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities sought to silence criticism of
the government using restrictive legislation.
Even though libel was decriminalized in
2020, the Criminal Code retains articles
criminalizing “Public insults and other
attacks on the honour and dignity of the First
President” (Article 373) and “Attacks on the
honour and dignity of the President” (Article
375).
On 10 August, a court in Taldykorgan ruled,
in civil proceedings, that Serik Kulmyrza and
eight other people should remove social
media posts because they insulted “the First
President of Kazakhstan” (Nursultan
Nazarbayev) and “created a negative image
of the human rights situation in the country”.
The court recommended that prosecutors
should open a criminal case under Articles

218

373 and 375 of the Criminal Code. Only one
of the defendants took part in the hearing via
WhatsApp and the others only heard of the
decision via the media in October.
On 15 September, parliament approved
amendments to laws intended to protect
children from cyberbullying. The
amendments require foreign internet
platforms and messenger applications to
register and have representatives in
Kazakhstan, or face being blocked. Human
rights defenders criticized these legislative
changes as a means of unduly restricting the
right to freedom of expression and access to
information.
On 7 October, an ambulance driver,
Kenzhebulat Esimseitov, was detained and
questioned by police under Article 274 of the
Criminal Code for “distribution of knowingly
false information”. He was among 24
ambulance drivers who had signed a letter to
officials complaining about conditions at the
Ambulance Service, including the failure to
pay drivers the additional sum due to them
because of the Covid-19 pandemic. At the
end of the year the case had not been
closed, but was not being actively
investigated.
EXTREMISM LEGISLATION
There was a rise in the number of people
convicted under Article 405 of the Criminal
Code for membership of an “extremist”
organization. By October, there had been 47
convictions, compared to 14 in 2020. All of
those convicted had simply expressed
criticism of the government or supported the
opposition movements Democratic Choice of
Kazakhstan and Koshe Partiyasi, which had
been arbitrarily declared “extremist” in
closed court sessions in 2018 and 2020,
respectively.
On 11 October, Askhat Zheksebaev was
sentenced to five years in prison for
belonging to an “extremist party”. He was
one of the founders of Koshe Partiyasi and
had been in detention since August 2020. He
was among 13 opposition activists convicted
in a politically motivated trial.
On 4 February, prisoner of conscience Maks
Bokaev was released from detention after

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

serving a five-year sentence. He remained
subject to three years of “administrative
supervision”, which restricts his rights to
freedom of peaceful assembly, expression
and association.1

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
The mobile devices of at least four
Kazakhstani activists were targeted and
infected with NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware
from June. The four were members of the
youth movement Oyan, Qazaqstan.2

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Requests to hold demonstrations were
frequently denied under overly restrictive
legislation. According to human rights
monitors, between July 2020 and October
2021, 133 applications to local authorities in
22 cities were arbitrarily refused. Of those,
103 were in 2021. Peaceful demonstrators
were subjected to ill-treatment and “kettling”,
amounting to arbitrary detention by law
enforcement officers.
On 10 January, a group of about 12
peaceful demonstrators were surrounded by
police officers and forced to stand outside in
sub-zero temperatures for over nine hours
before being released. They were not given
access to a toilet or food and drink. One
woman was taken to hospital suffering from
hypothermia.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In January, three NGOs – the Kazakhstani
International Bureau for Human Rights, the
International Legal Initiative and Echo, an
election monitoring group – were arbitrarily
suspended for three months, and NGO
Erkindik Kanaty was fined under restrictive
tax regulations. All had been notified in
November 2020 that they had purportedly
violated Article 460-1 of the Code on
Administrative Violations for failing to properly
report on foreign funds each had received, in
some cases dating back to 2018.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Despite reforms in 2020 that made
registration of trade unions easier, some
still faced disproportionate bureaucratic
hurdles. On 5 February, the Specialized Interdistrict Economic Court in Shymkent
suspended the independent Industrial Trade
Union of Fuel and Energy Workers for six
months for failing to register in accordance
with the restrictive trade union law.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
According to the report of the National
Preventative Mechanism (NPM) for the
prevention of torture published in 2021, 63
reports of torture were registered in 2020 and
13 individuals were sentenced. The NPM
also noted the poor conditions in detention
facilities. Many facilities were inadequately
heated during the winter, food was
inadequate and there was a severe shortage
of medical staff, who continued to be
employed by the Penitentiary Administration.
On 15 October, a court in Öskemen
sentenced seven prison guards to between
five and 10 years’ imprisonment for torturing
25-year-old Andrei Kondratenko. He died in
prison on 18 July 2019 after being tortured
by prison guards. A witness testified that
guards held his head underwater and
deprived him of sleep; the witness also
testified that guards then forced other
prisoners to take Andrei Kondratenko’s body
to the punishment cell and make it appear
that he had hanged himself.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
People with mental disabilities continued to
be deprived of legal capacity by the courts,
and thereby of their human rights, including
the rights to education, a private life, to vote
and to stand for office. In July, the OSCE
recommended that all restrictions on the right
to vote and stand for office should be lifted
and that Kazakhstan introduce laws and
policies allowing people with disabilities to
access support in exercising their legal
capacity rather than being deprived of it.

219

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people faced discrimination,
marginalization and physical attacks from
state and non-state actors.
In May, Zhanar Sekerbayeva and Gulzada
Serzhan, founders of the queer feminist
collective, Feminita, were physically attacked
and abused by an angry mob when they
attempted to hold a human rights conference
at a hotel in Shymkent. Police officers failed
to protect their right to peaceful assembly
and forcibly detained them, later claiming
that they were detained for their own
protection. After the hotel cancelled their
booking, they moved to a nearby cafe where
an angry mob of men attacked them and
punched Zhanar Sekerbayeva in the face.
Police officers were in the mob and in video
footage can be seen forcing the two activists
into police cars. In Karaganda on 28 July,
both activists were again attacked by an
angry mob when they tried to hold a women’s
rights conference. Neither incident had been
investigated by the police by the end of the
year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Ethnic Kazakhs fleeing Xinjian in China faced
criminal prosecution and imprisonment for
crossing the border irregularly, as well as
discrimination, inadequate protection, and
administrative hurdles, including needing to
renew their documents annually and not
having the right to travel abroad. In April,
three ethnic Kazakhs who had fled from
Xinjiang were denied citizenship on the
grounds that they had crossed the border
irregularly.
1. Kazakhstan: Prisoner of Conscience Maks Bokaev Released but
Restrictions Must be Lifted (Index: EUR 57/3625/2021), 4 February
2. “Kazakhstan: Four activists’ mobile devices infected with Pegasus
spyware”, 9 December

KENYA
Republic of Kenya
Head of state and government: Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta
Police used excessive and sometimes lethal
force to break up protests; they unlawfully
killed 167 people, including some of those
arrested for violating Covid-19 restrictions,
and forcibly disappeared 33 people.
Incidents of gender-based violence,
primarily against women and girls,
increased. Courts affirmed the right to
housing, but government agencies flouted a
presidential moratorium on evictions during
the pandemic. A group of LGBTI refugees
and asylum seekers were attacked in
Kakuma refugee camp. No one was brought
to justice for the killing of environmental
activist Joannah Stutchbury in July.

BACKGROUND
The government continued to impose a
curfew and restrictions on movement and
public gatherings to curtail the spread of
Covid-19.
The authorities granted citizenship to 1,649
members of the Shona community in July,
ending decades of statelessness. The Shona
migrated to Kenya from Southern Africa in
1959 as missionaries but, following Kenya’s
independence in 1963, were never registered
as citizens. An additional 1,200 people of
Rwandan descent, who migrated to Kenya for
work during the colonial period, and 58
people of Asian descent, were also granted
citizenship. In September, parliament
recognized the Pemba community as an
Indigenous community. These steps added to
progress already made by Kenya over several
years to end statelessness for everyone. In
2016, 1,500 members of the Makonde
community, who migrated from Mozambique,
were also granted citizenship.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The brutal response by police officers to
protests resulted in human rights violations
against demonstrators. While Covid-19

220

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

regulations prohibited protests and public
assemblies, there were several spontaneous
demonstrations against containment
measures and the police responded using
excessive force. Alex Macharia Wanjiku was
shot in Kahawa West, an informal settlement
in Nairobi County, while police dispersed a
demonstration against the Nairobi
Metropolitan Services. Investigations into the
incident by the Independent Policing
Oversight Authority (IPOA), an independent
civilian body, were not concluded by the end
of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
SOCIAL MEDIA ACTIVISTS
Activists continued to use social media
platforms to raise governance issues.
Although online expression was largely
unrestricted, the police arrested Edwin
Mutemi wa Kiama, a human rights defender,
on 6 April for criticizing on Twitter
government borrowing.1 He was released on
bail of KES 500,000 (about US$4,488) on 7
April, ordered to report daily to the
Directorate of Criminal Investigation (DCI)
pending investigation, and not to comment
on social media about Kenya’s debt
sustainability. On 20 April, he was released
unconditionally due to insufficient evidence
that he had violated Section 22 of the
Computer Misuse and Cyber Crimes Act of
2018.
ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISTS
In July, 67-year-old Joannah Stutchbury, a
well-known environmental activist, was shot
dead at her home in Kiambu County on the
outskirts of the capital, Nairobi.2 She had
received death threats apparently linked to
campaigns against construction of buildings
in the Kiambu Forest. Although the president
ordered the DCI to expedite investigations
into her death, no suspects were arrested or
prosecuted.

DISCRIMINATION
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In May, the Ministry of Public Service,
Gender and Youth Affairs reported a five-fold
increase in gender-based violence, mainly

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

against women and girls, since the beginning
of the Covid-19 outbreak, identifying, in
particular, physical assault, rape and
attempted rape, murder, “defilement”,
physical harm, and psychological violence.
The upsurge occurred in the context of
prolonged lockdown periods, growing
inequality and lack of mental health support.
RIGHT TO HOUSING AND FORCED EVICTIONS
Courts, including the Supreme Court,
affirmed the right to housing and condemned
forced evictions in several pre-pandemic
cases.3 In January, the Supreme Court ruled
that, in the absence of accessible and
adequate housing, the government must
protect the rights and dignity of those in
informal settlements. In July, it finally ruled
on the 2013 eviction of residents from City
Carton, an informal settlement in Nairobi, by
the Moi Educational Centre and the Inspector
General of Police. It held that their forced
eviction violated fundamental rights to
inherent human dignity, security of the
person, and to accessible and adequate
housing guaranteed under the Constitution.
Government agencies breached a
presidential moratorium on evictions during
the pandemic. Furthermore, the evictions
were carried out without regard to due
process requirements, including adequate
notice. In February, 3,500 residents of Kibos,
Kisumu County, were violently evicted by
Kenya Railways Corporation officers, without
adequate notice. Armed police used tear gas
to force residents from their homes. A twoyear-old boy who had been trapped under
debris died during the evictions. In August,
the High Court ruled that the Kenya Railways
Corporation had violated the community’s
rights and failed to follow fair administrative
procedures. The decision barred future
forced evictions against the community
where alternative resettlement options are not
provided. The residents belonged to the
minority Nubian community who were
resettled in Kibos in 1938. Since then, the
state made no attempt to guarantee their
security of tenure there, and for decades they
have struggled to obtain recognition of their
tenure.4

221

In October, police supervised evictions in
Deep Sea and Mukuru kwa Njenga, informal
settlements in Nairobi, to pave the way for
the construction of roads, leaving hundreds
of residents homeless. While authorities
claimed to have given sufficient notice, the
government did not appear to provide
adequate alternative settlements or
compensation for the residents and did not
meet its obligation to ensure access to
housing as directed by the courts.
REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March, citing increased insecurity and
sustenance costs, the government issued a
14-day ultimatum to UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, saying that if it did not close
the Kakuma and Dadaab refugee camps,
steps would be taken to return refugees to
their countries of origin.5 The camps hosted
around 512,000 refugees, around half of
them from Somalia. Refugees, including
LGBTI people, expressed their fear of
returning to countries from which they had
fled to seek safety in Kenya. On 30 April, the
Kenyan government, following a meeting with
UNHCR, postponed the closure of the
Dadaab refugee camp to June 2022,
retracting its initial position of immediate
closure.6
There were around 1,000 LGBTI refugees in
the Kakuma and Dadaab camps who were
inadequately protected from homophobic
attacks. In late March, unidentified people
attacked the LGBTI refugee shelter in
Kakuma camp, throwing a petrol bomb at the
LGBTI refugees’ houses. Two LGBTI refugees
suffered second degree burns on about 50%
of their bodies and were evacuated for
specialized medical attention in Nairobi. One
of them, 22-year-old Chriton Atuhwera died
on 12 April. Chriton Atuhwera, also known as
Trinidad, had fled to Kenya from Uganda
where he had been persecuted because of
his sexuality.7

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Although the cost of vaccinating the adult
population against Covid-19 was equivalent
to 1% of the country’s annual budget
(KES 38,329,600,000, around US$350

222

million) only 15% were fully vaccinated.
While commercial vaccine supplies remained
a challenge to Kenya, the government made
no commitment to allocate sufficient
resources for vaccinations in the 2021-2022
annual budget.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
During the year, 167 people were killed and
33 were forcibly disappeared by the police.
Only 28 prosecutions were initiated against
suspected perpetrators of unlawful killings
and enforced disappearance. In April, a
youth known as Collins from Mathare, an
informal settlement in Nairobi, was arrested
and killed by a police officer already
suspected of multiple killings. His body was
taken to the Nairobi City mortuary. The
authorities did not investigate the crime.
In June, 28-year-old Erick Achando, a
motorcycle taxi driver, was arrested in Kisii
County for violating the curfew. He died a few
days later in a police cell after failing to pay a
fine of KES 8,000 (around US$71). The
police claimed that he had died of an illness.
Two police officers were arrested and
charged with his murder following an
investigation by the Internal Affairs Unit of the
National Police Service and an autopsy report
that confirmed he died of severe head
injuries after being hit by a blunt object.
Following an inquest,8 Police Constable
David Kibet Rono was arrested and charged
in July with the murder in 2015 of 20-yearold Nura Malicha Molu who died after being
shot in Nairobi’s Huruma estate. His alleged
killer claimed to have acted in self-defence
but the inquest found that he had not posed
any danger to the officer. The decision came
five years after the IPOA began investigating
the killing and found inconsistencies,
including in the various testimonies from
police officers. For example, material
evidence, including a weapon said to belong
to Nura Malicha Molu, was not presented by
officers for analysis.
In August, the bodies of brothers Benson
Njiru Ndwiga and Emmanuel Mutura, aged
22 and 19 respectively, were found in Embu

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Level 5 Hospital mortuary, two days after they
were arrested by officers from Manyatta
police station for allegedly breaking the
curfew. Six police officers suspected of
involvement in the murders were arrested
and charged on the IPOA’s recommendation.
They were released on bail of KES 3,000,000
(about US$26,291) on 4 November and
barred from entering Embu County to guard
against any potential interference with
evidence and witnesses.
1. “Kenya: Release and cease attacks on Edwin Mutemi wa Kiama”,
5 October
2. “Kenya: Statement on Joannah Stutchbury’s murder”, 16 July
3. “Kenya: Kibos land and demolition case: High court finds Kenya
Railways Corporation and the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of
National Government guilty of gross human rights violations”,
1 September
4. “Kenya: Press statement on the forceful mass eviction of the Nubian
community of Kibos, Kisumu County”, 8 February
5. “Kenya: Amnesty International statement on the proposed closure of
Dadaab and Kakuma refugee camps”, 6 April
6. “Kenya: Clarification on our statement on revised roadmap for the
closure of Kakuma and Dadaab refugee camps”, 30 April
7. “Kenya: Amnesty International statement on the killing of Ugandan
refugee Chriton ‘Trinidad’ Atuhwera” 13 April
8. “Kenya: Fix loopholes that facilitate unlawful killings”, 9 August

KOSOVO*
Kosovo*
Head of state: Vjosa Osmani (replaced Glauk Konjufca
in April)
Head of government: Albin Kurti (replaced Avdullah
Hoti in March)
*This designation is without prejudice to positions on
status, and is in line with UN Security Council
Resolution 1244 and the International Court of Justice
Advisory Opinion, Accordance with International Law of
the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in Respect
of Kosovo.
Proceedings continued at the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers established in The
Hague in 2016. Journalists faced indirect
pressure and online violence. Kosovo courts
issued their first conviction for wartime
sexual violence. Impunity for cases of
institutional negligence in addressing

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

domestic violence continued. A hydropower
company withdrew its lawsuits aimed at
silencing activists.

BACKGROUND
Following snap elections in February, the
Vetëvendosje (Self-determination Movement)
party won power, replacing the government of
Avdullah Hoti. The parliament elected Vjosa
Osmani as president.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In September, the trial began of Salih
Mustafa, commander of a Kosovo Liberation
Army unit, indicted on charges of arbitrary
detention, cruel treatment, torture and
murder. Pristina Basic Court sentenced
former reservist policeman Goran Stanišić to
20 years’ imprisonment for war crimes
against ethnic Albanians committed in 1999.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
More than 1,600 people remained missing.
In June, 11 bodies of Kosovo Albanians were
exhumed from a mass grave at the Kiževak
mine in Serbia. In September, the remains of
seven Kosovo Albanians were returned to
Kosovo authorities. Kosovo authorities
returned the remains of three Serbs to
Serbian authorities.

WARTIME SEXUAL VIOLENCE
In Kosovo’s first conviction for wartime sexual
violence, Pristina Basic Court sentenced
former Kosovo Serb police officer Zoran
Vukotić to 10 years’ imprisonment for raping
a 16-year-old girl in 1999.
As of December, a government commission
had granted the status of survivor of wartime
sexual violence to 1,048 of 1,618 applicants,
although over 4,500 rape survivors had been
counselled by the NGO Medica Gjakova.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Impunity for cases of institutional negligence
in addressing domestic violence continued.
The murders of two women, Sebahate Morina
and Marigona Osmani, both victims of
femicide, sparked public protests against

223

gender-based violence. The Ombudsperson
found the state institutions responsible for
violating Sebahate Morina’s right to life
because they neglected a domestic violence
report filed by her daughter days before she
was murdered by her ex-husband. Kosovo
courts handed down one life sentence and a
25-year sentence in femicide cases. A judge
and a prosecutor faced disciplinary
proceedings for convicting the rapist of a 15year-old girl to only eight months’
imprisonment.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Three doctors were penalized for speaking to
the media about practices in a public hospital
cardiology clinic “without permission and
damaging the image of the institution”. Two
of them were prohibited from promotion or
salary raises for three years, and one
received a 40% pay cut for three months.
JOURNALISTS
Journalists faced threats, indirect pressure,
obstruction, online violence and attacks. In
February, journalist Visar Duriqi was injured
by unidentified people. In October, journalists
were attacked by protesters while covering a
police action in Mitrovica. In December,
Pristina Basic Court ordered the house arrest
of two people for threatening journalist Vehbi
Kajtazi.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Amnesty International called on Austrian
hydropower company Kelkos Energy to
withdraw defamation lawsuits against activists
Shpresa Loshaj and Adriatik Gacaferi, who
had criticized the environmental impact of its
Kosovo operation.1 Kelkos withdrew the
lawsuits in October.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The government agreed to provide shelter
and grant temporary protection to up to
2,000 Afghan evacuees waiting to be
resettled in other host countries. Afghans
hosted in the camps enjoyed no freedom of
movement outside and visits by media and
other observers inside the camps were
restricted.

224

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The government approved a draft Civil Code
allowing same-sex civil unions, to be
regulated by a special law.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA, ASHKALI AND EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian people
continued to face barriers to accessing
drinking water and employment, as well as
accessing online education for children
during Covid-19 school closures.
Following a civil society petition, the
government awarded €20,000 in damages to
the family of Kujtim Veseli, an 11-year-old
Ashkali child who was repeatedly raped and
finally murdered in 2019. Months before the
murder, Kujtim’s abuser had confessed to the
police that he had raped Kujtim but he was
not arrested or detained. The Ombudsperson
found a violation of Kujtim’s right to life.
1. “Kosovo: Defamation lawsuits seeking to silence environmental
activists must be withdrawn”, 28 June

KUWAIT
State of Kuwait
Head of state: Nawaf al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah
Head of government: Sabah al-Khaled al-Hamad alSabah
The authorities detained and prosecuted
government critics under legal provisions
criminalizing speech deemed offensive to
the head of state. Members of the stateless
Bidun minority continued to face
discrimination. Courts continued to hand
down death sentences; no executions were
reported.

BACKGROUND
In February, the Emir suspended parliament
for a month, stating it was in a bid to defuse
tensions between the government and
parliament. Reasons for the tensions
included a proposed general amnesty bill to
pardon a group of former opposition
members of parliament (MPs) convicted in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

relation to their participation in a 2011
protest, as well as the sentencing of a group
of men following an unfair trial on charges
that included “spying for Iran and Hizbullah”.
On 8 November, the Emir granted pardons
and reduced the sentences of 35 men,
including 11 former MPs.

vaccination campaign, which began in
December 2020 and was free of charge.
Foreign nationals and migrant workers, who
comprise up to 70% of the population, were
denied access to vaccines for the first half of
the year until July, when vaccines were made
available to everyone.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

DISCRIMINATION

The authorities detained and prosecuted
government critics and activists under
provisions in the Cybercrime Law and Penal
Code, including for speech deemed offensive
to the Emir.
In April, the government approved
amendments to the Kuwaiti Code of Criminal
Procedure that mean the authorities can no
longer order pretrial detention in cases
related to freedom of expression. However,
individuals can still be prosecuted and
ultimately imprisoned for voicing their
opinion.
At the end of June, Jamal al-Sayer, a poet,
posted tweets on his account addressing the
Emir and criticizing him for the tensions
between the government and parliament. On
5 July, a number of State Security officers
dressed in plain clothes arrested him as he
was returning home in his car. He was
released nine days later pending charges of
“insulting the Emir, spreading false news with
the aim of undermining the state, and misuse
of his phone”. On 9 November, a criminal
court acquitted him.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
At the beginning of November, in the first
such case reported in 2021, the State
Security Agency arbitrarily detained 18 men,
including 10 Kuwaiti nationals, accusing
them of sending money to Hizbullah in
Lebanon.1 Many were interrogated for several
days without access to a lawyer. At the end of
the year, the detainees had yet to be formally
charged.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Until April, Kuwait
prioritized Kuwaiti nationals for its Covid-19

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

BIDUN
Stateless Bidun people remained unable to
access a range of public services.
Draft laws on the Bidun issue were
proposed in parliament but none were voted
on. In May, five MPs submitted a proposal for
granting the Bidun basic socio-economic
rights, including access to education,
healthcare and work. In September, the
speaker of parliament tabled a bill on the
same draft law proposed in 2019 that, if
enacted, would make Bidun individuals’
access to services conditional on
relinquishing their claims to nationality.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 1 January, a decision to ban the renewal
of visas for migrants over the age of 60 and
not holding a university degree came into
force. In October, a legislative advisory body
nullified the decision, which could have
provided grounds for the expulsion of
thousands of people, including many who
have lived in Kuwait for decades.
Controversial new regulations were then
introduced, allowing renewal of visas for an
expensive annual fee in addition to private
health insurance. Palestinian nationals,
children of Kuwaiti women, and those born in
Kuwait are exempt from the fees.
During the Covid-19 pandemic, Kuwait
imposed an entry ban on foreign nationals,
including migrant workers with valid
residency permits. On 1 August, the ban was
lifted on condition of a valid residency permit
and recognized double Covid-19 vaccination.
In a rare case in which a perpetrator of
abuse against a migrant worker had been
held to account, the Appeal Court overturned
in late May the death sentence that had been
imposed on a Kuwaiti woman accused of

225

killing her employee, Filipina domestic worker
Jeanelyn Villavende, and reduced her
sentence to 15 years in prison. The court
upheld the four-year sentence against her
Kuwaiti husband.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In early February, Kuwaiti women launched
their own #MeToo movement against sexual
harassment under the name Lan Asket (“I
will not be silenced”).
During the year, at least two women were
murdered, including a Bidun woman at the
hands of her brother. In one of the cases, in
January, Farah Hamza Akbar was abducted
and held briefly by Fahad Subhi Mohieddin
Mohammed, who had been harassing her.
She lodged a complaint while he remained
free, having signed a pledge not to harm her,
and the case went to trial on abduction
charges. In mid-April, Fahad Mohammed
killed her. He was sentenced to death on
6 July for murder and on 26 July he was
additionally sentenced to 15 years in prison
for abduction. He appealed against both
sentences.
In May, two women, a Kuwaiti national and
a Bidun, were arrested for placing street
signs bearing the initials of female victims of
male violence and the manner of their
deaths. They were later released.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 3 October, a criminal court convicted
Maha al-Mutairi, a transgender woman,
under the 2014 Communications Law and
Article 198 of the Penal Code which
criminalizes “imitat[ing] the other sex in any
way,” and sentenced her to two years in
prison and a fine based on her online
activities in 2021. She was incarcerated in
Kuwait Central Prison for men. She lodged an
appeal against her sentence.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were reported.

226

1. “Kuwait: Authorities must release arbitrarily detained individuals”,
14 December

KYRGYZSTAN
Kyrgyz Republic
Head of state: Sadyr Japarov (replaced Talant Mamytov
in January)
Head of government: Ulukbek Maripov (replaced Artem
Novikov in February)
Survivors of domestic violence faced
difficulties in reporting abuse and accessing
support. Peaceful demonstrators faced
violence and the new Constitution
undermined the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly. Journalists and activists
critical of the government faced attacks on
social media and unjust prosecution.
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread, as did impunity.

BACKGROUND
A new Constitution was passed by
referendum and enacted in May. The Council
of Europe’s Venice Commission and the
OSCE expressed concerns over the “overly
prominent” role of the president, the
weakened role of the parliament and
“potential encroachments on judicial
independence”.
Clashes between local residents on the
Kyrgyz-Tajik border in April-May left at least
36 Kyrgyzstanis dead.
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to affect
the economy. The vaccination programme
was delayed by a shortage of vaccines and
hampered by inefficient distribution of
humanitarian aid, but by September over 1
million people had had at least one
vaccination. In June vaccination was made
compulsory for all health workers and later
for other categories, causing controversy,
although sanctions for those refusing were
unclear.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND
DISCRIMINATION
Domestic violence remained widespread.
Survivors remained discouraged from
reporting abuse, due to economic
dependence on the perpetrator and social
stigma.
There were no comprehensive or unified
statistics on domestic violence and figures
varied across different government bodies.
By September, the Ministry of Internal Affairs
had registered 7,665 incidents, a 30%
increase compared to 2020.
Women with disabilities faced greater
barriers in reporting domestic violence. In
February Almira Artykbek-kyzy was finally
able to leave the family home with the
assistance of her brother and report the years
of sexual and physical abuse perpetrated
against her by some family members. Almira
Artykbek-kyzy, who suffers from cerebral
palsy, had been denied an education,
deprived of legal capacity and kept a virtual
prisoner in the family home. A criminal case
brought against her relatives was ongoing at
the end of the year.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In July, the president approved a new
“concept on spiritual-moral development and
physical education of individuals”. This calls
on state bodies to promote traditional values
and recommends that media outlets
propagate the values of a traditional society
[and] the ideals of the family.
On 16 November, Altyn Kapalova, a feminist
artist and writer, lost a final appeal at Bishkek
City Court in her case against the State
Registration Service in favour of putting
matronymics instead of patronymics in the
passports of her three children.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Protesters demonstrating peacefully against
the new Constitution and in favour of gender
equality were subjected to intimidation by
state and non-state actors.
Article 10 of the new Constitution allows
restrictions on events that contradict “moral
and ethical values’’ or “the public

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

consciousness’’, without defining these
concepts. Activists expressed concerns that
this could be used to unduly restrict the right
to freedom of peaceful assembly.
In March, municipal authorities in the
capital, Bishkek, obtained a court order
banning all assemblies in the centre of
Bishkek for two months on the grounds that
rallies disturb local residents “resulting in
negative feelings and concerns about
personal safety”. The ban was overturned by
a court in April following an appeal by a civil
society movement.
In April, a peaceful rally against violence
against women in Bishkek was disrupted by
about 200 men who harassed the
participants. Police took no action to protect
the peaceful demonstrators.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and civil society activists critical of
the authorities faced harassment,
intimidation, and in some cases unfounded
criminal charges.
In February, the civil defamation case
against two leading independent media
outlets, Radio Azattyk and Kloop, and a
journalist, brought by the family of a former
top customs official, was dropped, after the
official was found guilty of corruption in
criminal proceedings.
In March, civil society activist Tilekmat
Kurenov was detained and later charged with
“calling for mass riots” (through his posts on
social media) and for the “violent overthrow
of the government”. In April, he was
transferred to house arrest and on 20 August
he was convicted and sentenced to one and
a half years in prison. He had been among
the organizers of a peaceful rally against the
new Сonstitution.
Also in March, officers from the State
Committee for National Security (SCNS)
questioned Aprel TV journalist, Kanat
Kanimetov, about his coverage of a previous
investigation carried out by the SCNS. In
April, his relatives in his family home in
Balykchy were questioned and threatened
with being searched.

227

In August, the Law on Protection from False
and Inaccurate Information was signed by
the president, amid concerns that it unduly
restricted the right to freedom of expression
and could prevent criticism of public figures.
It empowered unnamed state bodies to shut
down or block websites for publishing “false
or inaccurate” information, on the basis of a
complaint by a private individual or a legal
entity.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment by law
enforcement officials continued to be
widespread and ineffectively investigated.
According to a survey published in July by
the NGO Coalition against Torture, 35% of
survivors were tortured during questioning as
suspects, 28% while being questioned as
witnesses and 24% while the police were
checking their identity.
The UN Human Rights Committee ruled in
March in the case of Sharobodin Yuldashev
that Kyrgyzstan had failed to carry out a
prompt, efficient and impartial investigation
into his torture allegations. Sharobodin
Yuldashev, an ethnic Uzbek, was tortured by
police officers in July 2011 to force him to
“confess” to crimes during the ethnic
violence in southern Kyrgyzstan in 2010. In
December 2011, the four police officers who
had tortured him were charged with abuse of
power and unlawfully entering his house.
They were acquitted in 2012. Sharobodin
Yuldashev was sentenced to 16 years’
imprisonment for participating in mass riots,
destroying property, robbery and taking
hostages.
In July, a new Criminal Procedural Code
was adopted alongside other laws. Human
rights defenders expressed concerns that it
impeded the work of lawyers while delaying
their access to suspects. Furthermore, it
reintroduced an additional check before the
opening of criminal investigations which had
existed before 2017 and prevented prompt
investigations into torture allegations.

228

IMPUNITY
In May, the State Penitentiary Service closed
its investigation into the death in 2020 of
prisoner of conscience Azimjan Askarov from
Covid-19-related complications. A human
rights NGO, Bir Duino, successfully
appealed against the decision and petitioned
the Prosecutor’s Office to transfer the
investigation to the State Committee for
National Security to avoid a conflict of
interest. Azimjan Askarov, an ethnic Uzbek
human rights defender, had been sentenced
to life imprisonment in September 2010,
following an unfair trial and torture.
Numerous international demands for his
release, and concerns over his deteriorating
health, had been ignored.

LATVIA
Republic of Latvia
Head of state: Egils Levits
Head of government: Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš
Border guards used force to pushback
refugees and migrants at the border with
Belarus. Women and girls faced difficulties
accessing sexual and reproductive health
services. There remained no legal bar to
discrimination on grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity.
Statelessness remained high. Some
children were discriminated against in
access to education.

BACKGROUND
The state of emergency in response to the
Covid-19 pandemic ended in April but many
restrictions remained.
Latvia acceded to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture in December.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Under a state of emergency beginning in
August, Latvian border guards used force to
summarily return people arriving at the
border with Belarus in search of asylum in
Latvia. The emergency law provided for food
and medical assistance in compliance with

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

measures ordered by the European Court of
Human Rights, but concerns were raised that
the needs of asylum seekers were not being
met. In November, Latvia installed a
temporary 37km fence on its border with
Belarus. In December, the EU Commission
proposed allowing Latvia, Lithuania and
Poland extended timescales to register and
process asylum claims, as well as simplified
and quicker return procedures, weakening
EU asylum procedures. By year’s end some
4,045 people had been intercepted at the
border and pushed back to Belarus and
around 446 detained for entering the country
irregularly.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In June, the Constitutional Court found the
Council of Europe Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) to be
in compliance with the Latvian Constitution,
but no further progress towards its ratification
was made.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

The ILGA-Europe index ranked Latvia the
second worst EU country in which to be an
LGBTI person, referring to bias-motivated
speech, violence and other forms of
discrimination.

RIGHT TO A NATIONALITY
Despite legislative changes in 2020,
statelessness remained high. Close to
200,000 people held the status of “noncitizens”, facing discrimination in accessing
economic, social, cultural and other rights.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The CESCR noted an increase in the number
of Roma students completing compulsory
primary education but expressed concern
about discrimination against children
belonging to minority groups and
undocumented migrant children, the
exclusion of people with disabilities from
mainstream education, and the
disproportionately high number of Roma
children enrolled in special needs
programmes.

Women and girls faced difficulties accessing
sexual, reproductive and other essential
health information and services. The UN’s
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (CESCR) noted in particular the
limited access to free contraception for
adolescent girls and young women.

LEBANON

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

The authorities’ response to Lebanon’s
deepening economic crisis failed to ensure
residents’ right to health and even their
right to life during the most acute moments
of fuel and medicine shortages, as it lifted
subsidies while failing to roll out an
effective social protection scheme to help
mitigate the impact of these policies.
Impunity continued to protect perpetrators
of murder, torture and the devastating
explosion in 2020 at the port in the capital,
Beirut. Authorities used terrorism-related
charges to prosecute protesters in Tripoli
demanding socio-economic rights. Migrant
workers, particularly women domestic
workers, continued to have their rights

After being cancelled in 2020 due to the
Covid-19 pandemic, Baltic Pride took place
in August. In March, the CESCR raised
concerns that the legislative framework
continued to omit sexual orientation and
gender identity as grounds for discrimination.
Parliament failed to legislate to recognize and
protect the rights of same-sex couples,
despite consecutive Constitutional Court
rulings confirming this obligation was
enshrined in the Constitution. In December,
the Supreme Court concluded that
administrative courts may temporarily provide
such recognition and protection pending
legislation.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Republic of Lebanon
Head of state: Michel Aoun
Head of government: Najib Mikati (replaced Hassan
Diab in July, who replaced Saad Hariri in July)

229

abused under the discriminatory kafala
(sponsorship) system. Women still faced
discrimination in law and in practice.
Authorities continued to deport Syrian
refugees back to Syria, despite risks of
egregious human rights abuses there.
Allegations of torture of Syrian refugees
documented since 2014 were still not
investigated, even when raised in courts.

BACKGROUND
Lebanon’s economic crisis ranked in the top
10 most severe crises globally since the
mid-19th century, according to the World
Bank. By the end of the year, the Lebanese
lira had lost 95% of its value since late 2019
and annual food inflation stood at 357.95%
as of November 2021. The World Food
Programme said in September that 22% of
Lebanese people, 50% of Syrian refugees
and 33% of refugees of other nationalities
were food insecure. According to a UN study,
82% of the population were living in
multidimensional poverty in September.
In January, the UN Human Rights Council
reviewed Lebanon’s human rights record as
part of the UPR.
On 15 July, the prime minister designate,
Saad Hariri, resigned and was replaced on
26 July by Najib Mikati, who successfully
formed a cabinet that was endorsed by
parliament on 20 September. The Mikati
government operated only for 20 days then
froze its cabinet meetings due to political
feuds over the investigation into the Beirut
port explosion of 4 August 2020.
On 11 August, the Central Bank started
lifting fuel import subsidies, prompting critical
shortages of petrol and diesel, exacerbated
by smuggling and hoarding, which in turn led
to dozens of people being killed or injured by
explosions of stockpiled fuel in residential
areas.
After months of delays, in December the
government launched a “ration card”
programme for 500,000 families, but the
funding for this card remained uncertain at
the end of the year.

230

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Throughout the year, access to health
services remained severely impacted by the
economic crisis. According to a September
UN study, the percentage of households
deprived of healthcare increased from 9% in
2019 to 33%, equivalent to approximately
400,000 households out of 1.2 million, and
the number of people unable to obtain
medicine more than doubled.
In July and August, acute fuel and medicine
shortages endangered lives, including the
ability of hospitals to ensure adequate
healthcare. Authorities failed to prioritize
hospitals and other critical services in their
redistribution of fuel seized from smugglers
and hoarders. In September, the directors of
three of Lebanon’s largest hospitals told
Amnesty International that they had been
unable to secure enough fuel to sustain
operations for even one month, leaving them
reliant on UN donations.1
On 26 August, cancer patients gathered
outside the UN offices in Beirut protesting
against the medicine shortage, following the
government's failure to pay pharmaceutical
suppliers as part of a subsidy programme.
The health ministry partially blamed the
shortages on hoarding by traders, yet the
authorities took no action to prevent or
punish such hoarding.
On 9 November, the government lifted
pricing subsidies on most medications,
except for cancer, dialysis and mental health
treatments. Throughout the year, drugs
remained unavailable and unaffordable to
most of the population.
By the end of the year, 35.15% of the
population, both nationals and residents, had
received their first Covid-19 vaccination and
28% their second. While refugees in Lebanon
had access to vaccination via teams deployed
by UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, the
proportion of refugees vaccinated remained
disproportionately low.

IMPUNITY
Lebanese officials responsible for human
rights violations continued to enjoy impunity
for murder, torture and the port explosion

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

alike. Authorities repeatedly obstructed the
investigation into the Beirut port explosion,
taking numerous steps to shield politicians
and officials from the investigative judge’s
summonses and even prosecution.2
In June, a group of 53 Lebanese and
international rights groups, including
Amnesty International, as well as 62 survivors
and families of victims and firefighters, called
on the UN Human Rights Council to create a
fact-finding investigative mechanism into the
explosion.3 In July, Lebanese authorities
rejected the second investigative judge’s
repeated requests to lift immunity for
members of parliament (MPs) and to
question senior members of the security
forces. The MPs filed more than a dozen
complaints accusing the judge of political
bias and causing four suspensions of the
investigation. The judiciary dismissed most of
these complaints, but a complaint filed in
December suspended the investigation to
2022.
The investigation into the 4 February
fatal shooting of intellectual and activist
Lokman Slim in his car in southern Lebanon
had yielded no results by the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
AND ASSEMBLY
Throughout the year, small protests took
place across Lebanon in reaction to fuel and
medication shortages, and against the rising
cost of living and government inaction on the
economic crisis.
The authorities for the most part allowed
these protests to go ahead; however, in
January, security forces used live
ammunition, tear gas and water cannons
against protesters in the northern city of
Tripoli, after clashes with protesters who
burnt municipality buildings. One protester
was killed and 300 injured, while security
forces said that over 40 of their members
were injured. Between 25 and 31 January,
35 people were detained incommunicado in
connection with the protests. After his
release, one detainee bore signs of severe
beatings all over his body, with significant
injuries to his head, shoulders and neck, and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

reported that he had been tortured or
otherwise ill-treated. On 19 February, the
military prosecutor filed terrorism-related
charges against at least 23 detainees,
including two minors, in what Amnesty
International considered to be an attempt to
harass protesters.4 If convicted, those
charged could face the death penalty. The
detainees were released on bail after weeks
of detention.5
On 11 August, parliamentary police as well
as unidentified armed men attacked relatives
of the victims of the port explosion and
journalists.6
Security services continued to summon for
interrogation activists, artists and journalists
in relation to their online expression critical of
the authorities. On 4 October, the General
Security (GS) summoned theatre director
Awad Awad for interrogation over an
improvised play, accusing him of criticizing
the president and failing to obtain GS
censorship bureau approval to stage the play,
as required under Lebanese law. He was
subsequently released.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. Women’s rights groups
continued to advocate for various personal
status and political rights, including the right
to equal custody of children and for women
to pass on their nationality to their husband
and children when married to a foreign
national.
In its third examination before the UN
Human Rights Council, Lebanon rejected
several recommendations to lift its
reservations to CEDAW, including adopting a
unified personal status law, but partially
accepted a recommendation to amend its
discriminatory nationality law.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Migrant domestic workers in Lebanon, 99%
of them women, continued to suffer
discriminatory practices under the kafala
system. The economic crisis coupled with the
pandemic meant many migrant domestic
workers were dismissed without pay, their

231

belongings or passports. By October, the
International Organization for Migration said
that about 400,000 mostly Asian and African
migrant and domestic workers living in
Lebanon were stranded without work or the
means to return home.
In its UPR, Lebanon failed to commit to
abolishing kafala and refused the
recommendation to sign and ratify the
International Convention on the Protection of
the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families.

REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
Lebanon continued to host the largest
number of refugees per capita globally, with
an estimated 1.5 million Syrian refugees,
including 879,529 registered with UNHCR as
of September.
In March, Amnesty International released a
report documenting an array of violations
committed primarily by Lebanese military
intelligence against 26 Syrian refugees,
including four children, held on terrorismrelated charges between 2014 and early
2021. Among the violations were unfair trial
and torture, which included beatings with
metal sticks, electric cables and plastic
pipes. Authorities failed to investigate the
torture claims, even when detainees or their
lawyers told a judge in court that they had
been tortured.7
Lebanon continued to forcibly deport
refugees back to Syria, despite the risks of
egregious violations upon return. On 28
August, army intelligence officers arrested six
Syrian men outside the Syrian embassy in
Baabda District after the men had received
calls from the embassy inviting them to
collect their passports. The men were
accused of entering the country illegally and
handed over to the GS, which issued a
deportation order on 5 September. The six
men were held incommunicado for 46 days.
Following pressure for their release, the GS
cancelled the deportation order on 8
September and released all the men on 12
October.8
In another incident in September, the GS
detained three Syrian men at Beirut

232

international airport. Following mounting
pressure to stop the men’s forcible
deportation, the GS released them in
October. The men had fled ongoing hostilities
in Daraa governorate in southern Syria.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences; no executions were carried out. In
the UPR process, Lebanon rejected
recommendations to abolish the death
penalty.
1. “Lebanon: Authorities violating right to health and endangering lives
by failing to provide fuel to hospitals”, 6 September
2. “Lebanon: One year on from devastating Beirut explosion, authorities
shamelessly obstruct justice”, 2 August
3. “Lebanon: UN Human Rights Council must establish probe into Beirut
blast”, 15 June
4. “Lebanon: Authorities step up repression through use of terrorism
charges against protesters”, 8 March
5. Lebanon: Open Letter to Human Rights Committee of the Lebanese
Parliament Regarding Violations of Rights During Protests in Tripoli
in January 2021 (Index: MDE 18/3733/2021), 22 February
6. “Lebanon: Parliament police take part in vicious attack on families of
Beirut blast victims and journalists”, 12 August
7. Lebanon: “I Wished I Would Die” – Syrian Refugees Arbitrarily
Detained on Terrorism-Related Charges and Tortured in Lebanon
(Index: MDE 18/3671/2021), 23 March
8. “Lebanon: General Security must halt imminent deportation of six
Syrians”, 8 September

LESOTHO
Kingdom of Lesotho
Head of state: Letsie III
Head of government: Moeketsi Majoro
No one was brought to justice for the
murder of Lipolelo Thabane and the
attempted murder of Thato Sebolla in
2017. The Appeal Court awarded damages
to a man who had been tortured by the
police in 2015. The Covid-19 pandemic led
to an increase in gender-based violence. It
had a devastating effect on the healthcare
system and led to greater economic
hardship for many.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

IMPUNITY
Former prime minister Thomas Thabane was
charged for the 2017 murders of Lipolelo
Thabane, his estranged wife, and the
attempted murder of her acquaintance,
Thato Sebolla. He was informed of the
charges by the high court on 30 November.
He and his current wife, and former First
Lady Maesaiah Thabane, are the main
suspects in the case. In February 2020,
Maesaiah Thabane was charged with murder,
attempted murder and conspiracy to murder.
The high court in Maseru, the capital,
granted her bail but in July 2020 she was rearrested when her bail was revoked and
released again on bail of LSL10,000 (around
US$700). In February 2020, Thomas
Thabane had sought immunity from
prosecution as a sitting prime minister but
the case was abandoned when he stood
down the following May. In August 2021,
Nqosa Mahao, who had been removed from
his post as law and justice minister in April,
revealed that, following police investigations
during his tenure, enough evidence had been
gathered to arrest and charge Thomas
Thabane with his late wife’s murder.
However, the Director of Public Prosecutions
decided not to pursue the charges. In
September, police sources told the Lesotho
Times newspaper that political interference
and other forms of obstruction of justice
continued to hinder progress.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The government used Covid-19 as a
justification for its ban on protests, denying
people their right to peaceful assembly.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, the Court of Appeal awarded
LSL250,000 (about US$17,500) in damages
to Tšolo Tjela for the torture he was subjected
to in police custody in Mafeteng city in 2015.
According to the judgment, the
compensation covered “shock and suffering,
contumelia and medical expenses”. The
Court said the torture of suspects by police
officers was responsible for making “the
country… lawless” and blamed the Police

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Commissioner for failing to prevent such
crimes. In November 2020, the Chief Justice
in the high court had awarded Tšolo Tjela
LSL400,090 (around US$28,000) which was
reduced by the appeal court.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence, including domestic
violence, continued to rise in the context of
Covid-19, especially in rural areas where
more women and girls lost their jobs and had
to rely on their male partners for survival.
Access to legal remedies for women in these
areas was limited, partly owing to lack of
information. In March, UNAIDS reported that
one in three women had been abused by an
intimate partner, and less than 40% of
women who experienced violence reported it
or sought help.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
According to an economic survey carried out
by the World Bank, Covid-19 lockdown
measures resulted in job and income losses
affecting people in urban and rural areas.
The global economic slowdown led to a
reduction of remittances sent home by
Basotho who worked abroad, especially in
South Africa where many were employed as
domestic workers or in mining. This resulted
in increasing economic hardship.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The effects of the Covid-19 pandemic
continued to put the already inadequate
healthcare system under strain. Early in the
year, Lesotho emerged from a second wave
of infections. Vaccines were still in short
supply by mid-year, and the vaccination drive
struggled to gain momentum. By the end of
the year, only 30.2% of the population had
been fully vaccinated while around 30.5%
had received one dose; 31,106 Covid-19
cases and 683 related deaths had been
recorded since the beginning of the
pandemic. Sinopharm in China, foreign
corporate companies and multinational
corporations continued to donate Covid-19
vaccines and PPE to Lesotho.

233

LIBYA
State of Libya
Head of state: Mohamed al-Menfi (replaced Fayez alSarraj in March)
Head of government: AbdelHamid al-Dbeibeh (replaced
Fayez al-Sarraj in March)
Militias, armed groups and security forces
continued to arbitrarily detain thousands of
people, some for over a decade, without
allowing them to challenge the lawfulness
of their detention. Scores of journalists,
politicians, government employees and civil
society activists were abducted, forcibly
disappeared and tortured or otherwise illtreated on the basis of their actual or
perceived political, regional or tribal
affiliation and/or activism connected to
planned elections. Militias and armed
groups killed and wounded civilians and
destroyed civilian property during sporadic,
localized clashes. Attacks by armed groups
on water infrastructure undermined access
to clean water for millions of people.
Authorities continued to integrate into state
institutions and fund militias and armed
groups responsible for war crimes and
serious human rights violations. Authorities
failed to protect women, girls and LGBTI
people from sexual and gender-based
violence or to address discrimination.
Ethnic minorities and internally displaced
people faced barriers in accessing
education and healthcare. Militias and
security forces used unlawful lethal force
and other violence to arbitrarily arrest
thousands of migrants and refugees, while
EU-backed Libyan coastguards intercepted
at sea thousands of others and forcibly
returned them to detention in Libya.
Detained migrants and refugees were
subjected to torture, unlawful killings,
sexual violence and forced labour. Military
courts convicted scores of civilians in
grossly unfair trials.

234

BACKGROUND
The UN-mediated process led to the
swearing-in of the Government of National
Unity (GNU) in March, tasked with preparing
for presidential and parliamentary elections.
Political divisions persisted and the Libyan
Arab Armed Forces (LAAF), an armed group,
retained effective control over large parts of
eastern and southern Libya.
On 22 December, presidential elections
scheduled to begin on 24 December were
postponed after authorities failed to confirm a
list of eligible candidates. Disagreements over
the eligibility of candidates and the
constitutional and legal basis for elections
persisted, with various political constituencies
dismissing electoral laws announced by
parliament’s spokesperson as invalid because
of the absence of a parliamentary vote,
procedural irregularities and breaches of the
UN-backed roadmap. For a period in
December, after AbdelHamid al-Dbeibeh
announced his candidacy in elections,
deputy prime minister Ramadan Abu Janah
assumed the role of prime minister.
Despite an August agreement by GNU and
LAAF representatives on the gradual
withdrawal of foreign fighters, thousands
remained in the country.
Libya’s economy showed signs of recovery,
in part due to the resumption of oil
production. However, failure to adopt a
national budget and unify the Central Bank
curtailed the population’s enjoyment of socioeconomic rights and led to repeated delays in
wages for public sector workers.
In October, the UN Human Rights Council
extended the mandate of the Fact-Finding
Mission to investigate crimes under
international law committed in Libya since
2016.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNLAWFUL
DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY
The GNU and LAAF announced the release
of scores of prisoners, including al-Saadi alGaddafi, son of former ruler Muammar alGaddafi. However, militias, armed groups and
security forces continued to arbitrarily detain

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

thousands of people; some had been held for
over 10 years without charge or trial.
Throughout the year, men and women were
arrested for their actual or perceived political
or tribal affiliation or activism in connection to
elections, and subjected to enforced
disappearances or held incommunicado for
up to seven months.1
In March, the Internal Security Agency, an
armed group affiliated with the LAAF,
abducted Haneen al-Abduli from a street in
Benghazi and detained her in al-Kouwifyia
prison until 28 June, after she had publicly
called for accountability for the murder of her
mother, lawyer Hanan al-Barassi, who was
gunned down in 2020.2
Military courts in LAAF-controlled areas
convicted dozens of civilians in grossly unfair
trials.3 The right to adequate defence, a
reasoned judgment and genuine review were
routinely flouted.
In September, the LAAF released journalist
Ismail al-Zway, who was serving a 15-year
prison sentence imposed by a military court
due to his media work.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Militias and armed groups systematically
tortured and otherwise ill-treated detainees in
official and unofficial places of detention with
impunity. Beatings, electric shocks, mock
executions, flogging, waterboarding,
suspension in contorted positions and sexual
violence were reported by prisoners held by
the Special Deterrence Force, Stability
Support Apparatus, Brigade 444, Public
Security Agency and the Security Directorate
Support Force militias, as well as by armed
groups including the Internal Security
Agency, Tareq Ibn Zeyad and the 128th and
106th brigades.
Prison officials, militias and armed groups
held detainees in cruel and inhuman
conditions, characterized by overcrowding,
denial of healthcare and lack of hygiene,
exercise and sufficient food. At least two men
died in custody after being denied adequate
healthcare.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Libyan legislation retained corporal
punishments, including flogging and
amputation.
In June, a Tripoli military court sentenced a
soldier to 80 lashes for drinking alcohol;
military police carried out the flogging.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The bodies of at least 20 individuals were
found following their abduction by militias
and armed groups. Some had marks of
torture or gunshot wounds.
In August, the body of Abdelaziz al-Ogali, a
56-year-old man abducted in November
2020 by armed men believed to be affiliated
with the LAAF, was found in Benghazi.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
EXPRESSION
Throughout the year militias and armed
groups in areas controlled by the GNU and
LAAF threatened and ordered dozens of
activists and politicians to cease their
activism and political involvement in the
elections, arresting at least 20 men.
After the National Youth League, a state
body, called for protests against the
postponement of the elections, armed men
abducted its director Imad al-Harati from his
Tripoli office in September and held him
incommunicado for nine days.
In October, parliament passed a cybercrime
law that severely limits free expression online,
allows for government surveillance and
censorship, and punishes with imprisonment
the dissemination of content deemed
“immoral”.
Militias and armed groups continued to
target journalists and social media users
through arbitrary arrest, detention and
threats, simply for expressing critical views or
carrying out their work.
In October, unidentified armed men in
military uniform abducted journalist Saddam
al-Saket during his coverage of a sit-in by
refugees in Tripoli. His whereabouts
remained unknown.
NGO registration, funding and activities
were subject to opaque and lengthy
procedures. A case against undue

235

restrictions to the right to freedom of
association in Decree No. 286/2019
regulating NGOs, remained pending at a
Tripoli administrative court.
Humanitarian actors reported increased
access restrictions to Libya and communities
in need.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
While the national ceasefire in place since
October 2020 held, militias and armed
groups violated international humanitarian
law during sporadic, localized armed clashes,
including indiscriminate attacks and
destruction of civilian infrastructure and
private property.
In June, clashes involving machine guns
between the Criminal Investigations Unit, a
militia based in al-Zawiya city, and a militia
led by Mohamed al-Shalfoh, based in the
neighbouring city of al-Agiliat, left two women
and one man dead and damaged civilian
property.
In October, a boy was killed in the southern
city of Sebha during clashes between Brigade
116, an armed group affiliated with the LAAF
but nominally commanded by the GNU, and
a local armed group.
Landmines planted by LAAF-affiliated nonstate actors before their withdrawal from
Tripoli in 2020 killed and wounded at least 24
civilians, including children. In March, a man
and a boy were killed in two separate
landmine explosions in Tripoli’s southern
outskirts.
Armed groups repeatedly attacked the Great
Man-Made River (GMMR) infrastructure, a
network of waterpipes that transports water
from aquifers in the south to coastal areas,
limiting access to water for millions of people.
In August, armed men affiliated with the
Magarha tribe forced the GMMR
administration to cut water supplies to
western Libya for a week, demanding the
release of their tribal leader Abdallah alSenussi, a former intelligence chief who was
sentenced to death in 2015.
In June, the Islamic State armed group
claimed a suicide attack on a police
checkpoint that killed six civilians in Sebha.

236

Several countries, including Russia, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), violated
the UN arms embargo established since
2011 by retaining foreign fighters and military
equipment in Libya. Verified videos showed
militias using UAE-manufactured and
exported armoured vehicles in a raid against
migrants and refugees in Tripoli in October,
which were likely seized by GNA-affiliated
militias (the previous Government of National
Accord) from the LAAF during the 2020
hostilities in Tripoli.

IMPUNITY
Officials and members of militias and armed
groups responsible for crimes under
international law enjoyed near total impunity.
Authorities continued to fund abusive armed
groups and militias without vetting and to
integrate them into state institutions.
In January, Abdel Ghani al-Kikli,
commander of the Abu Salim Central
Security Force militia, was appointed head of
the newly created Stability Support Authority
tasked with law enforcement and intelligence,
despite credible reports about his militia’s
involvement in war crimes since 2011.
Libyan officials and those with de facto
control of territory ignored ICC arrest
warrants, with Saif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, who
had been indicted by the ICC on charges of
crimes against humanity, running for the
presidency.
In February, Al-Tuhamy Khaled, wanted by
the ICC for crimes against humanity and war
crimes, died at liberty in Egypt. In March,
Mahmoud al-Werfalli, wanted by the ICC for
the murder of 33 people in Benghazi and
surrounding areas, was assassinated in
Benghazi.
In April, the GNU released Abdelrahman
Milad, also known as Bidja, following a
decision by the public prosecutor citing lack
of evidence. He remained under UN Security
Council sanctions, imposed in June 2018,
over his involvement in human trafficking. He
resumed his role as head of the Libyan Coast
Guard-Western Branch in al-Zawiya. Osama
al-Kuni remained director of al-Nasr
detention centre in al-Zawiya, despite being

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

added to the UN Security Council sanctions
list in October for his role in crimes against
detained migrants and refugees.
In June, the LAAF claimed that members of
the Tareq Ibn Zeyad armed group killed
Mohamed al-Kani, a commander of the alKaniat armed group, while he was resisting
arrest. Hundreds of mass graves containing
bodies of men, women and children believed
to have been unlawfully killed by al-Kaniat
were uncovered in Tarhouna after al-Kaniat’s
withdrawal from the city in June 2020.
Although authorities announced
investigations, no suspected perpetrators
were brought to justice.
In October, the Fact-Finding Mission found
that all parties to the conflict had violated
international law, and that abuses against
refugees and migrants may amount to crimes
against humanity.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Libyan authorities failed to protect women,
girls and LGBTI individuals from sexual and
gender-based violence as well as killings,
torture and unlawful deprivation of liberty, by
militias, armed groups and other non-state
actors. Women and girls faced barriers to
seeking justice for rape and other sexual
violence, including the risk of prosecution for
engaging in sexual relations outside marriage,
criminalized in Libya, and revenge by
perpetrators. Women activists and politicians,
including Najla al-Mangoush, GNU’s minister
of foreign affairs, and presidential candidates
Laila Ben Khalifa and Huneida al-Mahdi,
faced misogynistic abuse and threats online.
In February, following a family dispute,
student Widad al-Sheriqi was abducted by
armed men led by her father, tortured and
held captive in a private location in al-Zawiya
until she escaped in March.
In July, the Special Deterrence Force
captured and forcibly returned a girl survivor
of parental domestic violence to her family.
Armed groups and militias continued to
attack, harass and arrest LGBTI people.
Consensual same-sex sexual relations
remained criminalized.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In September, a transgender man fled Libya
after an armed group affiliated with the LAAF
threatened to kill him and his friend in
Benghazi.

DISCRIMINATION
ETHNIC MINORITIES AND INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES
Some Tabu and Tuareg, especially those
without national identity cards, faced
discrimination in southern Libya in accessing
essential services, including healthcare and
education, as well as sports clubs. In alKufra, Tabus were unable to access the
south-eastern city’s only university as it is
located in an area controlled by rival armed
groups. In September, the prime minister
announced the establishment of a committee
to review contested Libyan citizenship claims
mainly by ethnic minorities.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Nearly 200,000 people remained internally
displaced, some for over 10 years.
Thousands of internally displaced people
from eastern Libya were unable to return
home due to fear of reprisals by armed
groups and destruction of their property.
Thousands of residents of Tawergha city,
forcibly displaced since 2011, were unable to
return to their homes due to lack of security
and essential services.
Internally displaced people faced barriers
curtailing their access to education,
healthcare, housing and employment due to
the failure of successive governments to
prioritize their rights, including in national
budgets, and to protect them from arbitrary
detention, threats of eviction and other
attacks by armed groups and militias.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and migrants were subjected to
widespread and systematic human rights
violations and abuses at the hands of state
officials, militias and armed groups with
impunity.
EU-backed Libyan coastguards endangered
the lives of refugees and migrants crossing
the Mediterranean by shooting or otherwise
deliberately damaging their boats, leading to
loss of life (see Italy entry). They intercepted

237

and forcibly returned 32,425 refugees and
migrants to Libya, where thousands were
detained indefinitely in harsh conditions in
facilities overseen by the Directorate for
Combating Illegal Migration (DCIM).4
Thousands of others were forcibly
disappeared following disembarkation.
Refugees and migrants were also arbitrarily
arrested in their homes, on the streets and at
checkpoints. In October, Libyan security
forces and Tripoli-based militias used
unlawful lethal force and other violence to
round up over 5,000 men, women and
children from Sub-Saharan Africa.5
Guards and militia subjected those in their
custody to torture and other ill-treatment,
including sexual and gender-based violence,
forced labour and other exploitation,
including at the al-Mabani DCIM detention
centre opened in January in Tripoli. Guards in
the Shara’ al-Zawiya DCIM centre in Tripoli
raped migrant women and girls and coerced
them into sex in exchange for food.
DCIM authorities in eastern Libya expelled
at least 2,839 refugees and migrants to
Chad, Egypt and Sudan without any due
process.
Libyan authorities prevented departures of
several resettlement and evacuation flights
for refugees and asylum seekers out of Libya.
Guards, men in military uniforms and militia
unlawfully shot at refugees and migrants in
DCIM centres or during escape attempts,
killing at least 10 and injuring dozens in alMabani detention centre and Abu Salimcontrolled detention centres in separate
incidents in February, April, July and October.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 vaccine rollout began in April,
but was marred by delays, initial exclusion of
undocumented people, and failure to
prioritize health workers and other at-risk
groups. Libyan authorities failed to procure
sufficient vaccines, raise awareness or
ensure accessibility to at-risk groups.
Migrants, refugees and internally displaced
people faced additional barriers in accessing
the vaccine due to nepotism and
discrimination, while militias and armed

238

groups did not vaccinate people in their
custody. By the end of the year, only 12% of
Libyans and less than 1% of foreign nationals
were fully vaccinated.
The health sector struggled due to limited
and damaged infrastructure and equipment,
leading to the closure of several Covid-19
isolation centres. Armed men abducted and
violently attacked healthcare and
humanitarian workers.

DEATH PENALTY
Libyan law retained the death penalty for a
wide range of offences not limited to
intentional killing, and death sentences
continued to be passed. No executions were
carried out.
In May, the Supreme Court quashed the
conviction and death sentence against Saif
al-Islam al-Gaddafi and eight others, citing
fair trial concerns, and ordered a retrial.
1. “Libya: Authorities must address violations after elections
postponed”, 22 December
2. “Libya: Government of National Unity must not legitimize militias and
armed groups responsible for harrowing abuses”, 6 August
3. “Libya: Military courts sentence hundreds of civilians in sham,
torture-tainted trials”, 26 April
4. “Libya: Horrific violations in detention highlight Europe’s shameful
role in forced returns”, 15 July
5. “Libya: Unlawful lethal force and mass arrests in unprecedented
migrant crackdown”, 8 October

LITHUANIA
Republic of Lithuania
Head of state: Gitanas Nausėda
Head of government: Ingrida Šimonytė
Migrants were forcibly returned to Belarus.
Parliament voted against legalizing samesex unions. Domestic violence remained
widespread. Lithuania had still not ratified
the Istanbul Convention, nor implemented
the European Court of Human Rights’ ruling
regarding Abu Zubaydah.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Following a significant increase in the
number of migrants arriving at the border
from Belarus in August, Lithuania declared a
state of emergency in November, which was
extended until January 2022.
By the end of the year, Lithuanian border
guards had reportedly forcibly returned over
8,000 migrants to Belarus since August.
Migrants were held in poor conditions in
camps.The prime minister announced plans
to build a barrier separating Lithuania and
Belarus. Construction began in November.
On 1 December, the European Commission
published proposals allowing Lithuania to
derogate from EU rules for six months. The
measures allow Lithuania to extend the
registration period for asylum application and
simplify returns, thereby weakening asylum
protections.
On 23 December, parliament voted to
increase the six-month detention limit,
introduced in July, to one year for migrants
entering Lithuania from Belarus.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The issue of Lithuania’s ratification of the
Council of Europe Convention on preventing
and combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) was
excluded from the parliamentary session in
March.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Domestic violence remained widespread and
was exacerbated during the Covid-19
pandemic. In March, the parliamentary
Ombudsman’s Office published its 2020
annual report, which concluded that
provision of assistance to victims of domestic
violence was insufficient.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, parliament narrowly voted against
debating a bill – the “partnership law” – to
legalize same-sex unions.
In September, the city of Kaunas held its
first LGBTQ+ march. The local authorities,
which had refused to issue a permit, lost an
appeal and were ordered to authorize the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

event by Lithuania’s Supreme Administrative
Court.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Abu Zubaydah, a Palestinian national
detained in Guantánamo Bay, submitted a
petition in April to the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention, and in November to a US
federal court, calling for his release. In 2018,
the European Court of Human Rights had
ruled against Lithuania for its deliberate
facilitation of Abu Zubaydah’s enforced
disappearance and torture in a secret CIA
prison that it hosted between 2005 and
2006. By the end of the year, Lithuania had
still not yet fully implemented the court’s
decision.

MADAGASCAR
Republic of Madagascar
Head of state: Andry Rajoelina
Head of government: Christian Ntsay
The severe drought in southern Madagascar
had a devastating impact on a wide range of
human rights, including the rights to life,
health, food, water and sanitation. At least
2,747 prisoners were pardoned but
detention facilities remained overcrowded,
and conditions poor. Media workers were
harassed for reporting on subjects such as
the Covid-19 pandemic. Gender-based
violence, particularly against women and
girls, was widespread and abortion
remained criminalized. LGBTIQ+ people
continued to face discrimination.

BACKGROUND
In June, the security forces said they
prevented an alleged assassination attempt
on President Andry Rajoelina and other
members of the government, including the
then minister of interior and decentralization,
the minister of national defence and the
minister of communication and culture.
Dozens of people, including national police
and military personnel, were investigated for

239

their involvement in the alleged assassination
attempt.

children who had served at least half their
sentence.

HUMAN RIGHTS IMPACT OF CLIMATE
CHANGE

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

The southern region of Madagascar
experienced its worst drought in 40 years,
with more than 1 million people on the brink
of famine and over 14,000 people living in
famine-like conditions.
RIGHTS TO FOOD, WATER, EDUCATION AND SANITATION
The severe drought affected the population of
southern Madagascar, most of whom rely on
subsistence agriculture, livestock and fishing
as their main sources of livelihood. Their
ability to enjoy the internationally recognized
right to a clean, healthy and sustainable
environment which is essential to the
enjoyment of many other rights, including the
rights to life, health, water and sanitation, was
seriously undermined.1
Children and women were
disproportionately affected by the drought.
Children dropped out of school to help their
families to find food. Women had to engage
in negative coping mechanisms, such as
restricting adult family members’ food intake
to provide for children and preparing cheaper
and less nutritious food for their families.
Additionally, families increasingly migrated to
other regions to escape hunger.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Conditions in detention facilities were poor
and overcrowded. The prison administration’s
statistics showed that by July, prisons with a
maximum capacity for 10,645 inmates held
27,611 people, including 918 children, all of
whom suffered inhumane conditions.
Thousands of people continued to be
detained without trial. By July, around 45% of
the prison population, including 77% of child
prisoners, were in pretrial detention.
In June, President Rajoelina commuted the
sentences of 10,840 detainees and pardoned
at least 2,747 sentenced prisoners, including
people convicted of minor offences who had
up to three months left on their sentence;
women over 55 and men over 60 who had
been in prison for 10 years or more; and

240

MEDIA
On 22 April, an inter-ministerial decision led
to the banning of radio and audiovisual
broadcasts in the regions of Analamanga,
Atsinanana, Sava, Boeny and Sofia as they
were deemed to be “responsible for
threatening public order and security and
threatening national unity.” The decision was
reversed on 26 April after a backlash from
civil society and media organizations.
The government used Law 91-011 of 1991
– intended to be applied only in exceptional
circumstances – to limit the media’s ability to
share information on the Covid-19 pandemic,
except for government sanctioned
information. Journalists who attempted to
report information not sanctioned by the
government were harassed and intimidated.
On 30 May, the Madagascar Collective of
Journalists denounced harassment
against journalists. Police officers said
journalists were not allowed on the streets
during the Covid-19 lockdown. Also in May, a
journalist from Basy Vava newspaper was
harassed and threatened with prosecution for
public defamation after she published an
article on alleged embezzlement of public
funds by a former communications director
in the president’s office.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
On 28 September, Nifin’Akanga, which
campaigns for decriminalization of abortion,
published a report based on findings from its
national survey. The report highlighted that
52.5% of abortions took place in unhygienic
conditions outside health facilities, such as in
the homes of women and girls or of the
abortion practitioners; and that 31% of
abortions were performed by people with no
medical training. The report noted that
unsafe abortion increased the risks of severe
complications, including haemorrhage,
physical damage, psychological trauma and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

even death. The report also found that over
90% of women and girls were not using
contraceptive methods, due to lack of access
and lack of sexual education and were
therefore not protected from the possibility of
unwanted pregnancies.
On 19 October, proposed law 004-2021/PL
to modify article 317 of the Penal Code to
decriminalize abortion was tabled before the
National Assembly. The law aimed to
decriminalize abortion where pregnancy
presents a risk to the life of the pregnant
woman or girl, in cases of serious fetal
impairment, and pregnancy resulting from
rape or incest.
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Local organizations and the media reported
an increase in the number of domestic
violence cases during the pandemic and the
resulting rise in the numbers of people in
poverty.
LGBTIQ+ PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination against and stigmatization of
people on grounds of their sexual orientation
and gender identity remained widespread in
Malagasy society. On 1 July, the interior
ministry suspended an annual LGBT event
scheduled for 3 July in Antananarivo, the
capital. The Director General for Culture
explained the ministry’s decision, saying that
“homosexual-related activities are not yet
permitted in Madagascar” and concluded
that “the event will be cancelled as it harms
morality”.
1. Madagascar: It Will Be Too Late to Help Us Once We Are Dead: The
Human Rights Impact of Climate Change in Drought-Stricken
Southern Madagascar (Index: AFR 35/4874/2021), 26 October

MALAWI
Republic of Malawi
Head of state and government: Lazarus McCarthy
Chakwera
Gender-based violence against women and
girls escalated. Prosecutions for murder and
other violent attacks against persons with
albinism were continually delayed.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Allegations of corruption involving the use
of Covid-19 funds, and vaccination
shortages undermined the right to health.
Despite steps to decongest prisons, they
remained overcrowded, and conditions were
poor. The Supreme Court of Appeal ruled
that the death penalty was unconstitutional.

BACKGROUND
Two million people in rural areas and
610,000 people in the cities of Lilongwe,
Blantyre, Mzuzu and Zomba faced acute
food insecurity.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Despite numerous interventions to curb
violence against women, particularly in
schools, cases of sexual, physical and
emotional abuse, predominantly against
women and girls, escalated. The police
recorded around 250 such cases each
month.

DISCRIMINATION
PERSONS WITH ALBINISM
Persons with albinism were murdered and
faced other violent attacks and mutilations. In
February, unidentified men murdered Dayton
Saidi in Mangochi; in the same month,
unidentified assailants attempted to abduct a
12-year-old girl in Machinga. The body of Ian
Muhamba, aged 20, was found in August in
Blantyre. Two suspects were arrested for his
killing. Prosecutions against alleged
perpetrators of such crimes were continually
delayed.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Reported cases of corruption impacted
people’s ability to access health services.
Senior government officials were implicated
in the mismanagement of Covid-19 funds. An
audit report on Covid-19 funds during 2020
was commissioned in February 2021 and
published in April. It revealed that
government officials and private sector
employees had abused about US$1.3 million
of the funds. In April, police arrested 64
people for alleged misuse of Covid-19 funds,
and the president fired the labour minister

241

following his indictment on mismanagement
of such funds.
The vaccination roll-out began in March
with 512,000 doses. In May, the World Bank
approved a US$30 million grant to help
Malawi acquire more vaccines. Thousands of
people were unable to receive their Covid-19
vaccinations when, in June, health authorities
closed over half the country’s vaccination
centres because of shortages. By August,
around 455,000 people had received their
first dose, and at least 139,000 had been
fully vaccinated.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Prisons were chronically overcrowded and
conditions were poor; facilities were
dilapidated and there was insufficient access
to basic services. By April, overcrowding fell
from 260% of prison capacity to 186% due
to the Chilungamo Programme (an initiative
to improve justice and accountability in the
country). However, in Chichiri prison, the
largest in the Southern Region, cells with a
60-person capacity continued to hold over
200 men.

DEATH PENALTY
In April, the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled
that the death penalty was unconstitutional
and contrary to the right to life guaranteed
under the Constitution. The Court ordered the
re-sentencing of all convicts facing execution.
However, following the retirement of Chief
Justice Dunstain Mwaungulu in August, the
remaining judges issued what they called a
perfected judgment, overturning the
declaration that the death penalty was
unconstitutional.

MALAYSIA
Malaysia
Head of state: Abdullah
Head of government: Ismail Sabri Yaakob (replaced
Muhyiddin Yassin in August)
Human rights defenders, journalists,
opposition leaders and others were

242

investigated, arrested and prosecuted for
criticizing the government. The government
used Covid-19 measures to restrict the
rights to freedom of expression and
assembly. Further custodial deaths were
recorded but no one was held to account.
Immigration raids, detention and other
forms of persecution against refugees,
asylum seekers and migrant workers
continued. LGBTI people faced increased
discrimination.

BACKGROUND
The government’s handling of the Covid-19
pandemic caused public protest and political
instability. A state of emergency was imposed
from January to 1 August 2021 in response
to the pandemic under which the national
parliament and state legislative assemblies
were suspended. Prime Minister Muhyiddin
Yassin resigned on 16 August after losing
majority support. His replacement, Ismail
Sabri Yaakob, was sworn in one week later.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In February, news outlet Malaysiakini was
fined RM500,000 (approximately
US$119,000) for contempt of court for
comments posted by its readers criticizing a
court judgment. The Communications and
Multimedia Act (CMA) and Sedition Act were
used to criminalize dissenting voices. In
March, the government enacted an
ordinance to combat “fake news” in relation
to Covid-19, which expired with the lifting of
the state of emergency in August.1
Activists, journalists and others faced
investigation, prosecution and harassment for
criticizing the authorities. In July, refugee
rights activist Heidy Quah was charged under
the CMA for a comment posted on social
media in 2020 highlighting poor conditions at
an immigration detention centre.
In July, police raided the offices of the
makers of an animated film on police
violence. On 29 July student activist Sarah
Irdina Arif was detained under the Sedition
Act and questioned for social media posts
supporting “Lawan”, a movement protesting

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

against the government’s handling of
Covid-19.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Peaceful Assembly Act (PAA) and
Covid-19 control laws and regulations were
used to prevent and disperse peaceful
protests. In March, police interrogated
demonstrators following a protest calling for
the voting age to be lowered to 18.2 In May,
protesters calling for parliament to be
reconvened were investigated under the PAA.
In July, police threatened to arrest doctors at
one medical facility who were participating in
a nationwide hour-long strike in support of
better job security. The strike was called off
as a result.
In the weeks preceding the resignation of
Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin, the
crackdown on the right to peaceful assembly
intensified.3 Dozens of people were
investigated in relation to a “Lawan” protest
in the capital, Kuala Lumpur, on 31 July.
Many others reported being harassed by
police in their homes.
On 2 August riot police blocked 107
opposition members of parliament (MPs)
from entering the parliament building, which
had been sealed off after the government
said Covid-19 cases had been detected.
Police called in for questioning MPs who
were part of the protest that led to the
blockade and fined them for violating
Covid-19 control laws.
On 19 August, police dispersed a “Lawan”
vigil for Covid-19 victims and arrested and
fined 13 people for violating Covid-19 control
laws. Two participants were charged under
the Police Act for behaving in “a riotous,
indecent, disorderly or insulting manner.”
Organizers cancelled a subsequent “Lawan”
protest. The police nevertheless obtained a
court order barring 34 activists from entering
Kuala Lumpur and blocked roads leading to
the city.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The harsh treatment of refugees, asylum
seekers and migrant workers continued with
immigration raids, arrests, detentions and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

deportations to countries where returnees
were at real risk of human rights violations. In
February, the government deported 1,086
migrants and asylum seekers to Myanmar in
defiance of a court order and despite
increased violence and threats of persecution
following the military coup there.
In June, hundreds of people were detained
during a series of raids on areas with high
numbers of undocumented migrants.
Crowded immigration detention facilities
placed those detained at increased risk of
contracting Covid-19.4 The government also
disseminated anti-Rohingya posters and
other anti-migrant messages online.
In May, the Canadian government
announced that it was investigating
allegations of forced labour in palm oil
plantations and glove factories in Malaysia.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
At least 19 people died in police custody or
shortly after release during the year. A 40year-old man died in April after being
hospitalized on release from police detention
the previous month. According to media
reports, the autopsy found that A
Ganapathy’s death was due to injuries
sustained while in police detention. The
government claimed that investigations were
ongoing, but no one was charged. According
to government figures, 105 people died in
police custody, prisons and immigration
detention centres between January 2020 and
September 2021.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The persecution of LGBTI people and
activists continued. In January, the
government said it was considering increased
penalties for “wrongdoings” by LGBTI people.
In June, the government’s “anti-LGBTI task
force” warned of action against those
“promoting the LGBTI lifestyle.” As of June,
1,733 individuals had been sent to
government “rehabilitation” camps run by
the Islamic Development Department (Jakim)
with the aim of changing the “lifestyle” and
“sexual orientation” of LGBTI people. In

243

October, Nur Sajat, a transgender woman,
successfully claimed asylum in Australia. She
alleged that she was sexually assaulted while
in police detention in January.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous people in Kelantan state
protested plans to build a dam, with
community leaders alleging lack of free, prior
and informed consent. In July, an Indigenous
community filed a judicial review against the
Selangor state government challenging a
notice to evict them from their land to make
way for a tourism project.

DEATH PENALTY
Progress towards the abolition of the death
penalty stalled although a moratorium on
executions remained in place. Mandatory
death sentences continued to be imposed,
including for drug-related offences.
1. “Malaysia: Government must immediately withdraw draconian fake
news ordinance”, 15 March
2. “Malaysia: Drop investigations into the Undi18 protest”, 30 March
3. “Malaysia: PM’s resignation must restore respect for freedom of
expression and assembly”, 17 August
4. “Malaysia: Immigration raids on migrant workers during lockdown
3.0”, 3 June

MALDIVES
Republic of Maldives
Head of state and government: Ibrahim Mohamed Solih
The space for freedom of expression and
dissent shrank. The impunity enjoyed by
Islamist groups had a chilling effect on civil
society and opposition voices.

BACKGROUND
The archipelago remained vulnerable to
climate change and experienced increased
flooding, erosion and fresh water shortages.
The government of the Maldives committed
to achieving net-zero emissions by 2030,
subject to receiving the technical and
financial support required from the
international community. The Maldives is one

244

of the most vulnerable countries to climate
change and this will in turn affect the rights
of its citizens.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Throughout the year there were frequent
police crackdowns on protests, particularly
those by opposition political groups. Media
personnel reporting on protests were also
attacked or harassed by police. Police
dispersed protesters, citing the Freedom of
Peaceful Assembly Act 2016 and health
guidelines because of the Covid-19
pandemic.
The new Evidence Bill contained a worrying
provision that would allow journalists to be
forced to reveal their sources, a contravention
of media ethics and the right to freedom of
expression.
On 6 May, an explosion targeted former
President Mohamed Nasheed outside his
home. Mohamed Nasheed, the current
Speaker of the Maldives’ Parliament, had
previously spoken out against alleged
corruption and extremist groups operating in
the Maldives. He was seriously injured in the
blast along with four others. According to
media reports, the police stated that the
explosion was orchestrated by “Islamic State
sympathizers”.
Investigations continued against the
Maldivian Democracy Network (MDN), a
widely respected NGO, which was deregistered and banned by the authorities in
November 2019 and had its bank accounts
closed in 2020. The investigations concerned
allegations of blasphemy against Islam, in
relation to a report published by MDN in
2016. By the end of the year there had been
no thorough, impartial and transparent
investigation into MDN’s forced closure.
The government had yet to respond to the
targeting of the women’s rights organization
Uthema by extremist groups in April 2020.
The groups called for Uthema to be banned,
labelling the organization “anti-Islam”. The
authorities’ inaction was despite Uthema
calling for the government to facilitate a
dialogue with groups opposed to its work.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FREEDOM OF RELIGION
In May a bill was proposed in Parliament to
criminalize hate speech. Media reports
claimed the bill targeted conservative Muslim
groups and that the MP who proposed it had
received threats from these groups.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 15 January, President Solih appointed
three Ombudspersons to the Office of the
Ombudsperson for Transitional Justice,
established under the Transitional Justice Act
of 2020. According to the President’s Office,
the Act sought to end the culture of impunity,
strengthen the rule of law, prevent future
abuses of authority and provide
accountability and reparations for victims of
violations that occurred between 1 January
1953 and 17 November 2018.
On 24 April, protesters gathered to raise
concerns about the increase in cases of
harassment and violence against women and
children in the country. This was in light of
government failures to safeguard women and
children, and properly investigate cases of
harassment and violence against them.
Protesters said they were threatened with
arrest by the police.
In April, seven years after the
disappearance of journalist Ahmed Rilwan,
the Presidential Commission on Investigation
of Murders and Enforced Disappearances
(DDCom) stated there were new
developments in the case which would be
shared with the Prosecutor General’s Office.
The trial of six men accused of involvement
in the killing of blogger Yameen Rasheed in
2017 faced severe delays. In February,
Yameen Rasheed’s family expressed concern
about the carelessness and negligence of the
prosecutors’ handling of the trial. In April,
DDCom called on the authorities to
accelerate the trial.
At the end of the year, there had yet to be
any transparent, thorough, independent and
impartial investigations conducted into the
death on 13 September of Mohamed Aslam,
a prisoner at Hulhumalé prison, and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

allegations of the torture of Ahmed Siraj in
police custody in 2020.

MALI
Republic of Mali
Head of state: Assimi Goïta (replaced Bah Ndaw in
May)
Head of government: Choguel Kokalla Maïga (replaced
Moctar Ouane in June)
Military forces and armed groups continued
to commit human rights violations and
abuses against civilians, including war
crimes. The intelligence services were
suspected of forcibly disappearing senior
officials. There were some developments in
investigations into the use of lethal force
during protests in 2020 but progress was
limited regarding justice for violations by
the military. The government failed to
protect citizens from discrimination based
on social status. The Covid-19 vaccine rollout was slow.

BACKGROUND
Following a cabinet reshuffle in May, the
military arrested the transitional president
and prime minister in the second coup in
nine months. There were clear signs that the
transitional government phase might extend
beyond the February 2022 deadline.
ECOWAS suspended Mali following the coup
and imposed sanctions against several
transitional leaders. In October, the ECOWAS
Special Representative in Mali was ordered to
leave the country.
Civilians bore the brunt of the continuing
armed conflict in the Mopti and Ségou
regions. In June, the French authorities
announced plans for a phased reduction of
Operation Barkhane, their regional
counterterrorist operation in the Sahel region.
Rumours that a Russian private military
company would fill the void further strained
Franco-Malian relations.

245

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
The Group for the Support of Islam and
Muslims (GSIM) and the Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara (ISGS) committed war crimes
and other abuses against civilians.
The GSIM blockaded many villages and
communities, restricting residents’ free
movement and access to their farmland and
water, to force them to cease collaboration
with the army. Farabougou village in Ségou
region was blockaded for six months until
April.
Between April and August, the GSIM
blockaded Dinagourou in the Mopti region,
denying villagers access to their lands during
the rainy season.
In August, ISGS attacks in the Ansongo
Cercle killed 51 civilians in the Ouattagouna,
Karou and Daoutegeft communes of the
Ménaka region.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Military operations in the Mopti region led to
serious human rights violations which could
in some cases amount to crimes under
international law.
On 3 January, the French military killed 22
people who had gathered for wedding
celebrations, in an airstrike on Bounti village.
The airstrike occurred in the context of
Franco-Malian military operations between 2
and 20 January. An investigation by
MINUSMA (the UN mission in Mali)
concluded that most of the guests were
civilians from Bounti and nearby villages,
including 19 of those killed, while three were
possibly members of Katiba Serma, a GSIMaffiliated group. It recommended that the
Malian and French authorities conduct an
independent, credible and transparent
investigation into the attack and possible
violations of humanitarian law.
Following an attack on a Malian military
position in Boni (Mopti region) in February,
local residents said Malian armed forces
committed violations in retaliation, including
the enforced disappearance of 17 bus
travellers in March and the torture and other

246

ill-treatment of dozens of marketgoers in
April.
On 2 April, Malian soldiers extrajudicially
executed four people on the outskirts of
Diafarabé town, according to the victims’
relatives. The victims, who lived near an army
camp, were accused of harbouring people
who had attacked the camp that day.
In October, Malian soldiers arrested at least
30 people in Sofara on market day. A video
documenting the arrests showed soldiers
torturing an elderly man to force him to
confess to belonging to an armed group.
Later that month, the army announced it was
investigating the torture and that the soldiers
responsible had been suspended. The same
communiqué announced that “22 presumed
terrorists” had been arrested in Sofara and
held in the gendarmerie’s custody.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In March, the Appeal Court of Bamako
dismissed all charges, due to lack of
evidence, against several individuals
arbitrarily arrested in December 2020. The
detainees, including popular radio host
Mohamed Youssouf Bathily - also known as
“Ras Bath” - and five senior civil servants
had been accused of plotting to “destabilize
the institutions of the transition” with former
prime minister Boubou Cissé, who was
accused but never arrested. They were
released from custody in April; however, in
May, Ras Bath was arbitrarily detained again
for a week after he denounced the judiciary’s
complicity in the “sham” investigation against
him.
Following the coup in May, the military
arbitrarily arrested and detained the former
president, Bah Ndaw, and prime minister
Moctar Ouane without charge at the
Soundiata Keita military camp in Kati; after a
few days, Bah Ndaw was transferred to Camp
A in Bamako, and Moctar Ouane placed
under house arrest in Bamako. The military
justified their detention on security grounds.
In August, both were released and allowed to
move freely.
Two civil servants were forcibly disappeared
for two months, allegedly by the Sécurité

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

d’État, before being transferred to Bamako
central prison. Kalilou Doumbia, Permanent
Secretary to the Presidency under Bah Ndaw,
was arrested on 6 September according to
Human Rights Watch, and his family was
unable to obtain information as to his
whereabouts or his fate. On 10 September,
Moustapha Diakité, a police commissioner
based in Kayes, was also disappeared after
he was summoned to a meeting with the
National Police high command.It was not
until 5 November that the whereabouts of
both men became known when, along with
Colonel Kassoum Goïta, former head of the
Sécurité d’État, and four other individuals,
they were charged with criminal conspiracy
and plotting against the government.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In April, the Bamako Assizes Court heard 12
trials on terrorism charges, leading to the
conviction of 28 people who were given life
sentences, and the acquittal of one. In
October, another Special Assizes session in
Bamako heard 47 additional cases under
terrorism charges. In some cases, violations
of the right to a fair trial were documented
with illegal pretrial detention by intelligence
services and a lack of legal representation
during preliminary investigations. In June, the
Assizes Court of Mopti tried 12 people for the
unlawful killings of 39 civilians from
Koulogon-Peul in January 2019. The
accused, who had been provisionally
released by the court, were convicted in their
absence and sentenced to life imprisonment
on charges including murder.
There was limited progress in investigations
into crimes under international law
committed by the military.
In September, the commander of the
Special Anti-Terror Force, Oumar Samaké,
was arrested and charged with “murder,
aggravated assault, lethal assault and
complicity in murder”, in relation to the
deaths of 14 protesters in 2020 following the
use of excessive force by security forces. His
arrest led to spontaneous protests by police
officers, who freed him from the main prison

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

in Bamako and paraded him through the
streets. Oumar Samaké returned voluntarily
to pretrial detention after the government
gave him an ultimatum.

DISCRIMINATION
Discrimination and violence continued
against people based on social status arising
from their descent. In September, one person
was killed and many others injured in a mob
attack in Tomora against an Independence
Day procession of people belonging to a
caste perceived to be inferior.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In February Mali received its first batch of
396,000 Covid-19 vaccines through COVAX.
By December, 963,968 doses were
administered, with 349,000 (1.7% of the
population) having received two doses.
Vaccinations were mainly concentrated in
urban centres due to the lack of security in
the central and northern regions and poor
medical infrastructure made it difficult to
conserve doses for delivery to remote areas.

MALTA
Republic of Malta
Head of state: George Vella
Head of government: Robert Abela
An independent inquiry into the killing of
journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia found
that the state had failed to protect her and
had created a climate of impunity that
facilitated her killing. A total ban on
abortion remained in place. Asylum seekers
and migrants continued to be unlawfully
detained in appalling conditions. Three
asylum seekers remained on trial for
opposing their unlawful pushback to Libya
after surviving a shipwreck.

BACKGROUND
In June, the intergovernmental Financial
Action Task Force placed Malta on the socalled “grey list” of countries with weak
safeguards against money-laundering and

247

the financing of terrorist activities, effectively
discouraging international investment.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In July, the final report of the independent
inquiry into the 2017 killing of journalist
Daphne Caruana Galizia was published. The
inquiry found that the authorities had failed to
recognize the imminent risks to her life and
to take steps to protect her; and that the
prime minister and other officials at the
highest levels had created a climate of
impunity which facilitated her killing. The
inquiry recommended the continuation of
investigations into all aspects of the killing
and systemic reforms to strengthen the rule
of law and the protection of journalists. In
August, a former businessman suspected of
ordering her killing was indicted. Two men
accused of planting the bomb which killed
her were awaiting trial, while a third, who
pleaded guilty, was sentenced in February to
15 years’ imprisonment.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A total ban on abortion remained in place,
preventing people from accessing the
procedure even in cases where their health
was at risk. In May, a member of parliament
presented a bill to decriminalize abortion, the
first time such a proposal had been tabled in
parliament. However, opponents of the
proposal prevented its discussion from taking
place.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, 832 refugees and
migrants reached Malta by sea, many after
being rescued by the Maltese armed forces.
By the end of September, when arrivals by
sea had reached 464 people, a quarter of
them were unaccompanied children and
most were Syrian, Sudanese and Eritrean
nationals. In 2020, 2,281 people had
reached Malta by sea in search of safety.
In March, the Council of Europe (CoE)
Commissioner for Human Rights criticized
Malta for ignoring or responding slowly to
distress calls from refugees and migrants at

248

sea and for instructing private vessels to
return rescued people to Libya.
In May, the OHCHR also expressed concern
about the lives of people at sea being
endangered by Malta and other EU states
delaying rescues and shifting responsibilities
for rescue onto Libyan authorities, resulting in
people being returned to abuse in Libya.
Asylum seekers continued to be detained
arbitrarily in sub-standard, unsanitary
conditions. Both the CoE Commissioner and
the European Committee for the Prevention
of Torture (CPT) expressed concerns over the
legality and length of detention for numerous
asylum seekers. In March, the CPT published
the report of the visit it carried out in various
centres, including the Hermes Block and Safi
Detention Centre, in September 2020. The
CPT described a system of “institutional
mass neglect”, inhuman and degrading
treatment, and reports of ill-treatment and
excessive use of force. It urged Malta to
reconsider its immigration detention policy. In
October, the CoE Commissioner for Human
Rights also visited Safi Detention Centre. She
urged the authorities to immediately ensure
dignified conditions there and to consider
alternatives to immigration detention.
In March, the European Court of Human
Rights, in the case of Feilazoo v. Malta, found
that Malta had violated the rights of a
Nigerian national by holding him in prolonged
isolation in inadequate conditions and
detaining him unnecessarily with people in
Covid-19 quarantine.
In March, the European Commission
against Racism and Intolerance expressed
concern that Malta had no plans to introduce
a form of regularization for people who had
resided there for many years and could not
be returned to their countries of origin.
The survivors and the relatives of some of
those who died during the so-called “Easter
Monday” pushback to Libya, carried out in
April 2020 by a merchant vessel contracted
by the Maltese government, sued Malta for
denying their right to asylum. At a hearing in
May, a former senior official confirmed
organizing several pushbacks, including the
“Easter Monday” one.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In October, 32 men sued the government
for their unlawful detention in ferry boats,
positioned outside territorial waters to
circumvent human rights obligations,
between late April and early June 2020. They
were among over 400 people detained by the
government in boats unequipped for long
stays, without being provided with legal
grounds for their detention.
Three asylum seekers remained on trial for
opposing their unlawful return to Libya, with
over 100 other people, by the captain of the
ship that rescued them at sea. Witnesses
described how the young men, known as the
“El Hiblu 3”, were only trying to mediate
between the survivors and captain. They
faced charges, including under counterterrorism legislation, punishable by life
imprisonment.1
1. Malta: The El Hiblu 3 Case – Update. The Long Wait for Justice (Index:
EUR 33/3884/2021), 26 March

MEXICO
United Mexican States
Head of state and government: Andrés Manuel López
Obrador
The government continued to make public
statements attacking civil society
organizations, the media, human rights
defenders and academics, as well as women
protesting against gender-based violence.
There were repeated reports of excessive
use of force by police officials when
detaining people or policing protests and by
members of the National Migration Institute
(INM) and the National Guard against
migrants. Women and girls continued to
face high levels of gender-based violence
and criminal investigations for feminicides
remained inadequate. The Supreme Court
issued a historic ruling decriminalizing
abortion.

BACKGROUND
Despite international recommendations, as
part of its public security strategy, the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

presidential administration continued to
deploy the largest number of military
personnel in the streets since the beginning
of the “war on drugs” in 2006, according to
official data released following freedom of
information requests. It also presented a bill
to formally incorporate the National Guard
into the armed forces. The National Guard
was the security force with most complaints
filed against it before the National Human
Rights Commission, with an increase
in complaints received compared to the
previous year.
A truth and justice commission was
established in relation to grave human rights
violations committed during the “Dirty
War” (1960s to 1980s). Civil society
organizations praised the inclusion of victims
in the process yet highlighted the need to
guarantee collaboration from the army in
making historic archives available.
The independence of the judiciary was put
at risk by a legislative reform to extend the
term of the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court and the counsellors of the Federal
Judiciary; it was declared unconstitutional by
the Supreme Court in November.
In June, the Supreme Court declared
unconstitutional articles of the General Health
Law prohibiting the recreational use of
cannabis.
In October, the Supreme Court ruled
unconstitutional some articles of the National
Law on the Use of Force and asked Congress
to legislate on several principles that were left
out of the law. However, it did not rule on the
creation of an external police observatory, as
ruled by the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, regarding the serious human rights
violations committed in San Salvador Atenco
in May 2006.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES AND
IMPUNITY
Authorities registered at least 7,698 cases of
missing and disappeared persons during
2021, of which 69% were men and 31%
were women. This brought the total number
of reports of missing and forcibly disappeared
people in Mexico since 1964 to over 97,000

249

by the end of the year. Impunity largely
prevailed on this issue, with just 35
convictions for the crime of enforced
disappearance. According to official figures,
the bodies of more than 52,000 people
remained unidentified, most of them in mass
graves. Several people searching for their
missing relatives were killed during the year;
no one had been brought to justice for the
killings by the end of the year.
In April, authorities arrested 30 marines
accused of a series of enforced
disappearances in Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas
state, in 2018, 12 of whom were
subsequently released by administrators of
justice on procedural grounds. In July, the
navy offered a public apology for the
disappearance of 47 people in the same
incidents and pledged to cooperate with
ongoing investigations.
In June, the Attorney General's Office
announced the identification of the remains
of Jhosivani Guerrero, the third of the 43
students from Ayotzinapa who went missing
in 2014 to have been identified. After
considerable delays, in September, the
President sent a letter to the Prime Minister
of Israel, emphasizing the importance of the
extradition of Tomás Zerón, accused of
torture in the Ayotzinapa case and currently
seeking asylum in Israel. Parents of the
Ayotzinapa students reported that the
Ministry of Defence hindered the progress of
the investigations in the case.
The UN Committee on Enforced
Disappearances (CED) visited Mexico in
November and noted the challenge of
tackling disappearances as “immense” and
called on authorities to redouble efforts to
combat structural impunity and ensure
coordination between different government
ministries.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In March, several UN bodies and human
rights organizations condemned the death of
Victoria Salazar, a Salvadoran refugee, at
hands of four police officers in Tulum, state of
Quintana Roo, as a result of excessive force
during her arrest.

250

In August, 23-year-old José Eduardo Ravelo
died of multiple injuries inflicted by police
officers in the state of Mérida. The National
Human Rights Commission concluded that
his death was the result of excessive force
and torture during his detention. By the end
of the year, no one had been brought to
justice for these crimes.
In September, two former state and federal
police commanders were arrested, accused
of responsibility in the repression of a
teachers’ protest in 2016 in Nochixtlán, state
of Oaxaca, that left at least six people dead
and more than 100 injured.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In May, the cases of Daniel García Rodríguez
and Reyes Alpizar Ortíz reached the InterAmerican Court of Human Rights. The two
men had been held in pretrial detention since
2002.
In June, police in the city of León, state of
Guanajuato, detained dozens of people for
not wearing masks, without taking measures
to prevent Covid-19 infection during the
arrests.1 Several were held for several hours
before being brought before a judge.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In August, the President issued a decree, in
line with provisions of pre-existing national
laws, to release prisoners held in prolonged
pretrial detention who were elderly or victims
of torture. However, the decree did not adopt
recommendations from civil society
organizations and restricted the threshold for
proving torture to people who had had a
medical examination based on the Manual on
the Effective Investigation and
Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (Istanbul Protocol). It also
excluded prisoners accused of involvement in
organized crime and kidnapping. The decree
resulted in approval of the release of more
than 682 prisoners and 4,233 files were
under review.
The UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention called on Mexican authorities to
immediately release Verónica Razo Casales,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

held in pretrial detention since 2011, and
convicted by a federal judge in December
2021. She had been arbitrarily detained and
tortured with rape by members of the Federal
Police.
Authorities detained a former Federal Police
commander accused of torture in the case of
French citizen Florence Cassez. She was
detained in 2007 and released in 2013 after
being cleared of the crime of kidnapping. Her
co-defendant, Israel Vallarta, also a torture
victim, remained in pretrial detention, 15
years after his arrest.
The National Programme for the Prevention
and Punishment of Torture and Ill-treatment
had still not been published by the end of the
year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to stigmatize and
repress feminist protests and to misuse the
criminal justice system to discourage people
from taking part in them. Days before
International Women's Day demonstrations,
the President and some other officials
described the protests as violent. In the
states of Querétaro, Aguascalientes and
Jalisco, the security forces detained at least
44 women protesters for allegedly damaging
property, in some cases demanding large
sums of money to clear them of
responsibility.
In May, during a protest by students from
the Mactumactzá Rural Normal School in the
state of Chiapas, the authorities detained 97
people. Of these, 74 were women, some of
whom reported being subjected to sexual
violence by police officers.
In June, a court handed down a second
conviction against the former mayor of
Chínipas, state of Chihuahua, for the killing of
journalist Miroslava Breach in 2017.
The organization Article 19 recorded at least
seven killings of journalists during the year.
An investigation revealed that the
former government purchased Pegasus
software to carry out secret surveillance of
dozens of journalists, activists and human
rights defenders.2 In November, authorities

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

arrested a man as a suspected operator of
the espionage software.
In response to student protests, police from
the Federal Protection Service took charge of
security at the Centre for Economic Research
and Teaching in December, a public
university in Mexico City, making it one of the
very few academic institutions in the country
to have a police presence on campus.3

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities registered 3,427 killings of
women in the country during the year, of
which 887 were under investigation as
feminicides.
In the state of Mexico, the state with the
highest number of feminicides in 2021, there
were serious flaws in the criminal
investigations of these crimes.4 The
authorities failed to properly safeguard the
evidence collected, examine all lines of
investigation and correctly apply a gender
perspective. As a result, it was left to families
to invest time and money in pursuing
investigations, which increased the likelihood
that these crimes would go unpunished. In
addition, victims’ families continued to be
threatened and mistreated by the authorities.
These shortcomings were neither unique to
the state of Mexico nor new (they had already
been observed in Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua,
since the 1990s) but served to highlight
Mexico’s persistent failure to investigate and
prevent violence against women.
In May, a statue in memory of Karla Pontigo
was installed in San Luis Potosí as part of the
reparation for her killing. Her feminicide
remained unpunished.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to face
high levels of violence and the vast majority
of attacks remained unpunished.
Organizations reported an increase in
violence against defenders of the land,
territory and environment. The government
made statements calling into question the
work of organizations and communities that
opposed megaprojects promoted by the
presidential administration.

251

The whereabouts of human rights defenders
Grisell Pérez Rivera, Claudia Uruchurtu Cruz
and Irma Galindo, who disappeared in March
and October in the states of Mexico and
Oaxaca, remained unknown at the end of the
year. In June, the OHCHR expressed concern
about the disappearances and killings of
several leaders of the Yaqui Indigenous
people in Sonora state.
In November, the media reported that
instead of investigating the 2011 San
Fernando massacre of 193 people, the
Public Prosecutor’s Office opened criminal
proceedings in 2016 for kidnapping and
organized crime against a journalist and two
human rights defenders who had been
documenting and accompanying the families.
The Interior Minister reported that by
October, 1,506 people were beneficiaries of
the Mechanism for the Protection of Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists, of whom
1,011 were human rights defenders. He
announced reforms to consolidate the
Mechanism and strengthen investigations
into attacks against defenders.
By the end of the year, the
recommendations of the OHCHR regarding
the creation of a comprehensive policy to
protect human rights defenders had yet to be
implemented.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
During the year, 55.9% of the population
received full Covid-19 vaccination. The
authorities ignored WHO standards by
omitting private sector health professionals
from the first stage of vaccination.
One year on from his unfair dismissal after
he spoke out about poor working conditions,
Jorge Pérez, a 70-year-old cleaner in a public
hospital, had not obtained justice or redress.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court
determined in September that the
criminalization of abortion in the state of
Coahuila was unconstitutional. The Court
opened the way for decriminalization in the
rest of the country by establishing this as a

252

mandatory criterion to be applied by judges
in all states.
Months earlier, Hidalgo and Veracruz joined
the list of states that authorized abortion up
to the 12th week of pregnancy; Baja
California did so in October and Colima in
December. By the end of the year abortion
was legal in six states.
The Supreme Court also invalidated the
clause on conscientious objection to abortion
by medical professionals contained in the
health law and asked the legislature to
approve a new clause that guarantees that
refusals to provide abortion care is exercised
without putting at risk the human rights of
others, especially the right to health.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers
continued to face excessive use of force,
arbitrary detention and unlawful returns by
the authorities, as well as abductions and
killings by non-state actors. In January, the
burned bodies of 19 people, including 16
Guatemalans, were found in a vehicle in
Camargo municipality, Tamaulipas, an area
where criminal gangs operate and migrants
often try to cross the border with the USA. By
November, authorities had detained 252,526
people in overcrowded immigration detention
centres that did not comply with basic
sanitary measures, despite the pandemic.
Children were among those held, although
the law expressly prohibits the detention of
children.
The country’s refugee agency received
131,448 asylum applications in 2021, the
highest to date. For the first time, the largest
number of asylum seekers came from Haiti,
followed by Honduras. Tens of thousands of
people, mostly Haitians, were stranded in
precarious conditions in Tapachula, state of
Chiapas, for months as the asylum system
collapsed due to high demand, and the INM
initially refused to issue humanitarian visas
allowing them to work or move to another
state, as required by law.5
Local organizations reported that from
August onwards the authorities carried out
unlawful deportations at the border with

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Guatemala of Central Americans and Haitians
detained in the Mexican interior or at the US
border. The Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights and OHCHR condemned the
excessive use of force by the INM and the
National Guard against thousands of Haitians
seeking to leave the state of Chiapas. The
authorities subsequently carried out raids in
several states of the country to detain
Haitians. In October, the National Guard fired
on a truck carrying migrants in Chiapas state,
causing the death of two migrants.
By November, authorities had sent back
101,571 people, most from Central America.
Among them were thousands of
unaccompanied children whose best
interests the authorities failed to take into
account.6

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The state congresses of Baja California,
Guanajuato, Querétaro, Sinaloa, Sonora,
Yucatán and Zacatecas approved same-sex
marriage, bringing the number of states that
recognize same-sex marriage to 26 A reform
approved in the state of Mexico brought to 14
the number of states that have laws
guaranteeing recognition of gender identity
and allow people to change the name and
gender on their birth certificates.
Mexico had the second highest number of
attacks against LGBTI people in the region.
The National Observatory of Hate Crimes
Against LGBT Persons recorded at least 72
killings and disappearances during the year.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
As in previous years, Congress failed to pass
a law to regulate Indigenous peoples’ right to
free, prior and informed consent, guaranteed
under ILO Convention 169, despite a 2020
Supreme Court ruling. The President passed
a decree to fast-track approval processes for
infrastructure and megaprojects, overriding
environmental approvals and processes for
consultation with Indigenous peoples. The
Supreme Court placed an injunction on the
decree following a constitutional challenge
presented by the national transparency
agency.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government proposed a reform to the
electricity and energy sector which experts
said posed risks to investment in the
renewable energy sector.
Mexico’s new commitments on climate
change presented at the Conference of
the Parties on Climate Change in November
were criticized for being essentially almost
the same as its commitments of 2015.
1. “Mexico: Open letter from Amnesty International to the Governor of
Guanajuato and the President of León Municipality”, 29 June
(Spanish only)
2. “Mexico: Pegasus in México: No to surveillance”, 28 July (Spanish
only)
3. “Mexico: The entry of the SPF into the CIDE to carry out security and
surveillance tasks has a chilling effect that inhibits the right to
peaceful assembly and freedom of expression of people in that
academic institution”, 31 December (Spanish only)
4. Mexico: Justice on Trial: Failures in Criminal Investigations of
Femicides Preceded by Disappearance in the State of Mexico (Index:
AMR 41/4556/2021), 20 September
5. Haiti: Not Safe Anywhere: Haitians on the Move Need Urgent
International Protection (Index: AMR 36/4920/2021), 28 October
6. USA: Pushed into Harm’s Way: Forced Returns of Unaccompanied
Migrant Children to Danger by the USA and Mexico (Index: AMR
51/4200/2021), 11 June

MOLDOVA
Republic of Moldova
Head of state: Maia Sandu
Head of government: Natalia Gavrilița (replaced
Aureliu Ciocoi in August)
Torture and other ill-treatment persisted.
Impunity for grave past abuses by law
enforcement agencies remained endemic.
Concerns over unfair trials continued.
Judicial oversight of surveillance and
approval of pretrial detention was reported
to be weak. Little progress was made in
addressing domestic violence. In the
breakaway Transdniestria region critics of
the de facto authorities faced prosecution
and concerns were raised about the right to
education.

253

BACKGROUND

IMPUNITY

A stand-off between the President and
parliament following the Prime Minister’s
resignation came to an end with early
parliamentary elections in July, resulting in
the formation of the first non-coalition
government since 2009.
In September parliament voted to appoint a
new national human rights Ombudsperson,
amid concern in some quarters that her role
as legal adviser to Maia Sandu in the 2020
presidential elections may create a potential
conflict of interest.
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to affect
the economy, resulting in falling standards of
living for many, although government
economists predicted a return to growth by
the end of the year. Free Covid-19
vaccination was made widely available, with a
choice of vaccines, and promoted during
vaccination marathons in the capital,
Chisinau, and elsewhere. The uptake of free
Western-supplied vaccines in the breakaway
Transdniestria region was lukewarm, with
many residents preferring the Russianproduced Sputnik vaccine or resisting
vaccination altogether.

Impunity for major past human rights
violations by members of law enforcement
agencies, including mass torture and other
ill-treatment of peaceful protesters in 2009,
remained endemic.
No progress was reported in the case of the
abduction and forcible return of seven
Turkish nationals by Moldovan security
services in 2018, further to the limited
investigation and a single conviction and noncustodial sentence in 2020. In March, the
Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers
considered implementation of the European
Court of Human Right’s decision in this case
(Ozdil and Others v. Republic of Moldova)
and “firmly reiterated” the need to ensure
effective oversight and accountability of the
security services and "regretted the
authorities’ lack of a response” to its previous
call. In October, Moldova submitted its
Updated Action Plan on the judgment which
committed it to review past judicial decisions
and adopt legislation intended to increase the
accountability of its security services.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
No visible progress was made in addressing
torture and other ill-treatment. Overcrowding,
unsanitary and otherwise inadequate
detention conditions were regularly reported
in adult, juvenile and mixed penitentiary
institutions.
The National Ombudsperson for Children’s
Rights reported further adverse effects of the
Covid-19 pandemic on conditions for minors
in detention, with those from socially
disadvantaged families particularly affected.
Complaints of poor diagnostics and health
provisions were commonplace, while medical
staff remained part of penitentiary rather than
health authorities.
A riot at the Brănești penitentiary institution,
on 5 February, highlighted the issue of an
informal hierarchy and inter-prisoner
violence, which the authorities chronically
failed to address.

254

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Concerns over unfair trials persisted.
No progress was reported in the 38 criminal
cases in which the Prosecutor General had
acknowledged political motivation and
promised a review in 2020. In none was the
conviction quashed or criminal proceedings
terminated. In the most high-profile case,
Veaceslav Platon, freed in 2020 pending a
new investigation and retrial, left Moldova in
July. The Prosecutor General was widely
blamed for him leaving the country but
brushed aside criticism as “political
interference” with his work. The handling of
these cases in light of persistent concerns
over selective justice again exposed the
weaknesses of the criminal justice system, its
vulnerability to political interference and the
need for reform.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
NGOs and defence lawyers continued to
express concern that judicial review of law
enforcement agencies’ requests for

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

wiretapping of private communications and
for placing criminal suspects in pretrial
detention was insufficiently probing, and
resulted in near-total approval. Safeguards
envisaged in national law, such as the
persons being wiretapped being compulsorily
informed, were not observed.
At a press conference on 4 October, the
Prosecutor General accused a former
colleague and several NGOs of plotting to
unseat him, and claimed he had seen the
content of their mobile communications. He
was arrested the following day on several
charges, including abuse of authority.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 14 October parliament approved
ratification of the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention), which
Moldova signed in 2017. Little tangible
progress was made, however, in addressing
domestic violence, which predominantly
affected women.

Blaga Theoretical High School, the only
Romanian-language school in the regional
capital, Tiraspol, and suspended its
operations for at least three months. The
reasons were not reported. The de facto
authorities reversed the decision to suspend
the school in the same month, after
intervention by the OSCE and other
international partners.

MONGOLIA
Mongolia
Head of state: Ukhnaa Khurelsukh (replaced Khaltmaa
Battulga in June)
Head of government: Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene
Covid-19 restrictions were used to repress
the rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. Health workers were
threatened and assaulted for protesting
against poor working conditions. Authorities
failed to adequately address allegations of
torture.

TRANSDNIESTRIA REGION

BACKGROUND

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Critics of the de facto authorities faced
criminal prosecution.
In July, pensioner Mikhail Yermuraki was
convicted of “insulting the President” and
fined the equivalent of US$600. Two other
charges against him, “denying the positive
role of Russian peacekeepers” and “inciting
national, racial, religious hatred”, were
dropped.
In the same month, activist Gennadiy
Chorba was sentenced to three years and
three months’ imprisonment, for the same
offence of insulting the President as well as
on charges of “extremism” in connection with
a peaceful picket a year earlier which he had
attended. The de facto authorities accused
him of inciting people to protest, as well as of
making derogatory comments about medical
personnel during the pandemic.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In August, the de facto Transdniestrian
authorities refused to reregister the Lucian

Over 200 protests took place during the year,
mainly against the negative impact on
people’s livelihoods caused by government
measures in response to the Covid-19
pandemic.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Restrictions introduced to control the spread
of Covid-19 that prohibited demonstrations
were used to as a pretext to arbitrarily and
sometimes forcibly disperse peaceful
protests. Some protest organizers were
arrested, detained and fined.1

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The Covid-19 pandemic exposed longstanding weaknesses in the healthcare
system. Frontline health workers were
subjected to harassment by the authorities
and physical assaults by frustrated and
desperate patients. Protests about health
workers' treatment, including poor working

255

conditions and exhaustion, were met by
threats from the prime minister.
Many health workers continued to work
despite their own poor health for fear of
losing their jobs. As of October, approximately
one in five health workers had been infected
with Covid-19.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Government-imposed school closures in
response to Covid-19 severely impacted
access to education for children of herders
and other children living in rural areas or
areas with limited or no access to the internet
and television. Schools reopened in
September after almost two academic years.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In July, the Law on the Legal Status of
Human Rights Defenders entered into force.
It consolidated legal protections for human
rights defenders but also contained
provisions that could be interpreted to
arbitrarily restrict human rights defenders’
voices and put them at risk of prosecution.
Rights activists, including herders working on
environmental and land rights issues and
advocates, continued to face threats,
intimidation and prosecution for their
legitimate activities.2

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There was no progress towards setting up a
national mechanism for the prevention of
torture, which was provided for under the
2020 revised law on the National Human
Rights Commission of Mongolia, despite
Mongolia’s acceptance of relevant
recommendations during its UPR.
Torture survivors and victims’ families
remained unable to access full and effective
reparation. Investigations into allegations of
torture were generally flawed and those
suspected of being responsible were rarely
brought to justice. According to statistics
published by the Prosecutor General’s Office
in October, 53 alleged torture cases had been
reviewed, but only three resulted in
prosecutions.

256

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The government continued to block the
establishment of “Citizens’ Representative
Organisations”. Provided for in the Law on
Urban Redevelopment, these bodies ensure
the participation of communities in decisions
relating to the projects affecting their land
and housing. In October, the Supreme Court
dismissed the case of Davaanyam Puntsag
and his family who were forcibly evicted in
2018 when a property developer demolished
their home in the Bayangol district of the
capital, Ulaanbaatar.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Online discriminatory comments posted by
the Deputy Mayor of Ulaanbaatar in
September led to an increase in threats and
hate speech against LGBTI people, activists
and organizations.
1. “Mongolia: The right to freedom of assembly and expression is being
suppressed”, 12 May (Mongolian only)
2. “Mongolia: The real situation of human rights defenders is a
problem,” 25 May

MONTENEGRO
Republic of Montenegro
Head of state: Milo Đukanović
Head of government: Zdravko Krivokapić
Impunity persisted for crimes under
international law and attacks on journalists.
Misogynist hate speech increased, while
ethnic division and religious intolerance
deepened. The government failed to deliver
promised reforms.

BACKGROUND
The shaky multi-ethnic coalition government
began to address past violations, including
political control of the police, prosecution and
judiciary, and complicity with organized
crime.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The NGO Human Rights Action urged the
new Supreme State Prosecutor to revise the
unimplemented 2015 War Crimes Strategy
and adopt measures ending impunity.
Investigations opened into one case,
transferred from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Judgment remained pending after the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
concluded its consideration of Montenegro’s
failure to provide justice to relatives of
Bosniak refugees transferred in 1992 by
Montenegrin police to Bosnian Serb forces
and subsequently murdered.
The Minister of Justice and Human Rights
was dismissed in June for refusing to accept
a government resolution recognizing the
Srebrenica genocide.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The ECtHR awarded €7,500 to both Momčilo
Baranin and Branimir Vukčević, finding that
their ill-treatment by police during antigovernment protests in October 2015 had not
been effectively investigated. However, the
ECtHR considered Milorad Martinović’s
complaint terminated, as Montenegro had
prosecuted two police officers and awarded
compensation. Video footage showed
Martinović being attacked by around 20
unidentified riot police. In July, police wearing
balaclavas and without visible identification
were again filmed ill-treating an individual.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, police and prosecutors participated
for the first time in the Commission for
Monitoring Violence against the Media.
In December parliament adopted
amendments to the Criminal Code
strengthening protection for journalists and
media workers. Twenty-five journalists
reported physical or verbal attacks, including
death threats.

Orthodox Church. Police responded with tear
gas and rubber bullets.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In April, NGOs called for a law on sexual
harassment after misogynistic hate speech
was directed at the Minister of Health, female
politicians and other women.
The increase in domestic violence,
attributed to the pandemic, continued. Few
criminal prosecutions took place and shelter
capacity remained inadequate.

DISCRIMINATION
In June the Council of Europe warned of
growing ethnic division. Montenegrins and
Serbs were prosecuted for inciting ethnic
hatred. Albanians and Bosniaks claimed that
Covid-19 measures to close cafes in Tuzi
were discriminatory. In November Bosniak
activist Sabina Talović was injured in a
racially-motivated attack.
Around 30% of Roma and Egyptians living
in Podgorica did not receive Covid-19-related
social and economic assistance. Bijelo Polje
municipality failed to provide adequate
alternative housing to 26 Roma families in
advance of road-widening, instead offering an
inadequate payment to leave. The authorities
failed to assist undocumented Roma and
Egyptians at risk of statelessness.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In March, two women were the first of five
couples to be married under the Law on Life
Partnership of Same-Sex Partners. In March,
a transgender member of LGBT Forum
Progress was attacked by unknown assailants
and seriously injured.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In September, former government supporters
and others attempted to prevent the
enthronement of the new head of the Serbian

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

257

MOROCCO/
WESTERN SAHARA
Kingdom of Morocco
Head of state: Mohamed VI
Head of government: Aziz Akhannouch (replaced SaadEddine El Othmani in October)
The authorities continued to use the 2020
health emergency decree-law to arbitrarily
restrict freedom of expression and
assembly, including of journalists, activists
and workers. The authorities continued to
violate the rights of pro-independence
Sahrawi activists through arbitrary house
arrests, ill-treatment and harassment. The
government introduced a Covid-19 vaccine
pass necessary for anyone to enter their
places of work, public and private
administrations, restaurants and to travel
inside and outside Morocco. Protests
against the pass were held in several cities
and were met by force at least once. The
Feminist Action Union recorded monthly
increases in domestic violence cases in
almost every city in Morocco. Parliament
passed a new law that allows for gender
reassignment for those born
“hermaphrodites”, which was criticized by
LGBTI communities for its vagueness and
lack of reference to transgender people.
Migrants and asylum seekers were
arbitrarily detained and, in areas close to
border crossings, the authorities raided the
lodging places of sub-Saharan nationals,
sometimes burning their belongings or
forcibly evicting them.

BACKGROUND
Government measures to support the
economy during the second year of the
pandemic included compensating those who
could not work, although this only applied to
those in formal jobs.
In October, the UN Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
was renewed, but still lacked a human rights
mandate. Human rights organizations could

258

still not access Western Sahara and Polisario
camps.
On 21 October, the government announced
that a vaccine pass would be necessary to
enter places of work, restaurants and for all
travel inside and outside of Morocco. The
union of café and restaurant owners, the
lawyers’ union and some rights organizations
criticized the move, saying the pass was
unconstitutional, arbitrary or a danger to the
economy. Protests against the decision were
held across Morocco on 31 October.
Between January and December, the king
issued royal pardons affecting 4,127
prisoners.
In September, Algeria cut diplomatic ties
with Morocco.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Human rights defenders, journalists, social
media users, academics and activists
continued to face repression of the legitimate
exercise of their freedom of expression. At
least seven were arrested and/or prosecuted
for freedom of expression-related offences.
On 23 March, academic and human rights
defender Maati Monjib was provisionally
released from El Arajat prison near the capital
Rabat. In October, he was prevented from
travelling to France for a medical
appointment and to see his family, due to an
arbitrary travel ban imposed since October
2020.
In July, Omar Radi, an independent
journalist who was often critical of the
authorities, was sentenced to six years in
prison on charges of espionage and rape
after a trial that did not meet international fair
trial standards. Among other things, he was
denied the right to see and challenge each
piece of evidence used against him.
In September, the Marrakesh Court of First
Instance sentenced Jamila Saadane to three
months in prison for videos she posted on
YouTube accusing the Moroccan authorities
of covering up prostitution networks and
human trafficking in Marrakesh. She was
convicted of “insulting institutions” and
“spreading false information”.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The Moroccan authorities continued to
violate the rights of pro-independence
Sahrawi activists throughout the year, through
ill-treatment, arrests and harassment. In May,
the authorities arrested Essabi Yahdih, a
Sahrawi journalist and director of the online
Algargarat Media company, at his workplace
in Western Sahara. They interrogated him
about his journalistic work and accused him
of filming military barracks in Dakhla, a city in
Western Sahara. On 29 July, he was
sentenced to one year in prison and a fine. In
Dakhla prison he was denied medical
attention for pre-existing hearing and sight
conditions.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In July, together with the coalition Forbidden
Stories, Amnesty International revealed that
NSO Group’s Pegasus surveillance spyware
was used extensively by the Moroccan
authorities. Journalists, activists and political
figures of French and Moroccan origin had
been targeted with the spyware. The devices
of Hicham Mansouri, a Moroccan journalist
living in exile in France; Claude Mangin, the
partner of Naama Asfari, a Sahraoui activist
who is imprisoned in Morocco; and Mahjoub
Maliha, a Sahraoui human rights defender,
were infected with Pegasus software in
violation of their rights to privacy and freedom
of expression.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On at least four occasions, the authorities
repressed peaceful protests demanding
improved working conditions and used the
health emergency decree-law to suppress
workers’ grievances.
In April, police arbitrarily arrested 33
teachers who were protesting peacefully in
Rabat against education policies they
deemed harmful for public education and
forcibly dispersed the protesters even though
they were respecting Covid-19 safety
measures such as social distancing. The
teachers were provisionally released after 48
hours but were still facing charges of
“incitement to unarmed gathering without an
authorization”, “breaching health emergency

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

status” and “offending public officials”. Their
trial was ongoing at the end of the year.1
In July, Noureddine Aouaj, an activist and
human rights campaigner, was sentenced to
two years’ imprisonment. He was arrested in
June after joining a peaceful rally supporting
jailed journalists Omar Radi and Suleiman
Raissouni, and charged with “insulting
constitutional institutions, principles and
symbols of the kingdom”, “denouncing
fictitious crimes” and “undermining judicial
authority”.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Some prisoners were held in harsh
conditions, including prolonged and
indefinite solitary confinement, in violation of
the prohibition of torture and other illtreatment.
Suleiman Raissouni, a journalist and editor
of Akhbar Al Yaoum newspaper, remained in
solitary confinement since his imprisonment
in May 2020. He staged a 118-day hunger
strike from 8 April to protest against his
solitary confinement.
Mohamed Lamine Haddi, sentenced in
connection with the Gdeim Izik protest,
continued to be held in solitary confinement
since 2017. In March, prison guards ended
his hunger strike held in protest at his illtreatment by force-feeding him, which
amounts to torture under international law.
Members of the security forces raided the
house of Sahrawi activist Sultana Khaya in
Boujdour at least three times in 2021. She
said that during a raid in May, members of
the security forces beat her and tried to rape
her with batons, and attacked and raped her
sister. On 15 November, members of the
security forces broke into her house and
raped her and sexually abused her two
sisters and 80-year-old mother.2

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In May, the Independent Syndicate of Public
Sector Doctors held a 48-hour national strike,
excluding emergency services, to protest at
the authorities’ inaction to their long-standing
demands for improved pay and working

259

conditions and better resourced public
hospitals.
By the end of the year, Morocco had fully
vaccinated about 67% of the country’s
population against Covid-19.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
A national pandemic fund was created in
2020 to compensate those forced to leave
work. However, Moroccan NGO the Feminist
Action Union found that women were less
able than men to benefit from the scheme as
they are less likely to be in regular work
Implementation of the 2018 Law 103-13 for
the prevention of violence against women
remained weak. Contrary to claims by the
Public Prosecution Office that domestic
violence cases decreased by 10% compared
to previous years, the Feminist Action Union
recorded monthly increases in domestic
violence cases from January to April in
almost every city in Morocco.
In May, the Minister of Justice announced
that the number of child marriages had
reduced since 2019. UN Women disputed
this, saying the figures do not provide
information on the forms of customary
marriage involving children, nor do they
consider the impacts of the Covid-19
pandemic on mobility and access to public
administrations. Article 19 of the Family Code
sets the marriage age at 18, but Articles 20
and 21 give judges in charge of family issues
the right to authorize requests for child
marriages.
In January, former police officer Wahiba
Kharchich relocated to the USA after
suffering defamation when media company
ChoufTV published a video alleging to show
her having an extra-marital affair in
December 2020. She had filed a complaint in
2016 about sexual harassment by her boss
Aziz Boumehdi, head of El Jadida police unit,
which was never followed up.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Article 489 of the Penal Code continued to
criminalize consensual same-sex sexual
relations.

260

In July, parliament passed Article 28 of the
36.21 Civil Status Bill, which states that the
gender assigned to “hermaphrodite”
newborns can be changed later in life. While
billed as an advancement in LGBTI rights in
Morocco, the amendment was criticized by
trans rights organizations who said they had
not been consulted and that many find the
term “hermaphrodite” offensive.
Furthermore, the law continues to assign
intersex people to either male or female
genders, does not extend to allowing
transgender people to transition and focuses
on the appearance of genitals without
reference to chromosomes or hormones.
There remained no mention of transgender
people in law.
In February, gender non-conforming artist
Abdelatif Nhaila was released after serving a
four-month prison sentence imposed in
2020. Police arrested him after he visited a
police station to report death threats and
homophobic harassment he had received as
part of a widespread social media smear
campaign begun in April 2020, and
subsequently prosecuted him for “violating
the state of health emergency” and “insulting
an official”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities arrested and arbitrarily
detained migrants and asylum seekers during
the year, deporting some to their country of
origin and expelling others to southern areas
of Morocco and the Western Sahara. In areas
close to border crossings or on migratory
routes to Europe, including Nador, Oujda and
Laayoune, the authorities raided the housing
and encampments of sub-Saharan nationals,
sometimes burning their belongings or
forcibly evicting them from their makeshift
shelters, according to the Moroccan
Association for Human Rights.
In addition to refugees and migrants from
sub-Saharan Africa or Middle Eastern and
North African countries, most of the 8,000 or
more individuals who crossed from Morocco
into the Spanish enclave of Ceuta in late May
(see Spain entry) were Moroccans and
included at least 2,000 unaccompanied

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

children.3 Between April and May, at least
three unidentified migrants and nine
Moroccan men died during attempts to reach
the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla
from Moroccan territory.
Morocco continued to cooperate with the
EU to prevent the irregular entry of migrants
from its territory into Europe. In June, a group
of 15 Sudanese and Chadian asylum
seekers, including two minors, were
sentenced to six months in prison for
attempting to enter Melilla from Morocco.
1. “Morocco: Drop charges against teachers who peacefully protested
over workers’ rights”, 19 May
2. Morocco/Western Sahara: Further Information: Sahrawi Activist
Raped by Moroccan Forces: Sultana Khaya (Index: MDE
29/5058/2021), 30 November
3. “Spain/Morocco: People ‘being used as pawns’ as political games
turn violent”, 19 May

MOZAMBIQUE
Republic of Mozambique
Head of state and government: Filipe Jacinto Nyusi
The armed group known locally as alShabaab, government security forces and
private military operatives continued to
commit war crimes and other serious
human rights violations. The authorities
mishandled the humanitarian crisis in Cabo
Delgado, seriously undermining rights to
food, water, education, housing and health.
Violence against women and girls continued
unchecked. Expectant mothers were treated
inhumanely, and were beaten, insulted and
humiliated in public maternity wards. The
authorities stifled activity within civic space
through intimidation, harassment and
threats against civil society activists and
journalists.

BACKGROUND
The armed conflict in Cabo Delgado province
remained the most critical issue, with
President Nyusi facing criticism about his
mishandling of the conflict. Under mounting
pressure from the Southern African

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Development Community (SADC), he
relented to the call for the deployment of
foreign troops to the region where, by the end
of the year, Mozambican, SADC and
Rwandan troops were fighting insurgents.
The “hidden debt” trial exposed, to a limited
extent, the corruption scheme which drove
the country into economic crisis, further
deepening the unpopularity of the governing
party, the Mozambique Liberation Front.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Civilians were caught between three armed
forces in the conflict in Cabo Delgado, in
which more than 3,000 people have died
since the conflict began. Fighters in the
armed rebel group, known locally as alShabaab (not thought to be related to alShabaab in Somalia) killed civilians using the
most gruesome methods, looted their
property, burned their homes, and kidnapped
women and children. The Mozambican
security forces abused people they were
meant to protect through harassment,
extortion, torture, enforced disappearances
and extrajudicial killings. The Dyck Advisory
Group, a private military company hired by
the government as a rapid reaction force,
fired machine guns and dropped explosives
indiscriminately from helicopters, often failing
to distinguish between civilian and military
targets. The death toll continued to rise
throughout the year.1

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Nearly 1 million people (primarily women,
children and older people) were internally
displaced in the homes of families and
friends and in camps in relatively secure
settlements in the south of Cabo Delgado
province, where they lacked adequate access
to food, water, education, health and
housing. Food scarcity primarily affected
women and children, putting their health at
risk. The authorities responsible for food aid
distribution demanded sexual favours from
displaced women in exchange for
registration, documentation and food aid. The

261

displaced people settled in locations without
adequate water and sanitation in
overcrowded dwellings without privacy or
proper ventilation, putting their health at risk.
The settlements offered few health and
education services, and large numbers of
children did not attend school.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violence against women and girls remained
rampant, with few measures taken to hold
perpetrators accountable. Although such
violence was prevalent prior to the Covid-19
outbreak, it was, according to local women
human rights defenders and organizations,
further aggravated during the restrictive
measures taken to control the virus.2
In June, revelations emerged that, for years,
the wardens of the Ndlavela Women’s Prison
in Maputo province had created an elaborate
scheme for sexual abuse and exploitation of
prisoners.
In March, in Beira, Sofala province, a man
brutally killed his wife with an iron bar,
alleging that she had been drinking beer with
a male neighbour. In April, in Balama, Cabo
Delgado province, a man beat his wife to
death because he suspected she had had an
affair. In Nampula province, in July, a man
tied up his wife, poured petrol on her and set
fire to her because he suspected her of
infidelity; and in September, a school janitor
sexually assaulted a 16-year-old girl on her
way to school, after threatening her with
physical violence. In all these cases the
perpetrators remained in police custody. In
August, a human resources manager at a
primary school in Murrupula district,
Nampula province, was found sexually
assaulting a 14-year-old schoolgirl with
autism. The police dismissed the case,
forcing the girl’s family to take the case to the
district Public Prosecutor, who assigned the
case to the investigative police unit.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Local women’s organizations heard
testimonies from dozens of women who
described being subjected to physical
aggression, insults and humiliation by nurses

262

and midwives in some public maternity
wards. Pregnant women dreaded the
prospect of delivering their babies in public
hospitals and clinics due to obstetric
violence. The abuse often took place at night
in the absence of staff supervisors.
Significant numbers of women who had
delivered babies in maternity wards said they
were expected to pay bribes to midwives and
nurses to be treated with respect and dignity.
When they failed to do so, they were left
unattended as their waters broke and at the
point of their baby’s birth, forcing them to
negotiate the payment of bribes at the height
of their fear and physical pain. Despite
repeated calls by women’s rights groups, the
Mozambican authorities made no apparent
attempts to address the problem by bringing
perpetrators to justice or compensating the
survivors.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities restricted activity within civic
space. On various occasions the police
prevented activists from exercising their civic
rights, including their right to peaceful
assembly.
In May, the police dispersed students who
were peacefully protesting against a new law
giving parliamentary workers benefits which
the protesters considered to be excessive. In
June, they prevented activists from the
Centre for Democracy and Development from
submitting a list of their concerns to the
Administrative Tribunal. The activists were
protesting at the construction of urban toll
gates on the Maputo circular road. In
September, police officers beat and arbitrarily
arrested six journalists in Nampula province
for covering a peaceful protest against
government delays in paying Covid-19
subsidies. In October, the police prevented
medical doctors from peacefully protesting in
solidarity with another doctor who was among
a group of people who had been abducted.
The mayor of Maputo claimed that he had
not authorized the event, even though the
constitution requires organizers only to
inform, not ask permission from, the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

authorities four days ahead of any planned
gathering.
1. “What I Saw Is Death”: War Crimes in Mozambique’s Forgotten Cape
(Index: AFR 41/3545/2021), 2 March
2. “Treated Like Furniture”: Gender-Based Violence and Covid-19
Response in Southern Africa (Index: AFR 03/3418/2021), 9 February

MYANMAR
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Head of state: Myint Swe (replaced U Win Myint in
February)
Head of government: Min Aung Hlaing (from August)
The human rights situation deteriorated
dramatically after a military coup in
February. Security forces killed over 1,000
people and detained many thousands of
others who opposed the military takeover.
Widespread torture of detainees was
reported. Armed conflict, including
indiscriminate attacks and attacks against
civilians and civilian objects by the military,
forcibly displaced tens of thousands of
people. Similar vast numbers remained
displaced as result of past conflict or
violence. People in areas affected by armed
conflict lacked basic services, and in some
areas the military blocked the delivery of
humanitarian aid. Women and girls were
subjected to sexual violence by the military.
Children were denied the right to education.
Dozens of people were sentenced to death
by military tribunals in their absence.

BACKGROUND
The military staged a coup on 1 February and
arrested State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi
and President U Win Myint, along with other
senior leaders from the ruling National
League for Democracy (NLD). The military
formed the State Administrative Council
(SAC) to govern the country led by General
Min Aung Hlaing, who was also appointed as
prime minster when the role was reestablished in August.
Following the military takeover, thousands of
people throughout the country took part in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

protests, and public and private sector
employees participated in a mass civil
disobedience movement.
The Committee Representing Pyidaungsu
Hluttaw (CRPH), a group of NLD-led elected
members of Myanmar’s parliament, formed a
National Unity Government. It was led by
Duwa Lashi La as acting president in place of
the imprisoned U Win Myint. The National
Unity Government, which also included some
representatives of ethnic minority groups,
was declared a terrorist group by the military.
On 5 May, the National Unity Government
announced the establishment of the People’s
Defence Force (PDF) to counter SAC
“violence against the public and its military
offensives”. On 7 September, the National
Unity Government declared a “people’s
defensive war”, which was followed by
escalating violence throughout Myanmar.
Fighting between the military government’s
forces and ethnic armed organizations
(EAOs) also escalated.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The military government violently cracked
down on those who opposed its February
coup, widely using rubber bullets, tear gas,
water cannons, live rounds of ammunition
and other lethal force against protesters.
According to the NGO Assistance Association
for Political Prisoners (Burma) (AAPP), as of
31 December the military government’s
security forces had killed at least 1,384
people, including 91 children, and arrested
11,289.
Those killed included protesters and
bystanders. On 10 March, after examining
more than 50 video clips of the ongoing
crackdown, Amnesty International concluded
that the military had used lethal tactics and
weapons appropriate only for battlefield use
against peaceful protesters in cities and
towns across the country.1 On 2 May, for
example, there were reports of security forces
throwing grenades into a crowd of protesters
in northern Kachin State. Soldiers were also
witnessed indiscriminately firing live
ammunition in urban areas on multiple
occasions.

263

Thousands of doctors and other healthcare
workers joined the protests and refused to
work under the military government, although
many provided medical care to injured
protesters and to Covid-19 and other patients
outside state hospitals. As of 31 December,
at least 12 health workers had been killed,
and 86 remained in detention.
The military authorities also attacked trade
unionists, workers and civil servants who
joined protests demanding a return to
democracy. Workers were intimidated and
threatened into returning to work, and trade
union leaders and workers were among those
arrested and killed.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
The military government announced
amendments to the Penal Code that
criminalized both the intent to criticize and
actual criticism of government actions. These
included the addition of Section 505(a) which
criminalized comments that “cause fear” and
spread “false news”, as well as criminalizing
individuals “committing or agitating, directly
or indirectly, a criminal offense against a
government employee”. As of 31 December,
189 people had been convicted under
Section 505(a). According to AAPP, at least
another 1,143 detained individuals were
awaiting sentencing and warrants for 1,545
others had been issued, including under
Section 505(a) which carries a sentence of
up to three years’ imprisonment.
New provisions were also introduced in the
Criminal Procedure Code to allow searches,
seizures, arrests, surveillance and
interception of communications to take place
without warrants.
The military authorities periodically imposed
nationwide internet and telecommunications
shutdowns, violating the right to freedom of
expression. In areas where there were
military operations, such as in Hpakant
township in Kachin State, Chin State and the
regions of Sagaing, Magway and Mandalay,
internet and WiFi services were suspended
and, in some instances, mobile phone
networks cut. This severely obstructed

264

communications, including those concerning
human rights violations committed by
security forces, as well as negatively
impacting humanitarian operations.
The military authorities closed at least five
independent news publications and revoked
the licences of eight media outlets. At least
98 journalists were arrested following the
coup, including three foreign journalists. One
journalist, Ko Soe Naing, died while in
custody.
At the end of the year, at least 46 journalists
and other media workers remained in
detention. This included 13 who had been
convicted and sentenced to terms of
imprisonment.
In early December, a court sentenced Aung
San Suu Kyi to four years’ imprisonment,
later reduced to two, on bogus charges of
inciting dissent and breaking Covid-19 rules.
Verdicts in relation to other charges against
Aung San Suu Kyi were postponed.2

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
According to the AAPP, at least 8,338 of
those arrested since 1 February remained in
detention as of 31 December, including 196
children. In addition to journalists, these
included NLD party members and their
relatives, peaceful protesters, members of the
civil disobedience movement and other
activists, as well as bystanders. Relatives who
were able to visit family members in
detention reported seeing physical injuries
and other signs of torture or ill-treatment. The
UN also documented the widespread use of
torture by security forces against detainees,
in some cases resulting in death.
Sexual violence and threats of sexual
violence by the security forces against
women, girls and in some instances men
arrested during protests, were documented
by the UN and others, including in the
context of interrogations. Detained LGBTI
people who participated in the protests, often
under rainbow flags, were also reported to
have been subjected to torture including
sexual violence.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS
The military used its “Four Cuts” strategy to
cut off EAOs and People’s Defence Force
(PDF) units from funding, food, intelligence
and recruits with devastating consequences
for civilians. The military launched air strikes,
shelling and arson attacks against towns and
villages in the ethnic states of Kayah, Kayin,
Kachin and Chin, and in the regions of
Sagaing, Magway and Thanintharyi. The UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Myanmar reported that, as of
September, 200,000 people had been
forcibly displaced in a bid to escape attacks
by the military.
In May, following assaults by a newly formed
PDF unit, the Chinland Defence Force (CDF),
the military laid siege to the town of Mindat in
Chin State using heavy artillery fire and
cutting off essential services. According to
the UN, around 15 villagers, including a
pregnant woman, were used by the military
as human shields and others were trapped
without water or electricity. As clashes
between the military and the CDF escalated
in October, there were also reports of arson
attacks by the military. In the town of
Thantlang alone, at least 160 houses and
four churches were reportedly destroyed in
late October.
From May to November, the military
launched retaliatory attacks on villages in
Kayah and Southern Shan states in response
to attacks by the Karenni Nationalities
Defence Force, a joint PDF and EAO force,
on police and military facilities in Demoso
and Loikaw townships in Kayah State and
Pekon townships in southern Shan State. At
least 55 civilians were killed and churches
reportedly destroyed during successive
military attacks in these areas.
In December, reports of the killing by the
military of at least 35 civilians in eastern
Kayah State, including four children and two
humanitarian workers from Save the
Children, prompted condemnation by the UN
Security Council and renewed calls for a
global arms embargo on the Myanmar
military government.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

There were reports of rape and other sexual
violence by the military against women and
children in conflict-affected areas. According
to media reports, soldiers gang-raped a
woman in front of her husband during a
military raid in Aklui village close to Tedim
township in Chin State in November. The
victim’s pregnant sister, who lived in the
same village, was also reportedly raped.
According to the same source, the military
also raped a 62-year-old woman in Kutkai
township, northern Shan State.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLES’
RIGHTS
As of 9 December, indiscriminate attacks and
attacks directed against civilians and civilian
objects, primarily by the military, and fighting
between the military, EAOs and PDFs, had
displaced more than 284,700 people,
including over 76,000 children.
Around 336,000 people were already
internally displaced prior to the military
takeover. These included 130,000 people
living in camps in Kachin, northern Shan
State and parts of the south-east, and more
than 90,000 people in Rakhine and Chin
states displaced by fighting between the
Arakan Army and the military before
hostilities between them ceased in November
2020. There were concerns about lack of
humanitarian access to many of the sites in
which they were living.
At least 126,000 Rohingya Muslims
remained effectively interned in camps in
Rakhine State since violence in 2012. After
the coup, local authorities reinstated a
directive that further restricted the freedom of
movement of Rohingya communities living in
northern Rakhine. These communities
continued to have very limited access to
basic services, including healthcare and
education. The rapidly deteriorating human
rights situation in Myanmar failed to provide
an enabling environment for voluntary
repatriations of Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh who fled atrocities in Rakhine
State in 2016 and 2017.

265

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
The military authorities restricted
humanitarian access to internally displaced
people in Kayah, Chin and Shan states.
There were reports of roads being blocked
and aid convoys being turned back by the
soldiers. In June, the military destroyed an
ambulance and burned stockpiles of rice and
medicine intended for displaced people in
Pekon township, Shan State.3 In other areas,
including Kachin and Rakhine states, the
military authorities imposed additional
requirements on humanitarian organizations
in order to obtain travel authorizations that
severely delayed the delivery of aid to
vulnerable populations.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
In July and September, fighting erupted
between the Restoration Council of Shan
State, the Shan State Army-North, and the
Ta’ang National Liberation Army, three EAOs
in Shan State. These groups reportedly
abducted villagers and subjected them to
forced labour.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The health system effectively collapsed in the
aftermath of the military takeover as health
workers joined the civil disobedience
movement and a third wave of Covid-19 hit
the country. Health workers clandestinely
providing medical care, including to injured
protesters, were attacked and arrested by the
security forces. According to the WHO, more
than 286 attacks on healthcare facilities and
personnel took place during the year,
accounting for over one third of attacks on
healthcare globally. The majority of attacks
were attributed to the military, although bomb
attacks by unknown assailants against
military-run hospitals were also reported. At
least 26 health workers were killed and 64
injured during the year.
The military government further
undermined the Covid-19 response by
confiscating personal protective equipment
and already severely limited oxygen supplies
in Chin, Kayin and Yangon for use by the
military. In July security forces reportedly

266

opened fire to disperse people queuing for
oxygen cylinders in Yangon.
Women and girls faced difficulties in
accessing sexual and reproductive
healthcare, especially in armed conflict
areas. There were reports of displaced
women giving birth without access to basic
medical services. In several reported cases in
Kayah and Shan states, newborn babies of
displaced families died due to lack of
adequate healthcare and shelter.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Almost 12 million children and young people
had no access to formal education due to the
combination of Covid-19-related school,
college and university closures, armed
conflict and the actions of the military
authorities. Teachers who participated in the
civil disobedience movement were among
those arrested and at least 139 teachers had
been detained as of the end of November.
Schools and other educational facilities were
bombed or otherwise attacked by unknown
actors. In May alone, at least 103 such
attacks were reported. The military occupied
schools and university campuses across
Myanmar.

DEATH PENALTY
Military courts sentenced dozens of people,
including several children, to death after
unfair trials. Many were tried in their
absence.
1. “Myanmar: Vast arsenal and notorious troops deployed during
nationwide ‘killing spree’ protest crackdown”, 11 March
2. “Myanmar: Unbridled destruction of freedoms as Aung San Suu Kyi
sentenced”, 6 December
3. “Myanmar: After coup, Myanmar military puts chokehold on people’s
basic needs”, 17 December

NAMIBIA
Republic of Namibia
Head of state and government: Hage Geingob
Police repeatedly used excessive force. The
use of prolonged and indefinite pre-trial

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

detention was exacerbated under Covid-19
restrictions. Gender-based violence
remained widespread and LGBTI people
faced discrimination. There was a shortage
of Covid-19 vaccine supplies. Oil and gas
exploration threatened the environment and
Indigenous peoples’ livelihoods. A
commission recommended that the
government enact legislation to protect
ancestral land rights. The president was
implicated in corruption allegations.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In April, a man with disabilities was assaulted
by police officers before he and his sister-inlaw were arrested for violating Covid-19
curfew regulations in Khorixas town. In June,
a police officer shot and injured three pretrial detainees at Rundu police station. In
August, a police officer shot and killed two
people, including a police officer, in Lüderitz
town.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
The use of prolonged and indefinite pre-trial
detention was exacerbated as a result of
Covid-19 restrictions. Several detainees had
their hearings postponed as correctional
authorities imposed a lockdown in prisons;
conditions in detention centres and police
holding cells remained poor.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The tier four Covid-19 lockdown made life
especially difficult for those women and girls
who were forced to self-isolate with their
abusers. In February, the Chief Justice
announced that domestic violence court
cases had increased sharply in 2020. Child
marriage persisted and in January it was
reported that a four-year-old’s parents had
married her to a 25-year-old man when she
was only two.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people remained subject to
widespread discrimination. In April, a
transgender woman was accused by police of
faking her identity to avoid prosecution and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

was subjected to transphobic harassment
while in custody.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
RIGHT TO HEALTH
In July, Namibia experienced a third wave of
Covid-19 infections, exacerbated by
insufficient vaccine supplies and slow
vaccine uptake. During the pandemic,
access to sexual and reproductive health
services was further disrupted.
RIGHT TO ANCESTRAL LANDS
In January, the Commission of Inquiry into
Claims of Ancestral Land Rights and
Restitution published a report supporting the
restitution of ancestral land rights. The
commission concluded that land claims
demanded by groups and individuals as
restitution fell under the broader concept of
reparations under international and human
rights law. In light of this, it recommended
that parliament enact an ancestral land rights
claim and restitution law within the next two
years, on condition that the process and its
outcome be consistent with constitutional,
international and human rights law.
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In August, UNESCO’s World Heritage
Committee registered its concern about oil
exploration licences being granted in
environmentally sensitive areas in the
Kavango river basin, in north-eastern
Namibia, to Canadian-based mining
company ReconAfrica. This followed the
government’s confirmation that drilling
operations had been successfully concluded
on the 6-1 well. Environmental activists and
local people organized several petitions and
other protests against drilling during the year,
but drilling continued. The operations
threatened the fragile environment and the
livelihoods of local Indigenous peoples.

IMPUNITY
In April, the president was implicated in
allegations of corruption involving the
country’s lucrative fishing industry. Officials
were accused of engaging in corrupt
practices for which they enjoyed impunity.

267

NEPAL
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
Head of state: Bidya Devi Bhandari
Head of government: Sher Bahadur Deuba (replaced
Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli in July)
Federal legislation limiting the rights to
freedom of expression and privacy remained
pending, while provincial governments
drafted new bills threatening media
freedom. Protesters were detained and
security forces continued to use
unnecessary and excessive force to disperse
protests. The government failed to deliver
justice, truth and reparations to victims of
the 1996-2006 conflict. Thousands died of
Covid-19 amid a severe shortage of vital
infrastructure and lack of an adequate
response by the government. Gender-based
discrimination continued in law and
practice. The authorities failed to carry out
credible and independent investigations
into several deaths in custody, mostly of
people from marginalized communities.

BACKGROUND
Amid disputes within the ruling party, Prime
Minister Oli dissolved the lower house of the
parliament in May. Calling it an
“unconstitutional move”, in July the Supreme
Court reinstated the dissolved lower house
and ordered the appointment of Sher
Bahadur Deuba as the new prime minister.
In October, unseasonal rainfall linked to
climate change led to floods and landslides,
resulting in more than 100 deaths and
displacing more than 1,100 families. The
rains affected farmers’ livelihoods and
threatened food security, destroying more
than 325,000 tonnes of paddy crops, the
highest losses on record. The government’s
mitigation and relief support was inadequate.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to use the
Electronic Transactions Act 2006 to arbitrarily
detain individuals, including journalists. They

268

particularly targeted those critical of the
government and of the leaders of the ruling
party.
In February, the Ministry of Communication
and Information Technology drafted social
media guidelines that would give the
government sweeping powers to regulate
social media content and criminalize users’
activities, including the ability to hold people
liable for liking, sharing and commenting on
posts. Several bills threatening the rights to
freedom of expression and privacy remained
pending in the federal parliament, and the
provincial governments in Bagmati, Gandaki
and Lumbini provinces drafted bills that
would limit freedom of expression, especially
media freedom.
In May, the Office of the Registrar of the
Supreme Court summoned two journalists,
pressuring them to divulge their sources and
to apologize for reporting on an alleged
meeting between Prime Minister Oli and
Chief Justice Cholendra Shumsher Rana.
In June, 20 civil society leaders were
arrested while peacefully protesting against
political interference in the Medical
Education Commission.
In October, police detained 13 activists who
were peacefully demanding impartial
investigations into the death of one woman
and the disappearance of another in Banke
district. Ruby Khan, one of the protesters,
was detained by police on trumped-up
charges of “polygamy” before the Supreme
Court ordered her release.
Also in October, four men died when
security forces opened fire to evict protesters
in Rupandehi district.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The government continued to fail to deliver
truth, justice and reparations to tens of
thousands of victims of crimes under
international law and other grave human
rights violations committed during the
1996-2006 conflict. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the
Commission of Investigation on Enforced
Disappeared Persons, which had respectively

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

collected more than 60,000 and 3,000
complaints from victims, failed to resolve a
single case. By the end of the year, the
government had still not amended the
Investigation of the Enforced Disappeared
Persons, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission Act of 2014, as ordered by the
Supreme Court in 2014 and 2015, to bring it
in line with Nepali and international human
rights standards. In July, the government
extended the terms of the two Commissions.

Sunsari and Kailali District Police Offices
respectively.
The government failed to implement the
National Human Rights Commission’s
(NHRC) recommendations to hold those
responsible for human rights violations to
account. In July, the government promoted a
police officer whom the NHRC had
recommended for prosecution over an
extrajudicial killing.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

The government failed to reform the National
Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1973,
which does not meet international standards.
Indigenous people, evicted from their
ancestral lands during the establishment of
national parks and conservation areas,
remained landless and continued to live in
informal settlements facing risks of further
forced evictions. The authorities failed to
allow their return, or provide them with
alternative land and livelihoods,
compensation, or access to protected areas
for fishing, grazing and gathering food,
medicinal herbs and firewood. Farmers
whose lands came within the boundary of the
Bardiya National Park as a result of the
Geruwa river changing its course continued
to be denied access to their lands some three
decades later.

The second wave of Covid-19, which began
in April, caused the collapse of the country’s
fragile healthcare system, resulting in more
than 7,000 deaths. The situation was
exacerbated by a severe shortage of
vaccines, medical facilities and vital hospital
supplies including oxygen, ventilators and
other life-saving medical equipment, and a
lack of adequate preparation by the
government. People from marginalized
groups such as Dalits and people living in
poverty, including daily wage earners, were
also hit by the worsening socio-economic
situation resulting from the pandemic and
related restrictions.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment were
widespread in pretrial detention to extract
“confessions” and intimidate detainees. By
the end of the year, there had yet to be any
convictions under the 2017 Criminal Code,
which criminalized these practices.
Several deaths in custody were reported
during the year – mostly of detainees from
marginalized Dalit and Madhesi
communities. No independent investigations
were carried out.
In July, Paltu Ravidas was found dead in the
toilet of the Dhanusha District Police Office
after being detained by police. In August, a
police officer on duty at the time of Paltu
Ravidas’ death was suspended for six
months. In September, Bhim Kamat died in
the custody of Morang District Police. In
October, Mohammad Hakim Sah and Dhan
Bahadur Rana died in the custody of the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION
Gender-based discrimination continued and
the government did not reform constitutional
provisions which denied women equal
citizenship rights. The restrictive provision for
statutory limitations for rape in the Criminal
Code continued to allow impunity for
perpetrators.
In February, the Department of Immigration
proposed introducing a policy requiring
women below the age of 40 to obtain
permission from their families and a
recommendation from the local government
before travelling internationally. Following
widespread public backlash, the Department
of Immigration issued a clarification stating
that the provision, which had been suggested
to prevent trafficking, would only apply to

269

women travelling to the Gulf and African
states for the first time. The policy had not
come into force by the end of the year.

suggestion that the bill may not be
implemented until 2024.

NETHERLANDS

ALGORITHMS
The tax authorities were exposed as utilizing
a discriminatory algorithmic system to detect
inaccurate and potentially fraudulent
applications for childcare benefits. Tens of
thousands of people were falsely accused of
fraud and were compelled to repay large
sums of money. This led to devastating
problems for the families, ranging from debt
and unemployment to forced evictions and
health issues. In particular, people with a
migrant background and from low-income
households were disproportionately affected
as information on whether an applicant had
Dutch nationality was used as a risk factor in
the algorithmic system and the algorithms
assigned people on lower incomes a higher
risk score.2
RACIAL PROFILING
Law enforcement agencies continued to use
racial profiling, although the government
denounced the practice in principle. In
September the District Court of The Hague
ruled that ethnicity could be used along with
other criteria in deciding whether to stop an
individual against whom there was no
suspicion of any wrongdoing. A civil society
coalition including Amnesty International had
filed the lawsuit seeking to challenge racial
profiling.3

Kingdom of the Netherlands
Head of state: Willem-Alexander
Head of government: Mark Rutte
Legislation excluding certain documents as
evidence in applications for international
protection was ruled in violation of EU law.
A new bill defining all forms of involuntary
sexual penetration as rape was published.
The tax authorities used a discriminatory
algorithmic system to detect potential fraud
in childcare benefits. A court ruled that
border police could continue to use racial
profiling. The National Coordinator for
Counterterrorism and Security was revealed
as having illegally monitored activists on
social media for years.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, the European Court of Justice ruled
that Dutch legislation – which automatically
dismissed subsequent applications for
protection as inadmissible when the
documents submitted were not authenticated
– was not in line with EU law. This ruling
makes it possible for rejected applicants for
international protection to submit new
applications, with the authorities no longer
able to refuse to examine such documents.
People seeking international protection in
Curaçao, one of the constituent countries of
the Netherlands, were detained in inhumane
conditions, subjected to ill-treatment and
denied their right to seek protection.1

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In March the Minister of Justice and Security
published a new draft of the Sexual Offences
Act which proposed that all involuntary
sexual penetration would be defined as rape.
By year’s end the proposal had still not been
submitted to parliament, however, and civil
society expressed concern at the minister’s

270

DISCRIMINATION

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, journalists revealed that the National
Coordinator for Counterterrorism and Security
had been monitoring activists on social media
for years. The Coordinator collected, analysed
and shared their personal data without a legal
basis or the activists’ consent, using fake
profiles. After the revelations, the Minister of
Justice proposed a controversial and farreaching bill through which the government
urgently sought to continue online
surveillance. Amnesty International urged the
ministry to address the human rights impact
of such surveillance and enshrine human
rights protection in law.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

1. Netherlands: Still no Safety: Venezuelans Denied Protection in
Curaçao (Index: EUR 35/4724/2021), 11 October
2. “Netherlands: Dutch childcare benefit scandal an urgent wake-up
call to ban racist algorithms”, 25 October
3. “Netherlands: Court allows racial profiling”, 22 September

NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Cynthia Kiro
(replaced Patricia Lee Reddy in October)
Head of government: Jacinda Ardern
Criminal detention facilities continued to be
used to detain people seeking asylum.
Official investigations highlighted ongoing
concerns about conditions in detention and
prison facilities. Following evidence of
human rights violations in a women's
prison, the government issued an apology
and ordered improvements. Reviews of
childcare and protection services continued.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Asylum seekers continued to be detained
solely on immigration grounds. Research
revealed that asylum seekers experienced a
number of human rights violations while
detained.1 In July, the government
announced an independent review into the
practice of detaining asylum seekers in
criminal detention facilities solely on
immigration grounds.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Prisoners at a high security facility at
Waikeria Prison held a protest which ended
in January. The detention conditions in this
prison had caused concern for many years.
In May, the Chief Ombudsman announced
an investigation into the Department of
Corrections’ response to repeated calls for
reform to improve conditions for detainees. In
June, the Office of the Ombudsman
published inspection reports of Christchurch
Men’s Prison and Whanganui Prison
highlighting the “undignified and barren
conditions of prisons”.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Reports into Auckland Women’s
Correctional Facility detailed serious human
rights concerns. In February, a District Court
Judge found the practice of requiring
prisoners to lie down on the floor in order to
receive meals was “excessive, degrading and
fundamentally inhumane”. The judge also
found the use of pepper spray against a
woman alone in her cell, unarmed and faced
by six officers in full body armour, to be
excessive use of force. Following this case,
the Minister of Corrections issued an official
public apology in March and ordered a
programme of work, largely focused on
women’s prisons.
In October, a report by the Office of the
Inspectorate into women in prisons stated,
among other concerns, that “generally,
women’s prisons are not therapeutic
environments conducive to rehabilitation and
reintegration”.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In April, the Waitangi Tribunal reported on the
significant disparity between the number of
Māori and non-Māori children being taken
into state care, and that these disparities
were a direct consequences of Crown
intrusion. The Tribunal recommended that
“the Crown steps back from further intrusion
into what was reserved to Māori under Te
Tiriti [o Waitangi] / the Treaty [of Waitangi],
and allow Māori to reclaim their space”.
In June, the Office of the Children’s
Commissioner released reports raising
serious concerns about the safety and wellbeing of children in the Epuni childcare and
protection residence.
1. Aotearoa New Zealand: Please Take Me to a Safe Place: The
Imprisonment of Asylum Seekers in Aotearoa New Zealand (Index: ASA
32/4113/2021), 18 May

271

NICARAGUA
Republic of Nicaragua
Head of state and government: Daniel Ortega Saavedra
Nicaragua’s human rights crisis persisted.
Journalists, human rights defenders and
health workers continued to face a hostile
environment. Political activists, human
rights defenders and journalists were
frequently arbitrarily detained. Violence
against Indigenous peoples persisted. The
government failed to provide accurate
information about the Covid-19 pandemic.

BACKGROUND
President Ortega’s fourth consecutive term of
office was announced following elections in
November that were widely condemned by
the international community due to the
severe restrictions on civil and political
rights. In November, Nicaragua denounced
the OAS Charter.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In May, authorities began a legal investigation
into the Violeta Barrios de Chamorro
Foundation, one of the main organizations
working on press freedom, for money
laundering-related charges. In June, the
director of the Foundation, a presidential
hopeful, was arrested; she remained in
detention at the end of 2021.
The headquarters of the online magazine
Confidencial and the television programme
Esta Semana were raided in May and the
director was forced back into exile. In June,
two journalists, Miguel Mora and Miguel
Mendoza, were arrested; they remained held
at the end of the year.
As of August, the Public Prosecutor's Office
had summoned for questioning more than 25
media workers who had collaborated with the
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro Foundation.
Several journalists reported being threatened
during interviews with criminal charges,
including under the Special Law on
Cybercrime.

272

The newspaper La Prensa was raided and
its property seized in August. The general
manager was detained on money launderingrelated charges. The NGO Reporters Without
Borders called for his immediate release,
however, he remained in jail at the end of the
year.
During the year, the hostile environment
and the continuous attacks by authorities
also led a number of journalists to flee the
country.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders and NGOs
continued to face an extremely hostile
environment.
During the year, the legal registration of at
least 45 NGOs was rescinded. NGOs whose
registration had been cancelled since 2018
by the National Assembly were not reinstated
and their confiscated assets were not
returned.
Human rights defenders were criminalized
and arbitrarily detained; some remained held
at the end of the year. Women human rights
defenders reported suffering police
harassment, criminalization, smear
campaigns and threats.
At least two human rights defenders were
charged under the Special Law on
Cybercrimes and others were reportedly
subjected to harassment, surveillance and
threats.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Arbitrary detentions remained part of the
state strategy of repression. By December,
local organizations reported that 160 people
detained solely for exercising their rights
since the 2018 protests started remained in
prison . Precarious detention conditions, illtreatment and incommunicado detention
were reported by detainees’ relatives who
were unable to see them regularly. Women´s
rights organizations reported that some of the
women detained during the year were
arrested with violence sometimes in front of
their children, and remained detained in very
precarious conditions. Some relatives of
detainees reported harassment, including

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

barriers to travelling abroad and criminal
prosecution.
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights
granted provisional measures in favour of a
number of detainees and ordered their
release. However, authorities failed to comply
with the Court’s rulings.
Authorities arbitrarily detained, forcibly
disappeared and prosecuted political
opponents and presidential hopefuls.1 Days
before and during the elections, the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR) received information on increased
police harassment, threats and arbitrary
detentions against opposition leaders, human
rights activists, members of civil society
organizations and journalists.2

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between the end of May and November,
authorities detained at least 39 people they
considered government opponents, including
seven presidential hopefuls. Some were
victims of enforced disappearance – their fate
or whereabouts were unknown for weeks or
months.3

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Local NGOs and communities reported the
presence of and attacks by non-Indigenous
settlers on their lands. Some of the attacks
resulted in the deaths of Indigenous people.
During August, an attack by non-Indigenous
settlers against a community in the
Mayangna Sauni As territory resulted in the
deaths of at least nine Indigenous people.
In September, the IACHR detailed a number
of reports of Indigenous communities on the
northern Caribbean coast being the victims of
kidnappings, killings, sexual assaults, threats
and arson attacks on their homes.
In October, the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
expressed concern regarding allegations that
authorities had promoted the creation of
parallel governments to supplant the chosen
representatives of Indigenous peoples.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In February, the OHCHR expressed concern
about the lack of disaggregated data
regarding Covid-19 infection among
Indigenous peoples and Afro-descendant
communities and of information on specific
measures to protect them.
In August, the Pan American Health
Organization reported that it could not assess
the state of the pandemic in Nicaragua
because of the lack of official information.
Ignoring international guidelines from the
WHO, Nicaragua did not prioritize health
workers at the start of its Covid-19
vaccination programme. Some media reports
stated that government supporters were
prioritized for vaccination, regardless of their
risk profile for Covid-19.4
Harassment and threats against health
workers who criticized government policies or
informed the public about the pandemic
continued. In July, the Vice-president publicly
called them “fake doctors” and some were
forced to flee the country for their own safety.
1. “Nicaragua: Strategy of repression in the run-up to elections
continues relentlessly”, 6 July
2. “Nicaragua: Announcement of Ortega’s re-election augurs a terrible
new cycle for human rights”, 8 November
3. Nicaragua: Where Are They?: Enforced Disappearance as a Strategy of
Repression (Index: AMR 43/4631/2021), 25 August
4. “‘Prison, economic ruin, repression and exile’: the price Nicaragua’s
health workers pay for doing their jobs”, 14 September

NIGER
Republic of Niger
Head of state: Mohamed Bazoum (replaced
Mahamadou Issoufou in April)
Head of government: Ouhoumoudou Mahamadou
(replaced Brigi Rafini in April)
Armed groups continued to commit human
rights abuses, including war crimes. The
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
launched several attacks against civilians in
Tillabéri region, while humanitarian access
to communities was restricted by
administrative measures. The lack of

273

security further affected women’s and
children’s rights, the right to education and
the right to health, while the rights of
refugees and migrants continued to be
violated. Internet shutdowns and other
violations of freedom of expression were
documented.

Niger, and 79% of attacks targeting civilians
during the first half of the year.
In August, unidentified gunmen attacked
the village Darey Dey (Tillabéri region), killing
37 people, including 14 children.
Armed groups also destroyed state
infrastructure and burned granaries.

BACKGROUND

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

The election of President Mohamed Bazoum
in February was followed over several days by
widespread protests, at times violent.
Self-defence groups emerged in northern
Tillabéri and eastern Tahoua (Tillia commune)
in response to killings by the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara (ISGS).
The humanitarian situation remained
critical, due to continued situations of armed
conflict mainly in the Lake Chad and the
Tillabéri regions. By December, UNHCR, the
refugee agency, had established that
264,257 people were internally displaced
due to the violence, along with 249,816
refugees from neighbouring countries.

Children’s rights were seriously affected in
Niger due to lack of security, among other
factors. By September, at least 60 children
had been killed during attacks on villages by
ISGS and other armed groups. The Group for
the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM)
recruited children in several communities in
Torodi department (Tillabéri region).
In May, an attack by a faction of the ISGS in
Tillia (Tahoua region) led to mass
displacement and the kidnapping of four
boys.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
The conflict in the west of Niger escalated,
with a surge of attacks by the ISGS and other
armed groups against civilians mainly in the
Tillaberi region. The attacks targeting civilians
or carried out indiscriminately constitute war
crimes.1
On 2 January, the ISGS attacked the villages
of Tchoma Bangou and Zaroum Darey
(Tillabéri region), killing at least 103 civilians.
ISGS launched another attack on 15 March
against traders between Banibangou and
Sinégodrar (Tillabéri region), resulting in 58
deaths. This was followed on 21 March by
attacks against villagers and Malian refugees
in the Tillia commune (Tahoua region), in
which 137 people were killed, according to
the government. Among these victims, 29
were children, including three girls.
ISGS officially claimed these attacks in May,
justifying them by the emergence of progovernment militias in these communes.
According to the Armed Conflict Location and
Event Data Project, ISGS was responsible for
66% of all deaths from organized violence in

274

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Armed groups including Boko Haram, the
ISGS and the GSIM continued to prohibit
“Western” education and to commit war
crimes by attacking schools, denying children
the right to education. By May, around 700
teachers were no longer at their posts in
Tillabéri region, and by June, 377 schools
had closed nationwide. At least 31,728
pupils, including 15,518 girls, were not
attending school, according to UNICEF and
government sources.
According to UNICEF, as of June over 50%
of children aged seven to 16 were not
enrolled in school in Niger.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The rights of women and girls continued to
be routinely violated, particularly in the
context of the armed conflict. The influence
of customary law meant that child marriage
continued to remain prevalent.
In April, members of the Chadian
contingent of the G5 Sahel threatened several
women and girls and raped three of them,
including an 11-year-old girl in Tera (Tillabéri
region). The soldiers were repatriated and an

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

investigation was announced by the G5
Sahel.
GSIM and ISGS continued to restrict the
freedom of movement of women and girls in
the departments bordering Mali and Burkina
Faso, and pressured women and girls in
these communities to marry.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In November, a French military convoy was
stopped in Tera by protesters challenging
French military presence in the Sahel. At
least three protesters were killed and more
than 12 injured when shots were fired to
disperse the crowd. An investigation was
announced by the Nigerien authorities
following the incident.

IMPUNITY
The judicial authorities failed to investigate
and prosecute the enforced disappearances
and extrajudicial executions by the military of
72 civilians in Ayorou department (Tillabéri
region) in March/April 2020. This was despite
an investigation by the National Human
Rights Commission which concluded that the
military was responsible for these crimes.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Authorities imposed military escort on
humanitarian convoys, especially in
departments bordering Mali and Burkina
Faso. Convoys were sometimes turned back
by the authorities citing security reasons.
In May, a new decree was promulgated
giving increased powers to regional
authorities in determining the conditions for
humanitarian access and aid delivery in
departments where armed groups operated
and contributed to improvements in the
delivery of aid.
In May, the UN Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs said that 500,000
people in Tillabéri region needed
humanitarian assistance.

REFUGEES’ AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The rights of refugees and internally
displaced people were violated by parties to

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the conflict. In March, the ISGS attacked
settlements inhabited by Malian refugees in
Intikane (Tahoua region), killing dozens of
people.
After around 10,000 people were displaced
from the Anzourou department in Tillabéri
city due to attacks and threats by the ISGS,
they were blackmailed by the authorities into
returning to their settlements in May.
According to humanitarian sources, the
authorities threatened them with the denial of
humanitarian aid if they stayed away.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The conflict significantly undermined
people’s access to healthcare in Tillabéri
region. Armed groups looted health facilities
and the authorities restricted movement by
civilians, impeding their access to aid.
Immunization rates plummeted and diseases
such as measles were on the rise, according
to humanitarian sources.
As of December, a total of 971,636 vaccine
doses against Covid-19 had been
administered and 464,000 people had
received two doses (1.9% of the population).

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND OF
PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY
In reaction to post-electoral protests by the
opposition in Niamey, the authorities imposed
an internet shutdown for several weeks in
February/March.
The authorities continued to judicially
harass journalists reporting on public affairs.
Moussa Aksar, an investigative journalist and
editor of L’Évènement newspaper, was
convicted of defamation in May after a series
of articles from September 2020 that covered
the misappropriation of public funds from the
Ministry of Defence between 2017 and 2019.
He was fined 200,000 XOF (US$362) and
ordered to pay 1 million XOF (US$1,810).
The authorities continued to target journalist
Samira Sabou after she reposted a March
report by the Global Initiative Against
Transnational Organized Crime, which alleged
that a drug seizure made by the authorities in
Niger, had been returned to members of a
narcotics cartel a few weeks later. She was

275

prosecuted in September for “defamation”
and “diffusing information to disturb public
order” under the 2019 Cybercrime law.
In December, five members of the civil
society organization Tournons La Page-Niger
(TLP-Niger) were arrested for illegal gathering
after the group organized a taxi caravan to
raise awareness about the human rights
situation in Niger. All five were provisionally
released two days later.
1. Niger: “I have nothing left except myself”: The worsening impact on
children of conflict in the Tillabéri region of Niger (Index: AFR
43/4627/2021), 13 September

NIGERIA
Federal Republic of Nigeria
Head of state and government: Muhammadu Buhari
Armed groups and the security forces
continued to commit crimes under
international law and serious human rights
violations in north-eastern Nigeria. Armed
groups abducted and killed hundreds of
civilians. Government forces also carried
out indiscriminate attacks against civilians
during counter-insurgency efforts.
Throughout the year, the Borno state
governor carried out forced resettlements of
internally displaced people (IDPs) and
closures of IDP camps. More than 3,494
people died in inter-communal violence and
bandit attacks, and more than 5,290
people were abducted for ransom by
bandits and other gunmen. The rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly and association were routinely
violated. Journalists and activists were
arrested or questioned for exercising their
right to freedom of expression. Law
enforcement agents used excessive force to
disperse protests, sometimes leading to
deaths. Hundreds of people who
demonstrated against the security forces in
2020 remained in detention. The right to
health was undermined by the authorities
and health workers resorted to strike action.

276

The authorities forcibly evicted thousands
of people from their homes.

BACKGROUND
The armed groups Boko Haram and the
Islamic State of West Africa Province (ISWAP)
ambushed, injured and killed many members
of Nigeria’s security forces. At least 31
soldiers were killed by ISWAP on 26 April in
Mainok, Borno state.
Inter-communal violence, mostly between
herders and farming communities, as well as
attacks by bandits escalated, resulting in
more than 3,494 deaths and thousands of
displacements. Over 5,290 people, including
foreign nationals working on quarry sites,
were abducted for ransom by bandits and
other gunmen. More than 93 people were
killed on 12 June by gunmen who attacked
Kadawa village, Zurmi Local Government
Area (LGA), Zamfara state.
Educational institutions were also targeted
by gunmen, forcing school closures in the
north. At least 855 students were abducted
for ransom in seven states in 10 separate
attacks. Most of the students were freed after
ransoms were paid; however, some were
killed by their abductors and others died in
crossfire during attacks.
Throughout the year, some nationwide
Covid-19 restrictions remained in place.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups, including Boko Haram and
ISWAP, continued to commit war crimes and
crimes against humanity in North East
Nigeria, killing and abducting civilians,
looting property, and committing rape and
other sexual violence against women and
girls. They carried out at least 30 attacks,
causing more than 123 civilian deaths.
On 3 January, at least 50 people including
an aid worker were abducted while travelling
along the Maiduguri-Damaturu way. On 23
February, at least 16 people were killed and
47 injured when Boko Haram fired rocketpropelled grenades on parts of Maiduguri,
Borno state.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Boko Haram targeted recently resettled
families, killing at least eight returnees and
injuring 14 on 30 August in Ajiri, Mafa LGA,
Borno state.
Aid workers and humanitarian facilities were
targeted by armed groups during attacks. On
3 March at least seven aid workers were
abducted and their offices burnt by ISWAP in
Dikwa LGA, Borno state. Those abducted
were released on 14 June, alongside other
civilians.
On 11 April the UN suspended its aid
operations in Damasak, Borno state, because
of attacks on aid workers and humanitarian
facilities. About 65,000 people, including
internally displaced people and locals, fled
Damasak following the renewed attacks by
ISWAP in April.
SECURITY FORCES
The Nigerian security forces intensified
counter-insurgency operations in North East
Nigeria. Gross human rights violations and
crimes under international law – including
extrajudicial executions, enforced
disappearances, arbitrary arrests and
incommunicado detentions – were recorded
during the security forces’ response to threats
by Boko Haram and ISWAP.
On 15 September, nine people were killed
and several injured during a military air strike
in Buwari village, Yunusari LGA, Yobe state.
The military said it had hit the village
accidentally.
On 14 July, 1,009 Boko Haram suspects
who had been detained incommunicado
were cleared and released to the Borno state
government pending resettlement.
Following the death of Boko Haram leader
Abubakar Shekau on 19 May, thousands of
Boko Haram members, including teenagers,
voluntarily surrendered to security forces
alongside their families. On 28 July, one of
the remaining Chibok schoolgirls, abducted
in 2014, returned to the custody of the
Nigerian military with her children and
husband. Another abducted Chibok
schoolgirl returned on 14 August with her two
children.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 4 June, the authorities suspended Twitter
after the site deleted a controversial tweet
from President Buhari for violating its
community rules. President Buhari had
threatened to deal with troublemakers in
Nigeria using “the language they
understand,” referencing the 1967-1970 civil
war in which millions of Nigerians were killed.
Twitter and other social media platforms were
then ordered to register in Nigeria and
comply with local regulations before they are
licensed to operate.
At least eight people were killed on 28
September during a crackdown by security
forces on members of the Islamic Movement
of Nigeria who were embarking on the
Arba’een, an annual symbolic religious trek,
in the capital, Abuja.
In September, the Ebonyi state government
signed the state Cybercrime Prohibition bill
into law. In October, Godfrey Chikwere, a
journalist, was arrested by the police for
social media posts that allegedly violated the
state’s Cybercrime Prohibition Law.
ACTIVISTS AND PROTESTERS
On 12 June, police fired tear gas and shot
live bullets into the air to disperse protesters
in Lagos and Abuja.
On 4 July, activists Larry Emmanuel, Anene
Victor Udoka, Samuel Gabriel, Henry Nwodo
and Ben Mannaseh were arbitrarily arrested
and detained for 30 days by Nigeria’s secret
police, the Department of State Services
(DSS). They had been beaten by private
security officers at a church in Abuja for
wearing t-shirts with the slogan
#BuhariMustGo, and were subsequently
handed over to the DSS.
Prisoners of conscience Agba Jalingo,
Omoyele Sowore and Olawale Bakare
continued to face trumped-up charges and
prolonged trials for organizing peaceful
protests to demand good governance in
Nigeria.
Mubarak Bala, president of the Humanist
Association of Nigeria, remained in detention
following his arrest by Kano state Police
Command officers in 2020 on allegations that

277

he had insulted the Prophet Muhammad on
Facebook. Yahaya Sharif-Aminu, a musician,
remained in detention following a death
sentence for blasphemy handed down in
2020 by the Upper Shari’a Court in Kano.
JOURNALISTS
On 7 July, Nigeria’s media regulatory agency
the National Broadcasting Commission asked
broadcast stations in Nigeria not to report the
details of attacks by bandits and insurgents
in the country. On 12 July, media
organizations in Nigeria staged a campaign
tagged “Information Blackout” to protest
against the proposed National Press Council
bill and the application of some parts of the
existing National Broadcasting Commission
(Media) Act. The two pieces of legislation,
which were under consideration by the
National Assembly, threatened to tighten
regulation and undermine access to
information.
On 28 August the DSS summoned television
hosts Chamberlain Usor and Kayode Okikiolu
for questioning in relation to comments made
by Samuel Ortom, governor of Benue state,
during a live interview on Channels
Television. The authorities alleged that the
governor’s comments were “inciting, divisive
and unfair”.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
At least 300 protesters remained in detention
a year after the #EndSARS protest against the
Nigerian security forces. Kemisola Ogunniyi,
an 18-year-old woman who gave birth during
her eight-month detention, was granted bail
on 25 June.
Three Israeli film makers, Rudy Rochman,
Noam Leibman and David Benaym, were
arrested and detained by the DSS for 20 days
without trial in inhumane conditions after
they were accused of having links with the
banned group Indigenous People of Biafra
(IPOB).
Despite a court order granting her bail,
Gloria Okolie remained in detention following
her arrest by the police on 17 June on
suspicion of being the friend of a wanted
man. Her lawyers and family alleged that she
was ill-treated in detention.

278

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
pervasive within the criminal justice system.
The police, military and DSS continued to
subject detainees to torture, as well as other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
Kubiat Akpan was tortured to death within
hours of his arrest by police on 29 August in
Uyo, Akwa Ibom state.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In the course of the year, Amnesty
International received credible reports that
security agencies, including officials from the
police and DSS, carried out arbitrary
detentions and kept detainees
incommunicado. At least 200 people –
including former militants from the Niger
Delta region, members of IPOB, #EndSARS
protesters and security suspects – were
believed to have been subjected to
unresolved enforced disappearance during
the year.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
Security agencies used excessive force to
disperse peaceful protests and assemblies.
On 20 September, Davou Bulus Bashi was
shot dead by security officials while
peacefully protesting with other students of
Plateau state Polytechnic, Barkin Ladi LGA,
against the postponement of their exams.
On 13 February, police arrested around 20
protesters at Lekki Toll Gate in Lagos after
activists staged a protest against the
reopening of the toll gate following the killing
of protesters at the venue in October 2020.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Nigerian security forces killed at least 115
people and committed numerous other
human rights violations and crimes under
international law in response to increasing
violence and killings of their officers in southeastern Nigeria. Their repressive campaign
also included mass arrests, excessive and
unlawful force, and subjecting detainees to
torture and other ill-treatment.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In May, DSS operatives stormed the house
of Sunday Ighoho, a Yoruba activist, killing
two of his supporters and arresting 13 others.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Forced evictions continued unabated despite
the Covid-19 pandemic. On 10 and 13 July,
more than 400 homes in Iddo Sarki
community, Abuja, were demolished by staff
of the Federal Capital Development Authority
and personnel from the police, army, Security
and Civil Defence Corps and other security
agents. Residents were tear-gassed by
security agents. University of Abuja students
who were renting apartments in the
community returned from lessons to find
their accommodation and belongings in
ruins. The homes were demolished without
genuine consultation with affected
communities, adequate written notice, or
provision of alternative accommodation.
On 11 and 12 August, hundreds of houses
in Mpape community, Abuja, were
demolished by staff of the Federal Capital
Territory Ministerial Committee on City
Sanitation, personnel from the police, army,
Nigeria Security and Civil Defence Corps and
other security agents, without following
human rights and procedural safeguards for
evictions. The demolitions not only violated
people’s right to adequate housing but also
negatively impacted their livelihoods. Threats
of further forced evictions by the authorities
remained in communities across the country.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
HEALTH WORKERS
Resident doctors in government-owned
hospitals went on strike over their welfare,
unfair remuneration, poor working conditions,
inadequate health infrastructure and
equipment, and unpaid salaries, among other
concerns.
On 24 June, doctors in government-owned
hospitals in Ondo state embarked on a threemonth industrial action. On 2 August,
resident doctors embarked on a nationwide
industrial action which was suspended on 4
October.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Access to education was limited for tens of
thousands of children due to the authorities’
ongoing failure to protect schools from
attacks by insurgents and other armed
groups. Further mass abductions of
schoolchildren resulted in hundreds of
children killed, raped, forced into
“marriages” or forced to join Boko Haram.
Children were abducted from Kagara,
Jangebe, Afaka, Kasarami, Tegina and other
communities across northern Nigeria,
resulting in hundreds of schools being
closed, with serious consequences for young
people in a region already facing extreme
insecurity.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In August, a Federal High Court in Abuja
delivered judgment in favour of women who
were subjected to sexual and gender-based
violence by agents of the Federal Capital
Territory Administration in the so-called
“Abuja raids”. Damages were awarded to the
survivors. The court also issued an injunction
restraining law enforcement agencies from
further acts of violence against women.
In September, state governor Ahmad Fintiri
signed the Violence Against Persons
Prohibition Bill into law in Adamawa state. In
December, Imo and Cross River state
governors signed into law their states’
Violence Against Persons Prohibition Bills.
The Akwa Ibom state House of Assembly
passed a bill to provide free medical care for
survivors of sexual abuse.
Lagos state governor Babajide Sanwo-Olu
upgraded the Lagos state Domestic and
Sexual Violence Response Team (DSVRT)
into an agency. The DSVRT is charged with
combating sexual and domestic violence in
Lagos state.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Taraba state House of Assembly passed
the Violence and Discrimination Against
Persons Prohibition Bill (2021) into law. It
included a provision for life imprisonment for
transgender people.

279

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
In October, the governor of Borno state
announced a plan to close all IDP camps by
31 December. During the year, some IDP
camps in Maiduguri were forcefully closed
and internally displaced people were
resettled in areas that continued to suffer
attacks from Boko Haram.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to issue death sentences;
no executions were carried out. In February
the Jigawa state governor signed into law a
bill allowing death sentences to be handed
down for rape cases. The newly passed
Taraba state law on Violence and
Discrimination Against Persons included a
provision imposing the death penalty for the
rape of a child.
In July, the minister of the interior called on
state governors to sign the death warrants of
the 3,008 prisoners awaiting execution, as
part of measures to reduce prison
populations nationwide.

NORTH KOREA
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Head of state: Kim Jong-un
Head of government: Kim Tok-hun
Freedom of movement, both internationally
and domestically, was almost completely
curtailed by the government’s response to
the Covid-19 pandemic. Widespread
shortages of medicine and food negatively
affected the right to health. Other
fundamental rights, including freedom of
expression, remained severely limited. The
government increased its participation in
international forums by sending
representatives to global events, particularly
those concerning economic, social and
cultural rights.

BACKGROUND
North Korea remained effectively cut off from
the rest of the world after ever more

280

draconian restrictions were imposed,
ostensibly to prevent the spread of Covid-19.
The country did not participate in the
Olympic Games in Japan due to the
pandemic.
Despite ongoing strict economic sanctions
and UN prohibitions, North Korea continued
to test missiles, firing a long-range cruise
missile in September and submarinelaunched ballistic missiles in October.
Relations with South Korea remained tense.
Serious flooding in South Hamgyong
province in August and unusually high
temperatures in July compounded an already
precarious food security situation.
Malnutrition remained a concern.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
North Korea remained effectively sealed off
from the outside world throughout 2021, the
second consecutive year in which the
government closed borders to prevent the
spread of Covid-19. The train service
between North Korea and China was
suspended both for passengers and freight.
Security on North Korea’s long land border
with China remained tight. An order allowing
security forces to “unconditionally” shoot
anyone attempting to cross the border
without authorization remained in effect.
By the end of the year, at least 63 North
Koreans (23 women, 40 men) had defected
to South Korea, the lowest number since
2003 when official records were first made
public.
Domestic travel became increasingly
difficult due to Covid-19; in addition to preexisting restrictions, special permits were
required for travelling between provinces.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Regular statistics provided by the government
to the WHO indicated that there were no
Covid-19 infections and no deaths during the
year. However, this was contradicted by
unofficial sources who reported high
numbers of infections and deaths, and
cremations taking place before the cause of
death could be determined. The true
situation remained unclear.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The COVAX initiative made repeated offers
to provide vaccine assistance. An initial offer
in March of 2 million doses was turned down,
apparently for fear of possible side effects.
The North Korean leadership also suggested
that other countries had a greater need. In
November, a further offer of more than 4
million doses was made. According to the
WHO, as of November North Korea was one
of only two countries globally with no
vaccination programme in operation.
Restrictions imposed by the government to
curb the spread of Covid-19 led to families
being quarantined at home for several weeks
with no support from the authorities to ensure
adequate food supply.1
Medicines became more scarce than usual
due to border closures and sanctions. The
WHO and UNICEF were permitted to ship
some medicines into North Korea.
The national healthcare system remained
fragile and unable to meet people’s medical
needs.2 Despite government warnings of
punishment, there were reports of people
using illicit drugs such as methamphetamine
and opium to deal with chronic pain.3

RIGHTS TO FOOD, WATER AND
SANITATION
Food insecurity remained a serious problem,
exacerbated by closed borders and extreme
weather events.4 In June, leader Kim Jong-un
acknowledged difficulties meeting grain
production targets.
After border closures and the cutting of all
train links with China, food imports reportedly
disappeared, both through governmentcontrolled trading and the unofficial “grey”
market. Prices for staples such as rice, corn
and oil tripled in some areas.
According to UNICEF’s 2021 child nutrition
report, almost one in five North Korean
children suffered from moderate to severe
growth stunting. While this was an
improvement on previous years, concerns
remained that food insecurity would reverse
this trend.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Freedom of expression, including open
criticism of the authorities or leadership, was
non-existent.5 In October, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
reported on a “widespread awareness that
anyone believed to be a political threat to the
current political system and the leadership...
continues to be sent to Kwanliso [political
prison camps].”
Severe punishments, including years of
“reform through labour”, were imposed on
those who broke the Reactionary Thought
and Culture Denunciation Law, issued in
December 2020. The law criminalized those
who “encountered illegal foreign culture”,
including South Korean dramas, films and
songs. Unconfirmed reports indicated that
several people were executed after viewing
and distributing films and other culture from
abroad, and that death sentences continued
to be imposed and executions carried out
widely.
Mobile phone subscribers increased to 6
million (out of a population of about 25
million). Surveillance also increased,
particularly in border areas, to identify those
accessing international mobile phone
services including China’s communication
networks to make international calls,
including to South Korea. Internet access
remained restricted to a very small ruling
elite.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Despite several reports that human rights
violations had partially reduced in some
detention facilities, treatment of detainees still
appeared to be harsh.6
Beatings and other torture or ill-treatment
during investigations continued to be
reported in detention facilities under the
Ministry of State Security. Conditions in
detention facilities under the Ministry of
Social Security remained poor, with reports of
forced labour, inadequate food and medical
care, and verbal abuse.

281

KWANLISO
Four Kwanliso were known to remain in
operation although their existence was
denied by the authorities. Up to 120,000
detainees were believed to be held and
subjected to forced labour, torture and other
ill-treatment.

3. “Drugs have become a part of everyday life in North Korea” (Korean
only), 31 October

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS

7. “Poor labour rights in North Korea”, (Korean only), 10 February

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Wages in state-run factories remained very
low. Some workers in state-run factories and
other enterprises, where the pay is
significantly lower than the cost of living,
resorted to bribing officials in an effort to
exchange their designated working hours for
better paid work elsewhere, including in the
grey economy.7
RIGHT TO FREE CHOICE OF EMPLOYMENT
The “Songbun” system of “ascribed status”
remained in place, dictating educational,
political and professional mobility for all North
Koreans. Children of farmers were often
obliged to take over their parents’ jobs. Some
parents reportedly resorted to bribery or
powerful contacts to give their children the
opportunity to change careers.
CHILD/FORCED LABOUR
State media claimed that orphans
“volunteered” en masse to take jobs in
unpopular and dangerous manual labour
professions, including mining.
INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT
North Korea participated in several
international forums related to economic,
social and cultural rights. In July, it
participated in the UN High-level Political
Forum and presented a Voluntary National
Review for the first time, effectively agreeing
to implement the Sustainable Development
Goals. In November, North Korea participated
in the COP26 UN Climate Change
Conference.

NORTH MACEDONIA

1. “Isolation and human rights violations in North Korea's response to
infectious diseases”, (Korean only), 31 May
2. “Recent health care in North Korea”, (Korean only), 30 September

282

4. “North Korea’s food shortage and the right to food”, (Korean only), 30
July
5. “Silent society – Suppressed freedom of political expression in North
Korea”, (Korean only), 31 December
6. “Blind spots for human rights, detention facilities in North Korea”,
(Korean only), 30 June

Republic of North Macedonia
Head of state: Stevo Pendarovski
Head of government: Dimitar Kovačevski (designate)
(replaced Zoran Zaev in December)
Former government officials were brought to
account. Conditions for detainees and
prisoners failed to meet international
standards. Hate speech was directed at
ethnic minorities and LGBTI people, as well
as women and girls, who were not protected
from gender-based violence. Discrimination
persisted against Roma and Albanians.

BACKGROUND
The country’s efforts towards EU membership
were blocked by Bulgaria, in a dispute over
language, culture and Macedonia’s failure to
recognize Bulgarian ethnicity. This – along
with the failure to implement domestic
reforms and poor local election results –
contributed to Zoran Zaev’s resignation in
December.

ACCOUNTABILITY
Investigations continued into alleged serious
crimes, including human rights violations, by
former government ministers and officials.
Sašo Mijalkov, former head of the secret
police, and 10 former police officers and
employees were convicted in February for
offences arising from widespread unlawful
wire-tapping revealed in 2015.
In June, the former parliamentary speaker
and two ministers were convicted for their
role in organizing the April 2017 storming of
parliament, when 100 people, including
members of parliament, were injured.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

In February, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) struck out two complaints of
suspicious prison deaths in 2017, after the
government agreed a €12,000 settlement
with the parents of a Roma man and with the
sister of another. In both cases, ill-treatment
was suspected.
In May the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture, following their 2020
visit, highlighted the chronic ill-treatment of
suspects by police officers and other
violations of detainees’ rights. They also
criticized the authorities’ persistent failure to
address systemic failings in prisons,
including ill-treatment and inhumane and
degrading conditions.

Almost 19,000 refugees and migrants
transited through the country. Between
January and September 388 people,
including children, were arbitrarily detained
in immigration detention centres as witnesses
in 24 proceedings brought against
smugglers. Between January and March
alone, an estimated 4,000 refugees and
migrants were pushed back into Greece,
often after registration, many reporting abuse
and ill-treatment. One asylum seeker was
granted subsidiary protection.
From September, 407 Afghan citizens
evacuated from Kabul arrived in North
Macedonia prior to resettlement in the USA
or Canada. They were granted a three-month
visa and accommodated in hotels. By
December, 76 Afghans had been resettled to
Greece, France and Ireland.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In December journalists and media workers
urged the government to adopt measures
announced in July increasing penalties for
the increasing number of attacks on
journalists and reducing fines for defamation.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
During a protest calling for accountability for
the deaths of 14 people in a fire in a
Covid-19 unit in Tetovo hospital on 8
September, five ethnic Albanians were
detained for public order offences, two of
them for “participation in a mob”. After 38
days’ detention they were sentenced to one
year’s probation.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Law on Prevention and Protection from
Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence was adopted in January.
Misogynistic hate speech increased. Police
failed to investigate complaints by women
and girls whose images were, without their
consent, among 7,000 shared by men on the
social media platform Telegram. Proceedings
for child pornography opened against two
men in July. In April NGOs recommended a
support package for women following
domestic violence, and called for femicide to
be a specific criminal offence.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DISCRIMINATION
In June, the Helsinki Committee reported a
49% increase in both incidents and
prosecutions for ethnically motivated hate
speech. The Commission for Prevention and
Protection from Discrimination was not fully
functional.
ROMA
In April a gynaecologist was appointed to the
clinic in Šuto Orizari, a Roma suburb in the
capital, Skopje, following a complaint by 58
Roma women (assisted by the European
Roma Rights Centre) who had been denied
access to reproductive healthcare for over a
year.
In June the Skopje Basic Court ruled that
the Ministry of Health had discriminated
against Roma drug users who were minors,
mandating a specialized health unit to
provide them with appropriate treatment and
rehabilitation.
In June, the ECtHR found the authorities
had failed to investigate a racially motivated
assault by several police on a Roma man
during a raid in Topana, Skopje, in 2013,
requiring Macedonia to provide €3,000
compensation.

283

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Proposed amendments to the Civil Status
Registration Act enabled transgender people
to register their chosen gender. The Helsinki
Committee reported a 31% increase in
homophobic hate speech prior to the Skopje
Pride in June.

NORWAY
Kingdom of Norway
Head of state: Harald V
Head of government: Jonas Gahr Støre (replaced Erna
Solberg in October)
The annual resettlement quota for refugees
was continued but the government made
clear that it could use its legal scope to
refer asylum seekers back to other “safe
countries”. Parliament adopted a new law
obliging larger companies to ensure respect
for human rights and decent working
conditions throughout their operations and
supply chains. Plans were announced to
redefine rape as sexual intercourse without
consent.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the government announced that it
would stop all deportations to Afghanistan.
The new government, elected in September,
continued the annual resettlement quota
commitment to accept 3,000 refugees.
Separately, however, it announced that it
would consider the possibility of using the
“room for manoeuvre” in current legislation
to “refer” asylum seekers back to so-called
“safe countries” outside Europe if they had
come to Norway via those countries. This
meant that it could deprive asylum seekers of
their right to apply for and receive asylum in
Norway – something that would represent a
serious setback in national refugee practice.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In June, the parliament adopted a corporate
due diligence law based on the UN’s Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights
and the Organisation for Economic

284

Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. The
legislation required larger enterprises (a total
of around 9,000 companies) to carry out due
diligence with respect to human rights and
decent working conditions in relation to their
own operations, their supply chain and all
business relationships within the value chain.
It obliged companies to disclose key findings
– as well as preventive measures taken to
avoid adverse impacts – on an annual basis
and to respond to specific enquiries within a
three-week time limit.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In October, the new government announced
its intention to amend the Penal Code and to
define sexual intercourse without consent as
rape, in line with the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention), which it
ratified in 2017.

OMAN
Sultanate of Oman
Head of state and government: Haitham bin Tariq
The government continued to detain and
prosecute critics, activists and peaceful
demonstrators. Migrant workers remained
insufficiently protected against exploitation.
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. The death penalty
remained in force.

BACKGROUND
Authorities pursued their Omanization policy
to replace foreign workers with nationals. In
May, the sultan announced directives to
create up to 32,000 jobs in the public sector
following protests over unemployment.
In June, Oman, which had the slowest
Covid-19 vaccination roll-out in the Gulf,
accelerated its immunization drive. The
Ministry of Health announced that persons
with disabilities could receive the vaccine at
home.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The government extended an amnesty
scheme allowing free exit to migrant workers
with illegal status until the end of August,
without which they could face criminal and
financial liabilities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained severely
curtailed. In February, the Internal Security
Service arrested four environmental activists
– Ahmed Issa Qatan, Salem Ali al-Maashani,
Amer Bait Saeed and Salem Tabuk – for
commenting on Twitter against a
governmental decision banning camel
grazing in the plain of Dhofar governorate, in
prelude to construction of housing
complexes. The Court of First Instance in
Salalah city sentenced Salem al-Maashani to
a suspended one-month prison term and a
fine, Ahmed Qatan to a suspended six-month
prison term and a fine, and Salem Tabuk to
two months in prison and a fine, for
“publishing information that harms public
order”. Amer Saeed was acquitted.
In March, Oman blocked the social network
app Clubhouse citing “lack of proper
licence”. The app had gained traction during
lockdown and become popular among
activists.
In July, security forces arrested online
activist Gaith al-Shebli, who initiated online
discussions on Twitter on atheism, religion
and freedom of speech. At least two others, a
man and a woman, were arrested for
engaging with him on Twitter and then
released after signing pledges to stop such
activity. In August, authorities detained
Khamis al-Hatali for posting a video online
criticizing the sultan and calling him an
“oppressor”.
In December, the Ministry of Information
shut down the radio programme All
Questions following an interview with a
member of the Shura Council (Consultative
Assembly) who criticized the performance of
the head of the council.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities responded to protests against
unemployment and deteriorating economic

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

conditions in May and June with arrests and
use of force. In May, protests took place in
several cities, including Sohar and Salalah.
Videos posted online showed a heavy
presence of security and military forces firing
tear gas at protesters and arresting scores.
Many were released the same day but others
remained in custody for several days,
including activist Ibrahim al-Baluchi. They
were released after being made to sign
pledges not to participate in future
demonstrations.
In August, authorities arrested Talal alSalmani after he submitted a request to
organize a demonstration calling for the
shutdown of liquor stores and posting online
a related video. In October, a court of first
instance sentenced him to a suspended sixmonth prison term and he was released.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to be denied full rights in
law and in practice. Under the UPR process
in January, Oman rejected recommendations
to withdraw its remaining reservations to
CEDAW, including those granting women
equal rights with men in matters relating to
the nationality of children, marriage, divorce
and other family matters. It also rejected the
recommendations to criminalize marital rape.
Furthermore, in the World Bank’s Women,
Business and the Law index for 2021, which
ranks women’s economic opportunities,
Oman ranked lower than the regional
average, scoring 35.5 out of 100. It noted
that women in Oman were especially
disadvantaged in terms of mobility,
parenthood and marriage.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Migrant workers continued to face abuse and
exploitation due to insufficient protection,
including poor living conditions, forced labour
and human trafficking. Domestic workers,
mostly women, faced long working days,
home confinement and unpaid wages.
During the UPR process, Oman rejected
recommendations to ratify the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of

285

All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families.
In June, the government extended its
Covid-19 vaccination campaign to migrant
workers; before this they had to pay for
vaccines.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down the death
penalty. No executions were reported.

PAKISTAN
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Head of state: Arif Alvi
Head of government: Imran Khan
While some legislative progress was made,
freedom of expression and dissent
continued to be restricted through new laws
and harsher punishments. Police used
excessive force against protesters.
Accountability for enforced disappearances
remained elusive, despite the government
taking some steps to criminalize the
practice. A series of highly publicized cases
highlighted the ongoing problem of violence
against women. Thousands of people were
made homeless following forced evictions.

BACKGROUND
The Senate unanimously passed the
Prevention of Torture and Custodial Death
Bill, an overdue but encouraging step for the
campaign to criminalize torture. The
Supreme Court banned the death penalty for
prisoners with mental health disabilities.
There remained a strong emphasis on
tackling climate change, with Pakistan
hosting the 2021 virtual World Environment
Day. Prime Minister Khan continued to
prioritize climate change mitigation both
domestically and in foreign policy, and the
development of a National Adaptation Plan
was announced. Other existing adaptation
and mitigation measures continued,
including a mass tree planting drive,
protection of wetlands, expanding mangrove
forest cover, an electric vehicle policy and a

286

“green Eurobond” to finance dam
construction. However, the country’s most
climate-vulnerable populations did not seem
to benefit from these measures, and
assistance to cope with extreme weather
remained elusive. Pakistan fulfilled its
commitment to submit its updated and
enhanced National Determined Contributions
ahead of the 26th Conference of the Parties
(COP26), stating the intention to cut
Pakistan’s carbon emissions by 50% by
2030. While a welcome development, no civil
society groups were consulted in the
decision-making process.
The unfolding crisis in neighbouring
Afghanistan brought new security
implications for Pakistan, with the rise of
Taliban-affiliated armed groups in Pakistan.
Pakistan closed its borders to Afghans
travelling without documents following an
influx of refugees.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression intensified, with journalists and
human rights defenders coming under
increased scrutiny.
Retired Professor Muhammad Ismail was
detained in February, following the
cancellation of his bail. He was targeted by
the authorities in connection with his
daughter’s human rights advocacy. Despite
his ill health, hearings to grant him bail were
repeatedly delayed until he was released in
April.
Journalist Absar Alam was shot and injured
outside his home in April. Although the
government was quick to denounce the
attack, the investigation remained ongoing at
the end of the year.
In May, three men, at least one of whom
was armed, broke into the home of journalist
Asad Toor and physically attacked him. Days
after the attack, he was summoned for
questioning by the Federal Investigation
Agency for “defaming” Pakistan. Journalist
Hamid Mir was taken off the air by his
broadcaster – allegedly because of pressure
from the state – after he called for
accountability for Asad Toor’s attack. The

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Minister of Information, Fawad Chaudhry,
tweeted that the government had nothing to
do with the decision.
In September, the Pakistan Media
Development Authority Ordinance was
proposed, which effectively enabled press
censorship by bringing all media under one
regulator, granting the government
unchecked powers to punish journalists
through steep fines, special “media
tribunals” and appointing government
officials to key positions. Petitions were filed
in the Islamabad High Court against the
draconian Removal and Blocking of Unlawful
Online Content (Procedure, Oversight and
Safeguards) Rules – legislation which would
censor online content. Consultations with civil
society did not lead to meaningful changes
and the rules were enacted. Social media
app TikTok was blocked by the Pakistan
Telecommunication Authority three times
during the year after the High Courts of
Peshawar and Sindh imposed bans for
“vulgarity”.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Blasphemy cases continued to be registered
against the beleaguered Ahmadi Muslim
community in Pakistan, putting them at risk
of danger or even the death penalty. At least
10 places of worship for Ahmadi Muslims
were desecrated – often by the police or with
their acquiescence. In January, the Pakistan
Telecommunications Authority banned
access to the US-based website
trueislam.com, which documents the
activities of the Ahmadi community in the
USA – part of a broader pattern of
discrimination and state overreach, which
has included issuing notices to Google and
Wikipedia to remove “sacrilegious content”.
There were sporadic reports of Ahmadi
graves being desecrated. In June, a group of
men prevented the burial of an Ahmadi
woman in a local graveyard in the city of
Sheikhupura.
In May, a crowd of people violently attacked
a police station in the capital, Islamabad, in
an attempt to lynch a man accused of
blasphemy, who was already in police

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

custody. An eight-year-old Hindu boy was
charged with blasphemy in August for
urinating in a Madrassah library, where
religious texts were stored. Following the
charge, locals attacked and destroyed a
Hindu temple in the same area. The child
was detained for a week before charges
against him were dropped. Authorities
restored the temple within a week. A video of
a man bullying a boy from the Hindu
community went viral in July, which led to a
swift intervention from President Alvi, leading
to the arrest of the suspected perpetrator.
After several delays, the Lahore High Court
acquitted Christian couple Shagufta Kausar
and Shafqat Emmanuel in June. The couple
had been on death row for seven years on
false blasphemy charges. Their acquittal
followed nationwide protests held by religious
political group Tehreek-e-Labaik Pakistan
(TLP); a continuation of demonstrations that
began in November 2020. Authorities
arrested the TLP leader, Saad Rizvi, and the
ensuing violence resulted in the deaths of
four police officers and hundreds injured,
and led to the group being banned. On 18
April, the TLP took six police officers hostage
in Lahore to pressure the government into
releasing Saad Rizvi.
There were continued reports of forced
conversions to Islam of young Hindu and
Christian girls. The Ministry of Human Rights
drafted an Anti-Forced Conversion Bill, but
this was rejected by a parliamentary body in
October.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Protests were violently dispersed. In January,
students protesting in-person exams during
the Covid-19 pandemic were met with
excessive force and five of the leaders were
held incommunicado for five days. In March,
Aurat March, the country’s largest women’s
movement, faced hostility and threats from
various actors, including private citizens,
journalists, political parties and an armed
group, who opposed Aurat March’s work
defending women’s rights. Following the
movement’s fourth annual International
Women’s Day march, videos of the event

287

were doctored by non-state actors to levy
blasphemy allegations against the organizers
and participants. This resulted in threatening
letters being sent to Aurat March from armed
groups. In August, Aurat March’s chapter in
the city of Faisalabad was barred by the
authorities from holding a protest calling for
justice for the murder of Noor Mukkadam
(see below), citing Covid-19 restrictions.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Law enforcement agencies cracked down on
demonstrations by the Pashtun Tahaffuz
Movement, which campaigns against the
racial profiling, discrimination and
extrajudicial executions of Pashtuns. In April,
scores of protesters were injured and at least
one killed in the town of Janikhel.
In August, police used excessive force
against health workers and students
protesting a new qualification exam in
Lahore. At least 20 of the participants were
injured. During the protests, an unidentified
spray was deployed by the police, which
acted as a skin irritant and caused respiratory
and vision difficulties.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
A series of cases of sexual and gender-based
violence were reported, underscoring the lack
of protection for women and igniting renewed
calls for redress, accountability and reform.
In June, months after the assault took place,
a video surfaced of business owner Usman
Mirza harassing a woman and her partner,
threatening her with gang rape if she did not
have intercourse in front of him. He was
arrested and charged, along with his six
accomplices.
In July, Quratul Ain was murdered by her
husband in front of her four children in the
city of Hyderabad. A week later, Zahir Jaffer
was arrested for the murder of Noor
Mukkadam, whom he had held hostage at
his home for more than 36 hours. Forensic
investigations found that he had tortured,
raped and shot Noor Mukkadam before
beheading her. Countrywide protests called
for accountability, which remained elusive

288

particularly for wealthy perpetrators and
those with political connections.
The lack of accountability was exemplified
by the shortening of the prison sentence for
Shah Hussain from five years to three years
and six months. He had been imprisoned for
stabbing Khadija Siddiqui in the neck 23
times in 2016 after she rejected his
advances.
In February, a transgender woman, Paras,
began receiving threatening messages from a
man she had rejected, and later from his
friends as videos of her began to be shared
widely. The man forced her to record a video
of herself asking for his forgiveness at his
feet. The Human Rights Commission of
Pakistan drew attention to her case,
prompting the accused to be arrested for
criminal intimidation. He was released on
bail; no trial had been scheduled by the end
of the year.
In April, parliament passed the Domestic
Violence (Prevention and Protection) Bill
2021. However, in July, an adviser to the
Prime Minister, Babar Awan, asked for the
bill to be reviewed by the Council of Islamic
Ideology – an advisory body – to allay the
concerns of conservative parties about the
law being misaligned with Pakistan’s “social
values”. The government denied any official
request had been made, and any feedback
provided by the Council was not made
public. The draft legislation was referred back
to parliament, after the review of the Senate
Standing Committee on Human Rights,
where it remained pending.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Thirteen families seeking information on their
loved ones’ whereabouts were met by the
Minister of Human Rights in April, followed
by a meeting with Prime Minister Khan, who
publicly assured them that information would
be provided. In July, the Prime Minister also
met with Amina Masood Janjua, a long-time
campaigner against enforced
disappearances. Days later, two formerly
disappeared men were freed, including
Hasan Qambrani whose release came one

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

year after his abduction by intelligence
agencies.
In June, a bill proposing amendments to the
Pakistan Criminal Penal Code to criminalize
enforced disappearances was presented
before parliament by the Ministry of Human
Rights. It was sent to the Standing Committee
on Interior in the National Assembly, which
sent problematic feedback distinguishing
between a “legal” and “unlawful”
disappearance. The most recent amendment
bill did not meet the minimum requirements
of international law. Civil society groups
reported that they had not been consulted on
the proposed bill. Just weeks after the bill
was presented, political activist Seengar
Noonari was abducted by law enforcement
agencies for protesting against alleged illegal
land grabs. He was released without charge
and returned to his family after a five-week
disappearance.
Younis Anwar, general secretary of the
Gwadar Fisherfolk Alliance, was abducted
allegedly by security agencies in August, days
before protests were held in Islamabad by
families of victims of enforced
disappearance.
In December, there were unconfirmed
reports of Idris Khattak being declared guilty
of espionage after a secret trial by a military
court. He had been abducted by state
authorities in November 2019 and remained
imprisoned in Adiala Jail, Rawalpindi. His
family had no information about the status of
his case or sentencing.
Also in December, Prime Minister Khan met
with the family of missing journalist Mudassar
Naru after a vigorous online campaign, and
ordered a “complete report” of his
whereabouts.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Thousands were left homeless in the city of
Karachi after houses in the Gujjar Nala
neighbourhood were razed by the Karachi
Metropolitan Corporation. The state offered
no resettlement plan nor compensation, and
media reports estimated that the forced
evictions put 21,000 children out of school.
The Supreme Court rejected a petition from

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

activists calling on it to stop the demolitions.
There were also reports of some antidemolition organizers being abducted or
arrested.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The Senate Standing Committee on Human
Rights unanimously approved the Islamabad
Capital Territory Domestic Workers Bill 2021,
which ensures protection and welfare,
including set working hours, entitlement to
leave and a minimum wage for domestic
staff. The sector was previously almost
entirely unregulated, leaving domestic
workers with little to no protection against
abuse.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Covid-19 remained a serious concern in
Pakistan’s overcrowded prisons. The
provincial government of Sindh released 64
prisoners as a preventative measure, but
appeared to be the only province to do so.
Prison authorities in Punjab and Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa stopped reporting infection
numbers in prisons.
Pakistan’s Covid-19 vaccine uptake was
bolstered by penalties for the unvaccinated in
August, including blocked cell phone service,
and barred access to most public spaces and
public transport. Access to vaccines was
subject to vaccine availability which, owing to
donations from China and the COVAX
initiative, remained steady. Vaccines were
reportedly administered to prisoners as a
priority group.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
After the fall of the Afghan capital, Kabul, in
August, thousands of Afghan people fled to
Pakistan to escape the newly-installed
Taliban regime. More than 2,400 people were
illegally deported back to Afghanistan,
according to media reports, although the
authorities did grant some visas to legally exit
the country. Authorities cited a lack of
additional capacity in existing refugee camps,
and Pakistan’s national security adviser
stated at a press conference that “Pakistan is
in no condition to accept any more refugees”.

289

PALESTINE (STATE
OF)
State of Palestine
Head of state: Mahmoud Abbas
Head of government: Mohammed Shtayyeh
Palestinian authorities in the West Bank
and the Hamas de facto administration in
the Gaza Strip repressed dissent, resorting
to arbitrary detention, torture and other illtreatment, and use of excessive force
against protesters. In Gaza, civilians were
tried before military courts. Palestinian
armed groups fired indiscriminate rockets
into Israel. Vaccine distribution in the West
Bank favoured high-ranking officials over
health workers. Women enjoyed fewer rights
than men in relation to divorce, custody of
children and inheritance, and violence
against women increased.

BACKGROUND
Armed conflict between Israel and
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza erupted
from 10 to 21 May, the fifth conflict in 15
years.
Palestinian governing factions remained
split territorially – Fatah in charge in the West
Bank and Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
Palestinians in both territories remained
under Israeli military occupation and
discriminatory rule that constituted apartheid.
On 15 January, President Abbas announced
a 2021 schedule for parliamentary elections,
presidential elections and elections to the
Palestinian National Council, but on 30 April
cancelled them all. The last elections were
held in 2006. Budget allocations to political
parties, governmental departments, security
personnel and tenders for natural resource
management were corrupt, according to
Aman, a Palestinian think tank advocating for
transparent governance.
On 10 March, Yahya Sinwar, a former
commander of a Palestinian armed group,
was re-elected head of Hamas in Gaza. On 1
August, Ismail Haniyeh was re-elected leader

290

of Hamas’s political bureau. Independent
monitors did not observe the internal Hamas
elections.
In June, the West Bank-based Palestinian
authorities replaced elected municipal
councils with caretaker committees
supervised by the Ministry of Local
Government.
Israel’s blockade on Gaza since 2007
forbade the import of materials it deemed a
security threat, including spare mechanical
parts and chemicals, some of which were
brought in through irregular and unsafe
tunnels under the Gaza-Egypt perimeter.
Tunnels were also used to bypass taxes
collected by Hamas on consumables from
Egypt. On 18 April, the Egyptian army said it
had destroyed five tunnels.
On 30 August and 28 December, President
Abbas met the Israeli defense minister as
part of confidence-building measures.
In October, Fatah and Hamas
representatives participated in talks in Egypt
to form a unity government.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 24 June, political critic Nizar Banat died
in the custody of Palestinian Preventive
Security forces after they arrested and
tortured him in Hebron, southern West
Bank.1 This triggered demonstrations for
freedom of expression in other Palestinian
towns,2 which the authorities met with
excessive and unnecessary force.
Demonstrators and bystanders were arrested
and allegedly tortured. According to
Addameer, a Palestinian prisoner support
organization, Palestinian security forces took
at least 15 protesters, journalists and human
rights defenders to a detention facility in
Jericho city in the West Bank known as “the
slaughterhouse” in late June and early July,
in the context of the protests. An Addameer
lawyer said they were accused of “inciting
sectarian and racial strife”.
During demonstrations on 26 and 27 June
in Ramallah city in central West Bank,
security forces in civilian clothes attacked

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

women protesters, broke equipment and
confiscated phones of eight journalists.
On 21 and 22 September, police entered
Azhar university campus in Gaza City and
beat 15 students at an induction event,
according to the Independent Commission
for Human Rights (ICHR), the Palestinian
national human rights institution. The ICHR
recorded 129 complaints of arbitrary
detention in the West Bank and 80 in Gaza,
many related to freedom of expression and
association.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
A presidential decree on 2 March required
NGOs to submit their annual plan to the
government for approval.
Around 12 people were arrested ahead of a
planned peaceful protest on 5 July. Among
them was Ubai Aboudi, who worked for
Bisan, a Palestinian NGO working for
economic and social rights. He was charged
with “participating in an illegal gathering”. On
30 November, the Magistrates Court in
Ramallah acquitted him and seven other
activists of all charges for lack of evidence.
On 4 July, Mohannad Karajah, director of
Lawyers for Justice, a Palestinian human
rights group, was arrested while working. The
Prosecutor-General questioned him on 10
November on charges of “slandering the
Palestinian Authority”, “participating in an
illegal gathering” and “inciting sectarian
strife”. Mohannad Karajah said that he was
told that the General Intelligence Service’s
complaint against him and Lawyers for
Justice related to their media campaign
against the illegal detention of political
activists.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Widespread use of torture by Palestinian
authorities continued. The ICHR received
104 complaints of torture and other illtreatment against authorities in the West
Bank and 104 against authorities in Gaza. On
6 September, prosecutors completed an
investigation into the torture and death in
custody of Nizar Banat. An autopsy found
fractures, bruises and abrasions all over his

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

body. Fourteen low-rank officers of Preventive
Security forces in Hebron were put on trial in
September.
On 22 May, Tarek Khudairi, a political critic,
was arrested at an event in Ramallah. He told
Amnesty International that he was slapped on
the face, shoved against a wall during
interrogation, kept in stress positions and
denied medical care for two days.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Presidential decrees on 11 January
appointing members of the Transitional High
Judicial Council, which replaced the High
Judicial Council and dissolved the High Court
in in 2019, further undermined the
independence of the judiciary.
On 21 October, the Hamas-run Authority for
Military Justice in Gaza announced the
sentencing of 13 men convicted of drug
trafficking. The defendants, all civilians, were
tried in military courts without access to legal
advice, and some said they were tortured to
extract “confessions”, according to the
Palestinian Centre for Human Rights. One
defendant was sentenced to death, 10 were
sentenced to between 10 and 18 years of
hard labour, and two were acquitted.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Between 10 and 21 May, Palestinian armed
groups in the Gaza Strip fired thousands of
rockets towards Israel, most of which were
intercepted by Israel’s “Iron Dome”
technology. The firing of indiscriminate
rockets is a war crime. Thirteen people in
Israel died as a result of rocket attacks,
including Khalil Awad and his 16-year-old
daughter Nadine on 12 May when a rocket
hit their home’s yard in Dahmash near Lod
town in central Israel. The rockets also
caused at least 20 deaths and 80 injuries in
the Gaza Strip, according to Al Mezan, a
Palestinian human rights organization. Bara
al-Gharabli, aged six, and Mustafa
Mohammad Al-Aabed , aged 14, were killed
on 10 May in Jabalya city in northern Gaza
Strip, according to Defense for Children
International-Palestine.

291

The UN Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) discovered a tunnel apparently
used by Palestinian armed groups under its
Zaitoun schools in Gaza City, which was hit
by Israeli missiles on 13 and 15 May.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 3 March, ICC prosecutor Fatou Bensouda
initiated an investigation into the situation in
Palestine. On 27 May, the UN Human Rights
Council established an international
commission of inquiry led by Navi Pillay to
investigate violations in the Occupied
Palestinian Territories (OPT), and in Israel.
The Palestinian leadership welcomed the
establishment of the commission. Both
investigations aimed to cover alleged
violations and crimes by the Palestinian
authorities and armed groups, as well as
those by Israeli authorities (see Israel and the
OPT entry).

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate of six men subjected to enforced
disappearance by the Palestinian authorities
in the West Bank in 2002 remained
unknown, and the authorities took no steps to
investigate.
Two Israeli citizens with mental health
conditions, Avera Mengistu and Hisham AlSayed, remained missing since they entered
the Gaza Strip in 2014 and 2015
respectively. Hamas used their detention in
negotiations for the release of Palestinians
held by Israel. Hamas provided no
information on the men’s health or on their
ability to communicate with their families in
Israel.

were not distributed fairly and transparently,
and that only 5,533 out of 40,000 eligible
hardship cases in the Gaza Strip had
received payments.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women continued to have fewer rights than
men in relation to divorce, custody of
children and inheritance. Relatives attacked
women who refused to give up their
inheritance or sued for other rights relating to
personal status, with inadequate protection
from the authorities.
Violence against women increased in the
context of Covid-19 measures and the
worsening economic crisis. According to the
Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and
Counselling, 28 women and girls were killed
by domestic violence. On 16 June, a woman
was killed by a male relative striking her head
following a dispute over inheritance in Gaza.
On 8 September, representatives of
government, civil society and UN agencies
pledged increased support for countering
gender-based violence. After women’s
shelters were closed during Covid-19
lockdowns, Palestinian hospitals opened safe
rooms for women.

DEATH PENALTY
The Hamas de facto administration passed
death sentences in Gaza. No executions were
carried out.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
While olive and grape harvests suffered for
consecutive years due to climate change, the
Palestinian authorities did not implement
proposals for low-resource climate adaptation
farming solutions.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION

The health ministry in the West Bank
confirmed on 2 March that it had distributed
about 1,200 Covid-19 vaccines to highranking officials rather than to health
workers.
On 14 October, a West Bank-based
governmental audit found that welfare
payments for people affected by Covid-19

In the Palestinian-controlled areas of the
West Bank, a third of solid waste went to
informal landfills that lacked environmental
protections, and only 1% of solid waste was
recycled.

292

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

1. “Palestine: Investigation into death in custody of Palestinian activist
must be transparent, effective”, 24 June
2. “Palestinian security forces escalate brutal campaign of repression”,
7 July

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Head of state: Elizabeth II, represented by Robert
Dadae
Head of government: James Marape
Lack of capacity in the healthcare system
and insufficient information about
vaccination programmes limited people’s
access to adequate healthcare. Genderbased violence remained pervasive,
including in the context of a growing
number of violent attacks against women
following accusations of sorcery.
Development and environmental destruction
negatively impacted the lives and
livelihoods of Indigenous peoples.
Continued intercommunal violence killed
dozens of people. Incidents of arbitrary
arrests and police brutality occurred.

BACKGROUND
The government and Bougainville leaders
reached an agreement on the timetable to
finalize the terms of secession of Bougainville
from Papua New Guinea following the 2019
independence referendum. Under the
agreement, Bougainville will assume
independent sovereign powers by 2027.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In October, following a renewed surge in
Covid-19 infections, hospitals in at least three
provinces reported shortages of medical
supplies and healthcare workers.
Less than 3% of the population were fully
vaccinated against Covid-19 by the end of
the year. Authorities failed to effectively
combat widespread vaccine hesitancy, or to
provide accurate and timely information

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

about the virus and the vaccine programme
through languages and formats that were
accessible to all segments of the population.
Healthcare workers were attacked by
members of the public and also remained at
high risk of contracting Covid-19. In October
in the city of Lae, health workers who were
administering Covid-19 and polio vaccines
had rocks thrown at them.1

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The police failed to adequately protect
women from violence in the home and in the
community. Violent attacks against women
accused of sorcery were reported throughout
the year. In one case in March, a woman and
her 19-year-old daughter were physically
assaulted and thrown off a bridge by
community members in Goroka after being
accused of sorcery following the death of the
woman’s husband from Covid-19. Local
human rights organizations reported that
sorcery-related violence and domestic
violence increased in the context of the
pandemic.
A Special Parliamentary Committee on
Gender-based Violence established in 2020
commenced hearings in May, with further
hearings postponed until 2022.
In June, male students at the University of
Papua New Guinea disrupted a protest by
female students and staff against allegations
of widespread sexual harassment at the
university. Journalists covering the event were
also attacked, but no serious injuries were
reported.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In January, Indigenous people in New Ireland
province staged a sit-in protest after the
government failed to pay agreed
compensation for the development of
Kavieng Airport on their lands.
In July, the Indigenous people known as
“shark callers”, also from New Ireland
province, held a cultural festival to protest
against the impacts of deep-sea mining for
minerals and metals on their livelihoods and
culture. The government declined to join the
increasing number of states, NGOs and civil

293

society groups calling for a ban on deep-sea
mining.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Intercommunal violence continued with 38
people killed in two separate incidents in
Hela and Eastern Highlands provinces in
February and April respectively. The lack of
an effective and adequately resourced police
service contributed to challenges in
addressing such violence and other law and
order concerns in remote areas.

DEATH PENALTY
On 31 July, the Supreme Court revoked
orders issued by the National Court in 2017
that had temporarily stayed executions,
pending the establishment of clemency
procedures under the Constitution.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In April, a lawyer, Laken Lepatu Agilio, was
assaulted and arrested by police after filing a
corruption complaint against the governor of
Enga province. The corruption allegations
related to a compensation scheme by the
Canadian-owned Porgera gold mine, for
human rights violations including forced
evictions, rape and other sexual violence by
police and private security personnel at the
mine. A police officer was subsequently
disciplined for the lawyer’s arbitrary arrest.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Papua New Guinea and Australian
governments ended the offshore processing
agreement between the two countries in
October. However, it was unclear what
protections or resettlement options would be
available to the 88 refugees and 36 asylum
seekers remaining in Papua New Guinea at
year end.
1. Papua New Guinea: Health in Crisis, Amnesty International
Submission for the Universal Periodic Review, 39th Session, UPR
Working Group (ASA: 34/4020/2021), 23 April

294

PARAGUAY
Republic of Paraguay
Head of state and government: Mario Abdo Benítez
Police responded with unnecessary and
excessive use of force to protests over the
government's management of the Covid-19
pandemic and alleged corruption. Several
protesters were arrested and faced criminal
charges. The health system collapsed as the
pandemic intensified. There was no
significant progress regarding several cases
of human rights violations in previous years,
including cases of torture and violations of
LGBTI and Indigenous rights. There were
high numbers of cases of sexual abuse of
children and adolescents and violence
against women. The country was shaken by
forced evictions, especially of rural and
Indigenous communities.

BACKGROUND
The UPR of Paraguay’s human rights record
resulted in more than 200 recommendations
of which seven were rejected and two were
partially accepted. The Inter-American Court
of Human Rights found Paraguay responsible
for violating judicial independence and legal
protections in the case of two former
Supreme Court justices dismissed in 2003
and the UN Human Rights Committee found
Paraguay responsible for violating the rights
of an Indigenous community.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, thousands of people throughout
the country took to the streets to protest
against alleged corruption in the pandemic
response as well as the collapse of the health
system. There were multiple complaints of
excessive use of force by police. Vivian Genes
and other student protesters were arrested,
charged and accused of involvement in a fire
at the premises of the ruling party, the
National Republican Association.
The authorities announced that they would
acquiesce to the facts presented before the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

regarding the killing of the journalist Santiago
Leguizamón in 1991, acknowledging their
responsibility. Deliberations regarding
reparations continued.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The health system collapsed as the Covid-19
pandemic intensified and thousands of
people were unable to access intensive care
units or receive adequate healthcare.
Implementation of the Covid-19 vaccination
plan was initially intermittent and slow. There
were allegations of corruption and strong
criticism of mismanagement regarding the
purchase of vaccines. As the vaccination rollout progressed, the number of deaths and
infections decreased.
Covid-19 claimed the lives of over 14,367
people in 2021, more than six times as many
as in 2020. The pandemic further exposed
historic underfunding of the health system
and the resulting inadequate access to public
healthcare, particularly for those with limited
resources.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The state failed to return the ancestral lands
to the Tekoha Sauce community of the Avá
Guaraní people. They had been evicted on
two occasions in previous years, one of them
to allow the construction of a hydroelectric
power plant in Itaipú.1
In October, the UN Human Rights
Committee issued a resolution holding
Paraguay responsible for violating the human
rights of the Campo Agua'e Indigenous
community through contamination by toxic
agrochemicals on their lands.

LGBTI PEOPLE´S RIGHTS
No progress was reported in the criminal
cases concerning attacks on LGBTI people
during a Pride march in 2019 in the city of
Hernandarias. The Hernandarias municipality
had banned the march in part as “contrary to
public morals”. A lawsuit against the
municipality´s decision filed by Amnesty
International in October 2019 also remained
stalled.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

No progress was made in investigations into
the alleged torture of 35 people at a naval
base in the city of Ciudad del Este in 2020.
By the end of the year, more than 18 months
after the incident, no one had been charged
in the case.

Despite a commitment made during a
previous UPR review, the authorities did not
identify a mechanism for the protection of
human rights defenders and did not
disseminate the Declaration on Human
Rights Defenders.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS

CHILDREN´S RIGHTS

By the end of the year, Paraguay had not
ratified the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR
or the Regional Agreement on Access to
Information, Public Participation and Justice
in Environmental Matters in Latin America
and the Caribbean (the Escazú Agreement).
The number of forced evictions increased,
several of them affecting Indigenous
communities. Many evicted groups had no
guarantees of effective judicial remedies and
the evictions were carried out without
granting them any resettlement alternatives,
among other irregularities.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The authorities did not implement sufficient
and effective measures to prevent, identify
and address cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse of children and adolescents.
The Ministry for Childhood registered 3,850
cases of mistreatment and sexual abuse of
children between January and October. Of
these, 1,345 related to sexual abuse and
exploitation. The Public Prosecutor's Office
received 2,284 complaints of child sexual
abuse in the first 10 months of the year.
The authorities did not guarantee the sexual
and reproductive rights of girls. By
September the Ministry of Public Health and
Social Welfare had registered 357 births to
girls aged between 10 and 14.2 However, in

295

December, a technical working group was set
up to address the problem and a single
comprehensive care route was finally
approved.
The authorities failed to shed light on the
circumstances surrounding the deaths of two
11-year-old Argentine girls during an
operation by the Joint Task Force in the
department of Concepción in September
2020. There were also no answers regarding
the flawed investigation by the Public
Prosecutor's Office and the authorities failed
to establish a special commission to
investigate the incident or to seek the
assistance of the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights, as requested by civil
society organizations.

WOMEN´S RIGHTS
In November, a sentencing court found a
priest responsible for the sexual harassment
charges brought by Alexa Torres, and he
faced a suspended sentence of one year
imprisonment.
A bill declaring femicides a national
emergency was passed in the context of an
increasing number of killings of women.
Congress also discussed another bill which
would define cases as family violence even
where the perpetrator and victim are not
cohabiting. The Supreme Court of Justice
approved the protocol for dealing with cases
of domestic violence against women and the
Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare
issued a manual on support services for
victims of domestic violence.
The Public Defender’s Office reported in
mid-November that a record 2,312 women
had been assisted in the first six months of
the year within the framework of Law 5777.
The National Police and Ministry of Women
SOS helpline registered 4,469 cases of
domestic violence in the same period.
A bill to prevent, punish and eradicate
gender-based political violence against
women was before Congress at the end of the
year.

296

1. Paraguay: Indigenous Community at Risk of Eviction (Index: AMR
45/0614/2019), 2 July.
2. Paraguay: They Are Girls, Not Mothers: Steps to Ending Sexual
Violence against Children and Adolescents and Forcing Girls into
Motherhood in Paraguay (Index: AMR 45/5031/2021), 1 December

PERU
Republic of Peru
Head of state and government: José Pedro Castillo
Terrones (replaced Francisco Rafael Sagasti
Hochhausler in July)
Peru recorded the highest number of
Covid-19 deaths per million people.
Concerns remained about impunity for
excessive use of force by law enforcement
officials. Formal criminal charges were
brought in cases of forced sterilization and
proceedings in other cases of systematic
sexual violence resumed. The authorities
had yet to adequately address the health
crisis experienced by Indigenous peoples
due to environmental contamination by
toxic substances. Cases of gender-based
violence increased, as did the number of
missing women.

BACKGROUND
During the first half of the year, presidential
and congressional elections were held. The
campaign was marked by discrimination and
racism towards voters from rural and
Indigenous peoples’ communities.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Investigations by the Attorney General’s Office
into the deaths of Inti Sotelo and Bryan
Pintado, two young men killed by police
during a protest in November 2020, made
slow progress. Although the government
granted the families economic, health and
educational assistance, their right to truth
and justice had not been fulfilled by the end
of the year.
The 2020 Police Protection Law, which
includes a presumption in favour of the
police about the reasonableness of the use of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

lethal force, contrary to international human
rights law, remained in force.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Although the Ministry of Justice approved an
Intersectoral Mechanism for the Protection of
Human Rights Defenders in April, three
defenders were killed during the year.
According to the NGO Global Witness, Peru
was the third most lethal country in South
America for human rights defenders.
Congress had yet to ratify the Regional
Agreement on Access to Information, Public
Participation and Justice in Environmental
Matters in Latin America and the Caribbean
(Escazú Agreement) by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to official figures, since the
beginning of the pandemic, 2,301,177
people had been infected with Covid-19 and
almost 202,741 deaths had been recorded,
making Peru the country with the highest
number of deaths per million people. Lack of
oxygen and insufficient hospital capacity
meant that care could not keep up with
demand. Despite initial scandals over
corruption and the failure by government
officials to respect prioritization in the
vaccination programme, the process
continued with clear prioritization criteria and
in accordance with international standards.
By the end of the year more than 80% of the
target population (those over 12 years of age)
has been vaccinated.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In July, the Cusco Regional Health Authority
shared its Action Plan with Amnesty
International and environmental health
specialist Fernando Serrano of Saint Louis
University.1 The plan had been ordered by a
December 2020 court ruling to address the
health crisis caused by toxic substances
among Indigenous communities in the
mining area of Espinar. By the end of 2021,
the plan, which is not based on specific
analysis of the risks to human health and the
environment related to exposure to toxic

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

metals in Espinar, had yet to be adequately
consulted with the communities.2
Thanks to the efforts of the National
Platform of Persons Affected by Toxic Metals,
a special multisectoral plan to ensure
medical care for those affected was approved
at the end of the year.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Despite the approval of the Gender Parity
Law for Political Participation in 2020, the
composition of the new government’s cabinet
was 87% male, compared to 58% under the
previous government.
The pandemic exacerbated economic
inequality by increasing the burden of unpaid
care work shouldered by women. According
to the National Statistics Institute, economic
recovery favoured men more than women;
paid employment increased by 15% for men,
while for women it increased by only 8%.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the Ministry of the Interior’s
Missing Persons Register, 12,984 women
were reported missing in 2021, compared to
11,828 in 2020. Women represented 64% of
the total number of missing persons, but this
was not recognized by the government as a
form of gender-based violence.
According to the Ombudsperson’s Office, in
2021 146 women were victims of femicide,
compared to 136 in 2020.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Victims of forced sterilizations more than 25
years earlier were still seeking truth, justice
and reparation. In March, the Public
Prosecutor's Office finally brought charges
against former president Alberto Fujimori and
several health ministers under his
administration as the “indirect perpetrators”.
In December, the judiciary ordered a judicial
investigation against them. However, the
executive had yet to grant reparations to the
victims, despite the fact that the official
registry of victims of forced sterilizations
contained more than 7,000 registered cases.
During the pandemic, the number of births
to girls under 10 years of age was

297

nearly three times higher than in 2019 (rising
from nine to 24), and there were 1,149 births
to girls under of 14, according to the Ministry
of Health. According to the United Nations
Population Fund, four girls under 15 years of
age gave birth every day in Peru during the
year.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Draft bills were submitted by a group of
members of congress on legal recognition of
gender identity for transgender people and
marriage equality for same-sex couples.
However, these bills had not been approved
by the end of the year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Peru hosted more than half a million asylum
seekers and more than 1.2 million
Venezuelan nationals in 2021, 43% of whom
were in an irregular situation, preventing
them from accessing rights such as
healthcare.
The processing of asylum applications was
suspended in February 2020 due to Covid-19
restrictions; the suspension remained in
place until the end of 2021.
In January, the Peruvian government
militarized its borders to restrict the arrival of
asylum seekers and migrants. This led to
several incidents of intimidation by the
Peruvian military, such as shooting into the
air to disperse groups of Venezuelans at the
border.
Two regularization processes for migrants
and asylum seekers were opened, but were
marked by bureaucratic hurdles, prohibitive
costs, or arbitrarily not allowing regularization
of certain groups, such as children and
adolescents in family groups. In December,
the regularization process was started for
more than 3,000 children and adolescents.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
According to the Ombudsperson’s Office,
only 20% of the bodies of more than 21,000
people on the National Register of Forced
Disappearances related to the internal armed
conflict (1980-2000) had been recovered.

298

On 27 September, the trial resumed of
members of the Peruvian military accused of
systematically raping scores of women in
Manta (Huancavelica province) more than 35
years earlier, raising hopes that victims of
human rights violations might finally obtain
truth, justice and reparation.
1. Peru: Authorities Must Redesign and Consult on Action Plan to
Address Health Crisis Caused by Toxic Substances in Espinar (Index:
AMR 46/4767/2021), 23 September
2. Failed State of Health: Health Emergency in Indigenous Peoples of
Espinar, Peru (Index: AMR 46/3829/2021), 18 May

PHILIPPINES
Republic of the Philippines
Head of state and government: Rodrigo Roa Duterte
Lack of accountability continued to
facilitate unlawful killings and other human
rights violations under the government’s
“war on drugs” campaign. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) announced an
investigation into crimes against humanity.
Human rights defenders, political activists
and politicians were subjected to unlawful
killings, arbitrary arrest and detention, and
harassment. Indigenous peoples were the
target of attacks by the authorities and
unknown assailants. Inadequate access to
healthcare worsened as Covid-19 infection
rates rose. Maria Ressa, journalist and critic
of the “war on drugs”, won a Nobel Peace
Prize but continued to face decades in jail
for pending cases brought against her
including by the government.

BACKGROUND
Restrictions remained in place in response to
the Covid-19 pandemic that
disproportionately affected people living in
poverty. Preparations began for the May
2022 presidential elections.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
IMPUNITY
Extrajudicial executions and other human
rights violations continued under the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

government’s ongoing “war on drugs”.
President Duterte continued to incite violence
against people suspected of using or selling
drugs. In his State of the Nation Address in
July, he also called on Congress to legislate
for free legal assistance for members of the
security forces accused of unlawful killings.1
In October, the Department of Justice
released partial information from its review of
just 52 of the thousands of cases involving
killings by police during anti-drug operations.
Although the review was woefully inadequate
and failed to meet international standards, its
limited findings contradicted police claims
that lethal force had been justified, and
confirmed violations documented by local
and international human rights groups.2
In September, the ICC’s pre-trial chamber
authorized an investigation into crimes,
including the crime against humanity of
murder committed in the context of the “war
on drugs”, throughout the country between
2016 and 2019, and killings in the Davao
area between 2011 and 2016.3 The
government said it would not cooperate with
the investigation. In November, the ICC
announced that it had temporarily suspended
the investigation, following a request by the
Philippine government.
UN experts and human rights groups
repeated calls for the UN Human Rights
Council (UNHRC) to set up an international
investigation into killings and other human
rights violations, amid concerns that the joint
UN capacity-building and technical
assistance programme established under a
2020 UNHRC resolution was failing to
advance justice and protect human rights.

arrested and killed. Allegations by the
security forces that firearms and explosives
were seized during the raids, and that those
killed were resisting arrest, were denied by
the groups involved.4 In a speech given two
days before the raids, President Duterte said
that he had ordered the police and military to
“kill” communist rebels. In December, the
Department of Justice recommended the
filing of murder charges against 17 law
enforcement officials for the death of labour
leader Emmanuel Asuncion during the raids.
Opposition to the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA),
which granted the government broad powers
to detain perceived enemies of the state,
continued. In December, the Supreme Court,
acting on petitions challenging the
constitutionality of the ATA struck down two
portions of the law, including parts of Section
4 that vaguely and broadly defined acts of
terror, which the Court found to be
“overbroad and violative of the freedom of
expression”. However, the law remained
flawed and open to abuse.5 In July, a court in
Olongapo city in Central Luzon dismissed
charges against two members of the
Indigenous Aeta community as a case of
mistaken identities. The case was believed to
be the first brought under the ATA since it
was introduced in July 2020.
Prisoner of conscience Senator Leila de
Lima, one of the first opposition politicians
targeted by the Duterte administration, spent
her fifth year in detention. In February, a
court dismissed one of three politicallymotivated charges against her – that of
conspiracy to commit illegal drug trading.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT

Attacks persisted against Indigenous peoples
and Indigenous peoples’ rights activists. In
January, the Cordillera police chief issued an
order to “shoot-to-kill” Windel Bolinget, a
prominent Indigenous peoples’ rights
advocate, if he resisted a warrant for his
arrest. A politically motivated murder charge
against Windel Bolinget was dismissed in
July.6
On 28 February, unknown assailants shot
dead Julie Catamin, the chief of Roosevelt

The linking of organizations and individuals to
communist groups by the authorities, known
as “red-tagging”, led to killings and
harassment of human rights defenders,
political activists and others. On 7 March,
security forces killed nine people and
arrested six others in simultaneous raids
against “red-tagged” groups in Southern
Tagalog. Environmental activists and urban
poor community leaders were among those

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

299

village in Tapaz municipality, Capiz province.
She had been a witness in a case relating to
a police raid in December 2020 in which
community leaders from the Tumandok
Indigenous people were arrested and others
killed. On 3 March, masked assailants
stabbed and seriously injured Angelo Karlo
Guillen, the lawyer for the Tumandok
community leaders, in Iloilo City.
In February, security forces raided a school
in Cebu City in which students from
Indigenous communities displaced by armed
conflict were living. Seven people, including
students, teachers and a community elder,
were arrested without warrants and charged
with kidnapping and human trafficking. They
were detained for three months before the
charges were dismissed.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
In March, the House of Representatives
passed a bill amending the Dangerous Drugs
Act of 2002. The bill contained provisions
that could encourage arbitrary arrests and
would violate the right to fair trial, including
the presumption of innocence of people
accused of using or selling drugs.7 The bill
remained before the Senate at year end.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, a sharp increase in Covid-19 cases
and deaths was recorded, leading to
accusations of government mishandling of
the pandemic.8 The already inadequate
healthcare system lacked sufficient hospital
beds and health workers to treat Covid-19
patients. The government began a Covid-19
vaccination programme in March, but there
were concerns about slow implementation,
uneven geographical distribution and
discriminatory access to vaccines.
In August, a report by the independent
statutory body, the Commission on Audit,
revealed deficiencies in the Department of
Health’s handling of funds allocated to the
Covid-19 response, including irregularities in
the transfer of funds between government
departments. The findings prompted a
Senate Committee investigation, which

300

recommended that perjury charges be filed
against senior executives of a company that
had been awarded PPE procurement
contracts, Pharmally Pharmaceutical
Corporation, and several former government
aides.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
In October, journalist Maria Ressa was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, jointly with
Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov, in
recognition of her fight for press freedom in
the Philippines. In June and August, two
charges of cyber libel against her were
dismissed, but she continued to face other
charges for which she could face up to 60
years in prison if found guilty.9
In April, authorities “red-tagged” individuals
and groups involved in running “community
pantries” that provided food to those in need
because of unemployment during the
pandemic.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In August, a report documented abuses of
workers’ rights in the nickel mining sector on
Dinagat Island, including employment
without contracts, delayed payment of wages
and non-payment of compulsory benefits.10

DEATH PENALTY
On 2 March, the House of Representatives
passed House Bill 7814 to amend the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of
2002, which would reintroduce the death
penalty for drugs-related offences. The bill
remained pending before the Senate at year’s
end. Several other bills to reintroduce the
death penalty also remained pending before
the House of Representatives and the
Senate.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 18 September, eight LGBTI individuals
were injured when an improvised explosive
device went off during a volleyball
tournament in Maguindanao province. The
Bangsamoro parliament condemned the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

incident as a hate crime and called on the
authorities to investigate.
1. “Philippines: Widespread killings, rampant impunity show real state
of nation”, 26 July
2. Philippines: Government Review a Woefully Insufficient Response to
Victims Of “War on Drugs” (Index: ASA 35/4911/2021), 22 October
3. “Philippines: ICC launches probe in deadly “war on drugs”, seeks to
end impunity”, 16 September
4. “Philippines: Brutal government crackdown against activists must
end now”, 8 March
5. “Philippines: Anti-Terror Act remains dangerous and fundamentally
flawed”, 9 December
6. Philippines: End Attacks Against Indigenous Peoples (Index: ASA
35/3677/2021), 11 February
7. Philippines: Amendments to Dangerous Drugs Act an alarming
kneejerk reaction to PNP-PDEA shootout”, 3 March
8. “Philippines: Country faces health and human rights crisis one year
into the Covid-19 pandemic”, 26 April
9. “Philippines: Maria Ressa and Dmitry Muratov’s Nobel Peace Prize
win is a victory for press freedom Globally”, 8 October
10. Philippines: Undermining Workers’ Rights: Labour Rights Abuses in
Nickel Supply Chains (Index: ASA 35/4389/2021), 26 August

POLAND
Republic of Poland
Head of state: Andrzej Duda
Head of government: Mateusz Morawiecki
The authorities continued to erode the
independence of the judiciary and the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
ruled that two of Poland’s high judicial
bodies did not meet fair trial standards.
There was a further rollback of sexual and
reproductive rights. Criminal charges used
to curtail freedom of expression were
dropped, or the activists acquitted. Several
regional councils withdrew anti-LGBTI
declarations but violations of LGBTI rights
continued. Border guards pushed asylum
seekers back to Belarus. Poland did not
implement the ECtHR ruling regarding Abu
Zubaydah, who remained held in the US
detention facility in Guantánamo Bay,
Cuba.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
The government continued to target judges
and prosecutors who raised concerns over
the lack of independence of the judiciary. In
January, the National Prosecutor transferred
seven prosecutors to new posts within 48
hours and hundreds of kilometres away from
their place of residence. Six of the
prosecutors were members of an association
defending the rule of law. NGOs criticized the
transfers as punitive.
International concern over the erosion of
judicial independence continued.1 In March,
the European Commission (EC) referred
Poland to the EU Court of Justice over its
2020 law on the judiciary, which prevents
courts in the country from submitting
requests to the Court of Justice for
preliminary rulings in relation to disciplinary
proceedings against judges. In July, the Court
of Justice ruled that the Disciplinary Chamber
of Poland’s Supreme Court lacked the
independence and impartiality required by
EU law.
In response, Poland’s Constitutional
Tribunal held that such rulings were not
compatible with the Constitution and asserted
the primacy of Polish law over EU law. In
November, the Constitutional Tribunal
declared Article 6 (the right to a fair trial) of
the European Convention on Human Rights
incompatible with the Constitution. In
December, the EC launched another
infringement procedure against Poland over
the rulings of the Constitutional Tribunal.
The ECtHR also ruled that Poland’s
Constitutional Tribunal and the Supreme
Court’s Disciplinary Chamber failed to meet
fair trial requirements. In May, in Xero Flor v
Poland, the ECtHR held that the actions of
the legislature and the executive amounted to
unlawful external influence in the election of
three judges of the Constitutional Tribunal in
2015. In July, in Reczkowicz v Poland, the
ECtHR held that the Disciplinary Chamber
was not an independent tribunal as
irregularities in the appointment of its judges
severely compromised its legitimacy.
In April, the ECtHR formally requested a
response from Poland about alleged

301

violations in the case of Judge Paweł
Juszczyszyn, who had been suspended by
the Disciplinary Chamber in 2020 after he
questioned the independence of the National
Council of the Judiciary.
Judge Igor Tuleya, an outspoken critic of
government interference with judicial
independence, continued to face criminal
proceedings after the Disciplinary Chamber
removed his immunity in 2020.2

protesters to stations outside Warsaw, which
hindered their access to lawyers.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

In October, the Group of Experts (GREVIO)
monitoring implementation of the Council of
Europe Convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention)
urged Poland to fully incorporate the notion
of freely given consent, as required by the
Istanbul Convention, and to ensure
appropriate sanctions for all non-consensual
sexual acts. GREVIO also criticized Poland for
the lack of action on domestic violence.

In March, the District Court in Płock
acquitted three activists who faced charges of
“offending religious beliefs” for possessing
and distributing posters and stickers
depicting the Virgin Mary with an LGBTI
rainbow halo. An appeal by the prosecutor
was pending at the end of the year.
In June, the police closed the investigation
into a charge of “theft and burglary” allegedly
committed by two activists involved in a 2020
poster campaign accusing the government of
manipulating Covid-19 statistics.
In November, a district court in Warsaw
convicted journalist Ewa Siedlecka of criminal
defamation for articles she wrote in 2019.
She had exposed a hate campaign linked to
the then deputy justice minister, which
targeted judges opposing “reforms” which
undermined judicial independence.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

There was a further rollback on sexual and
reproductive rights.3 In January, the
Constitutional Tribunal published a ruling that
the law permitting abortions in cases of
severe fetal impairments was
unconstitutional. Hospitals in Poland stopped
providing abortion services in cases of such
impairments to avoid medical staff facing
criminal liability. In July, the ECtHR formally
requested a response from Poland in the
cases of 12 individuals who claimed that the
country’s abortion legislation violated their
right to a private and family life and the
prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment.

In response to continuing violations of LGBTI
people’s rights, the European Commission
launched infringement procedures. In
September it requested that five regional
councils withdraw anti-LGBTI declarations
adopted in 2019, making it a condition of
receipt of EU funding. In response, also in
September, four regional councils withdrew
such resolutions.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The publication of the Constitutional Court
ruling banning abortions in cases of severe
fetal impairments triggered protests in
January and February. During
demonstrations held on 27 January in
Warsaw, the police arrested 20 protesters
and filed 250 cases alleging administrative
offences. The police took the arrested

302

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Border guard officials admitted pushing back
asylum seekers to Belarus. Between 18 and
19 August a group of 32 asylum seekers from
Afghanistan, who had entered from Belarus,
was pushed back to the Belarussian side of
the border. All 32 tried to seek international
protection in Poland but Polish border guards
would not allow them to access Polish
territory. Despite two orders by the ECtHR,
Poland failed to provide the group with food,
water, shelter, medical assistance and access
to lawyers.4
In October, parliament adopted
amendments to the Law on Foreigners and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the Law on Granting Protection to Foreigners
under which those who cross the border
“irregularly” must leave the territory of Poland
and are banned from re-entry. The law thus
makes it generally impossible for people who
enter “irregularly” to seek asylum in Poland.
On 2 September, the President declared a
state of emergency on the border with
Belarus, which prohibited access to the
border area by journalists, media workers
and NGOs, and barred lawyers from
accessing asylum seekers.5 On 1 December,
an amendment to the law on border
protection banned entry into the border area
without time limits.

PORTUGAL

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY

In April, Abu Zubaydah, a Palestinian
national detained in Guantánamo Bay,
submitted a petition to the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention calling for his
release. Abu Zubaydah had been held in a
secret detention site in Poland between 2002
and 2003, and Poland again failed to
implement fully the ECtHR ruling and carry
out an effective investigation of the case.

Portuguese Republic
Head of state: Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa
Head of government: António Costa
A decade-old procedure that infringed the
rights of protesters in Lisbon was exposed.
Migrant agricultural workers continued to
live in overcrowded and substandard
conditions, leaving them vulnerable to
Covid-19. Racism within the police
remained a concern. High levels of violence
against women persisted.

In June, it emerged that since 2011 Lisbon’s
municipal authorities had been passing
personal information to foreign embassy
officials about protesters who demonstrated
in front of their embassies. The authorities
agreed to conduct risk assessments to
ensure the rights to privacy and peaceful
assembly.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

In December Ewa Wrzosek, a Warsaw district
prosecutor and member of Lex Super Omnia,
an association defending the rule of law, was
notified by Apple that her phone had been
targeted by Pegasus spyware from
surveillance company NSO Group.

The government took measures to facilitate
access to Covid-19 vaccination for people
with irregular immigration status.
In May, a Covid-19 outbreak among 13,000
migrant agricultural workers in Odemira
exposed their poor living conditions in
substandard, overcrowded houses or
container dwellings. The workers, mostly
from south and south-east Asia, were
temporarily rehoused to prevent further
infections.
Following the Taliban seizure of power in
Afghanistan, Portugal resettled 764 Afghan
nationals seeking safety.
In May, three officials of the Foreigners and
Borders Service (SEF) were sentenced to
between seven and nine years’ imprisonment
for the assault, aggravated by unintentionally
causing his death, of a Ukrainian national
who had died in SEF custody in March 2020.
In December, on appeal, the sentence was
increased to nine years’ imprisonment for all.

1. Poland: Briefing on the Rule of Law and Independence of the
Judiciary in Poland in 2020-2021 (Index: EUR 37/4304/2021), 17
June
2. Poland: Third-party Intervention to the European Court of Human
Rights in the Case of Igor Tuleya (Index: EUR 37/3548/2021), 20
January
3. Poland: Roll Back of Reproductive Rights is Dark Day for Polish
Women, 27 January
4. Poland: Digital Investigation Proves Poland Violated Refugees’
Rights, 30 September
5. Poland: State of Emergency Risks Worsening Already Dire Situation
for 32 Asylum Seekers at Border, 2 September

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

303

DISCRIMINATION
In March, the Council of Europe (COE)
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed
concern about racism in the police. She
recommended recruitment procedures
promoting access for people from minority
groups and the establishment of a fully
independent police complaints mechanism.
She also noted the rise of racially motivated
hate crimes and hate speech, especially
targeting Roma and people of African
descent.
In March, the Ministry of Home Affairs
introduced a Plan for the Prevention of
Manifestations of Discrimination in the
Security Forces.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In March, the COE Commissioner for Human
Rights expressed concern at the persistence
of high levels of violence against women. She
called for domestic violence to be more
effectively prosecuted and punished and for
further amendments to the definition of rape
in the Criminal Code so that it is entirely
based on the absence of free consent of the
victim.
In August, a new law entered into force to
strengthen protection for children who
witness or are exposed to domestic violence.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In March, the European Commission Against
Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) welcomed the
adoption, in 2019, of the Basic Housing Law,
in which the right to adequate housing was
recognized and safeguards against evictions
were strengthened. However, ECRI noted that
it had not received sufficient information to
assess the implementation or impact of the
law on people at risk of forced eviction.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Substandard conditions persisted in several
prisons, aggravated by the pandemic. In May,
the Ombudsperson criticized a plan for the
social reintegration of inmates released
during the pandemic to avoid overcrowding
because it failed to prevent homelessness for

304

those with no family or other support
network.

PUERTO RICO
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Head of state: Joseph Biden (replaced Donald Trump in
January)
Head of government: Pedro Rafael Pierluisi
Urrutia (replaced Wanda Vázquez Garced in January)
The government declared a state of
emergency on domestic violence. The
authorities repressed the right to protest of
environmental defenders. Child poverty
increased. The legislature presented bills
that, if passed, would result in violations of
the rights of LGBTI people.

CHILDREN´S RIGHTS
The Administration for the Comprehensive
Care and Development of Childhood in
Puerto Rico released a report in March noting
that child poverty had increased by 62.7%
during the previous two years, largely due to
the 2017 hurricane season and the Covid-19
pandemic. In the first nine months of 2021,
the government received 10,390 complaints
of child abuse, an increase of 3,167 cases in
comparison to the same period the previous
year. By November child abuse referrals had
risen to 12,109.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In August, a study by Ayuda Legal Puerto
Rico reported that, almost four years after the
devastation of hurricanes Irma and María,
housing had yet to be repaired and people
were still living in homes with temporary
tarpaulin roofs (blue tarps). According to a
separate report on the Action Plan for
Mitigation Funds, between 15,000 and
18,000 properties still had blue tarp roofing.
According to official data, 1,640 houses had
been repaired or reconstructed.
According to data from the Court
Administration Office, by August there had
been 676 eviction cases on the archipelago

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

without any suitable alternative
accommodation offered.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, the Governor declared a state of
emergency on gender-based violence and
ordered measures to prevent and eradicate it.
By May, 511 cases of domestic violence had
been filed, a sharp increase compared to the
same period in 2020. In September, the
Governor signed Law 40, which recognizes
and establishes criteria for classifying certain
homicides as femicides and trans femicides.
During the year, there were 53 gender-based
killings of women, a decrease of seven cases
compared to 2020, according to Gender
Equality Observatory, a civil society
organization.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
None of the seven bills discussed that could
limit the right to abortion had been approved
by the end of the year. Authorities approved
an educational curriculum that introduces
the concept of a gender perspective; it was
due to be taught in schools beginning in
2022. There were protests against the
curriculum's implementation.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government invested resources in
creating the Committee of Experts and
Advisers on Climate Change to help define
public policy on climate change. The
Department of Natural Resources issued
several construction permits, allegedly by
means of procedural irregularities, that
threaten marine and coastal systems as well
as putting lives at risk due to rising sea levels
and risks of hurricanes. The legislature
considered pushing forward a law that could
eventually limit excessive construction in
Puerto Rican coastal areas.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The Office of the Federal Police Monitor
published a report in March which concluded
that various police units had not complied
with the requirements of the Police Reform of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

2013 in relation to use of force and internal
procedures.
In June, a report by the NGO Kilómetro 0
stated that at least 23 people had died as a
result of police violence in the previous two
years.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In September, the American Civil Liberties
Union denounced civil rights violations
against environmental defenders. The police
department sought to repress protests,
including by deploying the security forces
and arbitrarily detaining environmental
defenders.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
arrested three men linked to the death of
Alexa, a transgender woman killed in 2020.
In July, human rights defenders denounced
targeted operations by municipal police
against establishments frequented by LGBTI
people. In August, the federal government
ordered the protection of students with
transgender and other sexual identities in
schools. The legislature presented several
bills that threatened the dignity and rights of
LGBTI people by prohibiting hormonal
treatments and banning trans athletes in
female sports; none had been approved by
the end of the year. A bill seeking to prohibit
conversion therapies was defeated in the
Senate. At the end of the year, a bill was
before the Senate to create a Bill of Rights for
LGBTI people.

QATAR
State of Qatar
Head of state: Tamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani
Head of government: Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz
Al Thani
Despite government reforms, migrant
workers continued to face labour abuses
and struggled to change jobs freely.
Curtailment of freedom of expression
increased in the run-up to FIFA World Cup

305

2022. Women and LGBTI people continued
to face discrimination in law and practice.

BACKGROUND
The Gulf diplomatic crisis that started in
2017, pitting Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt against Qatar,
ended in January.
In July, the emir ratified a law paving the
way for the first legislative elections of the
Shura Council (Consultative Assembly) to
elect 30 of its 45 members. However, the law
excluded Qataris whose grandfathers were
not born in Qatar from voting or standing for
election on the basis of the discriminatory
nationality law. The election was held on 2
October. No women were elected.
In October, the emir reshuffled the cabinet
and demerged some ministries.
Covid-19 vaccines were made available to
all citizens and residents aged 12 and above
without discrimination, including foreign
residents. By October, 77% of the population
had been fully vaccinated.

MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Despite its stated commitment, the
government failed to implement and enforce
reforms, enabling abusive practices to
resurface and reviving the worst elements of
kafala (the sponsorship-based employment
system).
Migrant workers continued to face
sometimes insurmountable bureaucratic
barriers and requirements when seeking to
change jobs without the permission of their
employers, even though permission was no
longer a legal requirement. In December, the
government reported that 242,870 migrant
workers had been able to change jobs
following the reforms in September 2020;
however, it did not report how many workers
managed to do so without securing the
permission of their employer – information
that is key to measuring progress.
The situation remained even more difficult
for live-in women domestic workers on
account of their isolation in their employer’s
house, which is also their workplace.

306

The system continued to yield powers to
employers who oversee the entry and
residence of migrant workers in Qatar,
enabling abusive employers to cancel
residency permits or file cases accusing their
employee of absconding, jeopardizing
migrant workers’ legal presence in the
country.
In May, the Ministry of Labour launched a
digital platform intended to enable workers to
submit complaints.
Despite the introduction of a new minimum
wage, as well as measures to monitor
payment of wages, migrant workers
continued to fall victim to wage theft by their
employers without effective recourse to
justice. Indeed, access to justice for migrant
workers remained largely slow and, when it
did occur, did not often lead to an effective
remedy. The support fund set up to help
workers recoup their money if they win their
cases before the Committees for the
Settlement of Labour Disputes worked on an
ad hoc basis and it remained unclear to
workers if and when they could collect their
unpaid wages from the fund.1
In April, workers from a company supplying
security guards went on strike to protest
against their employer’s failure to honour the
new minimum wage. State-aligned media
reported that the government had
investigated and found the company’s pay
did meet the legal requirement. The
authorities continued to fail to investigate
properly the deaths of migrant workers,
thousands of whom have died suddenly and
unexpectedly in Qatar in the past decade
despite passing mandatory medical tests
before travelling to the country. This failure,
which precluded any assessment of whether
the deaths were work-related, meant Qatar
failed to protect a core element of the right to
life. It also denied the workers’ bereaved
families the opportunity to receive
compensation from the employer or
authorities.2
TRADE UNION RIGHTS
Migrant workers continued to be barred from
forming or joining trade unions. Instead,
authorities introduced joint committees, an

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

initiative led by employers to allow workers’
representation. The initiative fell far short of
the fundamental right of workers to form and
join trade unions.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to curtail freedom of
expression using abusive laws to stifle critical
voices.
On 4 May, authorities forcibly disappeared
Malcolm Bidali, a Kenyan security guard,
blogger and migrant workers’ rights activist.
They held him in solitary confinement for a
month and denied him access to legal
counsel. On 14 July, the Supreme Judiciary
Council fined him under the controversial
cybercrime law for publishing “false news
with the intent of endangering the public
system of the state”. The criminal order was
passed without Malcolm Bidali being formally
charged, brought before a court or informed
of the criminal charges he faced. He left
Qatar on 16 August after paying the heavy
fine.3
In early August, members of tribes, mainly
the al-Murra tribe, protested against their
exclusion from the Shura Council elections.
On 8 August, the Interior Ministry stated that
seven men had been arrested and referred to
the public prosecution, accused of “using
social media to spread false news and stir up
racial and tribal strife”. Some were released
but others remained in detention without
access to their lawyers.
In November, two Norwegian journalists
investigating the situation of migrant workers
were detained for trespassing and filming on
private property, accusations the journalists
refuted. They were questioned about their
reporting and had all their equipment
confiscated. They were released 36 hours
later without facing any legal charges.
Earlier in their trip, the two journalists had
been due to interview Abdullah Ibhais, the
former communications director for Qatar’s
2022 World Cup organizers, but he was
arrested on 15 November hours before the
planned interview. His arbitrary detention

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

came while he was appealing a five-year
prison sentence handed down after an unfair
trial based on a “confession” that was
extracted under duress, and which he made
without a lawyer present.4 On 15 December,
a court rejected his appeal and sentenced
him to three years in prison.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. Under the guardianship
system, women remained tied to their male
guardian, usually their father, brother,
grandfather or uncle, or for married women,
to their husband. Women continued to need
their guardian’s permission for key life
decisions to marry, study abroad on
government scholarships, work in many
government jobs, travel abroad until certain
ages, and receive some forms of reproductive
healthcare.
Family laws continued to discriminate
against women by making it difficult for them
to divorce. Divorced women remained unable
to act as their children’s guardian.
In March, the government disputed the
findings of a Human Rights Watch report on
discrimination against women in Qatar, and
pledged to investigate and prosecute anyone
who had breached the law. By the end of the
year, no such investigations had taken place.
Noof al-Maadeed, a 23-year-old Qatari
woman who sought asylum in the UK citing
family abuse, decided to return to Qatar after
seeking reassurances from the authorities.
She started documenting her journey on
social media but was last heard from on 13
October after she reported threats from her
family to the police. Despite reassurances
from the authorities that she was safe, her
whereabouts remained unknown, raising
fears about her safety.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
“Sodomy” or same-sex sexual conduct
between men remained an offence under the
Penal Code, punishable by up to seven years’
imprisonment. Article 296 states that
“leading, instigating or seducing a male in
any way to commit sodomy or dissipation”

307

and “inducing or seducing a male or a
female in any way to commit illegal or
immoral actions” is a crime.
In February, Mashrou’ Leila, a Lebanese
rock band whose lead singer is openly gay,
cancelled its planned appearance at
Northwestern University’s Doha campus for
“safety concerns” after an anti-gay online
backlash.

accession pledges to tackle corruption and
meet EU benchmarks to ensure a fair legal
system, including safeguards against political
interference. In June, the European
Commission (EC) reported a positive trend in
relation to judicial reforms and the fight
against corruption.

DEATH PENALTY

In June, dozens of civil society organizations
wrote to the Minister of Justice expressing
their wish to be fully involved in a government
review of the regulatory framework for
associations and foundations. They called for
simplified procedures to be balanced with
adequate safeguards against discretionary
decisions that could threaten NGOs.
In August, Bucharest Pride’s organizers
were fined after more than the permitted 500
people joined the march. The NGO Accept
contested the fine arguing that Covid-19
restrictions on attendance were
disproportionate. In July, NGOs had raised
concerns that pandemic-related restrictions
on protests were not similarly applied to
sport, cultural, religious or family events.
Reporters investigating alleged irregularities
and corruption in the use of public funds
were questioned by the Directorate for
Investigating Organized Crime and Terrorism
in May, after a mayor lodged a criminal
complaint accusing them of organizing a
criminal group and blackmail – both crimes
punishable by up to five years in prison.
NGOs warned that a dangerous precedent
had been set, which could undermine the
right to freedom of expression. Prosecutors
closed the complaint against the reporters in
June.
A draft law on the protection of whistleblowers in the public interest – excluding
whistle-blowers in private sector – remained
pending in Parliament. The Ministry of
Justice was criticized for overlooking several
amendments proposed by NGOs, including
on legal aid provision and the ability of
whistle-blowers to report directly to the press.

In February, the emir halted the execution of
a Tunisian man convicted of murder. No
execution was reported.
1. Reality Check 2021: A Year to the 2022 World Cup, the State of
Migrant Workers’ Rights in Qatar (Index: MDE 22/4966/2021), 16
November
2. “In the Prime of Their Lives”: Qatar’s Failure to Investigate, Remedy
and Prevent Migrant Workers’ Deaths (Index: MDE 22/4614/2021), 26
August
3. Joint Statement: Kenyan Labour Rights Activist Leaves Qatar After
Paying Hefty Fine for Publishing “False News” (Index: MDE
22/4626/2021), 19 August
4. “Qatar: Ensure fair trial for Abdullah Ibhais”, 19 November

ROMANIA
Republic of Romania
Head of state: Klaus Iohannis
Head of government: Nicolae Ciucă (replaced Florin
Cîțu in November)
A statute of limitations on torture, among
other crimes, was removed. NGOs raised
concerns around the exercise of the rights
to freedom of association, peaceful
assembly and expression. Healthcare
workers demanded increased protection
against Covid-19. The media exposed
violent pushbacks of refugees and migrants
at borders. Roma and LGBTI people
continued to face systemic discrimination.
An investigation into the unlawful CIA
rendition and torture of Abd al-Rahim AlNashiri was closed.

BACKGROUND

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY

In May, the European Court of Justice (CJEU)
ruled that Romania must abide by pre-EU

308

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 pandemic put immense
pressure on an already underfunded and
overstretched health system. In March 2021,
healthcare workers held demonstrations
calling for an increased health budget, better
protection from Covid-19, increased wages
and lower retirement ages.
By end of the year, 40% of the population
had been fully vaccinated and vaccine
uptake had plateaued. Romania registered
the highest rate of mortality due to Covid-19
in the region and one of the highest in the
world.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In October, an investigation by Lighthouse
Reports exposed how authorities in Romania
– as well as in other EU countries – had
violently rounded up migrants and asylum
seekers and summarily returned them to
countries outside the EU.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA RIGHTS
In January, a new law criminalizing hate
crimes against Roma came into force. Roma
continued to experience harassment, in both
online and public spheres, and to face
discrimination, including segregation, in
education, housing and employment.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face systemic
discrimination. In January, the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruled that
Romania violated the rights of two
transgender people by refusing to recognize
their identities, on the basis that they had not
undergone gender reassignment surgery. It
considered that the legal framework was not
clear and consistent in this area.
In June, the ECtHR ruled that authorities
had failed in their duty to protect individuals
from far-right militants who stormed an
LGBTI film screening in October 2013
shouting threats and homophobic abuse.
In July, NGOs raised concerns that
politicians intended to propose anti-LGBTI
legislation. Same-sex marriage and
partnership remained unrecognized. In

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

September, the European Parliament asked
the EC to address Romania’s failure to
comply with a 2018 CJEU decision on the
need to harmonize national legislation to
guarantee freedom of movement and
residence for same-sex couples.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In March, authorities closed an investigation
into Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri’s unlawful
rendition, secret detention and torture at a
CIA black site in Romania. In 2018, the
ECtHR had found that Romania hosted the
secret facility and was complicit in Abd alRahim al-Nashiri's torture and enforced
disappearance. Authorities continued in their
refusal to acknowledge complicity or
recognize the ECtHR judgment. Abd alRahim Al-Nashiri remained detained in
Guantánamo Bay without trial and at risk of
facing the death penalty.

RUSSIA
Russian Federation
Head of state: Vladimir Putin
Head of government: Mikhail Mishustin
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to
exacerbate the dire state of healthcare
services. The rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly were routinely violated. Public
assemblies organized by the political
opposition were almost completely
prohibited. Legislation on “foreign agents”
and “undesirable organizations”, together
with prosecutions on trumped-up charges
and other forms of pressure, were widely
used to suppress dissent. Threats and
attacks against journalists, human rights
defenders and other activists were
perpetrated with impunity. Persecution of
Jehovah’s Witnesses intensified. Torture and
other ill-treatment in places of detention
remained endemic and prosecutions of
perpetrators rare. Enforced disappearances
were reported in Chechnya. The authorities
failed to address domestic violence. LGBTI

309

people continued to face discrimination.
Arbitrary deportations of refugees and
asylum seekers persisted.

encountered difficulties, with many having to
pay for their vaccination.

BACKGROUND
The parliamentary election in September was
accompanied by unprecedented pressure on
independent opposition candidates, including
through barring them from running on
spurious grounds. A record number of
violations were reported by independent
election monitors over three days of voting.
Corruption remained pervasive.
Low Covid-19 vaccine uptake and a rapid
growth in the infection rate led all regional
governments to introduce mandatory
vaccination for certain groups of workers. The
government repeatedly announced fully paid
“non-working days” to halt the pandemic’s
spread, forcing businesses to pick up the
cost with limited government support.
Unprecedented wildfires raged in Siberia
and the Far East following record-breaking
heat and drought. Toxic smoke spread widely,
further reducing the already poor air quality
in large cities.
Russia continued to occupy Crimea and
other territories.

Public assemblies organized by the
opposition were mostly prohibited, including
under the pretext of public health restrictions,
unlike pro-government mass events.
Individuals staging single-person pickets
were routinely arrested and prosecuted, in
violation of an unduly restrictive law.1
Rallies in support of opposition leader
Aleksei Navalny resulted in unprecedented
numbers of mass arbitrary arrests2 and
administrative and criminal prosecutions on
spurious charges.3 In Moscow, facial
recognition technologies were reportedly
used to identify and reprimand peaceful
protesters.
Police enjoyed impunity for the unlawful use
of force, including with stun guns, against
peaceful protesters.4
Around 10 criminal cases for “repeated
violation of public assembly regulations” were
opened. In October, environmental activist
Vyacheslav Egorov was sentenced to 15
months’ imprisonment for organizing a
peaceful protest.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION

Soaring Covid-19 infection and death rates
exacerbated problems in healthcare, already
dismal in some places. Worn-out
infrastructure, negligent use of equipment
and underfinancing, for example, were cited
among the reasons for a cut in oxygen supply
in a North Ossetian hospital in August,
resulting in the deaths of at least nine
patients on life support. Despite a shortage of
healthcare workers reported across the
country, the government adopted further cuts
to the health budget. The large number of
hospitalized Covid-19 patients led to delays in
planned medical care.
The vaccination of homeless people and
undocumented migrants against Covid-19
was complicated by a requirement for
identification documents and medical
insurance, often unavailable to such groups.
Documented migrant workers also

Civil society organizations suffered further
reprisals and restrictions due to newly
amended legislation on “foreign agents” and
“undesirable organizations”, which widened
their scope (for instance, outlawing
cooperation with “undesirable organizations”
abroad) and increased respective
administrative and criminal sanctions.
In July, the Council of Europe’s Venice
Commission sharply criticized the new
amendments to the “foreign agents”
legislation noting that “they constitute serious
violations of basic human rights”. It urged
Russia to “abandon” this special regime or
alternatively revise “the entire body of the
legislation”. The government ignored these
recommendations.
A further eight NGOs were added to the list
of “foreign agents”, including the
independent health workers’ union, Doctors’

310

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Alliance, and 18 more listed as
“undesirable”, including the International
Partnership for Human Rights and European
Network of Election Monitors. Authorities
continued penalizing those on the list of
“foreign agents” with heavy fines.
In July, the human rights group Team 29
announced its closure after its website was
blocked for alleged publication of materials
by a Czech NGO newly designated as
“undesirable”. The group deleted all its
online publications and web archive to
prevent prosecutions.
In August, the election watchdog Golos
became the first entity to be designated as an
unregistered “public association – ‘foreign
agent’” under the amended legislation,
followed by five more groups. In December,
the country’s oldest and most influential
human rights groups, International Memorial
and Human Rights Centre Memorial, were
ordered to close down, on grounds of their
alleged violations of the “foreign agents”
legislation. The organizations appealed
against the ruling.
Persecution of the NGO Open Russia as
“undesirable” continued, including after its
disbanding in May to protect its activists. In
February, Anastasia Shevchenko received a
four-year suspended sentence, reduced to
three on appeal in August.5 In May, its former
executive director Andrey Pivovarov was
arrested after boarding an international flight,
for cooperation with an “undesirable
organization” due to his Facebook posts. His
trial started in November.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities used laws on “foreign agents” and
“undesirable organizations” to curb the right
to freedom of expression and silence
independent media, journalists and activists.
Fines were introduced for non-inclusion of
the mandatory headline-style “foreign
agents” disclaimer in relevant publications.
Fourteen media outlets and 70 people were
designated “foreign agents”, while the
investigative Project Media was outlawed as
“undesirable”. In June, its founder, Roman
Badanin, later designated as “foreign agent”,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

and two other journalists faced searches
under a libel case.
Journalist Elena Milashina received thinly
veiled death threats after her newly published
investigation into extrajudicial executions and
torture by the Chechen police. The threats
were not effectively investigated.
In August, a BBC Moscow correspondent
was barred from Russia indefinitely as “a
threat to national security”.
In April, four journalists from the student
magazine DOXA were placed under travel
restrictions as criminal suspects, and
accused of “involving minors in dangerous
activities” in relation to a video that called on
students to brave threats of expulsion for
participation in peaceful protests. Their trial
started in December.
Dissenting musicians faced cancelled
concerts. In October, poet and journalist
Tatyana Voltskaya’s concert was cancelled
because of her newly imposed “foreign
agent” status.
Arbitrary and extrajudicial blocking of
websites continued, while the scope of
respective related legislation was widened. In
July, over 40 websites associated with Aleksei
Navalny’s anti-corruption and political
activities were blocked under the pretext that
they were used “for prohibited extremist
activities”.
In September, the Moscow Arbitration Court
ordered Google and Yandex to delete “Smart
Voting” from their search engine results.
Google and Facebook were repeatedly fined
for not removing “prohibited content”.
Journalist Igor Khoroshilov was sentenced
twice to 10 days’ administrative detention for
“propaganda of extremist insignia” after
mentioning “Smart Voting” on Facebook.
In September, the Federal Security Service
published an extensive list of unclassified
topics, ranging from crimes in the army to
delayed space programmes, the monitoring
of which would render an individual a
“foreign agent”. A veteran human rights
NGO, the Soldiers’ Mothers of St Petersburg,
declared in response that it would end its
work on human rights violations in the army.

311

In October, Dmitry Muratov, editor of the
independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta, was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition
of his contribution to freedom of expression
in an increasingly repressive media climate.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Reprisals against human rights defenders
were widespread and egregious.
In April, Ivan Pavlov, a human rights lawyer
and founder of Team 29, was arbitrarily
charged with “divulging the results of a
preliminary investigation”. He left Russia in
September and was subsequently placed on
a “wanted” list. He was also at risk of being
stripped of his lawyer’s licence. In November,
Ivan Pavlov and four of his colleagues were
designated “foreign agents”.
The trial of feminist and LGBTI activist Yulia
Tsvetkova, who was accused of
“disseminating pornography” for sharing
online her body-positive drawings of female
bodies, started in Komsomolsk-on-Amur in
April and was ongoing at the end of the year.
Prominent human rights defender Ernest
Mezak faced trumped-up charges of
contempt of court in June for his critical
remarks on social media on the role of judges
in the prosecution of peaceful protesters.6
In October, Galina Arapova, lawyer and
director of the Mass Media Defence Centre
(placed on the “foreign agents” register in
2015), was designated as an “individual –
‘foreign agent’”.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for crimes committed against
human rights defenders and journalists
persisted. Numerous crimes, past and
ongoing, remained unsolved with
investigations unopened or manifestly stalled.
In August, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) held that the Russian
authorities had failed to properly investigate
the abduction and murder of Natalia
Estemirova in 2009, but did not find them
directly responsible for the murder.
In October, the 15-year statute of limitation
in the murder of prominent investigative
journalist Anna Politkovskaya expired. The

312

masterminds behind her killing had not been
identified.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Reprisals against opposition activists and
dissenters intensified as the authorities and
the ruling United Russia party were
confronted by increasingly critical public
opinion in the run-up to parliamentary
elections.
In February, prominent opposition activist
Aleksei Navalny was sentenced in a politically
motivated trial to 32 months’ imprisonment
for violating the terms of his probation in
relation to an unfounded prosecution in
2014. The same month, the ECtHR ordered
his immediate release as interim measures
related to his physical safety, but Russia
refused to comply. Aleksei Navalny
complained of inhuman and degrading
treatment, including denial of essential
healthcare. In June, his movement’s regional
offices and two NGOs associated with him
were declared “extremist” and banned by a
court. In September, Russia ignored a call by
the Council of Europe to release him and
overturn his convictions. Instead, in October,
the authorities announced five new criminal
cases against him and his associates.
Other associates and supporters of Aleksei
Navalny faced persecution across Russia,
including unfounded criminal and
administrative proceedings. In April, Andrey
Borovikov, in Arkhangelsk, was sentenced to
over two years’ imprisonment for
“disseminating pornography” in relation to a
videoclip by the German band Rammstein
that he had shared on social media in 2014
and long since deleted. In July, Violetta
Grudina, in Murmansk, was confined to a
hospital for 19 days on a false Сovid-19
related pretext. This also prevented her from
running as an independent candidate in the
local election. Ufa activist Lilia Chanysheva
faced 10 years’ imprisonment on
“extremism” charges for her role as a
regional coordinator in Aleksei Navalny’s
organization.
Other dissenting voices were also repressed.
In May, Nikolay Platoshkin, leader of the For

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

New Socialism movement, was given a fiveyear suspended sentence and an extortionate
fine for purported “calls to mass
disturbances” and dissemination of
“knowingly false information”. He had
criticized the authorities, including their
response to Covid-19, and planned peaceful
protests.
Mikhail Iosilevich, an activist from Nizhnii
Novgorod, was falsely accused of cooperation
with an “undesirable organization” and
threatening a witness, and spent over six
months in pretrial detention. He was released
in August under restrictions pending trial. His
trial started in December.
Siberian shaman Aleksandr Gabyshev, who
had vowed in 2019 to “purge" President
Putin from the Kremlin, was violently arrested
by some 50 police officers at his home in
Yakutsk. In July, a court confined him
indefinitely to a psychiatric hospital for
compulsory treatment. In October, he was
moved to a specialized psychiatric institution
in Novosibirsk, thousands of kilometres from
his home.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in custody
remained endemic and prosecutions of
perpetrators rare.
Those arrested during pro-Navalny rallies
complained of inhuman and degrading
conditions in detention, including severe
overcrowding at the Sakharovo detention
facility for migrants, outside Moscow, and
elsewhere.
Although several criminal investigations
were initiated into multiple allegations of
torture, including rape, of prisoners in Irkutsk
region in 2020, they were stalled with victims
and witnesses complaining of threats and
intimidation.
In February, brothers Salekh Magamadov
and Ismail Isaev were abducted by police in
Nizhnii Novgorod and taken to Chechnya
where they were remanded on false charges
of aiding an armed group. They complained
of torture and other ill-treatment, but the
Chechen authorities refused to open a
criminal investigation.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In October, Maksim Ivankin, sentenced to
13 years’ imprisonment for alleged
participation in a fictitious “terrorist”
organization named Network, told his lawyers
that he had “confessed” to a double murder
under torture while being transferred to a
penitentiary in another region.
Smuggled graphic videos of inmates’
torture, including rape, in Saratov prison
hospital and other penal institutions were
made public in October by activists from the
Gulagu.net group. In response to widespread
media coverage and a public outcry, the
authorities initiated criminal investigations
and sacked some prison officials. Threats
against the whistle-blower who procured the
footage, Sergei Savelyev, forced him to leave
Russia.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
There were new reports of enforced
disappearances, particularly from Chechnya.
The fate and whereabouts of Salman
Tepsurkayev, moderator of Telegram channel
1ADAT, remained unknown. A critic of the
authorities, he was seen being tortured in a
video that was anonymously published after
his disappearance in 2020. In October, the
ECtHR found Russia responsible for his
arbitrary, unacknowledged detention and
torture, and for the failure to effectively
investigate his torture.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses
intensified after the organization’s arbitrary
designation as “extremist” in 2017, with
intrusive home searches and criminal cases
initiated across the country and in occupied
Crimea. At least 105 people were convicted,
with those imprisoned sentenced to
increasingly long terms.
In October, a court in Astrakhan sentenced
Olga Ivanova to three-and-a-half-years’
imprisonment, and Rustam Diarov, Sergei
Klikunov and Evgenii Ivanov to eight years’
imprisonment, the longest sentences issued
to Jehovah’s Witnesses yet.

313

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In August, a study by the Women’s NGOs’
Consortium found that 66% of women
murdered from 2011 to 2019 had been
victims of domestic violence. Significant
efforts to address the issue were absent, with
the draft law on domestic violence, stalled
from previous years, still failing to make the
parliamentary agenda. The situation of
survivors continued to be exacerbated by
pandemic-related restrictive measures.
In September, the ECtHR ruled in Volodina v
Russia No. 2 that the authorities had failed to
protect the applicant from cyberviolence, and
to effectively investigate and bring the
perpetrator to justice. The Court concluded
that the ensuing impunity “was enough to
shed doubt on the ability of the State
machinery to produce a sufficiently deterrent
effect to protect women from cyberviolence”.

6. “Russian Federation: Prosecution of human rights defender must
stop” 14 July (EUR 46/4469/2021﻿)

RWANDA
Republic of Rwanda
Head of state: Paul Kagame
Head of government: Édouard Ngirente
The authorities took measures to respond to
the Covid-19 pandemic and to promote the
right to health. Ten girls and women were
pardoned for abortion-related offences.
Violations of the rights to a fair trial,
freedom of expression and privacy
continued, alongside enforced
disappearances, allegations of torture and
excessive use of force. People suspected of
genocide were prosecuted and convicted.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

BACKGROUND

Discrimination against LGBTI people
remained widespread, spearheaded by the
homophobic “gay propaganda” legislation.

The Ministry of National Unity and Civic
Engagement was created in July, replacing
the Genocide Survivors Support and
Assistance Fund, the National Commission
for the Fight against the Genocide, the
National Unity and Reconciliation
Commission and the National Itorero
Commission.
Also in July, armed forces were deployed to
Mozambique to fight an armed group known
locally as “Al-Shabaab”. With Mozambican
forces, they regained several key towns in the
north-eastern Cabo Delgado province.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and asylum seekers continued to
face refoulement.
In September, Valentina Chupik, a refugee
from Uzbekistan and a human rights
defender working on migrants’ rights, was
detained in Sheremetyevo airport transit zone
on returning to Russia, stripped of her
refugee status, banned from entering the
country for 30 years and faced a forcible
return to Uzbekistan. Only following a
widespread outcry, was she allowed to leave
for Armenia in October.
1. Russia: No Place for Protest (Index: EUR 46/4328/2021), 12 August
2. “Russia: Human rights crisis deepens as Navalny supporters arrested
en masse” 22 April
3. “Russia: Detention of Navalny associate on ‘extremism’ charges a
forewarning of mass reprisals”, 11 November
4. Russian Federation: Assaulted Peaceful Protester Denied Justice:
Margarita Yudina (Index: EUR 46/3695/2021), 12 February
5. “Russia: Prisoner of conscience Anastasia Shevchenko convicted,
given suspended prison sentence” 18 February

314

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government continued to impose
restrictions to reduce the spread of Covid-19,
including a nationwide curfew, mass testing,
and localized lockdowns in January, February
and July in Kigali and other districts. Rwanda
was one of only 15 African countries to meet
the global goal of 10% vaccination by the end
of September. By December, 40% of the
country’s population was fully vaccinated.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In July, President Kagame pardoned 10 girls
and women serving prison sentences for

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

abortion-related offences. Abortion remained
illegal in most circumstances, although the
2018 Penal Code introduced exceptions in
cases of rape, incest or forced marriage.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Paul Rusesabagina was convicted of
terrorism offences in September, following a
trial and pretrial period marred by serious fair
trial violations. Alongside 20 co-accused, he
was tried in relation to attacks by the National
Liberation Forces, a group he had previously
pledged support for. After his unlawful
transfer from Dubai to Kigali on 28 August
2020, he disappeared for four days, during
which time, according to his lawyers, he was
tortured. He was then held in
incommunicado detention for three days. The
lawyer appointed by his family was denied
access to him for his first six weeks of
detention, during which time he was
represented by two pro bono lawyers. The
prison authorities inspected and confiscated
privileged and confidential documents
brought to him by his lawyers. This practice
continued despite a court ruling that
documents related to the case should not be
confiscated (although other documents
unrelated to the case could first be
inventoried by the prison authorities). This
ruling was the only action taken by the court
to attempt to remedy the fair trial violations.
From 12 March onwards, Paul Rusesabagina
did not attend hearings because he believed
his fair trial rights would not be respected.1

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Several bloggers and commentators active on
YouTube were arrested and prosecuted.
Yvonne Idamange was arrested in February
after posting a video in which she claimed
that the president was dead and called on
people to march to his office. She also
criticized lockdown measures and policies
around genocide commemoration. She was
convicted in September and sentenced to 15
years in prison, on charges including
“inciting public disorder”, “disposing of or
degrading evidence or information relating to
genocide” and “publication of rumours”.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

After being repeatedly summoned by the
Rwanda Investigation Bureau, academic
Aimable Karasira was arrested in May and
charged with denying and justifying the
genocide, instigating division and fraud. A
genocide survivor, he had posted videos in
which he said that Rwandan Patriotic Front
soldiers had killed members of his family in
1994.
In October six people, including journalist
Theoneste Nsengimana and members of the
opposition political party DALFA-Umurinzi
(Development and Liberty for All), were
arrested, accused of “spreading rumours to
cause unrest among the population”. Two
days earlier, Theoneste Nsengimana had
posted a video of a woman calling on people
to celebrate “Ingabire Day” (named for
DALFA-Umurinzi leader Victoire Ingabire) to
honour jailed, abducted and killed opposition
figures.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In July, the Pegasus Project revealed that the
phone of Paul Rusesabagina’s daughter,
Carine Kanimba, was infected with the NSO
Group’s Pegasus spyware. Rwanda is
believed to be an NSO Group client. More
than 3,500 phone numbers, including those
of activists, journalists, political opponents,
foreign politicians and diplomats of interest to
Rwanda, had been selected as potential
targets for the spyware.2

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In March, a French commission, established
to review state archives concerning France’s
role and engagement in Rwanda between
1990 and 1994, published its final report.
The Duclert Commission found that, although
not an accomplice to the genocide, France
bore responsibility for its blindness to the
preparation for a genocide and its slowness
to break with the regime responsible for it.
President Macron acknowledged France’s
responsibility and sought forgiveness from
the Rwandan people. In April the Muse
Report, commissioned by the Government of
Rwanda, went further, stating that France

315

bore “significant responsibility for having
enabled a foreseeable genocide”.
In March, the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals filed a second amended
indictment against Félicien Kabuga,
acknowledged as a chief financier of the
1994 genocide. He was charged with
genocide, incitement and conspiracy to
commit genocide, and three counts of crimes
against humanity: persecution on political
grounds, extermination and murder.
In July, the High Court Special Chamber for
International and Transnational Crimes
convicted Jean-Claude Iyamuremye of
genocide and sentenced him to 25 years in
prison. He was accused of being a leader of
the Interahamwe militia in Kicukiro during the
genocide.
Genocide suspect Beatrice Munyenyezi was
extradited from the USA to Rwanda in April to
stand trial. The same month, Marcel
Hitayezu, a Rwandan priest living in France
was arrested on genocide charges. Another
genocide suspect Venant Rutunga was
extradited from the Netherlands in July. In
September, two investigating judges in Paris
ordered that Philippe Hategekimana be tried
in France for genocide and crimes against
humanity among other crimes. In October,
genocide convict Oswald Rurangwa was
deported from the USA to Rwanda.
Théoneste Bagosora, a former army colonel,
died in September in Mali where he was
serving a 35-year sentence for his role in
masterminding the genocide.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Rwanda backtracked on its previous
commitments and rejected recommendations
received during the Universal Periodic
Review (UPR) process to ratify the
Convention against Enforced Disappearance.
During two previous UPR reviews, it first
supported and then provisionally supported
recommendations to ratify the Convention.3
Suspected enforced disappearances were
reported and disappearances from previous
years remained unresolved. In May,
Rwandan asylum seeker and former radio

316

director Cassien Ntamuhanga was arrested
by Mozambican police; they have since
denied any knowledge of his detention.
Unconfirmed reports say he was handed over
to the Rwandan embassy in June. He had
been convicted alongside Kizito Mihigo (see
below, Right to life) in Rwanda and escaped
from prison in 2017.

RIGHT TO LIFE
No independent investigation was carried out
into the death in custody of popular musician
Kizito Mihigo in 2020 despite renewed calls
by civil society.4
In September popular rapper Joshua
Tusyishime, also known as Jay Polly, died in
custody. He was arrested in April for hosting
a party at his home in violation of Covid-19
regulations.
Although in 2020 the president and minister
of justice had publicly condemned the use by
individual police officers of excessive force,
and committed to holding perpetrators
accountable, reports of police using
excessive and at times lethal force, including
in implementing Covid-19 restrictions,
continued.
1. Rwanda: Ensure Remedy after Fair Trial Violations in Paul
Rusesabagina Case (Index: AFR 47/4753/2021), 20 September
2. “Pegasus Project: Rwandan authorities chose thousands of activists,
journalists and politicians to target with NSO spyware”, 19 July
3. Rwanda: Consideration of UPR Reports (Index: AFR 47/4370/2021), 9
July
4. Rwanda: Call for Independent Investigation into Rwandan Singer
Kizito Mihigo’s Death (Index: AFR 47/3799/2021), 8 March

SAUDI ARABIA
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Head of state and government: Salman bin Abdulaziz
Al Saud
The crackdown continued on the rights to
freedom of expression, association and
assembly. The Specialized Criminal Court
handed down heavy prison terms to
individuals for their human rights work and
expression of dissenting views. Among

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

those arbitrarily detained, prosecuted or
sentenced were human rights defenders,
government critics and other political
activists. Women human rights defenders
were subjected to judicially imposed travel
bans following conditional release from
prison. Courts resorted extensively to the
death penalty and people were executed for
a wide range of crimes. Migrant workers
continued to be vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation under the country’s sponsorship
system, and tens of thousands were
arbitrarily detained and subsequently
deported. Prison authorities violated the
right to health of human rights defenders
and others imprisoned after grossly unfair
trials.

BACKGROUND
In January, the foreign minister announced
an end to the rift that had pitted Saudi
Arabia, Bahrain and other states against
Qatar since 2017, and that Saudi Arabia
would restore diplomatic ties with Qatar.
In July, the European Parliament strongly
condemned the ongoing use of the death
penalty in cases of child offenders and called
for the immediate and unconditional release
of human rights defenders. On 27
September, Saudi Arabia and the EU had
their first human rights dialogue, which was
held in Brussels, Belgium. The EU expressed
its concerns about freedom of expression in
Saudi Arabia and raised several cases of
individual Saudi human rights defenders.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition in the longrunning armed conflict in Yemen continued
to be implicated in war crimes and other
serious violations of international law (see
Yemen entry).

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Following a brief lull in prosecutions of
human rights defenders and dissidents
during the G20 summit chaired by Saudi
Arabia in November 2020, the authorities
resumed punitive trials, particularly before
the Specialized Criminal Court (SCC), of
anyone who expressed views critical of the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

government or opinions contrary to those of
the government about socio-economic or
political developments in the country. The
SCC sentenced people to heavy prison terms
for their human rights work and expression of
dissenting views, including on Twitter. It also
imposed restrictive conditions on individuals
released after serving their sentences,
including travel bans and ordering the
closure of their social media accounts.
In March, the SCC increased by a total of
three years the 14-year prison sentence that
Mohammad al-Otaibi, a founding member of
the Union for Human Rights, an independent
human rights organization, was already
serving. His sentence was based solely on his
human rights work, including forming a
human rights organization.
In April, the SCC sentenced Abdulrahman
al-Sadhan, who works at the Saudi Arabian
Red Crescent Society in the capital Riyadh, to
20 years in prison and a subsequent travel
ban of equal duration. The evidence
presented against him consisted of satirical
and critical tweets about the government’s
economic policies and form of governance,
for which he was charged with, among other
things, “preparing, storing and sending what
would prejudice public order and religious
values” and “offending state institutions and
officials and spreading false rumours about
them”.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
detained arbitrarily, sentenced after grossly
unfair trials or silenced following conditional
release.
In February, prominent women human
rights defender Loujain al-Hathloul was
conditionally released after serving her prison
term.1 In June, women human rights
defenders Nassima al-Sada and Samar
Badawi were also conditionally released. The
conditions imposed included judicially
imposed bans on travel, public speaking,
resumption of human rights work and use of
social media, which violate their rights to
freedom of expression, association and

317

peaceful assembly in the country and
freedom of movement outside the country.
Between January and July, the SCC unjustly
sentenced five human rights defenders to
prison terms ranging from six to 20 years.
Some of them had recently finished serving
lengthy prison terms from previous cases on
similar charges related to their peaceful
exercise of human rights.2 For example, in
April, the SCC sentenced Mohammad alRabiah, a human rights defender, writer and
outspoken advocate for women’s rights, to six
years in prison to be followed by a six-year
travel ban when he had already served
almost three years in prison after his May
2018 arrest as part of the crackdown on
women human rights defenders.

DEATH PENALTY
In January, the authorities announced major
reforms in relation to the death penalty,
including a moratorium on executions for
drug-related crimes, but took no formal steps
to amend the Saudi Drugs and Narcotics
Control Law or clarify how the moratorium will
take effect .
In February, in a positive development in
the cases of Ali al-Nimr, Abdullah al-Zaher
and Dawood al-Marhoun, three young men
arrested as children, the SCC commuted
their death sentences and re-sentenced them
to 10-year prison terms inclusive of time
served.3 The re-sentencing followed an order
by the public prosecutor in August 2020 to
review the death sentences of the three men.
Ali al-Nimr and Abdullah al-Zaher were
released in October and November,
respectively, after finishing 10-year prison
terms.
The judiciary resumed handing down
discretionary (ta’zir) death sentences against
individuals convicted of crimes not
punishable by death under sharia (Islamic
law). On 15 June, the authorities executed
Mustafa al-Darwish, a young Saudi Arabian
man from the Shi’a minority who was
convicted of charges related to his alleged
participation in violent anti-government
protests.4

318

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Ministry of Labour introduced limited
reforms to its sponsorship (kafala) system in
March, easing restrictions on some migrant
workers in relation to transferring jobs without
the permission of their employers under
certain conditions. The conditions include
non-payment of salary for three consecutive
months; expiry of the employee’s work
permit; and when an employer fails to attend
two litigation hearings if a labour dispute has
arisen. The reforms also include allowing
migrant workers to request an exit permit
without the permission of their employer, but
did not abolish the exit permit. Under these
conditions, migrant workers continued to be
tied to their employers, who retained
considerable control over their rights and
freedom of movement. Domestic migrant
workers continued to be excluded from
protections under the country’s labour law.
Throughout the year, the authorities
continued their crackdown on migrants
accused of violating residential, border
security and labour regulations and laws
through mass arbitrary arrests. The Ministry
of Interior announced that in November and
December alone, at least 117,000 men and
women were arrested for violating these
regulations, and over 2,400 individuals –
most of them Ethiopian and Yemeni migrants
– were arrested for crossing the border into
Saudi Arabia without valid visas. Some
73,000 men and women were subsequently
deported to their home country.
In April, Amnesty International documented
the detention of at least 41 Sri Lankan
women, all migrant domestic workers, for up
to 18 months at the Exit 18 Deportation
Detention Centre in Riyadh, awaiting
repatriation. Many of the women had been
detained due to their migration status under
the kafala system. Reasons included expiry of
their work permit, their employer’s failure or
refusal to obtain an exit permit, and their
attempted escape from an abusive employer
to travel back to their countries without an
exit permit. Following international and
national attention, all the women were
repatriated by May.5

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In July, a state-aligned media outlet
announced that Qiwa, a platform run by the
Ministry of Human Resources, had set a
maximum quota for the hiring of Indian,
Bangladeshi, Yemeni and Ethiopian
nationals. While this decision stated that it
only applied to newly hired workers, or
workers who had shifted their permits to new
entities, Reuters and Human Rights Watch
reported that the Saudi authorities had
effectively terminated contracts or stopped
renewing the contracts of tens of Yemenis
already employed in institutions in the
country.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 8 February, Crown Prince Mohammad bin
Salman announced on Saudi Arabia’s official
press agency major legislative developments,
including a new personal status law. The
authorities made no further announcements
regarding this legislative reform and it
remained unclear when the new law would
come into effect. Women continued to face
serious discrimination in marriage, divorce,
inheritance and child custody.
In May, a state-aligned media outlet
reported that the Shura Council renewed
discussions to amend the nationality law to
give permanent residency, without any fee or
lengthy procedures, to the children of Saudi
Arabian women married to foreign nationals.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
As of September, according to the Ministry of
Health, at least 42 million doses of Covid-19
vaccines had been administered. According
to Reuters, this represented about 61% of
the country’s population, assuming each
person had received two doses.
A state-aligned media outlet reported that as
of April, about 68% of detainees in state
security prisons had been vaccinated against
Covid-19, and that work to vaccinate the
remaining prisoners who had consented was
ongoing. In cases where prisoners tested
positive for Covid-19, prison authorities
isolated them in individual cells. However,
prisoners were also denied contact with their
families for the duration of their isolation. In

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

one case, Mohammad al-Qahtani, a human
rights defender and founding member of the
now disbanded Saudi Civil and Political
Rights Association (ACPRA), was detained
incommunicado and was not allowed to
speak to his family for 14 days after he tested
positive for Covid-19 in April.6
Individuals in urgent need of medical care
continued to be imprisoned without adequate
medical attention or treatment.
Mohammad al-Khudari, an 83-year-old
Palestinian man and retired surgeon,
politician and writer, whose health was
deteriorating in prison, was deprived of
adequate medical treatment for multiple
health issues, including cancer,
incontinence, herniated discs, bone fragility
and general frailty. The SCC sentenced him
on 8 August to 15 years in prison (with half of
the term suspended because of his age) after
a mass trial that included his son. The
sentence was reduced following an appeal
session on 28 December to six years in
prison (with a three-year suspension). The
trial was marred by serious due process
violations.7
Religious cleric Salman Alodah remained in
solitary confinement since his arrest in
September 2017. According to his son, his
health had deteriorated in detention, leading
him to lose part of his vision and hearing.
Charged with offences punishable by death,
Salman Alodah had faced over 10 trial
sessions since his trial began in August
2018, including three sessions in 2021
alone, all of which were postponed for
months with no clear reason given, exacting a
huge mental and emotional toll on him and
his loved ones.

DEATH IN CUSTODY
In October, cleric Musa al-Qarni was attacked
and killed in detention by another inmate in
his cell in Dhahban prison near Jeddah.
According to sources, his face, skull and ribs
were smashed and fractured, and he
suffered bleeding in the brain. The authorities
failed to carry out an investigation into his
death.8

319

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In July, the Pegasus Project investigation
revealed the leak of 50,000 phone numbers
of potential surveillance targets of NSO
Group’s Pegasus spyware, including those of
Saudi journalists, human rights defenders
and relatives of dissidents. Amnesty
International’s forensic evidence confirmed
that family members of Saudi journalist Jamal
Khashoggi were targeted with Pegasus
software before and after his murder in
Turkey on 2 October 2018 by Saudi
operatives, despite repeated denials by NSO
Group. Pegasus spyware was installed on the
phone of Jamal Khashoggi’s fiancée Hatice
Cengiz four days after his murder. His wife,
Hanan Elatr, was repeatedly targeted with the
spyware between September 2017 and April
2018, and his son Abdullah was also
selected for potential targeting.9
1. “Saudi Arabia: Release of women’s rights defender Loujain alHathloul long overdue”, 10 February
2. Saudi Arabia’s Post-G20 Crackdown on Expression: Resumption of
Crackdown on Free Speech, Human Rights Activism and Use of the
Death Penalty (Index: MDE 23/4532/2021), 3 August
3. “Saudi Arabia: Withdrawal of death sentences for three Shi’a
activists arrested as teenagers a welcome move”, 8 February
4. Saudi Arabia: Further Information: Young Saudi Executed After
Grossly Unfair Trial: Mustafa al-Darwish (Index: MDE 23/4453/2021),
14 July
5. “Saudi Arabia: Dozens of Sri Lankan women wrongfully detained for
months due to abusive kafala system”, 15 April
6. “Saudi Arabia: Fears for health of imprisoned human rights defender
held incommunicado”, 16 April
7. Saudi Arabia: 83-Year-Old Detainee Needs Urgent Medical Care: Dr.
Mohammed al-Khudari, Dr. Hani al-Khudari (Index: MDE
23/4758/2021), 22 September
8. Saudi Arabia: Impunity for Cleric Death in Custody Illustrates
Disregard for Prisoner Rights (Index: MDE 23/5105/2021), 15
December
9. “Massive data leak reveals Israeli NSO Group’s spyware used to
target activists, journalists, and political leaders globally”, 18 July

SENEGAL
Republic of Senegal
Head of state and government: Macky Sall

320

The authorities arbitrarily detained
opposition and civil society figures,
disrupted the internet, and shut down TV
stations. Security forces fired at protesters.
The right to health was undermined in the
context of the Covid-19 pandemic. Forced
evictions continued.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
In January, Boubacar Seye, president of the
NGO Horizons Sans Frontières, was arbitrarily
detained on his arrival at Dakar airport. He
was charged with “disseminating fake news”;
this was because of an October 2020
interview, in which he denounced the lack of
transparency in the government's use of
funds provided by the EU for programmes on
youth employment and fighting irregular
migration to Europe. He was provisionally
released after 20 days.
In February, the government arbitrarily
arrested several opposition and civil society
figures who had been critical of the
government’s role in a criminal affair linked to
a rape accusation involving the opposition
leader Ousmane Sonko, president of the
Pastef party (full name: Pastef-Les Patriotes).
Among people arrested were members of the
Pastef party, including Birame Souleye Diop
and Abbas Fall, accused of “criminal
conspiracy and complicity in the
dissemination of content contrary to good
morals, threat of assault and violence”.
Seventeen female Pastef militants, including
their leader Maimouna Dieye, were also
arrested and detained in Rebeuss prison
despite not being accused or charged with
any criminal offence. The activist Guy-Marius
Sagna was also arrested and accused of
“criminal conspiracy”, “participating in an
insurrection” and “threatening to disturb
public order” after he accused the police of
torture and other ill-treatment of supporters
of the Pastef party arrested in February. They
were all freed in April. Ousmane Sonko was
also arbitrarily detained in March accused of
disturbing public order, while, accompanied
by his militants, he was on his way to court,
responding to a summons for the rape
allegations. He was freed six days later.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Fourteen people, including three children,
were killed in March when security forces
used live ammunition to disperse nationwide
protests – some of which had turned violent –
in Dakar, Bignona, Kaolack and Diaobé,
following the arrest and detention of
Ousmane Sonko. At least 400 people were
injured.
During the protests in Dakar, armed people
were seen operating in support of the police
and attacking protesters in several
neighbourhoods. The Senegalese
government described these individuals as
police officers wearing civilian clothes.
The independent commission announced
by the authorities in April to investigate the
violent incidents during the protests had not
been put in place. The president announced
in December that a judicial investigation had
been opened.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In March, the national broadcasting regularity
authority suspended Walf TV and Sen TV for
72 hours because of their live broadcasts of
the protests, which it described as
“incitement to violence” and “irresponsible
coverage”. Protesters also vandalized
property belonging to the Groupe Futurs
Media press holding and the newspaper Le
Soleil for their perceived association with the
government.
In the same month, the authorities
disrupted access to the internet and social
media ahead of a planned protest in Dakar.
In June, the National Assembly amended
the terrorism-related chapters of the Criminal
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, in
a move that seriously restricted the rights to
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. Terrorism, which has an overly
broad definition, encompassed acts linked to
disturbing public order, criminal association,
infractions linked to new technologies of
information and communication, and
“incitement to terrorist acts”. Protests that
turn violent could fall under this definition

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

and lead to criminal charges against the
organizers.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Beginning in March, Senegal rolled out its
Covid-19 vaccination campaign, with the
support of COVAX. A shortage of vaccines in
July coincided with a new wave of Covid-19,
and a 44% increase in cases.
As of December, 1.9 million Covid-19
vaccinations had been administered, with
593,000 individuals fully vaccinated,
representing 5.6% of the population.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
The health of detainees was seriously put at
risk by prison overcrowding. The system
implemented by the prison authorities to
monitor Covid-19 cases led to overcrowding
in the CapManuel prison in Dakar, with
detainees unable to even lie down. This
prison was indeed chosen by the authorities
to receive all new detainees, as a triage and
quarantine facility, before they were
eventually dispatched to other detention
facilities.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Rural communities continued to challenge
their forced evictions, which were carried out
to make room for business interests. In
Dougar (a city to the east of Dakar), 21
people were arrested in May during protests
against the allocation of 72 hectares of land
to a private company. According to the
communities affected, the XOF100 million
(US$178,000) compensation offered, based
on a 1973 compensation scale, did not
reflect the current cost of living.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In August, the authorities warned private
employers against suspending and firing
workers who were not vaccinated against
Covid-19, calling such measures
discriminatory.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
There were several public physical attacks
against LGBTI people in Dakar and

321

Ziguinchor during the year, many of them
videoed by the attackers. In May, several
conservative groups organized a large protest
in Dakar, calling for the criminalization of
homosexuality in Senegal’s Criminal Code.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Senegal failed in its obligation to protect
children from ill-treatment. Hundreds of
thousands of Quranic students continued to
be forced to beg for their sustenance, despite
the existence of a 2005 law against forced
begging and child trafficking, and a 2018 bill
to modernize Quranic teaching.

SERBIA
Republic of Serbia
Head of state: Aleksandar Vučić
Head of government: Ana Brnabić
There was negligible progress in bringing to
justice those suspected of criminal
responsibility for past crimes under
international law. Police enjoyed impunity
for ill-treatment. Media workers and NGOs
were attacked by the government and progovernment media. Discrimination against
women, Roma and other ethnic minorities,
LGBTI people and the socially vulnerable
was widespread.

BACKGROUND
The Serbian Progressive Party (SNS)
strengthened its power in parliament, with no
effective opposition to curtail its dominance.
The EU-US sponsored dialogue on Serbia’s
normalization of relations with Kosovo stalled
after resuming in June. Tensions rose in
September when Kosovo enforced their
prohibition on Serbian number plates.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The European Commission in October
contrasted Serbia’s weak record in
addressing impunity against the support and
privileges the state afforded to convicted war
criminals. Prosecutions at Belgrade High

322

Court, mostly based on indictments
transferred from the Bosnia and Herzegovina
(BiH) state prosecutor, held Bosnian Serb
defendants accountable for war crimes,
including torture, murder, rape and sexual
exploitation. Proceedings related to
Srebrenica and Štrpci were delayed for over a
year.
In January, the Court of Appeal acquitted
two defendants accused of the inhumane
treatment, torture and murder of 69 civilians,
and the wounding of 12 in Lovas, Croatia,
and reduced the sentences of six others to
below the legal minimum.
In September, the same court upheld
judgments awarding compensation to the
families of 193 prisoners of war and civilians
murdered by the Yugoslav Army at Ovčara,
Croatia, in 1991. However, compensation fell
below levels awarded at the European Court
of Human Rights.
In August, following retrial, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
sentenced former state security officials
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović to 12
years’ imprisonment for aiding and abetting
murder as a war crime; and for murder,
deportation, forcible transfer and persecution
as crimes against humanity in BiH in April
1992.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In April, the Croatian president cautioned that
Serbia needed to clarify the fate of missing
Croats before joining the EU. Only seven
bodies of persons missing from Kosovo were
returned, and neither party opened their
military archives, as requested by families of
the missing in 2020.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In July, the Belgrade Centre for Human
Rights reported no progress in criminal
complaints by 40 people injured by police
during demonstrations in July 2020, due to
the police’s failure to identify the officers
responsible.
In December the UN Committee against
Torture urged the authorities to implement
legal safeguards protecting detainees’ rights

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

and to end impunity for torture and illtreatment by ensuring all complaints were
independently investigated.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
A draft internal affairs law was withdrawn in
September following concerns about its
potential impact on the rights to protest and
privacy. In October, the requirement for
advance notification for holding assemblies
was increased to 20 days under a new
environmental law regulating noise levels. In
November police used excessive force
against environmental protesters.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
NGOs and independent media were vilified
by politicians and media close to the
government. In March, Aleksandar
Martinović, SNS parliamentary leader,
accused the CRTA – an NGO monitoring the
parliament – of involvement in an earlier
coup and attempted murder of President
Vučić. In August, when the government
intensified its campaign against NGOs and
independent media, over 70 organizations
called on the Ministry of Human Rights for
protection. In October-November NGO
Women in Black’s offices were twice spraypainted with misogynist and nationalist
graffiti.
JOURNALISTS AND MEDIA WORKERS
In March, five media organizations left the
Working Group for the Security and
Protection of Journalists following
government-orchestrated campaigns against
independent media, including accusations
that the Crime and Corruption Reporting
Network (KRIK) was complicit with organized
crime. Four former state security officials
were convicted in December for their part in
the murder of journalist Slavko Čuruvija in
1999.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Thirty women were killed, 20 through family
or partner violence; five deaths were still to
be investigated. NGOs expressed concern
that the new Law on Gender Equality delayed

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

funding for support services for victims of
violence until 2024.
Several allegations of sexual abuse or
harassment were made by girls and women
against men in senior political, educational or
professional positions. While some criminal
investigations were opened, there were no
convictions.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 39,675 migrants and refugees
(predominantly from Afghanistan and Syria)
entered Serbia, of whom 2,306 expressed
their intention to seek asylum. Some 158
applied, yet out of 65 substantive decisions
by the end of November only six people
received refugee status and six subsidiary
protection, including two relatively highprofile figures.
Investigative journalists alleged that state
officials were complicit in smuggling
migrants.
In January, the Constitutional Court
concluded that in 2017 police had
inhumanely treated 17 Afghan nationals, who
had already registered their intention to seek
asylum when police pushed them back into
Bulgaria.
In mid-December UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, reported 210 pushbacks into North
Macedonia from Serbia, (probably an
underestimate) and 27,892 collective
expulsions from EU countries (Hungary,
Croatia and Romania) and BiH into Serbia.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Following a complaint by the A11 Initiative,
an NGO, and six Romani people forcibly
evicted in 2019 from an informal settlement
in Vinca, Belgrade, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development agreed to
facilitate negotiations with the city authorities
to ensure their rights, including to affordable
alternative housing.
In March, a homeless couple successfully
appealed against a fine imposed for breaking
the Covid-19 curfew. During the pandemic,
shelters were closed and some homeless
people were sentenced to 50 days’
imprisonment.

323

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In October, cases of Covid-19 rose
dramatically; human rights organizations
continued to urge the government to act to
protect the right to physical and mental
health. In many cases unvaccinated
employees were forced to work indoors
without face-coverings.
Environmental activists highlighted the
detrimental health impacts of coal-fired
power plants and a copper mine run by a
Chinese company, and the development of a
lithium mine by Rio Tinto.

Sierra Leonians denounced poor sanitation
in hospitals, and maternal and infant
mortality rates were high.

BACKGROUND
In January, 246 prisoners, including political
opponent Alfred Paolo Conteh, were released
following a presidential pardon. Restrictive
measures used to control the Covid-19
pandemic intensified. Sierra Leone accepted
216 of 274 recommendations made under
the UN Universal Periodic Review (UPR)
process.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

DEATH PENALTY

The draft law on same-sex partnership,
opposed by the president, was not adopted.
The draft allowed the registration of same-sex
partnerships and afforded a range of rights
but prohibited others, including the right to
adoption. The September Pride called for its
introduction, action against hate crimes and
hate speech, and progress in gender
recognition. In October, the Commissioner for
the Protection of Equality called on local
authorities to implement gender recognition
regulations.

On 23 July, parliament voted unanimously to
abolish the death penalty for all crimes and
passed the Abolition of the Death Penalty Bill,
which was signed by the president on 8
October.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

SIERRA LEONE

On 12 April, students at the Institute of
Public Administration and Management
participated in a protest against the
institution’s release of an incomplete
graduate list which omitted hundreds of
would-be graduates. The police violently
dispersed protesters, beating and stripping a
woman of her shirt.
Three days later, a police officer shot dead a
young man in Hastings over a private land
dispute. Following an internal investigation,
five officers were dismissed and the officer
who fired the gun was arrested and charged
with murder.
Recommendations to strengthen the
Independent Police Complaints Board went
before the ministry of internal affairs as the
basis for a proposed Act of Parliament to
regulate police violence.

Republic of Sierra Leone
Head of state and government: Julius Maada Bio

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In August, armed groups operating in the
Sahel were observed with Serbian small arms
and light weapons, highlighting the high risk
of diversion of Serbia’s ongoing arms’
transfers to Burkina Faso.1
1. “Sahel: Amnesty identifies Serbian weapons in stockpiles of brutal
armed groups”, 24 August

The president signed the Abolition of the
Death Penalty Bill into law. The police used
excessive force against protesters and other
people. The government failed to protect
the rights of LGBTI people. Sexual and
gender-based violence remained prevalent.

324

During the UPR process, the government
accepted a recommendation to enact a law to
protect human rights defenders. By the end
of the year, the legislative process to do so
had not yet started.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained a criminal offence under the
Offences Against the Person Act and carried
a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination and stigma and the
government rejected all recommendations
made during the UPR process to protect their
rights and dignity.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Early and forced marriage and female genital
mutilation (FGM) were still prevalent.
According to a Save the Children report
published in March, Sierra Leone had the
18th highest child marriage rate in the world.
The report also stated that girls often join
secret societies upon puberty, such as the
“Bondo Society”, where FGM is part of the
initiation process.
The Rainbo Initiative, a national organization
fighting sexual violence, recorded 1,691
cases of sexual and gender-based violence,
mostly against women, of which 1,522 were
sexual assault cases and 169 were physical
assaults, in the cities of Freetown, Bo,
Makeni, Kenema and the district of Kono
between January and June. In July, the
minister of gender and children’s affairs
reaffirmed the government’s commitment to
end such violence by 2030.
In October, the government introduced the
Gender Empowerment Bill in parliament
which aimed to increase women’s access to
finance and to reserve 30% of parliamentary
seats and cabinet positions for women.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Maternal and infant mortality rates remained
high. Sierra Leonians used social media to
denounce the lack of sanitation in two of the
main public hospitals in Freetown,
Connaught Hospital (the main referral
hospital) and the Princess Christian Maternity
Hospital (PCMH). On 13 April, junior doctors
announced a strike, demanding, among
other things, a clean working environment at
the Connaught Hospital and a running water
supply for PCMH.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

With a limited number of oxygen plants in
the country, hospitals struggled to respond to
the third Covid-19 wave. By the end of
September, more than 396,505 adults had
received their first Covid-19 vaccine and
more than 89,902 had received a second
dose.
Mental health services failed to meet the
needs of those suffering trauma from the
recent conflict, and of Ebola survivors who
lived with the after-effects of the virus. A lack
of government spending, insufficient donor
support and a shortage of skilled mental
health professionals, among other factors,
prevented them from receiving adequate
care. There were only two practising
psychiatrists and a visiting psychiatrist to
serve the entire population.1
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In July, a report by the special select
committee tasked by parliament to
investigate alleged contamination of the Taia/
Jong River disclosed that water pollution had
been caused by extensive mining activities
along the Pampana River and its tributary
streams in Tonkolili District, and Hugy River
in Valunia Chiefdom, Bo District, which finally
emptied into the Taia/Jong River. The report
further revealed that the mining activities had
an adverse impact on farming, fishing and
drinking water supplies. Seventeen deaths
were caused by waterborne diseases. The
committee recommended that all artisanal
and illegal mining activities in the region be
put on hold.
1. Sierra Leone: “They Are Forgetting About Us”: The Long-Term Mental
Health Impact of War and Ebola in Sierra Leone (AFR 51/4095/2021),
25 May

SINGAPORE
Republic of Singapore
Head of state: Halimah Yacob
Head of government: Lee Hsien Loong
Defamation suits and repressive laws were
used against human rights defenders and
government critics resulting in steep fines

325

and prison sentences. A new law further
limited rights to freedom of expression,
peaceful assembly and association.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Political leaders continued to use defamation
suits to silence critics. In February, blogger
and activist Leong Sze Han was ordered to
pay SGD133,000 (US$99,000) in damages
after being sued by the Prime Minister. Leong
Sze Han had shared a news article on social
media linking Lee Hsien Loong to a
corruption scandal. In September, Terry Xu
and Rubaashini Shunmuganathan from the
independent news site,The Online Citizen,
were also found guilty of defamation against
the Prime Minister and ordered to pay
SGD210,000 (US$156,138). Later that
month, The Online Citizen was forced to
close its website and social media accounts
after the government accused it of failing to
declare its funding sources. In November,
Terry Xu and Daniel de Costa were found
guilty of defamation against cabinet members
and were awaiting sentencing at year’s end.
In October, parliament passed the Foreign
Interference (Countermeasures) Act (FICA)
giving the government sweeping new powers,
including to remove or block access to online
content if “foreign interference” is suspected.
The law also introduced harsh penalties for
media outlets and others considered as
“foreign agents”.1

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In February, human rights defender Jolovan
Wham was convicted of breaching the Public
Order Act and the Vandalism Act for peaceful
protests in 2017 against violations of human
rights. He served 22 days in prison.2 In
August, Jolovan Wham appeared in court
again on charges related to an incident in
2018 when he took a photo of himself
holding a poster outside a court where Terry
Xu and Daniel de Costa were on trial.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
A woman was sentenced to 30 years’
imprisonment in June for starving, torturing
and killing her domestic worker in 2016.

326

Covid-19 restrictions continued to confine
low-income migrant workers to cramped
dormitories and workplaces. In November,
the UN CERD Committee reviewed the
government’s report and recommended
stronger protections for migrant workers,
including female domestic workers.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, a transgender student alleged
that the Ministry of Education prevented her
from receiving prescribed hormone
replacement therapy. Three students, who
were arrested in January for protesting
against discrimination against LGBTI+ people
in schools, were released on bail. In
November, they and three others were issued
with police warnings for staging a protest
without a permit.3

DEATH PENALTY
There was international outcry against the
planned execution in November of Malaysian
national Nagaenthran Dharmalingam who
was sentenced to the mandatory death
penalty for drug trafficking. He was assessed
to have intellectual disabilities. His appeal
was still pending at year’s end.4
1. “Singapore: Foreign interference law is a tool for crushing dissent”, 5
October
2. “Singapore: Quash conviction and sentence of human rights defender
Jolovan Wham”, 15 February
3. Singapore: Cease Investigation of Peaceful Activists and Respect
Transgender Rights (ASA 36/3643/2021), 8 February
4. “Singapore: Halt ‘despicable’ and unlawful execution of Malaysian
national”, 4 November

SLOVAKIA
Slovak Republic
Head of state: Zuzana Čaputová
Head of government: Eduard Heger
The authorities continued to impose
mandatory quarantines on Roma
settlements in response to Covid-19. There
were ongoing concerns over an investigation
into excessive use of force against Roma

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

people. Parliamentarians attempted to
adopt amendments that would restrict
access to abortion. Slovakia had not yet
ratified the Istanbul Convention.

BACKGROUND
In April, the Constitutional Court decided to
carry out an inquiry into the lawfulness of the
restrictions of the right to liberty during the
Covid-19 pandemic.

DISCRIMINATION
The authorities subjected Roma to
widespread discrimination.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities continued to impose
quarantines on Roma settlements, raising
concerns over proportionality and lack of
adequate socio-economic support. Regional
health authorities in several parts of Slovakia
introduced mandatory quarantines in dozens
of Roma settlements after some of the
residents tested positive. The quarantines
were enforced by the police. On 23 February,
the Government Plenipotentiary for Roma
Communities raised concerns over the
widespread practice of mandatory
quarantines. The authorities failed to carry
out an adequate assessment whether these
were proportionate or necessary. In
December, the Constitutional Court declared
the law providing for mandatory quarantines
unconstitutional, due to the lack of limits to
restrictions on human rights.
Throughout the year, there were concerns
over unequal access of Roma to Covid-19
vaccines, resulting in low vaccination rates in
Roma settlements. By the end of August,
only 7% of residents of Roma settlements
had been vaccinated against Covid-19,
compared to 43% of general population.
Before April, when an amendment to the law
entered into force, foreigners and people with
arrears on health insurance had not been
eligible for Covid-19 vaccines. This
disproportionately affected people from
disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds,
including Roma.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF FORCE
In April, the European Court of Human Rights
ruled in M.B. and Others v. Slovakia that
Slovakia had failed to investigate allegations
that police officers ill-treated six Roma boys
in a police car after arresting them in 2009 in
the city of Košice.
In May and June, the District Court in
Košice terminated the criminal proceedings
against five out of six Roma who had lodged
complaints about ill-treatment during a police
operation in Moldava nad Bodvou in 2013.
The police claimed that the men had falsely
accused them of wrongdoing. In December,
the District Court also terminated the
proceedings also against the sixth
complainant. In June, the government
apologized for the human rights violations
during the police action but provided no
justice or reparations to the Roma victims.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In April, the NGO eduRoma published a
report estimating that as many as 70% of
Roma children in Slovakia did not participate
in remote online learning during the first
wave of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. A
lack of internet access was one of the key
factors that hindered home schooling.
Slovakia continued to face infringement
proceedings initiated by the European
Commission for systematically discriminating
against and segregating Roma children in
education, breaching the EU’s equality
legislation.
FORCED STERILIZATIONS
In June, Roma women who had been victims
of unlawful sterilizations met parliamentarians
to urge the state to ensure justice and
remedy for the harm they had suffered. The
Public Defender of Human Rights and the
Centre for Civil and Human Rights NGO
reiterated the call for adequate
compensation. In November, the government
officially apologized for the unlawful
sterilization of thousands of Roma women.
However, it had yet to put in place an
effective compensation mechanism.

327

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Ten years after signing the Council of
Europe’s Istanbul Convention on Violence
Against Women, Slovakia had still not ratified
it. Drawing on the data of helplines for victims
of domestic violence, a report by the Institute
for Labour and Family Research highlighted
an increase in cases during the Covid-19
pandemic. In 2020, there was a 49%
increase in calls to helplines in comparison
with 2019.
In April, the prime minister allocated €3
million to centres for victims of domestic
violence to increase the financing of shelters.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June and November, parliamentarians
unsuccessfully attempted to adopt
amendments that would restrict access to
abortion. The proposals, which were rejected
by parliament, aimed to restrict access to
legal abortion.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, Slovakia announced that it would
only accept 10 Afghan evacuees. The party
leaders of the government coalition stated
that the country would not be open to accept
a “larger number” of refugees.

SLOVENIA
Republic of Slovenia
Head of state: Borut Pahor
Head of government: Janez Janša

were summarily returned to neighbouring
Croatia, based on a bilateral readmission
agreement, enabling informal returns which
circumvent the usual asylum procedures.
The Ombudsman’s Office criticized the
practice, saying that it deprived people of
legal remedies to address potential human
rights violations.
In April, the Supreme Court upheld the
earlier Administrative Court ruling that the
authorities violated the right of a
Cameroonian national to seek asylum when
he was deported without formal procedure to
Croatia and then on to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Courts in Italy and Austria also
found that Slovenia’s practice of expelling
asylum seekers based on bilateral
agreements was in breach of international
law and subjected the victims to so-called
chain pushbacks, which resulted in people
being further expelled to Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In December, two people
trying to cross to Slovenia drowned in the
Dragonja river, including a ten-year-old
Kurdish girl from Turkey.
Changes to the Law on Foreigners and the
Law on International Protection were adopted
in March, further restricting asylum seekers’,
refugees’ and migrants’ access to protection
and rights, and allowing the possibility of
complete border closure in case of a
“complex migration crisis”. NGOs argued that
the amendments violated Slovenian and EU
law and put people at risk of torture.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

Asylum seekers were denied access to
asylum and forcibly returned to Croatia. The
definition of rape in the Criminal Code was
brought into line with international
standards. Media freedom deteriorated.
Freedom of peaceful assembly was further
restricted.

In June, the Slovenian Parliament adopted
amendments to the Criminal Code that
recognized that sex without consent is rape,
bringing the legislation in line with
international law and standards.1 Under the
new law, coercion, or the use or threat of
force, will no longer be required as conditions
for the crime to be considered rape.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

RIGHT TO HEALTH

Slovenia continued to deny access to asylum
to potential asylum seekers irregularly
entering the country. The vast majority of
people apprehended on Slovenian territory

In December, the parliament adopted the law
on long-term care for older people to address
insufficient care services for the growing
elderly population.

328

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In June, the Constitutional Court declared
as unconstitutional the parts of the
Communicable Diseases Act that the
government had used as a basis for imposing
restrictive measures during the Covid-19
pandemic, and gave parliament two months
to amend the act. The proposed
amendments failed to gain the necessary
majority in parliament in July, leaving the
unconstitutional legal provision in force for
the time being.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The prolonged blanket ban on public
assemblies, originally introduced in October
2020 as part of the Covid-19 mitigation
measures, remained, except for a 12-day
hiatus, in place until 19 April. The authorities
imposed heavy fines on protesters who defied
the ban. In June, the Constitutional Court
ruled that the government’s decisions to
prohibit public gatherings and limit the
number of protesters were unconstitutional
and represented a disproportionate
infringement of human rights.
Media freedom continued to deteriorate,
with journalists – particularly, female
journalists – being the target of frequent
online harassment and threats, including by
the prime minister Janez Janša and other
senior politicians. Government officials took
measures to weaken public media services
by labeling them as “anti-government” or, in
case of the Slovenian Press Agency, by
withholding their funding until November.
Slovenia’s ranking in the World Press
Freedom Index dropped from 32nd in 2020
to 36th place.
Government officials also frequently
engaged in smear campaigns against NGOs
and other critical voices. The Council of
Europe’s Human Rights Commissioner
warned that the toxic and hostile environment
for media and civil society organizations had
a chilling effect on freedom of expression and
human rights work.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

1. Slovenia: Recognition that sex without consent is rape is a “historic
victory for women”, 4 June

SOMALIA
Federal Republic of Somalia
Head of state: Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
(Farmaajo)
Head of government: Mohamed Hussein Roble
All parties to the armed conflict carried out
indiscriminate attacks killing hundreds of
civilians. The right to freedom of expression
was suppressed; two journalists were killed
and others were beaten, threatened,
harassed and intimidated, and subjected to
arbitrary arrest. The government’s response
to the Covid-19 pandemic remained
inadequate and only 5.1% of the population
had been vaccinated by December; health
workers were particularly exposed to
infection risks and suffered poor and unsafe
working conditions. Hundreds of thousands
of people were displaced. In Somaliland,
the authorities continued to censor critics
and journalists and carried out large scale
forced evictions and transfer of people in
Las Anod town.

BACKGROUND
Heightened political tensions between federal
authorities, regional authorities and
opposition leaders rose to new levels, leading
to the postponement of presidential and
parliamentary elections. Political infighting
between Somalia’s president and his prime
minister prevented the implementation of
necessary judicial, constitutional and human
rights reforms. Their public disagreement
about the apparent enforced disappearance
of a woman officer in the National
Intelligence and Security Agency (NISA)
threatened to create political divisions
including within the security forces.
In May, Somaliland held long-delayed
parliamentary and local council elections for
82 members of the House of Representatives
and Councillors in 21 districts. On 5 June,
the opposition won 52 of the 82

329

parliamentary seats, none of which were held
by women, a fact which further undermined
women’s voices at the legislative level.

INDISCRIMINATE ATTACKS
All parties to the armed conflict continued to
commit crimes under international law with
impunity. According to the UN there were
536 civilian casualties (241 deaths and 295
injuries) between February and July, 68% of
which were the result of indiscriminate
attacks by the armed group Al-Shabaab,
while the rest were attributed to state security
forces, clan militias, and international and
regional forces including the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Al-Shabaab launched repeated attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including restaurants and hotels. The group
also carried out targeted killings of people
with perceived links to the government, and
journalists, among others. On 2 March, AlShabaab members killed at least 20 people
and injured 30 others in the popular Luul
Yemeni restaurant in the capital, Mogadishu,
in a suicide car bombing. On 25 September,
at least eight people were killed in another
such attack in Mogadishu. Among the dead
was Hibaq Abukar, an adviser on women and
human rights affairs in the prime minister’s
office.
On 10 August, allegations emerged that
AMISOM soldiers had targeted and killed
seven civilians in a retaliation attack against
Al-Shabaab in Golweyn town, in the Lower
Shabelle region. On 21 August, AMISOM said
it constituted a Board of Inquiry to investigate
the incident. On 21 October, the Board made
public its findings, admitting that “the seven
people killed were civilians and the conduct
of the personnel involved was in breach of
the AMISOM Rules of Engagement.” On 13
November, AMISOM announced that a
Ugandan court martial in Mogadishu had
found five Ugandan soldiers guilty of the
killings, two of whom were sentenced to
death and three to 39 years in prison, and
that they would serve their sentences in
Uganda.

330

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 12 July, a woman announced in the
media that her 25-year-old daughter, Ikran
Tahlil Farah, an officer with the NISA, had
been missing since 26 June when she was
abducted by unidentified people in a car
outside her residence in Mogadishu. The
family alleged repeatedly that NISA officers
were behind the abduction and
disappearance because she was taken from
a secure location near the heavily guarded
NISA headquarters, accessible only to
screened visitors and NISA personnel. On 2
September, an announcement was made in
state media saying that Ikran Tahlil Farah had
been kidnapped and killed by Al-Shabaab, a
claim immediately denied by the group.
A public outcry prompted the prime
minister to replace the NISA director,
following which the president appointed the
former NISA director as his National Security
Advisor. The prime minister referred the
disappearance to the Military Court
Prosecutor for investigation. On 21
November, the Chief Prosecutor announced
that preliminary investigations found no
evidence that NISA was involved in Ikran
Tahlil Farah’s alleged disappearance.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Two journalists were killed and others faced
beatings, threats, harassment and
intimidation, arbitrary arrests and prosecution
as a means to silence them.
On 22 February, Puntland police arrested
freelance journalist Ahmed Botan Arab in
Bosaso town after he posted interviews on
Facebook showing Bosaso residents
commenting on the Puntland president’s
speech about regional political developments
and a stalemate on the implementation of an
electoral agreement between regional and
federal leaders. He was detained at Bosaso
police station and released two days later
without charge after clan elders intervened.
On 1 March, independent journalist Jamal
Farah Adan was shot dead by unidentified
armed men at a shop in Galkayo town,
Mudug region. Al-Shabaab claimed
responsibility for the killing. Before his death,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Jamal Farah Adnan said he had received
anonymous threats and that an attempt had
been made on his life by an Al-Shabaab
member. On 6 March, the President of
Puntland said that the authorities had
arrested suspects in Galkayo and
investigations into the circumstances of the
killing were underway. The outcome of the
investigations was not made public by the
end of the year.
On 20 November, radio journalist Abdiaziz
Mohamud Guled, also known as Abdiaziz
Africa, was killed in a suicide bomb attack,
and two of his colleagues were injured. AlShabaab claimed responsibility for his killing.
On 3 March, Kilwe Adan Farah, a freelance
journalist, was sentenced to three months in
jail by a military court in Puntland. He had
been arrested and detained in December
2020 by the Puntland Intelligence Agency, a
day after he covered protests in Garowe town
against the government’s perceived
mismanagement of local currency. He was
charged with five offences, including
“publication of false news and bringing the
nation or the state into contempt”. He was
released from Garowe Central Prison on 22
March following a presidential pardon.
On 3 July, NISA officers in Balad Hawo
town, Gedo region, arrested Mohamud
Mohamed Sheikh also known as Lafagari, a
journalist for the Star Media Network. The
next day, he was transferred to a detention
facility in Dollow town where he was detained
for three days and released without charge
and without being provided with any
explanation for his arrest and detention.
On 5 September, a group of journalists
covering a protest in Mogadishu were beaten
and their equipment confiscated by Somali
Police Force officers. Following the incident,
a video circulated on social media showed
police beating and dragging Bashir
Mohamud, a Goobjoog Media producer,
along the ground.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

according to government records, 15,294
people had contracted the virus and 798
people had died since the beginning of the
pandemic. However, given the limited testing
capacity, and under-reporting and registration
of deaths, the real figure was expected to be
much higher. Over the last four years, the
budget allocated to health was on average
2% as compared to the 31% devoted to the
security sector.
The government’s response to the
pandemic was wholly inadequate. There was
almost no capacity to test, treat and manage
Covid-19 cases and patients’ access to health
facilities remained severely limited. For much
of the year, only one hospital in Mogadishu
handled all Covid-19-related cases across
south-central regions, which lacked essential
medicines and basic equipment like
ventilators and oxygen. From August, two
more hospitals, also in Mogadishu, were able
to manage Covid-19 patients. Access to
emergency transportation and ambulance
services in Mogadishu and the regional states
was almost non-existent and the city had only
two ambulances which operated free of
charge for Covid-19 patients and served
nearly 3 million people.1
Access to vaccines was severely limited.
Only 5.1% of the population was fully
vaccinated by December at which point
almost all the vaccines donated through
COVAX and by China had been used. Limited
public awareness compounded by a lack of
public information about the virus
contributed to people’s hesitancy to get
vaccinated, even among health workers.
HEALTH WORKERS
Many health workers contracted Covid-19.
They faced multiple challenges during the
pandemic and put their own health and lives
at risk. Some of them said they had not been
given enough appropriate training on
handling Covid-19 patients and the impact
on their own health; they worked prolonged
hours. In many cases, the payment of their
salaries was delayed.

The Covid-19 pandemic highlighted a range
of pre-existing weaknesses in Somalia’s
public healthcare system. By August,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

331

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
The impact of drought and floods driven by
climate change, conflict and the loss of
livelihoods exacerbated the protracted
humanitarian crisis. In addition to more than
2.6 million people who were already internally
displaced in previous years, 573,000 people
fled their homes between January and
August, according to the UN. Of those, over
70% were fleeing conflict, including around
207,000 who were temporarily displaced in
Mogadishu due to election-related violence in
April. Around 50% of all those displaced in
2021 were women and girls who faced an
increased risk of sexual violence and
harassment. Humanitarian access to most of
those affected was restricted because of
insecurity, severely limiting their access to
food, water, sanitation, housing and
healthcare.

SOMALILAND
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities in Somaliland severely restricted
freedom of expression, particularly targeting
individuals perceived to be promoting unity
with Somalia. The Human Rights Centre, a
local human rights organization, reported that
42 individuals were arrested in Borama town,
and 15 in Las Anod town, on 26 June and 16
July, respectively, for wearing outfits made
from the Somali flag. They were released
without charge.
On 19 August, the authorities in Burao town
arbitrarily arrested independent journalist
Abdimalik Muse Oldon for the second time in
two years. He was held in connection with an
altercation over social media with the
president when he alleged that the
management of Barwaaqo University was
spreading Christianity. On 12 October, he was
charged with offences including “spreading
false information and anti-national
propaganda”, and “criminal defamation”. His
trial was ongoing at the end of the year and
he remained in detention. In 2020, he had
been released from prison following a
presidential pardon having served one year of
a three-and-a-half-year sentence on charges

332

related to his criticizing the president on
Facebook.
FORCED EVICTIONS AND TRANSFER OF POPULATION
On 2 and 3 October, Somaliland authorities
forcibly evicted, rounded up and transferred
over 7,000 men, women and children from
Las Anod town and its surrounding areas in
the Sool region to locations in Puntland. The
Somaliland government said those targeted
for this exercise were “non-locals” from
southern Somalia who posed a security threat
to Somaliland. Some of the families had lived
in Las Anod for 20 years and have since lost
their property, business assets and
livelihoods. According to the UN, the majority
of those displaced initially arrived in Galkayo,
Puntland, most of whom proceeded to
Hirshabelle and Banadir in the South West
State, and were in need of urgent protection
and humanitarian assistance. Somaliland
authorities neither gave notice to the families
nor allowed them to take their belongings
with them.
1. Somalia: “We Just Watched Covid-19 Patients Die”: Covid-19
Exposed Somalia's Weak Healthcare System but Debt Relief Can
Transform It (Index: AFR 52/4602/2021), 18 August

SOUTH AFRICA
Republic of South Africa
Head of state and government: Matamela Cyril
Ramaphosa
Incidents of gender-based violence
increased dramatically and women’s access
to sexual and reproductive healthcare was
restricted. Children faced significant
inequalities in the public education system,
exacerbated by Covid-19: up to 500,000
children dropped out of school during the
pandemic. There were numerous cases of
alleged corruption in provincial health
departments. Millions of people did not
have access to adequate sanitation and
water. Foreign-owned businesses were
targeted in xenophobic attacks, and
undocumented migrants were excluded
from the vaccine roll-out. Security forces

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

continued to use excessive force against
peaceful protesters and hundreds of people
died as a result of police action. Violent
unrest across two provinces, which was
triggered by former president Jacob Zuma’s
arrest, resulted in at least 360 deaths as
well as job losses, further entrenching
inequalities. The authorities failed to ensure
that the mining industry complied with
standards to prevent human rights
violations against communities. Evidence
emerged of South Africa’s complicity in war
crimes committed in Yemen.
Environmentalists feared that a proposed oil
exploration project would threaten marine
wildlife.

BACKGROUND
In July President Ramaphosa authorized the
deployment of 1,495 troops to Mozambique,
to deal with insecurity in Cabo Delgado in the
north-east (see Mozambique entry).
The Commission of Enquiry into State
Capture continued to hear testimonies in
relation to allegations of corruption and other
abuses known as “state capture” under the
presidency of Jacob Zuma who was
imprisoned for contempt of court for refusing
to appear before the commission. He was
released on medical parole after serving two
months of his 15-month prison sentence.
The first part of the commission’s report was
to be released in January 2022 and to focus
on corruption in key state-owned entities,
including South African Airways. Parts two
and three were expected to be released in
February 2022.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Official crime statistics published in August
showed an increase in some forms of genderbased violence. Despite the adoption by the
government of the National Strategic Plan on
Gender-Based Violence and Femicide in
2019 to strengthen its response to the high
incidence of gender-based violence, the
statistics revealed a 72.4% increase in rape
cases, a 77.6% increase in other forms of
sexual assault, and a 74.1% increase in all
sexual offences. While the dramatic rise in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

cases was attributed to low reporting during
the Covid-19 lockdown period, the numbers
during 2021 were still higher than those
recorded in the pre-pandemic era.
Parliament adopted three new bills in
September to strengthen protection against
gender-based violence.
There were at least 117 cases of femicide in
the first half of the year. In August, the killing
of Nosicelo Mtebeni by her boyfriend led to a
public outcry. Nosicelo Mtebeni was a 23year-old law student in her final year at Fort
Hare University in the Eastern Cape province
when she was murdered. Her body was
dismembered and placed in a suitcase and
in plastic bags. Her boyfriend was sentenced
to 25 years in prison for her murder.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Many women and girls were unable to access
sexual and reproductive health services
during Covid-19 lockdown restrictions. In the
Gauteng province, 23,226 teenage
pregnancies were recorded between April
2020 and March 2021. Of this number, 934
concerned girls between the ages of 10 and
14. The high rate of teenage pregnancy was
partly attributed to difficulties with accessing
contraceptives. A survey of young women
aged between 15 and 24, conducted by the
South African Medical Research Council,
revealed that 21% of the respondents
reported challenges in getting condoms
because of Covid-19 measures.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The education system was ridden with
systematic failures during the Covid-19
pandemic.1 The National Income Dynamics
Coronavirus Rapid Mobile Survey, a
collaboration of over 30 South African
researchers from several universities and
research organizations, found that up to
500,000 additional children dropped out of
school during the pandemic. The drop-out
rate reached approximately 750,000 by May,
over three times the pre-pandemic number of
230,000. According to the Department of
Basic Education, one in three pregnant girls

333

aged between 10 and 19 did not return to
school.
Many schools were underfunded and
sanitation conditions were poor. As of 12
April, 5,167 schools still used pit latrines,
which contravened health and safety
legislation.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
South Africa remained the country worst
affected by Covid-19 in Africa, in terms of
both reported cases and deaths. In July,
healthcare facilities were struggling to cope
with the third wave. In the Gauteng province
alone, about 91% of private and public
hospital beds were occupied. There were
about 8.4 million fully vaccinated people by
September in a population of almost 60
million. Undocumented migrants were
excluded from the vaccine roll-out.
The Health Sector Anti-Corruption Forum
and the Special Investigating Unit took on
numerous cases of alleged corruption in
provincial health departments. Former health
minister Zweli Mkhize resigned in August
after being implicated in the irregular
procurement of a Covid-19 related
communication services tender which
resulted in the alleged misappropriation of
ZAR150 million (over US$10 million).

RIGHTS TO WATER AND SANITATION
Communities still struggled with access to
water and sanitation. According to the
Department of Water and Sanitation, an
estimated 5.3 million households did not
have access to safe and reliable drinking
water and 14.1 million people did not have
access to safe sanitation. In some
municipalities only 50% of residents enjoyed
adequate sanitation facilities. Protests over
access to water and sanitation continued
throughout the year, disrupting voter
registration for the 2021 local government
elections. In September, residents of
Khayelitsha in Cape Town, the legislative
capital, protested over blocked drains and
sewage running down their streets and into
their homes, compromising their health.

334

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
There were over 153,000 outstanding asylum
applications. The government and UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, signed a US$9.6
million agreement in March to clear the
backlog and revamp the asylum
management system by 2024. In May, the
Western Cape High Court ruled that the Cape
Town Refugee Reception Office (RRO), which
had been closed in 2012, be reopened. This
followed the Department of Home Affairs’
failure to comply with a 2017 court order
issued by the Supreme Court of Appeals to
reopen the RRO by March 2018. Since its
closure, asylum seekers living in Cape Town
had to travel to Durban, Musina or Pretoria
every few months (1,455km, 1,633km and
1,923km, respectively) to renew their
permits.
There were sporadic xenophobic attacks
throughout the year, with businesses owned
by migrants targeted in Durban.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
South African police continued to use
excessive force against peaceful protestors
resulting in deaths and injuries. The
Independent Police Investigative Directorate
(IPID), an official oversight body of the police,
received 6,122 new complaints by the end of
the 2021 financial year on 28 February. Of
these, 4,228 were assault cases, 353 were
cases of death as a result of police action,
256 were cases of torture, and 80 were rapes
by a police officer.
IPID received 74 complaints during the July
unrest in parts of the Gauteng and KZN
provinces (see below, Right to life and
security of the person). Of these, the majority
– 26 – were cases of deaths resulting from
police action, while there were 25 complaints
of assault, and four deaths in police custody.
Two cases involving torture were filed.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In March, Mthokozisi Ntumba was shot and
killed by members of the South African Police
Service while passing a student-led protest in
Braamfontein in Johannesburg. The
University of Witwatersrand students were
protesting the university’s exclusion of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

learners with outstanding fees. The trial of
four police officers in connection with
Mthokozisi Ntumba’s killing was postponed
until 2022.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
In July, violent looting and destruction of
property erupted in parts of Gauteng and
KZN provinces following the imprisonment of
Jacob Zuma. The unrest spread to residential
areas and in the absence of a clear police
presence many communities turned to
vigilantism. The South African National
Defence Force was deployed to support
police on the ground.2 At least 360 people
died during the week of unrest. Some died in
stampedes and others from live ammunition
or rubber bullets shot at close range.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
The Department of Mineral Resources and
Energy continued to fail to meet its annual
target of inspecting mines to ensure they
complied with its Social and Labour Plans
(SLPs). Strict adherence to SLPs would go
some way to ensuring that the negative socioeconomic ramifications of mining are
remedied, and human rights violations
prevented.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In March, a research report by Open Secrets,
an organization which exposes private sector
economic crimes, revealed South Africa’s
links to alleged war crimes committed in
Yemen. Rheinmetall Denel Munitions, one of
the state-owned enterprises, and other South
African companies had regularly supplied the
Saudi Arabia and UAE-led coalition in the
armed conflict in Yemen with weapons such
as bombs and shells, before and since the
conflict started (see Yemen entry). In June,
the Pretoria High Court ordered South African
arms companies that supplied weapons
found to have been used against civilians in
the Yemen conflict to be made public.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In July, the National Disaster Management
Centre, an official body, declared a drought
disaster in the Eastern Cape, Northern Cape
and Western Cape provinces. The country’s
first comprehensive legal framework for
climate change was tabled in parliament in
November. Also in November, the
government joined France, Germany, the UK,
USA and EU to support a just transition to a
low carbon economy. In December, the
energy minister supported Shell’s plans to
conduct seismic oil exploration on the Wild
Coast which environmentalists said would
threaten marine wildlife. The high court in
Makhanda in the Eastern Cape issued an
interdict on 28 December to temporarily halt
the exploration until the second part of the
interdict proceedings.
1. South Africa: Failing To Learn the Lessons: The Impact of Covid-19 on
a Broken and Unequal Education System (AFR 53/3344/2021), 15
February
2. “South Africa: Investigate loss of life during unrest and looting spree
and ensure accountability”, 22 July

SOUTH KOREA
Republic of Korea
Head of state and government: Moon Jae-in
Abortion was decriminalized. Gender-based
violence continued. Transgender people
suffered hatred and discrimination. The
National Human Rights Commission found
that mandatory Covid-19 testing for foreign
workers was discriminatory. Government
measures aimed at tackling the climate
emergency were criticized as being too
unambitious.

DISCRIMINATION
MIGRANT WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In March, the National Human Rights
Commission of Korea (NHRCK) found as
discriminatory the administrative orders by
some local governments, including Seoul and
Gyeonggi province, which made Covid-19
tests mandatory for foreign workers already in

335

the country. The central government
subsequently ordered the Seoul city
government to amend its order on the
grounds that it was discriminatory to foreign
nationals.
In September, migrant workers on
temporary visas in the lowest income bracket
were once again excluded from Covid-linked
exceptional financial support from the
government. Almost 2 million migrant
workers may have been affected, many of
whom remained jobless due to Covid-19
restrictions.
GENDER AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Further parliamentary bills were submitted
with the aim of passing a comprehensive
anti-discrimination act. The proposed law
would include crucial protection against
discrimination for reasons of sexual
orientation and gender identity. Existing
legislation did not protect all groups.1

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Abortion was decriminalized in January
following an earlier Constitutional Court
decision which declared the previous
abortion ban unconstitutional. Parliament did
not take action to revise the abortion law as
ordered by the Constitutional Court in 2020.
Several bills remained pending in the
National Assembly, including those
prescribing specific time limits for abortion
access as well as some calling for full
decriminalization. This prolonged legislative
vacuum caused confusion among medical
providers.
In a landmark ruling on 8 January, the
Central District Court in the capital, Seoul,
ordered the Japanese government to
compensate 12 women who had been forced
into the Japanese military sexual slavery
system before and during World War II. In a
separate ruling in April, the district court
ruling dismissed similar claims brought
against Japan by another group of survivors.2
Gender-based violence continued, as
evidenced by several cases of alleged abuse
of authority and sexual harassment and
violence in the military. In May, a female
master sergeant in the Air Force took her own

336

life after suffering sexual harassment. In the
same month, it was confirmed that a female
non-commissioned officer attempted suicide;
she had been stalked and molested by a
superior in the army. In August, a female
Navy chief petty officer, who had complained
of abuse by a senior colleague, was also
found dead at her base in a suspected
suicide. It was alleged that her superiors
failed to take adequate steps to protect her
from further abuse by the same perpetrator.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In February, the results of a survey
commissioned by the NHRCK into the
situation faced by transgender people were
published. They revealed that transgender
people are “exposed to hatred and
discrimination in all places”. The report
criticized the lack of laws, institutions and
policies guaranteeing the rights of
transgender individuals and called on the
government to establish a comprehensive law
banning discrimination.
At least three transgender people died in
circumstances suggesting suicide. Lee Eunyong, a playwright, was found dead in their
home on 8 February. The body of Kim Kihong, a former candidate for the Green Party
and one of two transgender candidates to run
for office in 2020, was found on 24 February
at their home on Jeju island. Former staff
sergeant Byun Hui-su died in March in
Cheongju, North Chungcheong province. Her
death was treated as suicide. Byun Hui-su’s
gender reassignment surgery was classified
by the military as a “disability”, and she was
discharged from the military after requesting
a transfer to the female corps. After her
death, a district court ruled in October that
there were “no mental or physical disability
grounds for dismissal” and ordered her
discharge to be posthumously cancelled.
In a significant decision for transgender
rights, a transgender man who had not
undergone sterilization was granted gender
recognition by an appellate court in October.
The current Supreme Court guidelines on
gender reassignment include the
requirement of sterilization.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Authorities continued to prevent
transgender individuals from serving in the
military.
CRIMINALIZATION
A case challenging the constitutionality of
Article 92-6 of the Military Criminal Act,
which criminalizes same-sex sexual activity in
the military, remained pending at the
Constitutional Court.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to defend the AntiLeaflet Law, which came into effect in March
to reduce tensions with North Korea. The law
bans the delivery of printed materials and
other goods across the border from South
Korea. Civil society groups claimed that the
law threatened freedom of expression and
provided disproportionate penalties, such as
a prison sentence of up to three years or a
fine of up to 30 million won (US$27,000) for
groups in South Korea sending leaflets and
USB drives to North Korea.3
An amendment bill on the Press Arbitration
Law was widely criticized both within and
outside the country due to the vague wording
that would impose punitive damage on
journalists and media organizations for
alleged “fake news”. The bill remained
pending in the National Assembly at the end
of the year.
The government ratified three core ILO
Conventions in February: No. 29 (Forced
Labor), No. 87 (Freedom of Association and
Protection of the Right to Organise) and No.
98 (Right to Organise and Collective
Bargaining). The conventions were due to
enter into force in South Korea in April 2022.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
A committee formed to prevent the deaths of
delivery workers from exhaustion and
overwork expressed concerns about working
conditions in e-commerce companies,
highlighting high demand and competition
between companies and the absence of
protections. One company, Coupang, was
criticized for numerous instances of abuse.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In October, a large-scale strike was
organized in Seoul by the Korean
Confederation of Trade Unions to protest
against poor labour conditions and inequality.
A police complaint was filed against the
organizers and participants for violating the
ban on assemblies to prevent the spread of
Covid-19; 34 people were investigated.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE
EMERGENCY
At COP26 in November, South Korea’s
Carbon Neutrality Committee announced a
new nationally determined contribution
(NDC) target to cut emissions by 40% from
2018 levels by the year 2030. This falls short
of the figure needed to keep the rise of global
temperatures below 1.5˚C.
In August, the National Assembly passed a
Framework Act on Carbon Neutral Green
Growth, enshrining in law carbon neutrality
by 2050. The new Act was criticized by
environmental and other civil society groups
for goals considered too unambitious. In
October, an appeal was filed with the
Constitutional Court by civil society groups
and several political parties, which claimed
that the new Act failed to protect people’s
fundamental rights.
Supplemental briefs by youth activists were
added during the year to a further case
before the Constitutional Court on climate
litigation, which remained pending. The
original briefs argued in part that under the
Constitution the state is obliged to protect the
health, life and environmental rights of the
people and that these rights were infringed
by 2019 amendments to the climate change
law which failed to set effective emission
reduction targets.
1. “South Korea: Lawmakers Must Seize Chance to Pass Landmark Antidiscrimination Act”, 9 August
2. “South Korea: Disappointing Japan Ruling Fails to Deliver Justice to
‘Comfort Women’”, 21 April
3. “Controversy over Anti-Leaflet Law – Amnesty International’s
approach” (Korean only), 17 May

337

SOUTH SUDAN
Republic of South Sudan
Head of state and government: Salva Kiir Mayardit
Hundreds of thousands of people fled their
homes because of conflict. Humanitarian
assistance was impeded or blocked. All
parties to the conflict perpetrated serious
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, including the
indiscriminate and targeted killing of
civilians, the recruitment and use of
children, acts of sexual violence and
destruction of property. At least 52 people,
including children, were extrajudicially
executed. Impunity for human rights
violations remained the norm and the
government failed to establish the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan (HCSS). The security
forces continued to use unlawful
surveillance to target government critics, in
some cases arbitrarily arresting and
detaining them. They responded to calls for
peaceful protests with a wave of repression.
Death sentences were imposed and
executions carried out. The government
continued to fail in its obligation to respect
and protect the rights to health and
education.

BACKGROUND
In July, South Sudan celebrated 10 years of
independence.
Extreme flooding continued and, according
to the UN, affected eight out of 10 states,
creating and exacerbating a humanitarian
crisis.
Violence persisted in various pockets across
the country, setting parties to the conflict, as
well as local groups aligned with them,
against each other. Months of tension
culminated in fighting in June in Tambura
county in Western Equatoria State between
competing local groups aligned with forces
affiliated to the government’s South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF) on the one
hand, and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army-In Opposition (SPLA-IO) on the other.

338

The SPLA-IO split in August led to inter-group
fighting in the north. Fighting continued
between government forces and the National
Salvation Front (NAS), a non-state armed
group, in Central and Western Equatoria
State.
In May, the UN Security Council renewed
the arms embargo and set five benchmarks
against which the embargo will be reviewed
in 2022.1
In July, the People’s Coalition for Civil Action
(PCCA) was formed. It called for mass
peaceful protests demanding that the
country’s leadership step down.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
From June to October local groups, affiliated
to the SSPDF on the one hand, and the
SPLA-IO on the other, waged a campaign of
terror on the civilian population of the
Balanda and Azande communities in
Tambura county. According to local
government figures, around 300 people were
killed. Fighters from both sides summarily
killed civilians by shooting them or cutting
their throats; they abducted civilians;
mutilated bodies; set fire to neighbourhoods;
and looted and destroyed civilian property,
schools and health facilities. The fighting
displaced more than 80,000 people
according to UN-verified government figures.
Families were separated as they fled, and
some were unable to reunite, even months
later. Displaced people in camps and host
communities lacked food, medicine and
adequate shelter.2
Fighting between government and
opposition forces and the NAS persisted for
the fourth year. According to the UN, NAS
members attacked a hospital and subjected
at least three people to sexual violence in
addition to other human rights violations.
In other areas, fighting between ethnic
groups, clans and sub-clans continued,
resulting in at least 441 incidents involving
human rights violations, including arbitrary
killings, injuries, abductions, conflict-related
sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and
detention, torture and other ill-treatment, and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the looting and destruction of civilian
property, according to the UN.
Attacks by armed youths on clearly marked
humanitarian vehicles persisted. The UN
reported that at least five humanitarian
workers were killed and two were arbitrarily
detained.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
According to the UN, an estimated 8.3
million people needed humanitarian
assistance. Despite the dire need for such
assistance, the denial of, and restrictions to,
humanitarian access continued. According to
UN OCHA, humanitarian actors reported 542
impediments to access and government
authorities continued to impose bureaucratic
obstacles.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
reported that between March and November
at least 52 people, including children, were
extrajudicially executed in the Warrap and
Lakes states. According to the UN
Commission on Human Rights in South
Sudan, state security forces either carried out
or were “present within the vicinity of the
executions” in almost all cases. Individuals,
including children, were lined up and
publicly executed by firing squad in a
marketplace. According to UNMISS, some
individuals were tied to trees before being
executed; and government officials defended
the executions as a necessary deterrence
mechanism in the absence of rule of law
institutions.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
According to the UN, the SPLA-IO, armed
groups and government security forces
committed grave violations and abuses
against 124 children – 28 girls and 96 boys.
These included killing, maiming, abduction,
sexual violence, forced recruitment and use
of children in combat and supportive roles
like porters, cooks and spies. The actual
numbers are likely to be higher.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The right to education for children remained
severely restricted. According to UNICEF,
more than 2 million children, most of them
girls, were out of school due to Covid-19 and
other challenges which hindered their access
to education, including financial barriers and
flooding.
In November, only eight of 53 schools in
Tambura county were open, severely
restricting the right to education for months.
SSPDF-affiliated fighters used a primary
school in Tambura town as their barracks for
several weeks during the fighting until late
October when government officials finally
coaxed them into leaving. Such use of
schools by armed actors runs contrary to the
global Safe Schools Declaration, which the
government endorsed in 2015, and
undermines international human rights and
humanitarian law.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
High levels of conflict-related sexual violence
and gender-based violence remained a
concern. According to the UN, state security
forces and non-state armed actors committed
at least 63 incidents of sexual violence in
conflict, affecting 89 women, girls and men,
aged between two and 50, including rape,
gang rape and forced nudity.

IMPUNITY
Impunity for crimes under international law
and other gross human rights violations and
abuses persisted. In January, the Council of
Ministers approved a Ministry of Justice plan
to establish the HCSS, the Commission for
Truth, Reconciliation and Healing (CTRH),
the Compensation and Reparation Authority
and other justice-related provisions in the
peace agreement. At the end of the year,
however, the government had only
reconstituted the technical committee for the
establishment of the CTRH, and a UN
agency had begun training committee
members. The government seemingly
prioritized truth over trials, continuing to
delay and block the establishment of the
HCSS which, if operational, would be

339

mandated to investigate and prosecute
crimes under international law.3
The 2008 Penal Code had still not been
amended to include crimes under
international law. While the Gender Based
Violence and Juvenile Court remained
operational, no conflict-related sexual
violence cases were brought to trial.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Throughout the year, the National Security
Service (NSS) continued to arbitrarily arrest
and detain real or perceived government
opponents and critics for prolonged periods,
including journalists and civil society
members. Between 2 and 30 August,
government actors arbitrarily arrested at least
14 people nationwide in relation to calls for
peaceful protests. In Yei, two civil society
members, as well as a bishop and a student,
were detained in a military intelligence
detention facility with limited or no access to
their lawyers for almost two months. Kuel
Aguer Kuel, one of the PCCA founders, was
arrested by NSS officers on 2 August and
remained in Juba Central Prison4 at the end
of the year (see below, Freedom of
expression, association and assembly).
The 2014 NSS Act remained in force,
despite clear obligations under the 2018
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
to amend it by February 2020. It continued to
grant NSS officers police-like powers of arrest
and detention, in violation of the service’s
constitutional mandate to gather intelligence,
and in contravention of international human
rights standards.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly remained restricted
and media continued to be censored.
In August and September, calls for peaceful
protests by the PCCA were met with a wave
of repression. The authorities deployed high
numbers of security forces to the streets in
major towns and arrested civil society
activists and a politician, among others; they

340

also closed a radio station and an academic
think-tank, both of which resumed operations
in September and November, respectively.
On 29 August, the eve of the planned
protests, internet disruptions were reported
which lasted until late afternoon on 30
August. There were indications that the
shutdown may have been a deliberate
attempt by the authorities to derail the
protests.5
After the failed protests, security forces
continued to harass civil society members in
the capital, Juba, Yei, Bor and Wau. Some of
them suspected that the security forces had
put them under surveillance. Several human
rights activists were forced into exile.
On 6 October, the Bank of South Sudan
directed all commercial banks to freeze the
accounts of three civil society organizations, a
think-tank, four activists and a politician, who
were either members, or suspected of being
members, of the PCCA.6 At the end of the
year, all but the think-tank’s accounts
remained frozen.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
The government conducted communications
surveillance, with the likely support of
telecommunication companies. The NSS also
conducted physical surveillance using a
widespread cross-border network of
informants and agents, penetrating all levels
of society and daily life; they monitored
media and social media, and required event
organizers to seek permission before holding
any form of public gathering. The NSS used
these forms of surveillance, in breach of
rights to privacy, to arbitrarily arrest and
detain individuals outside the law, infringing
on rights to freedom of expression and
assembly. In one case, on 17 July, they broke
up a civil society workshop on the
constitution-making process on grounds that
the organizers had not sought permission
from the NSS to proceed. The cumulative
effect of these measures created a pervasive
climate of fear and led to self-censorship.7

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be handed
down and executions were carried out. On 12
February, the Supreme Court upheld the
Court of Appeal’s 2020 decision to quash the
death sentence against Magai Matiop Ngong,
and also ordered an age assessment and
retrial. Magai Matiop Ngong was 15 at the
time of the incident and conviction.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The right to health remained under serious
threat and public health facilities were underresourced. South Sudanese continued to die
in high numbers of preventable diseases, and
other conditions, due to inadequate health
services, and attacks on healthcare facilities.
In Tambura county, armed men ransacked
and looted health facilities, depriving civilians
of crucial care and violating international law.
In November, 13 out of 20 medical facilities
across the county were rendered unusable
after being vandalized, and those that
remained were barely functional.
At the end of the year, only 1.52% of the
population was fully vaccinated due to factors
including the unequal distribution of vaccines
globally; insufficient supplies and
unpredictable arrival times; short shelf life of
vaccines; and obstacles to reaching some
areas due to flooding and conflict.8
MENTAL HEALTH
Access to mental health services was
severely limited and healthcare providers
were unable to meet the widespread and
significant needs. There were just three
psychiatrists serving the entire country, who
were also responsible for providing training
and supervision to health staff. Juba
Teaching Hospital was the only public
medical facility providing in-patient
psychiatric care, and demands exceeded
beds available for psychiatric patients. The
availability of psychotropic drugs was both
sporadic and limited.
1. South Sudan: UN Security Council’s Extension of Arms Embargo on
South Sudan a Welcome Step but Weak Benchmarks a Let-Down
(Index: AFR 65/4291/2021), 24 June

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

2. “South Sudan: Survivors describe killings, mass displacement and
terror amid fighting in Western Equatoria”, 9 December
3. Letter of Appeal for Truth and Trials in South Sudan (Index: AFR
65/4305/2021), 7 June
4. South Sudan Must Respect the Right to Freedom of Peaceful
Assembly (Index: AFR 65/4760/2021), 23 September
5. “South Sudan: End new wave of repression against peaceful
protests”, 3 September
6. South Sudan: Unfreeze Civil Society and Political Activist’s Bank
Accounts (Index: AFR 65/5017/2021, 19 November)
7. South Sudan: “These Walls Have Ears”: The Chilling Effect of
Surveillance in South Sudan (Index: AFR 65/3577/2021), 2 February
8. “Address the Access Issue and the Pandemic Will Be Managed
Tomorrow”: Global Vaccine Inequity’s Impact in East Africa (Index:
AFR 04/5084/2021), 14 December

SPAIN
Kingdom of Spain
Head of state: Felipe VI
Head of government: Pedro Sánchez
The authorities failed to ensure adequate
access to health during the pandemic.
Violence against women persisted, although
steps were taken to strengthen legal
safeguards. Women continued to face
challenges in accessing abortion. The right
to housing was not sufficiently protected.
Undue restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly
continued unamended in law. Excessive use
of force by law enforcement officials
persisted. The authorities failed to ensure
adequate reception conditions and a fair
and effective asylum procedure for people
arriving irregularly in the Canary Islands.
The government approved a bill on rights for
victims of the Civil War and Francoism,
while the courts continued to deny them
access to justice.

BACKGROUND
The final state of emergency to contain the
spread of Covid-19 ended in May. In July,
following a complaint filed by VOX, a far-right
political party, the Constitutional Court issued
a controversial ruling regarding the first such
state of emergency. It found that the
government should have used a different

341

form of state of emergency, known as a “state
of exception”, which would have required a
vote in parliament. In October, the
Constitutional Court found the second state of
emergency had also breached constitutional
rules.
In September, Carles Puigdemont, the
former President of the Catalan government,
was arrested in Italy on a warrant issued by
the Spanish Supreme Court for his
involvement in the 2017 referendum in
Catalonia and subsequent declaration of
independence. The Italian authorities
released him the following day and
suspended the extradition proceedings,
pending decisions on his parliamentary
immunity by EU courts.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 pandemic continued to place
the national healthcare system under
unprecedented pressure. However, the
authorities failed to put in place adequate
measures to guarantee everyone’s right to
health.1 Older people, people with chronic
illnesses and those with mental health
conditions faced the greatest difficulties in
accessing care and treatment. Migrant
women were particularly affected by a
weakened primary care service as they
shouldered the greater burden of caring for
the sick with a less accessible healthcare
system.2
During the Covid-19 vaccination campaign,
non-nationals, in particular people with an
irregular migration status, encountered
greater barriers to accessing the health
service and vaccines due to a lack of clear
protocols regarding identification and access
to information for these groups.
There was an increase in mental health
needs during the pandemic, which exposed
the lack of adequately resourced mental
health services. Healthcare workers were
particularly impacted by increases in stressrelated illnesses, due to working conditions
and care overload. In October, the
government announced the adoption of a
Mental Health National Strategy after seven
years without one.

342

OLDER PEOPLE
Thanks to the vaccination campaign, death
rates in care homes and as percentage of the
total Covid-19 deaths decreased dramatically.
Throughout the year, relatives of people who
had died of Covid-19 in care homes
demonstrated against insufficient
investigations to hold the authorities
accountable for decisions which may have
contributed to their deaths.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Violence against women persisted. Fortythree women were killed by their partners or
ex-partners. Seven children were killed by
their fathers to punish their mothers.
In May, parliament passed the Law for
comprehensive protection against violence
for children and adolescents. This extends
the time for initiating investigations in cases
of serious sexual offences against children
and provides for the statute of limitation to
start only once the victims reach the age of
35.
In July, parliament began discussing a bill to
strengthen protection for victims of sexual
violence. The bill includes a proposal to
redefine rape as based solely on lack of
consent. The bill was pending at the end of
the year. Sex-worker-led and other
organizations were concerned that proposed
reforms in the same bill to address
exploitation in the sex industry risked
undermining sex workers’ rights and had
been approved by the government without
meaningful consultation and their
participation.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion for girls between 16 and 18 years of
age still required parental permission. The
persistently high number of “consciencebased refusals” from healthcare providers
continued to limit women’s access to abortion
in the national health system.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Despite the pandemic, between January and
June, there were 22,536 evictions. Nearly
5,400 concerned people who were unable to

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

pay their mortgages and nearly 16,000
people who could no longer afford their rents.
The government did, however, extend the
suspension of evictions for economically
vulnerable people until 28 February 2022.
In March, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights upheld a
complaint that Spain had violated the right to
housing of a family evicted without the
provision of alternative, adequate
accommodation. Over 100 other complaints
concerning the right to adequate housing
against Spain remained pending before this
Committee.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Instances of unnecessary and excessive use
of force by the security forces continued. In
February, a law enforcement official used a
firearm against protesters during
demonstrations in Linares (Andalucía) after a
man and his daughter were assaulted by two
off-duty police officers. An internal
investigation concluded that no individual
agent could be identified as the shooter. In
June, the Ministry of the Interior rejected an
Ombudsman’s recommendation to adopt
mechanisms to prevent misallocation of
ammunition and to ensure that agents can be
identified.
Also in February, a woman lost her eye,
allegedly because of the impact from a foam
bullet fired by the Catalan police during
protests following the detention of the rapper
Pablo Hasél. A judicial investigation was
initiated.
In April, law enforcement officials fired
rubber balls at migrants to quell a protest in a
reception centre in the Canary Islands. Eight
migrants were detained, and at least 10
required medical assistance.
Investigations into allegations of unlawful
use of force by law enforcement officials
during the October 2017 protests in Catalonia
remained open at the end of the year.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In November, the European Committee for
the Prevention of Torture noted numerous
credible reports of ill-treatment by prison and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

police officers. It also noted that the practice
of mechanical fixation of people to a bed
persisted, including for juvenile detainees,
and recommended its abolition.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The 2015 Law on Public Security and
provisions of the Criminal Code which unduly
restrict the rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly were not amended
and continued to be enforced.
In February, the rapper Pablo Hasél began
serving a nine-month prison sentence for the
criminal offences of “glorification of
terrorism” and “insulting the crown and state
institutions”, following a conviction in 2018
for the content of some tweets.
In June, Jordi Cuixart and Jordi Sànchez,
civil society leaders of the movement for
Catalonia’s independence, were released
from prison following a government pardon.
They had spent almost four years in
detention, following an unjust conviction on
sedition charges in connection with peaceful
protests and the 2017 referendum on
Catalan independence.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The government evacuated 2,026 Afghan
nationals following the Taliban seizure of
power in Afghanistan. For the first time, the
government allowed Afghan nationals to
apply for asylum in the Spanish embassy in
Pakistan. Some 48 people were subsequently
transferred to Spain in October.
A total of 22,200 asylum seekers and
migrants arrived by sea in the Canary Islands.
At least 955, including at least 80 children,
died at sea while attempting the journey from
west African coasts. Poor management and
lack of reception capacity on the islands
resulted in unnecessary suffering for the
refugees and migrants, including many
unaccompanied children, due to avoidable
overcrowding and sub-standard conditions in
reception facilities. The authorities also failed
to ensure access to a fair and efficient
asylum procedure. Asylum seekers could not
access adequate information about their

343

rights and the authorities did not ensure the
timely registration and processing of asylum
claims. By September, around 1,000
unaccompanied children were awaiting
assessment of their cases and
documentation.
In May 8,000 people, including 2,000
unaccompanied children, entered the
Spanish enclave of Ceuta from Morocco
irregularly, while Moroccan guards waved
them in past their checkpoints. Shortly
afterwards, the Spanish authorities illegally
and collectively returned 2,700 people to
Morocco. There were reports of excessive use
of force.
In August, the authorities illegally returned
55 unaccompanied children to Morocco.
Spanish courts deemed the returns unlawful
and suspended them. Soon afterwards,
however, the Prime Minister reiterated the
government’s intention to continue expelling
unaccompanied children to Morocco.
In October, the government reduced the
time needed for unaccompanied children to
obtain a residence permit and relaxed the
requirements for renewing work and
residence permits after the age of 18 to
prevent them losing their regularized status.

IMPUNITY
In September, the government presented in
parliament a bill to ensure the rights to truth,
justice and reparations of the victims of the
Civil War and Francoism. The UN Special
Rapporteur on the Promotion of the Right to
Truth, Justice and Reparation and the UN
Committee on Enforced Disappearances
called on parliament to strengthen some
areas before its adoption.
In February, the Supreme Court delivered its
second judgment on the crimes of the Civil
War and Francoism, following its 2012
landmark ruling. It reiterated that the Spanish
judiciary could not investigate these past
human rights violations, due to the expiry of
the deadline within which the investigations
should have been initiated and because they
would breach the principle of legality and the
1977 Law on Amnesty.

344

In September, the Constitutional Court
rejected an appeal by a victim of torture
during the late Franco period, stating that
Spain had no obligation under international
law to investigate and prosecute the case
because the prohibition of crimes against
humanity could not be applied retroactively.
1. “Spain: The other pandemic. Between abandonment and
dismantling: right to health and primary care in Spain”, 26 February
(Spanish only)
2. “Spain: NGOs demand that vulnerable populations have guaranteed
access to Covid-19 vaccines in Spain”, 29 April (Spanish only)

SRI LANKA
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Head of state and government: Gotabaya Rajapaksa
The government continued its crackdown on
dissent, targeting multiple groups. Impunity
continued in a number of emblematic
cases. Excessive use of force and brutality
by law enforcement officers were widely
reported, and there were deaths in custody.
The UN Human Rights Council set up a
mechanism to consolidate evidence of
serious human rights violations for future
prosecutions after the Sri Lankan
government withdrew its support for
transitional justice. Existing transitional
justice mechanisms did not progress. The
Prevention of Terrorism Act continued to be
used to target critics from minority
communities through arbitrary arrests and
prolonged detention without judicial
oversight. New regulations issued under the
Act would effectively deny suspects a
judicial hearing and force them to attend
mandatory “rehabilitation”. Discrimination
and marginalization of the Muslim
community increased because of
government policies specifically targeting
them. The government failed to prioritize
health workers, older populations, people
with comorbidities or marginalized groups
during its Covid-19 response.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The crackdown on dissent continued. The
government targeted human rights
defenders, journalists, lawyers, members of
the opposition and criminal investigators and
expanded its scope to include university
students, academics, trade unionists and
social media commentators. In May, the
Secretary to the Ministry of Health issued an
order threatening disciplinary action against
health sector employees who spoke to the
media about difficulties in tackling the
Covid-19 pandemic.
There were protests over long-standing
salary issues for teachers and principals.
Demonstrators also called for the withdrawal
of a controversial education bill; some
activists were arrested, in some cases
spending more than 75 days in detention.
In an online meeting organized by the Sri
Lanka Judges Institute in August, judicial
officers were given instructions by nonjudicial officers on controlling public
gatherings during the Covid-19 pandemic.
The instructions followed widespread protests
by trade unions, and the judicial officers
reportedly felt pressured to deliver court
orders preventing such protests.
The government announced law reform
initiatives to regulate the work of NGOs,
potentially hindering the right to freedom of
association.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In emblematic cases which implicated
members of the military or government
supporters, either the suspects were
acquitted or the cases were withdrawn by the
Attorney General. Other cases failed to
progress. The trial relating to the enforced
disappearance in 2010 of journalist Prageeth
Eknaligoda was postponed multiple times,
owing in part to Covid-19 restrictions.
Suspects in the 2005 assassination of Tamil
MP Joseph Pararajasingham, including those
from a government-aligned political party,
were acquitted and the Attorney General’s
Office did not indicate any interest in re-

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

opening the investigation. Without publicly
providing reasons for its decision, the
Attorney General’s Office decided not to
proceed with charges against Wasantha
Karannagoda, a former Navy commander,
over his alleged role in the enforced
disappearance of 11 Tamils in 2008 and
2009. The Sri Lankan Navy is alleged to have
been responsible for the forcible
disappearance of the so-called “Navy 11”.
The UN Human Rights Council passed
resolution 46/1 with a view to advancing
accountability in Sri Lanka. The resolution
established an international mechanism for
OHCHR to collect, consolidate, analyse and
preserve information and evidence and to
develop strategies for future accountability
processes for gross violations of human rights
or serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
Under the leadership of the controversial
former Supreme Court judge Upali
Abeyratne, the Office on Missing Persons
(OMP) opened a new office in the North and
announced plans to “verify” the 21,374
cases collated by its former members. By the
end of the year, the OMP’s official caseload
stood at 14,988, with no clear explanation for
having dropped more than 6,000 missing
persons cases. New members were
appointed; there was lack of clarity over
whether the leadership changed.
The cabinet of ministers approved policies
and guidelines produced by the Office for
Reparations, which related to reparations for
victims of the armed conflict and civil or
political unrest. The document was not made
public by the end of the year. Law
enforcement officers brought court orders
against war-related memorialization initiatives
under the guise of Covid-19 restrictions, and
arrested those taking part.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities continued to detain hundreds
of Muslims arrested in connection with
bombings in April 2019, under the
Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).
Activist and lawyer Hejaaz Hizbullah, who
was also arbitrarily arrested under the PTA in

345

April 2020, remained in detention without
access to bail. He was indicted in March and
his trial was scheduled for 2022. Poet Ahnaf
Jazeem, who had remained in prolonged
detention following his arrest in May 2020 in
connection with his writings, was released on
bail in December. He was indicted under the
PTA in November. The PTA was also used to
target, arrest and arbitrarily detain numerous
journalists, particularly from the North. Both
Ahnaf Jazeem and Hejaaz Hizbullah were
repeatedly denied due process safeguards.
They were not informed of the reason for
their arrest, and they were both held in
prolonged administrative detention without
judicial oversight to monitor their wellbeing,
or access to legal counsel or family. In
March, President Rajapaksa issued new
regulations under the PTA which would allow
for the referral of people suspected of an
offence under the PTA or Emergency
Regulations to a “rehabilitation” programme.
The new regulations raised many human
rights concerns, including the use of overly
broad, subjective language to describe
offences, and the concern that rehabilitation
and detention under the regulations deprived
suspects of due process, access to family
and the ability to challenge their detention in
court. Such violations would also place those
arrested at risk of torture and other illtreatment.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE AND
EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Incidents of deaths in police custody and
police brutality were widely reported in the
media. There was no apparent criminal
liability or accountability for law enforcement
or government officers in such cases. Civil
society recorded numerous alleged incidents
during the year, including three shootings by
the police, 40 incidents of police violence, 10
deaths in police custody (some attributed to
suicide), at least 30 prison deaths (in some
cases attributed to suicide or Covid-19), at
least 16 incidents of violence by security
forces, 24 incidents of violence by
government officials including sexual

346

harassment, and at least three cases of
torture in prison.
The Minister for Public Security announced
his intention to introduce legislation to
dismiss human rights cases against police
officers if they are not heard “in a timely
manner”.
The Minister for Prison Management and
Prisoner Rehabilitation, Lohan Ratwatte,
forcibly entered a state prison in the city of
Anuradhapura in September. The Minister
held at gunpoint and threatened to kill Tamil
prison inmates, who were incarcerated under
the PTA. The incident highlighted impunity
for criminal behaviour at the highest levels of
government. Lohan Ratwatte had not been
held to account for his actions and remained
a government minister at the end of the year.

DISCRIMINATION
Sri Lanka’s minority Muslim community faced
increased marginalization and discrimination
as the government targeted Muslims with
new policies and laws.
In March, Public Security Minister Sarath
Weerasekera stated that the government was
planning to ban more than 1,000 madrasas
(Islamic education institutions) which were
operating outside the national education
policy. If authorized, the move would likely
amount to discrimination on religious
grounds, and may also violate the freedom to
manifest one’s religion or belief through
worship. In April, the cabinet approved a
proposal by the same minister to ban the
wearing of face veils.
In March, the Ministry of Defence stated
that Islamic books brought into Sri Lanka
would only be released following analysis and
review by the Ministry, as an alleged
“counter-terrorism measure”. The
government directive discriminates solely on
the grounds of religion and violates the rights
to religion and belief and to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas.
Ahead of sessions of the UN Human Rights
Council, Sri Lankan authorities finally moved
to change the policy of forced cremations of
Muslim victims of Covid-19, which began in
March 2020. The policy had remained in

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

place despite WHO guidance that allowed for
burial or cremation. The guidelines affected
the final burial rites of the Muslim
community, violating the right to freedom of
religion and belief. Although the forced
cremation policy was reversed, the
government continued to insist on Muslim
victims of Covid-19 being buried in remote
areas, limiting access by family members and
discriminating solely on the grounds of
religious belief.

GENDER-BASED DISCRIMINATION AND
VIOLENCE
Despite pledges made to amend the Muslim
Marriage and Divorce Act of 1951, which
allowed girls to be married from 12 years of
age, the Act remained unchanged.
Women’s rights groups sought, among other
reforms, for women to be eligible to be
appointed as Quazis (judges in the Quazi
court, an unofficial religious mediation body);
for polygamy to be abolished; and for consent
to be obtained from both parties when
registering a marriage, to prevent forced
marriages.
LGBTIQ people and women from ethnic
minorities and Indigenous communities faced
increased abuse and domestic violence while
forced to remain at home during Covid-19
lockdowns.
Same-sex sexual relations continued to be
criminalized in Sri Lanka. In a video shared
on social media, a counsellor at a police
training programme was seen making
malicious and discriminatory remarks about
the LGBTIQ community. An NGO pressured
the Court of Appeal to serve notice preventing
the police from conducting trainings that
marginalize and violate the rights of LGBTIQ
people.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Sri Lanka struggled to effectively respond to
the surge in Covid-19 cases without a
communicated national vaccination plan, and
amid difficulties in procuring vaccines from
manufacturers owing to vaccine hoarding by
rich and powerful states. The government
failed to prioritize health workers, older

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

populations, people with comorbidities, and
marginalized and minority groups.

SUDAN
Republic of Sudan
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Burhan
Head of government: Abdalla Hamdok
The transitional government’s modest
progress towards improving the human
rights situation suffered a major setback
after the October military coup. Security
forces used excessive and even lethal force,
and other repressive measures, including
reported cases of gender-based violence, to
counter protests and opposition to the
takeover. At least 53 people were killed and
hundreds injured in demonstrations
following the coup. Military authorities used
prolonged arbitrary detention, arresting
dozens of civilian political leaders and
activists, holding them in incommunicado
detention. Internet and telecommunication
services were regularly disrupted and
journalists were attacked. Previous promises
to investigate and prosecute crimes
committed by security forces remained
unfulfilled. Civilians in the western region
of Darfur continued to be inadequately
protected by security authorities from
unlawful attacks by militias in which
hundreds of civilians died. While the
government increased health expenditure,
hospitals lacked essential resources.
Women protested against the rise in genderbased violence and discriminatory laws. A
fresh wave of refugees fleeing conflict in
Ethiopia’s Tigray region arrived in Sudan.

BACKGROUND
Following former president Omar al-Bashir’s
deposition in 2019, a power-sharing
compromise between military and civilian
leaders led to the formation of a transitional
government. The government made some
advances in terms of long overdue reforms,
including by criminalizing female genital

347

mutilation and reforming laws on corporal
punishment.
However, ongoing power struggles between
the military and civilian wings of government,
including over economic and security sector
reforms, erupted and on 25 October 2021
the army seized power, dissolving the civilian
government and imposing a nationwide state
of emergency.
On 21 November, the army signed an
agreement that reinstated the ousted prime
minister but the deal failed to defuse the
crisis. Despite UN-mediated efforts to end
the crisis, public resentment against the
military’s actions grew.
Key economic reforms resulted in Sudan
securing US$20.5 billion in debt relief from
international financial institutions. Many
international organizations suspended
economic assistance programmes following
the coup, putting recent developments at
risk.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Security forces continued to use excessive,
and sometimes lethal, force against
protesters. On 11 May, they shot dead at
least two protesters and injured dozens at a
demonstration in the capital, Khartoum. The
demonstration was held to demand justice in
connection with an attack by security forces
on peaceful demonstrators in June 2019
when over 100 people were killed and
hundreds injured1 (see below, Right to truth,
justice and reparation).
Violence by security forces spiked after the
military takeover in October and hundreds of
thousands of people took to the streets in
frequent protests. All branches of the security
establishment, including the army, police and
the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), participated
in the violent repression and dispersal of the
protests.2 At least 53 people were killed and
hundreds injured in demonstrations. Security
forces reportedly subjected women to
gender-based violence to counter their
growing participation in protests, including
two reported rapes in December.

348

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The government took some positive steps
towards enabling justice and accountability
for human rights violations, by ratifying the
UN Convention against Torture and the
International Convention against Enforced
Disappearance on 10 August.
However, perpetrators of human rights
violations continued to enjoy impunity. Over
one decade since the ICC issued arrest
warrants against Omar al-Bashir, Ahmad
Harun and Abdel Raheem Muhammad
Hussein, the transitional government
continued to fail in its obligation to transfer
the suspects to the Hague court to answer
charges of crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes in Darfur.
The National Investigation Committee,
appointed in October 2019 to investigate a
brutal attack in which the RSF, the National
Intelligence and Security Service and the
police killed over 100 protesters and
subjected others to sexual violence and other
torture and ill-treatment in Khartoum in June
2019, was yet to release its findings. No one
was held accountable by the end of the year.
The modest progress made to improve
human rights protection during a period of
almost three years since Omar al-Bashir’s
deposal suffered a major setback after the
October military coup. Despite the prime
minister’s pledge in November that the
killings of those protesting the takeover would
be investigated, there was no evidence of any
progress in the matter.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
On 10 July, Muammar Musa Mohammed
Elgarari and Mikhail Boutros Ismail Kody
(opposition activists and members of the
Future Movement Group) were released on
bail after being held in prolonged arbitrary
detention without charge since June 2020.
They were held at a police station in
Khartoum North, for harassing members of
the Committee for Removal of Empowerment
which was established to dissolve the former
ruling National Congress Party and to
confiscate its property.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

After the October army takeover, security
authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained
dozens of civilian political leaders, including
cabinet members, and Prime Minster
Hamdok who was held for two days before
being put under house arrest for almost a
month. Other political prisoners, who were
held for nearly one month in incommunicado
detention without access to their families or
legal counsel, were released after the 21
November accord. However, security forces
continued to arrest and charge protesters.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression was
severely restricted. Internet and
telecommunications were repeatedly
disrupted from 25 October, limiting people’s
ability to access timely and accurate
information, infringing on their ability to
express political views and restricting
reporting on human rights violations.
Military authorities also targeted press who
covered anti-army protests. On 30 December
security forces attacked the offices of two TV
stations in Khartoum, assaulting journalists
and firing tear gas into their offices after they
broadcast footage of security force violations
against protesters.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
The premature withdrawal of the United
Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in December 2020, and the Sudanese
security forces’ repeated failure to protect
civilians, resulted in continued indiscriminate
violence against civilians, particularly in the
West Darfur region. RSF members
participated in some militia attacks against
civilians.
In January 2021, at least 163 people,
including three women and 12 children, were
killed and 217 injured during a revenge
attack by militias on the Krinding camp in El
Geneina, West Darfur State’s capital, and
home to thousands of internally displaced
Massalit people.3
On 3 April, armed men, said to be Arabs,
triggered four days of deadly violence when
they shot three Massalit men, killing 28-year-

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

old Saber Ishaq and 47-year-old Arbab
Khamis. A third man, Abdulhafiz Yahia
Ismaeil, aged 53, was seriously injured.
According to the West Darfur State Doctors’
Committee, at least 144 people were killed
and 232 injured during the clashes.
Also in West Darfur, 200 people died as a
result of intercommunal fighting between
October and November, according to the
Darfur Bar Association.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Government expenditure on health was
significantly greater than in previous years.
The Ministry of Finance allocated SDG99
billion (about US$242 million) – 9% of the
budget – to the healthcare system for lifesaving medicines; Covid-19 treatment; the
rehabilitation and construction of rural
hospitals, reproductive and other health
centres; and nutrition and health
programmes.
However, in the midst of the third Covid-19
wave in the first half of the year, hospitals
faced multiple challenges, including a lack of
medicine and oxygen, and a shortage of
doctors and other medical personnel due to
low salaries and poor working conditions.
Between March 2020 and May 2021, 89
Sudanese doctors, including 11 women, died
after contracting Covid-19.
The country continued to face a shortage of
Covid-19 vaccines. On 3 March, it received
over 800,000 doses of the AstraZeneca
vaccine from the COVAX initiative and began
its vaccination programme on 9 March
through the government’s National
Deployment and Vaccination Plan for
Covid-19 Vaccines. The plan first prioritized
frontline healthcare workers across Sudan
and older people with comorbidities. By the
end of the year, Sudan had received 5.25
million Covid-19 vaccine doses and 1.23
million people had been fully vaccinated,
representing 2.8% of a population of around
43.85 million people, according to
government figures. In 2021, there were
47,443 confirmed Covid-19 cases and 3,340
related deaths, according to the Ministry of
Health.

349

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 8 April, hundreds of women joined a
demonstration in Khartoum to protest against
the increased domestic and other genderbased violence in the context of Covid-19
restrictions, as well as to denounce
discriminatory laws and patriarchal
restrictions on women’s rights. Some of the
restrictions highlighted included laws
forbidding women from working outside the
home without the permission of their
husband or father as well as inequality in the
home and workplace. The protesters
launched the “Feminist Manifesto”,
produced in April after two years of
consultations with various grassroots
women’s organizations and gender rights
advocates. It urged the authorities to lift
numerous legal obstacles to equality and to
challenge existing social norms that result in
women’s and girls’ oppression.
Later that month, the Council of Ministers
ratified CEDAW (with reservations entered to
articles 2, 16 and 29/1), and the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on
the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo
Protocol).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, Sudan continued to host one of the
largest refugee populations in Africa, with
South Sudanese making up the majority of
the over 1.1 million refugees and asylum
seekers. It also hosted at least 55,000
refugees who fled the conflict in Ethiopia’s
Tigray region in 2021.
1. “Sudan: Speed up investigations into 2019 Khartoum massacre”, 3
June
2. “Sudan: Investigate the killings of people after military crackdown
against protesters”, 24 November
3. “Sudan: Horrific attacks on displacement camps show UN
peacekeepers still needed in Darfur”, 1 March

350

SWEDEN
Kingdom of Sweden
Head of state: Carl XVI Gustaf
Head of government: Magdalena Andersson
Immigrant communities continued to be
among the hardest hit by Covid-19.
Development projects in the north
proceeded without the consent of affected
Sami Indigenous communities. The
government promised new legislation on
legal gender recognition based on selfidentification. There were concerns about
proposals to increase police surveillance
powers and expand the mandate of private
security firms to use force. Refugees and
migrants applying for family reunification
faced new restrictions. Charges were
brought against representatives of the oil
company Lundin Energy in relation to war
crimes in South Sudan.

BACKGROUND
Gun violence, particularly involving young
men, escalated in areas with high rates of
crime and social exclusion. In September,
women from affected communities organized
a protest calling for more efforts to address
social inequality and poverty.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Public health studies showed that immigrants
continued to suffer disproportionately high
levels of critical illness and death as a result
of Covid-19; the studies noted socioeconomic
factors including crowded housing as well as
lower vaccination rates.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In November, the government-appointed
Corona Commission found that the education
system had become less equitable during the
pandemic as distance learning approaches
were less effective for students in a
vulnerable situation.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

INDIGENOUS PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Projects to extract minerals, increase logging
and develop wind power proceeded in the
north despite, in many cases, having failed to
obtain consent from the Sami Indigenous
people of affected regions. Several projects
risked devastating effects on reindeer-herding
Sami communities.
In September, the government presented a
legal proposal on the right to consultation for
the Sami people on matters potentially
affecting them. The proposal did not
incorporate the principle of free, prior and
informed consent and included exceptions to
the obligation to consult.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In November, the government presented a
draft bill on legal recognition of gender
identity based on self-identification. The bill,
which separated the process of changing
one’s legal gender from the medical
procedure, had been revised following
criticism from the Council on Legislation in
2018.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
In November, the government announced
proposals giving police powers to use camera
surveillance, interception and house
searches without suspicion of crime. Another
proposal included provisions expanding the
mandate of private security guards to use
force in upholding law and order. There were
concerns that this proposal lacked
procedural safeguards for individuals and
increased the risk of racial profiling.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, changes to the Aliens Act entered
into force, imposing new requirements that
greatly restricted the ability of refugees and
migrants to exercise family reunification
rights – one of the few safe and legal
pathways to protection in Sweden.
Also in July, authorities halted forcible
returns to Afghanistan. In August, the
government temporarily changed the rules to
enable people in Afghanistan to be part of the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

resettlement quota; 1,311 Afghans came to
Sweden as quota refugees in 2021.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In November, the Swedish Prosecutor
brought formal charges against two
representatives of the oil company Lundin
Energy (formerly Lundin Oil AB) for
complicity in war crimes in South Sudan. The
trial had not started by the end of the year.
.

SWITZERLAND
Swiss Confederation
Head of state and government: Guy Parmelin
A government-commissioned investigation
into the ill-treatment of asylum seekers by
private security staff in federal asylum
centres found some cases of excessive use
of force, and made recommendations for
reform. Parliament tightened control of
arms exports to countries in conflict.
Activists protesting with tactics involving
civil disobedience faced prison sentences.
Following a popular vote, same-sex couples
were granted the right to equal marriage.
Another two referendums, however,
confirmed draconian anti-terrorism laws and
a ban on full-face veils in public.

BACKGROUND
In September, following a 20-year campaign
by civil society, parliament accepted a
government proposal to create a national
human rights institution (NHRI). Details of
the institution’s statute and financing were
still to be drafted, and the NHRI is expected
to take up its work in 2023.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Amnesty International research exposed
abuses by private security staff against
people housed in federal asylum centres, and
identified systemic failures in the running of
the centres.1 Fourteen asylum seekers
interviewed, including two children,
described abuses including beatings and

351

denial of medical treatment. The government
commissioned internal and external
investigations, which found disproportionate
use of force in at least three out of seven
cases investigated. The external investigation
recommended reviewing the privatization of
security services, but failed to clearly
recommend protection for whistleblowers and
the creation of an independent complaints
mechanism.2
CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child
found that Switzerland violated 10 different
articles of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child when it deported a mother and her son
to Bulgaria.3

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In September, parliament passed a law
regulating the export of arms. It prohibits
transfers to States involved in internal armed
conflict and to those that seriously and
systematically violated human rights.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 1 April, police cleared a protest camp
near Eclépens. Of 150 environmental
activists temporarily arrested, 43 were
charged. The imposition of prison sentences
on some protesters following acts of civil
disobedience unduly restricted their rights to
freedom of expression, conscience and
peaceful assembly.4

DISCRIMINATION
WOMENS’ RIGHTS
Parliament continued revising the criminal
code provisions on rape. The public
consultation process showed an
unprecedented mobilization for a new rape
law based on consent.
In March, a referendum seeking to ban fullface veils was accepted by a narrow margin,
despite concerns that the ban discriminated
against a single religious community and
violated women’s rights, freedom of
expression and religion.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In a September referendum, a large majority
of the population agreed to grant same-sex

352

couples the right to equal marriage, including
access to sperm donation for lesbian
couples.5

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
After the rejection of the Responsible
Business Initiative by a majority of cantons in
2020, the parliament adopted a much
weaker counter-proposal focusing mainly on
non-financial reporting. The legislation, due
to enter into force in January 2022, was
criticized by civil society and looked unlikely
to fully guarantee respect for human rights by
Swiss companies.6

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
In June, the country voted in favour of a new
counter-terrorism law providing Federal
Police with far-reaching powers, mostly
without prior judicial control and due process
guarantees. The measures – including use of
foot shackles, no-contact orders, zone bans
and preventive house arrest – risked violating
the right to liberty and security of the person,
the right to a fair trial and the rights of
children. Many of the measures could be
applied to children from 12 years of age.7

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In a welcome development for the protection
of the right to privacy, in November, motions
were introduced in the local parliaments of
Zurich and Lausanne calling for a ban on the
use of facial recognition technologies.8
1. Switzerland: “I ask that they treat asylum seekers like human
beings” – Human rights violations in Swiss federal asylum centres
(EUR 43/4226/2021) 19 May
2. “Switzerland: Moving Forward to Fight Violence in Federal Asylum
Centres”, 18 October (French and German only)
3. “Children’s Rights: Switzerland criticized by UN Committee”, 21
December (French and German only)
4. “Switzerland: Prison sentences against environmental HRDs:
disproportionate and not confirming with human rights law”, 8
September (French and German only)
5. “Switzerland: A milestone for equality”, 26 September (French and
German only)
6. “Switzerland: Instructions for looking the other way”, 1 July (French
and German only)

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

7. “Switzerland: Dangerous “Yes” vote gives police sweeping powers to
target people including children without charge or trial”, 13 June
8. “Switzerland: No to facial recognition”, 18 November (French and
German only)

SYRIA
Syrian Arab Republic
Head of state: Bashar al-Assad
Head of government: Hussein Arnous
Parties to the conflict continued to commit
with impunity serious violations of
international humanitarian law, including
war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other gross human rights abuses.
Government forces carried out direct
attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and gas
facilities, and indiscriminate attacks
through aerial bombing and artillery shelling
in Idlib governorate and western Aleppo
countryside. They also besieged civilians in
southern Syria and restricted and denied
civilian access to humanitarian aid across
the country. Security forces arbitrarily
subjected refugees returning to their homes
to unlawful detention, torture and other illtreatment, and enforced disappearance.
Government authorities continued to
arbitrarily detain tens of thousands of
people, including peaceful activists,
humanitarian workers, lawyers and
journalists, subjecting many to enforced
disappearance. The Syrian National Army
(SNA), supported by Turkey, continued to
subject civilians in the northern cities of
Afrin and Ras al-Ayn to arbitrary detention,
torture and other ill-treatment, and
abduction. In the north-east, the
Autonomous Administration led by the
Democratic Union Party (PYD) arbitrarily
detained children in al-Hol camp and
transferred them to prisons where they were
detained with adults. In the north-west, the
opposition armed group Hay’at Tahrir alSham arbitrarily detained and harassed
activists and journalists. The government
failed to provide a robust response to curb

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the spread of Covid-19 and blocked access
to medical care for thousands in south and
north-east Syria. Tens of thousands of
internally displaced people were at risk of
contracting Covid-19 due to dire living
conditions. Some European countries
investigated and prosecuted individuals
suspected of committing crimes under
international law in Syria through their
national courts under the principle of
“universal jurisdiction”. The death penalty
remained in force and executions were
reported.

BACKGROUND
On 12 April, the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
reported that there “were reasonable
grounds” to believe that the Syrian
government had conducted a chlorine attack
on Saraqib city in Idlib governorate in 2018.
As a result, the OPCW suspended “certain
rights and privileges” of Syria’s membership.
On 26 May, Bashar al-Assad was elected
president for a fourth term. Only people living
in government-controlled areas and the
Syrian diaspora in some countries were
allowed to vote.
In June, hostilities between the government,
supported by Russia, and Hay’at Tahrir alSham escalated in Idlib governorate and
Aleppo countryside as government forces
tried to regain full control of the M4 and M5
highways. In July, the government launched
a military offensive against armed opposition
groups in Daraa al-Balad city, which ended
with a ceasefire agreement around midSeptember.
Between July and August, unidentified
armed groups detonated improvised
explosive devices in Afrin and Ras al-Ayn, two
cities under the control of pro-Turkey armed
groups, killing and injuring many civilians
and damaging civilian infrastructure. In
August, unknown groups shelled al-Bab, a
city in northern Aleppo countryside controlled
by pro-Turkey armed groups, causing civilian
casualties and destroying homes.

353

Israel continued air attacks targeting Syrian
government, Iranian and Hizbullah forces in
Syria.
Factors including corruption, currency
depreciation and Covid-19 measures
increased food insecurity and poverty.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
In early 2021, the government, supported by
Russian government forces, intensified aerial
and ground attacks on north-west Syria
under the control of Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham,
including Idlib governorate and Aleppo
countryside, according to the UN. The
attacks targeted civilians and civilian
infrastructure including hospitals on the UN
deconfliction list, residential buildings and
markets, killing and injuring several civilians.
According to the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic (UN Commission of Inquiry), the
government launched guided missiles and
artillery towards a hospital in Atareb in
western Aleppo countryside early on 21
March, killing at least eight civilian patients
and injuring 13 others, including five medical
workers. The report added that later that day,
the government launched air strikes at a gas
facility, destroying 18 trailers parked near
Bab al-Hawa crossing point. As a result,
humanitarian organizations operating at the
border area had to temporarily suspend their
operations.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Government forces besieged civilians and
blocked their access to food, water and
essential services and continued to impede
access to UN humanitarian agencies in the
south and north.
Between 24 June and mid-September, the
government besieged thousands of civilians
in Daraa al-Balad to pressure armed
opposition forces to surrender and evacuate.
Throughout the siege, government forces
prevented humanitarian organizations from
delivering food, medical supplies and other
life-saving aid.1 A resident said that the only
bakery in the neighbourhood had stopped
working after the flour ran out and there was

354

no access to food, electricity and enough
water for more than 60 days.
The government continued to block UN aid
to Rukban camp in the isolated area between
the Syrian and Jordanian borders known as
“the berm”, where tens of thousands of
people still lived in harsh conditions without
access to healthcare, sanitation or clean
water. The government denied UN agencies
access to Menbij and Kobani, towns in northeast Syria, forcing residents to rely mainly on
support from international humanitarian
organizations and the Autonomous
Administration, which were unable to meet
their needs.
On 9 July, the UN Security Council
conditionally renewed for six months the
authorization of Bab al-Hawa crossing point
for the delivery of UN humanitarian aid from
Turkey to north-west Syria.2
The closure of al-Yarubiyah border crossing
in 2020, which ended UN delivery of aid
from Iraq, exacerbated the humanitarian
crisis in north-east Syria. Due to the
government’s bureaucratic impediments and
restrictions on access, UN agencies and their
implementing partners could not deliver
enough aid, especially medical aid.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
The government continued to subject tens of
thousands of people, including journalists,
human rights defenders, lawyers and political
activists, to enforced disappearance, many
for up to 10 years.
Between January and April, the government
arbitrarily arrested 400 individuals, including
judges, lawyers, journalists and public sector
employees, for their online criticism of the
government’s handling of the economic
crisis. In a rare move, on 11 May, two weeks
ahead of the presidential election, the
government released them.
Government forces subjected refugees,
including children, who returned to Syria
between mid-2017 and April 2021, to
arbitrary detention; torture and other illtreatment, including rape and other sexual

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

violence; and enforced disappearance – and
interrogated them in connection with their
perceived opposition to the government.3 Five
refugees subjected to enforced
disappearance died in detention.
SNA
The SNA, a pro-Turkey coalition of armed
groups, continued to commit a range of
abuses against civilians, predominately
Syrian Kurds, in Afrin and Ras al-Ayn. The
abuses included arbitrary detention,
abduction, and torture and other illtreatment.
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
the SNA tortured detainees during
interrogation to extract “confessions”.
Detainees were also denied legal
representation and access to their families
while held in informal detention centres.
PYD-LED AUTONOMOUS ADMINISTRATION
The Autonomous Administration continued to
hold tens of thousands of people suspected
of affiliation to the Islamic State armed group,
including children, in al-Hol camp in squalid
conditions and without access to due
process. Women and children in the annex of
al-Hol camp, where third-country nationals
were held, were denied freedom of
movement. This impacted their access to
healthcare in the camp due to multiple
checkpoints and security checks by the
Asayish, the Autonomous Administration’s
police force.
The Asayish arbitrarily detained boys as
young as 12 in the annex, separating them
from their mothers and caregivers, solely on
suspicion of the boys’ potential future
“radicalization” and without any evidence of
wrongdoing. The Asayish transferred the boys
to detention centres described as
“rehabilitation centres” outside al-Hol camp,
which lacked adequate access to food, water
and healthcare and where diseases such as
tuberculosis and scabies were rampant.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
HAY’AT TAHRIR AL-SHAM
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, which controlled parts
of north-west Syria, continued to repress

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

freedom of expression and assembly by
arbitrarily detaining and harassing media
activists and journalists for criticizing the
armed group’s rule and ideology. For
example, in September, it banned Orient
News Channel from broadcasting.
PYD-LED AUTONOMOUS ADMINISTRATION
On 18 May, Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF),
the Autonomous Administration’s military
force, killed at least seven people while
dispersing a protest in al-Hasakeh
governorate against increased fuel prices. On
31 May, the SDF fired at a protest in Menbij
to disperse protesters calling on the
Autonomous Administration to end the forced
military conscription of men aged between 18
and 21. One protester was killed.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
As in 2020, the government failed to provide
a robust response to the spread of Covid-19,
including by failing to provide transparent
and consistent information about the
outbreak in areas under its control. Public
hospitals lacked sufficient beds, oxygen
tanks, ventilators and PPE, putting hundreds
of patients and health workers at risk.
As of November, only 4.2% of Syria’s
population had received at least one dose of
the Covid-19 vaccine through COVAX and
bilateral donations across Syria, according to
the WHO.
Due to the government’s restrictions on
humanitarian aid delivery and lack of support
to the health sector, people living in northeast Syria suffered the impact of severe
shortages of testing products, oxygen tanks
and ventilators as well as insufficient funding
to humanitarian organizations supporting
facilities treating Covid-19 cases. Aid workers
said NGOs had been unable to ensure a
continuous supply of critical medication to
treat diabetes, cardiovascular disease and
bacterial infections, as well as post-rape
treatment and reproductive health kits –
supplies had previously been provided crossborder by the WHO and the UN Population
Fund.
One health worker in Menbij, where the
Syrian government blocked UN access, said

355

they were unable to provide treatment for all
those suffering from cancer, thalassemia and
diabetes, and were forced to choose which
patients to treat due to short supplies.
During the siege of Daraa al-Balad,
government forces blocked medical
evacuations of patients with chronic health
conditions to hospitals in governmentcontrolled areas. They also blocked the entry
of medical aid and medication. According to
health workers, these actions caused the
death of injured and sick people.

REFUGEES’ AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
By the end of the year, the number of people
internally displaced in Syria since 2011 had
reached 6.7 million, while 5.6 million people
had sought refuge outside the country.
Worsening humanitarian conditions in
neighbouring countries, leading to
administrative and financial obstacles to
obtaining or renewing residency permits,
continued to drive refugees back to Syria
where some of them faced detention, torture
and other ill-treatment, and enforced
disappearance.
In July, the military offensive on Daraa alBalad displaced at least 36,000 civilians.
Most of them were hosted by friends and
relatives but some lived in collective shelters
such as mosques and schools with
insufficient access to food and medical aid.
Between June and August, the escalation in
hostilities in north-west Syria led nearly
100,000 people to flee their homes, the
largest displacement since a ceasefire was
agreed in March 2020. Most displaced
people lived in overcrowded, makeshift
camps and collective shelters with
inadequate access to aid, essential services,
clean water, hygiene, food, healthcare,
education and livelihood opportunities.
Al-Hol and al-Roj camps in al-Hasake
governorate continued to host more than
60,000 people, including refugees and
internally displaced people from Syria and
Iraq, the majority of them women and
children. The camps were overcrowded and
did not provide an adequate standard of

356

living. The camps’ populations had limited
access to humanitarian aid, especially food
and water, and health services. Children
continued to face inadequate access to
education and healthcare.
All displaced people in camps across Syria
were at increased risk of contracting and
being severely affected by Covid-19 due to
the lack of precautionary measures such as
social distancing, sufficient water and
sanitation facilities, and access to healthcare,
as well as underfunded humanitarian
organizations.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
While the failure of the UN Security Council
to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC
continued, at least four European states
investigated and prosecuted individuals
suspected of committing war crimes or other
crimes under international law in Syria
through their national courts.
On 24 February, the Higher Regional Court
in Koblenz, Germany, sentenced a former
Syrian security officer to four-and-a-half years
in prison for crimes against humanity for his
role in aiding and abetting the torture of
detained protesters in Damascus.
On 15 July, the German federal prosecutor’s
office charged a Syrian doctor, who fled Syria
to Germany in 2015, with crimes against
humanity, for torturing people in military
hospitals in Homs and Damascus.
On 16 July, a court in the Netherlands
sentenced a former commander of an armed
opposition group, who sought asylum in
2014, to 20 years in prison for committing
war crimes in Syria.
On 26 August, the Higher Regional Court of
Düsseldorf, Germany, sentenced two Syrian
nationals. One, a media activist, was
sentenced to nine years in prison for filming
the execution of a Syrian government soldier
by al-Nusra Front, an armed opposition
group. The other was sentenced to life
imprisonment for “shielding the execution”
and membership of a “foreign terrorist
organization”.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty remained in force for
many offences. The authorities disclosed little
information about death sentences passed
and rarely provided information on
executions. However, on 21 October, the
Ministry of Justice announced the execution
of people accused of involvement in igniting
the wildfires that ravaged Syria in 2020.
1. “Syria: Government must lift deadly siege of Daraa al-Balad and
allow humanitarian aid to flow”, 27 August
2. “Syria: Russian threat to veto renewal of last aid corridor leaves
millions at risk of humanitarian catastrophe”, 25 June
3. Syria: “You’re Going to Your Death”: Violations Against Syrian
Refugees Returning to Syria (Index: MDE 24/4583/2021), 7
September

In September, the Supreme Administrative
Court revoked the extension of the Asia
Cement Corporation’s mining permit in
Taroko people’s traditional territory. After
litigation lasting four years, the court found
that the Taroko people living near to the
mining site had not been adequately
consulted on the project. However, concerns
remained that existing legislation provided
inadequate protection for Indigenous peoples
against mining and other commercial
activities. Among the problems was Article 13
of the Mining Act, under which existing
mining permits remained valid and mining
could continue while mining companies
applied for permit extensions.1

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

TAIWAN
Taiwan
Head of state: Tsai Ing-wen
Head of government: Su Tseng-chang
Certain restrictions on Indigenous peoples’
hunting rights were found to be
unconstitutional. Legal protection for
Indigenous peoples remained inadequate,
including against mining and other
commercial operations. Despite a court
ruling permitting the marriage of a TaiwanMacau same-sex couple, limitations on
same-sex marriage remained in place.
Covid-19 orders discriminated against
migrant workers.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In May, the Constitutional Court ruled that the
Controlling Guns, Ammunition and Knives
Act and the Wildlife Conservation Act were
partly unconstitutional as they
disproportionately restricted the cultural and
hunting rights of Indigenous peoples.
However, the court found that other
restrictions on hunting were constitutional,
such as the requirement that Indigenous
people obtain approval from the authorities
days before any hunting activities.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The Taipei High Administrative Court issued a
judgment in May on transnational same-sex
marriage that allowed a Taiwan-Macau samesex couple to marry in Taiwan. However, the
judgment only applied to same-sex couples
where the Macau citizen is a long-term
resident of Taiwan. In the meantime, the
Ministry of Interior’s interpretation of the
relevant article in the Act Governing the
Choice of Law in Civil Matters Involving
Foreign Elements remained valid. Under this
interpretation, transnational same-sex
marriage between Taiwanese citizens and
foreigners was only permitted where the
spouse was from a country where same-sex
unions had been legalized.2

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, following an outbreak of Covid-19
cases among migrant workers, the Miaoli
County government issued an order confining
all migrant workers in the county to their
dormitory buildings except during working
hours. The order, which affected more than
22,000 people, discriminated against migrant
workers by severely limiting their freedom of
movement. It was lifted after three weeks.3

DEATH PENALTY
In September, the Prosecutor-General made
an extraordinary appeal against a court
decision not to sentence convicted arsonist

357

Tang Jing-Hua to death. The appeal argued
that the court’s reference to Taiwan’s
obligations under the ICCPR as a reason not
to impose the death penalty in this case was
a misinterpretation of that document. There
was no progress towards abolition of the
death penalty during the year and courts
continued to impose death sentences.
1. Taiwan: A victory! The Government of Taiwan should fulfil the consent
rights of Indigenous people, 17 September (Chinese only)
2. Taiwan: The Taipei High Administrative Court pronounces a ground
breaking judgment on transnational same-sex marriage, 6 May
(Chinese only)
3. Taiwan: The Covid-19 preventive measures should avoid
discrimination on the specific ethnic groups, 10 June (Chinese only)

TAJIKISTAN
Republic of Tajikistan
Head of state: Emomali Rahmon
Head of government: Kokhir Rasulzoda
The government’s premature claims that
Covid-19 transmission had ended, and tight
control over information released,
undermined measures to protect public
health during the pandemic. Survivors of
domestic violence continued to face
challenges in accessing justice. Torture and
other ill-treatment remained widespread but
under-reported. The government unduly
restricted freedom of expression, sentencing
opposition activists and government critics
to lengthy prison terms on politically
motivated charges.

BACKGROUND
On 28 April, fighting broke out on a disputed
section of the border between Tajikistan and
Kyrgyzstan, triggered by a dispute between
local inhabitants on both sides over access to
water. The Tajikistani authorities claimed that
by the time the violence ceased on 1 May, 19
people had been killed and 87 injured on the
Tajikistani side. In July the government
announced its readiness to accept 100,000
refugees from Afghanistan. In August, media
reported that 2,000 refugees from

358

Afghanistan had passed through Tajikistan
and all were resettled in third countries. In
September the Minister of the Interior stated
that Tajikistan did not have the infrastructure
to host many refugees. A further 200 Afghan
nationals tried to enter Tajikistan in
September but only 100 women and children
were admitted.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities tightly controlled the narrative
around the Covid-19 pandemic, underplaying
its real impact, which resulted in late and less
effective measures to limit its spread and
protect public health. On 26 January, the
President told parliament that there were no
more Covid-19 cases in Tajikistan. Media
reports alleged pressure on medical workers
not to diagnose the virus, and at least one
doctor was reportedly fired after returning a
positive test. On 21 June, the Prime
Minister’s office announced that some cases
had been detected and blamed the public’s
failure to comply with protection measures.
Compulsory vaccination of all adults was
introduced, but no information was given as
to how it would be enforced. Over 4 million
vaccine doses had been administered by the
end of the year. In September, the
government announced that there had been
17,000 cases of Covid-19 and 124 deaths
since the start of the pandemic, but
independent media claimed that the rates
were much higher based on their own
reporting.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Survivors of domestic violence continued to
face many challenges in accessing support,
protection and justice. The 2013 law on
domestic violence provides for survivors to
report abuse to law enforcement officers but
does not compel the relevant agencies to
take appropriate steps to investigate
complaints, issue protection orders and open
a criminal case. A new draft of the Criminal
Code, containing an article specifically
criminalizing domestic violence, was
discussed in parliament. It fails, however, to
cover all types of violence notably

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

psychological violence, marital rape and
sexual assault.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In February, an Action Plan introduced as
part of a new strategy to reform the criminal
justice system came into force. It provides for
independent monitoring of detention
facilities, as well as improved complaint
mechanisms for people in penitentiary
institutions and the development of
independent investigation mechanisms for
deaths in custody.
Only a small number of torture and other illtreatment cases continued to be reported to
the authorities. In March the legal assistance
group of the NGO Coalition against Torture
reported that it had documented at least 38
cases of torture and other ill-treatment in the
course of 2020, noting that this represented
a fraction of the actual number of cases.
In June, three police officers were
sentenced to between 10 and 13 years’
imprisonment for the torture of Hasan
Yodgorov in 2017. He “confessed” to a
murder after being tortured with beatings and
electric shocks for several days by police in
Tursunzoda, western Tajikistan. He spent six
months in pre-trial detention before the
charges were dropped and he was released
in May 2018, when another suspect was
arrested. Hasan Yodgorov reported the
torture the day after his release. Two of the
police officers fell under amnesties and their
sentences were shortened as a result.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to suppress
opposition activists and government critics by
sentencing them to lengthy prison terms on
politically motivated charges, often requesting
their extradition from countries of exile and
harassing their relatives in Tajikistan and
abroad.
On 13 January, Sadi Rakhmatov, the
brother-in-law of Sharofiddin Gadoev, the
deputy leader of the arbitrarily banned
opposition movement Group 24, was
released from prison in Greece after
spending two months in detention because

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the Tajikistani authorities had placed him on
an Interpol wanted list. Sadi Rakhmatov had
been charged in Tajikistan with “facilitating
mercenaries”, a crime which carries a 15year sentence.
On 25 March, independent lawyer and
Chairman of the Tajik Centre in Moscow, Izzat
Amon (also known as Izatullo Kholov), went
missing. Two days later the Tajikistani Interior
Ministry announced that he was in detention
in the capital, Dushanbe, having been
extradited from Russia. Izzat Amon had
repeatedly criticized the Tajikistani
government for failing to protect the rights of
Tajikistani migrants in Russia. In October the
Dushanbe City Court sentenced him to prison
for nine years for fraud.
On 1 June, Mirzo Hojimuhammad, a former
member of the arbitrarily banned Islamic
Renaissance Party of Tajikistan (IRPT), was
sentenced to five years in prison for
“membership of a banned extremist
organization”. He had been working as a
doctor in Russia for the past two years and
returned to Tajikistan in February for a visit.
He was first placed under travel restrictions
and then arrested in May. His conviction was
reportedly based on unspecified posts on
social media. In 2020 he had delivered a
media interview criticizing the authorities’ late
recognition of the Covid-19 pandemic.
In January, independent journalist Daler
Sharipov was released on the expiry of his
sentence. In April 2020, he had been found
guilty of “inciting religious discord” and
sentenced to one year’s imprisonment for
unofficially publishing and disseminating his
dissertation on Islam.
In October, Buzurgmekhr Yorov’s sentence
was reduced by four years under an amnesty
declared to celebrate the 30th anniversary of
the country’s independence. Buzurgmekhr
Yorov, a lawyer, was sentenced to 28 years’
imprisonment for having represented several
members of the banned IRPT.

359

TANZANIA
United Republic of Tanzania
Head of state and government: Samia Suluhu Hassan
(replaced John Pombe Magufuli in March)
Following the sudden death of President
Magufuli, the incoming president
established a task force to improve the
authorities’ response to the pandemic,
marking a shift in her predecessor's policy
of Covid-19 denial. The government
continued to limit the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly by implementing draconian
measures targeting political dissidents and
opposition, human rights defenders,
journalists and media outlets. The
authorities continued to pressure Burundian
refugees into returning to Burundi. The
government lifted a ban on pregnant girls
attending regular schools.

BACKGROUND
Samia Suluhu Hassan was sworn in as
Tanzania’s first female president on 19
March. She pledged to improve human
rights, but many of the commitments were
yet to be acted upon at the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Public health prevention measures were
largely absent in the earlier part of the year.
President Magufuli, who died in March, had
downplayed the scale of the pandemic,
including by publicly dismissing the use of
face masks, social distancing and vaccines.
Until May, the government withheld
information relating to Covid-19, disregarding
WHO guidelines on how to respond to the
pandemic.1 In February and March, religious
leaders reported a surge in the number of
Covid-19-related deaths, including of nurses,
priests and nuns. The new president’s
administration reversed her predecessor’s
approach, strengthening measures to control
the virus. On 28 July, the government rolled
out its Covid-19 vaccination programme,
which prioritized health workers, following a

360

recommendation from a national task force
set up in May by the incoming president to
inform state response to the pandemic. The
taskforce recommended that the authorities
implement preventive measures to tackle the
spread of the virus. In August, the
government started providing electronic postvaccination certificates as proof of
vaccination, fulfilling international
requirements. According to the WHO,
Tanzania had administered over 2,431,769
Covid-19 vaccine doses by the end of the
year, representing 4% of the population.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Burundian refugees in Tanzania continued to
live in fear. UN human rights experts said
that in 2021 the police and intelligence
services, in cooperation with the Burundian
intelligence services, continued to use
violence, arbitrary arrests, strict encampment
policies and threats of deportation to
pressure the refugees to leave the country.
The government also continued to implement
refugee returns facilitated by UNHCR, the
UN refugee agency. Government and
UNHCR sources estimated that, at the end of
December, there were 162,711 Burundian
refugees in Tanzania, representing about
65% of the country’s refugee population; and
UNHCR and other partners in Tanzania had
supported more than 20,000 Burundian
refugees to return to their country, many of
whom left Tanzania because of pressure from
the Tanzanian government.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 24 November, the government
announced it had lifted a 2017 ban on
pregnant girls, and girls with children, from
attending regular schools. Since 2017, the
authorities had implemented the ban under
the Education Regulations Act 2002 which
states that students can be expelled if they
are married or commit a criminal offence.
In August, the president made sexist and
other offensive comments about women
footballers, describing some of them as “flatchested” and suggesting that their physical
appearance would prevent them from

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

marrying. The comments were made while
she addressed guests at a function to
celebrate the victory of a men’s football team
in a regional competition.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In the early hours of 21 July, police officers
raided a hotel in Mwanza town, arresting
Freeman Mbowe, leader of the main
opposition Party of Democracy and Progress,
commonly known as Chadema, and 11 party
officials. He was about to convene a meeting
calling for constitutional reform.2 Later that
day, three other men associated with
Chadema were arrested in Mwanza. Freeman
Mbowe was taken to the Oysterbay police
station in Dar es Salaam, presented at court
more than five days later and charged with
offences relating to economic crimes and
financing terrorist activities, based on
allegations dating back to the period between
May and August 2020. The move appeared
to be a tactic to silence him. He was then
transferred to Ukonga prison where he
remained at the end of the year. The 14
others were accused of gathering illegally and
contravening Covid-19 prevention measures,
although such restrictions had not been
made public. Eleven of them were released
on police bail on 24 July and the remaining
three on 25 July.
On 3 August, police arrested 22 women
from BAWACHA (the women’s wing of
Chadema), ahead of planned protests against
Freeman Mbowe’s detention. The arrests took
place in multiple regions, including the
capital, Dar es Salaam, Mara and Mwanza.
They were held in police detention for
between four and 15 days before being
released on bail.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
On 17 August, a court dropped criminal
charges against Idris Sultan, a Tanzanian
actor, comedian and radio host, who was
arrested in May 2020 for alleged “cyberbullying” after he distributed a video on social
media in which he mocked the late
president. The charges against him – “failure
to register a SIM card previously owned by

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

another person” and “failure to report change
of ownership of a SIM card” – were dropped
after the Director of Public Prosecution (DPP)
failed to prosecute the case.
On 22 September, a court dismissed a
sedition case against the Chadema deputy
party leader, Tundu Lissu, and four Mawio
newspaper employees, after the DPP
withdrew the charges. Since 2016, the five
had been in court repeatedly, following the
state’s claim that they published seditious
content in the Mawio newspaper.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Information Services Department, an
official body in the Ministry of Information,
Culture, Arts and Sports which has the
authority to license newspapers, continued to
use repressive media laws to target and
suppress independent reporting and restrict
the media. The authorities imposed Section
59(2) of the Information Services Act 2016,
which gives the minister of information
powers to ban any newspaper and to censor
media outlets.
On 6 April, the president instructed
authorities to allow media outlets banned
under her predecessor’s administration to
resume operations. The director of the
Information Services Department (also the
department’s Chief Government
Spokesperson), backtracked on the order,
announcing on Twitter that the president had
“directed the ban to be lifted for online
television only” and therefore newspapers
remained subject to the ban “according to
the laws”.
On 11 August, the authorities suspended for
14 days Uhuru, a newspaper owned by
Uhuru Publications Limited and established
by Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), the ruling
party. The authorities claimed that it had
published a false report carrying the
headline: “I have no intention of running for
the presidency in 2025 – Samia”. The CCM
Secretary General responded by saying that
the newspaper’s board had suspended three
senior managers, including the CEO, over the
story and that they were conducting

361

investigations as to why it was published.
Uhuru resumed publication on 27 August.
On 5 September, the Information Services
Department suspended Raia Mwema
newspaper for 30 days, on allegations it
repeatedly violated professional journalistic
standards and broke the law by publishing
reports that were misleading and amounted
to incitement to violence.
On 23 September, the police arrested
cartoonist Optatus Fwema at his home in the
Bunju area of Dar es Salaam after he posted
a caricature of the president on social media.
He was detained at Oysterbay police station
where he was denied access to a lawyer,
including during interrogation. Optatus
Fwema was released on bail on 8 October
after he was arraigned in a Dar es Salaam
court and charged with publishing false
information online. He was facing trial at the
end of the year.
On 2 October, Harold Shemsanga, a
journalist for Mgawe TV, and six women
members of Chadema were arrested while
out jogging. They were charged with illegal
assembly and held at Mbweni police station
in Dar es Salaam before being released on 4
October without being brought before a court.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The authorities subjected human rights
defenders to arbitrary arrest and detention,
prosecution, intimidation, harassment and
threats. On 5 January, a court in Dar es
Salaam released human rights lawyer Tito
Magoti, and his co-accused Theodory Giyani.
They had been arrested in December 2019
in connection with social media activities and
charged under the Economic and Organized
Crimes Control Act 1984 for offences that do
not allow for bail, and other charges under
the Cybercrimes Act 2015 and the AntiMoney Laundering Act 2007. Their court
case was adjourned more than 10 times
before they were finally released after
entering a plea-bargain agreement with the
DPP under which they were ordered to pay a
joint fine of TZS17.3 million (about
US$7,400).3

362

On 20 April, the Tanzania Human Rights
Defenders Coalition (THRDC), made up of
more than 160 members, including human
rights defenders and NGOs, announced that
its bank accounts had been unfrozen. The
police had ordered a commercial bank in
Tanzania to freeze the accounts in August
2020, claiming it had failed to submit to the
Office of the Treasury Registrar its contractual
agreements with donors, leading the THRDC
to suspend operations during that period.
1. “Tanzania: President’s new Covid-19 taskforce a positive move but
the work starts now”, 26 April
2. “Tanzania: Release opposition leader and party members”, 21 July
3. Tanzania: A chance to Prioritize Human Rights: Amnesty International
Submission for the UN Universal Periodic Review, 39th Session of the
UPR Working Group, November 2021 (Index: AFR 56/3885/2021), 25
March

THAILAND
Kingdom of Thailand
Head of state: Maha Vajiralongkorn
Head of government: Prayut Chan-O-Cha
The government redoubled its efforts to
restrict the rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly. Police used
excessive force against protesters.
Authorities judicially harassed and
arbitrarily detained pro-democracy activists
and human rights defenders. Proposed
legislation on torture and enforced
disappearance did not comply with
Thailand’s international human rights
obligations. Authorities increased the use of
lèse-majesté laws and criminally accused at
least 100 people, including children, of
defaming the monarchy.

BACKGROUND
Student-led protests gathered in strength and
number over the course of the year.
Authorities imposed lockdown measures in
parts of the country in response to surges in
Covid-19 infections. The government was
criticized for its slow vaccine roll-out, and the

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

economy continued to suffer under Covid-19related restrictions.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Despite severe restrictions imposed by
authorities on public gatherings, ostensibly to
curb the spread of Covid-19, 1,545 protests
took place over the course of the year in
different parts of the country. Calls by
protesters included amendments to the
Constitution, dissolution of parliament, reform
of the monarchy and the release of arbitrarily
detained protest leaders. They also
demanded improvements in the
government’s handling of the pandemic.
Authorities filed multiple charges against
protest leaders and participants for violating
restrictions on gatherings.
Riot police used excessive force during the
protests, indiscriminately firing rubber bullets
and tear gas canisters at short range towards
protesters, bystanders and journalists. Many
described being kicked, hit with batons and
restrained for hours in tight plastic wrist cuffs,
both on arrest and while in detention.
Authorities often did not disclose where
individuals were detained and delayed their
access to lawyers.1
Live ammunition was used against
protesters outside a police station in the
capital, Bangkok, in August. Although police
denied using live rounds, a 15-year-old-boy
was shot in the neck and left paralyzed for
three months before he died. Two other boys,
aged 14 and 16, also suffered gunshot
injuries.2
From August to September, at least 270
children, including a 12-year-old boy, were
charged as a result of their participation in
protests. Some of them were prosecuted
under lèse-majesté or other provisions of the
Criminal Code, and others under the
Emergency Decree on Public Administration
in Emergency Situations related to the
Covid-19 response.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In December, the government approved a
draft Act on the Operations of Not-for-Profit
Organizations. Civil society groups criticized

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

the draft as containing prohibitions on
operations of NGOs that are too broad and
include most of their legitimate and protected
activities. If the draft is passed, NGOs would
also be subjected to overly broad reporting
and disclosure requirements and authorities
would be able to exert undue control over
funds received by groups from foreign
entities. Other provisions of concern included
disproportionate fines and penalties for nonprofit-organizations that would have a chilling
effect on individuals wishing to organize their
own groups.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to use legislation
including the Emergency Decree, sedition
and defamation laws, the Computer Crimes
Act and laws relating to contempt of court
and insulting the court to unduly restrict the
right to freedom of expression. During the
year, criminal and civil proceedings were
initiated against at least 1,460 individuals,
including children and student activists, for
expressing views perceived to be critical of
government actions. Protest leaders Parit
Chiwarak, Anon Nampa, Panusaya
Sitijirawattanakul and Panupong Chadnok,
along with many others, faced sentences up
to life imprisonment if convicted. The
authorities repeatedly arbitrarily detained and
denied bail to other government critics.
In July, Prime Minister Chan-O-Cha issued a
regulation that provided for up to two years’
imprisonment for dissemination of “fake
news” that “could spread fear and unrest,
and harm national security”. However, in
August, the Civil Court suspended a
regulation allowing internet censorship and
suspension of media organizations, finding
that it excessively restricted rights.
Authorities threatened Facebook and other
platforms with legal action to force them to
restrict content perceived to be insulting the
monarchy. Authorities also blocked access to
the website Change.org after it hosted a
petition signed by more than 130,000 people
calling for King Maha Vajiralongkorn to be
declared persona non grata in Germany.

363

After a two-year pause, authorities resumed
using lèse-majesté laws. At least 116 people,
including at least three children, were
charged with lèse-majesté between January
and November. Among them was “Anchan”,
a former civil servant, who was sentenced to
87 years’ imprisonment for sharing audio files
on social media. The sentence was halved
after she pleaded guilty. In March, police
arrested and charged two girls, aged 14 and
15, for burning pictures of the King.
In July, five people, including an Amnesty
International staff member, were fined after
they took part in a panel discussion on the
fate of Thai activists abducted in
neighbouring countries since 2016. The
panellists raised concerns about the lack of
investigation into the enforced disappearance
of pro-democracy activist Wanchalearm
Satsaksit in Cambodia in June 2020, as well
the failure of the Thai authorities to establish
the fate or whereabouts of eight other exiled
activists who remained missing.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In August, Jiraphong Thanapat died after
being tortured at Muang Nakhon Sawan
police station. Video evidence showed police
officers suffocating him by placing a plastic
bag over his head until he collapsed.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In September, parliament agreed an initial
draft of a law that would criminalize both
torture and enforced disappearances for the
first time. However, the draft failed to include
important elements, in line with international
standards, such as: the inclusion of “persons
or groups of persons acting with the
authorization, support or acquiescence of the
State” among perpetrators of an enforced
disappearance; the inclusion of cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment by law
enforcement personnel as punishable
offences; and provisions on the continuous
nature of the crime.

arrested by authorities for entering the
country illegally. Border officials pushed back
into Myanmar approximately 2,000 Karen
villagers who fled to Thailand to escape
military air strikes. In November, authorities
forcibly returned refugees to Cambodia.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Thailand was hit by a third wave of Covid-19
infections in April, with the government’s slow
vaccine roll-out cited as a significant
contributory factor to this and other surges in
infections during the year. Government
records showed more than 20,000 people
died from the virus. Approximately 87,000
cases were reported in prisons, exacerbated
by poor hygiene and overcrowded conditions.
At least 185 prisoners died as a result.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In February, ethnic Karen people protested in
front of the Government House in Bangkok
demanding to be allowed to return to their
ancestral lands in Jai Pan Din village in
Kaeng Krachan National Park, where they
had lived for decades prior to being forcibly
evicted in 2011. In March, 22 Karen villagers
were arrested and detained in Kaeng
Krachan National Park for trespassing.
Lawyers were not allowed to be present
during their interrogations.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In February, parliament amended the
Criminal Code, making abortion legal up to
the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The term of
imprisonment for women convicted of
terminating their pregnancy after the first
trimester was also reduced from three years
to six months, but abortion after 12 weeks
remained a criminal offence.
1. Thailand: "My Face Burned as if on Fire": Unlawful Use of Force by
Police During Public Assemblies (ASA 39/4356/2021), 2 July
2. “Thailand: Urgent investigation needed after live rounds fired at
child protesters”, 18 August

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
After the February military coup in Myanmar,
three journalists who fled to Thailand were

364

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

TOGO
Togolese Republic
Head of state: Faure Gnassingbé
Head of government: Victoire Tomegah Dogbè
The right to freedom of expression was
violated; sanctions were imposed on media
outlets. A draft freedom of association bill
threatened to violate human rights.
Detainees suffered overcrowding. Health
workers denounced violations of the right to
health. Discrimination including violence
against women continued.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Several cases of judicial harassment against
journalists, media outlets and activists were
reported.
On 3 February, three journalists were
arrested for interviewing a local authority
chief perceived to be critical of the
government. They were released the same
day.
On 9 March, L’Alternative newspaper was
suspended for four months, after the
Supreme Court’s administrative chamber
upheld the suspension imposed in February
by the High Authority of Audiovisual
Communication (HAAC). The sanction
followed a complaint by a minister regarding
an article which alleged that he falsified
documents.
The administrative chamber also upheld a
January HAAC decision to order
L'Indépendant Express newspaper to cease
all activities after it reported on an alleged
theft by two ministers. The HAAC decision
said the article “seriously violated rules of
professional conduct and ethics”.
On 27 August, Paul Missiagbeto, special
adviser to government opponent and former
presidential contender AgbéyomMessan
Kodjo, was sentenced to 48 months in
prison, 24 of which were suspended, by the
Court of First Instance of Lomé, for “death
threats, insults against representatives of
public authority, and dissemination of false
news”. He had sent WhatsApp messages

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

saying, among other things, “Faure
Gnassingbé will have a tragic end if he does
not act quickly to hand over power to the real
winner”, and claiming that Agbéyom Messan
Kodjo was the real winner of the 2020
presidential election.
On 9 December the Supreme Court
overturned an HAAC decision to suspend La
Symphonie newspaper for two months, after
it criticized an HAAC sanction against The
Guardian newspaper.
Ferdinand Ayité, editor of L’Alternative, and
Joël Egah, editor of Fraternité were detained
on 10 December for contempt of public
officials, and “dissemination of false news”,
according to their lawyer, after journalists
criticized two ministers during broadcasting.
They were provisionally released on 31
December and the presenter, Isidore
Kouwonou, was placed under judicial
supervision.
On 11 December activist Fovi Katakou, a
known government critic, was arrested and
charged with “incitement to revolt against the
authority of the state”, among other things.
He was provisionally released on 20
December and placed under judicial
supervision.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
A major investigation into the leak of 50,000
phone numbers of potential surveillance
targets of Pegasus spyware, revealed more
than 300 Togolese phone numbers on the
list. Numbers included those belonging to
activists, political opponents and journalists –
including Ferdinand Ayité – who were
potential targets for surveillance by the
authorities.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
On 26 July, the authorities announced the
suspension until further notice of the granting
and renewal of NGO licences in order to
“update the regulatory framework” and
“strengthen the results of NGO interventions
by aligning them with government priorities”.
For the first time since 2012, the Ministry of
Territorial Administration did not renew the

365

licence of the Association of Victims of
Torture in Togo.
In August, four UN Special Rapporteurs
wrote to the authorities expressing concern
about provisions in a freedom of association
bill which violated international human rights
standards.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Yakoubou Abdoul-Moutawakilou, secretary
general of the Pan African National Party,
Kpalimé section, died on 26 August a month
after he was temporarily released from Lomé
prison for health reasons. Arrested in January
2020 and detained until July 2021, he was
accused of attempting to conspire against
state interior security in the “Tiger
Revolution” case, in which dozens of people
were arrested and accused of destabilizing
state institutions in the context of the
presidential elections. In 2020, at least four
of them died after being transferred from
Lomé prison to healthcare facilities. The
Committee for the Release of All Political
Prisoners denounced the ill-treatment of
detainees in this case.
In May, there were 4,906 people held in 14
prisons which had a capacity for 2,886;
2,762 of them were pre-trial detainees.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee
adopted its concluding observations on
Togo’s fifth periodic report, noting that several
national laws still contained provisions which
discriminated against women; a lack of
measures – particularly in terms of protection
– to allow rape victims access to justice
without fear of discrimination, stigmatization
or reprisals; and the continued use of female
genital mutilation despite its being
criminalized.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In September, health unions organized a sitin in several cities to denounce the
dysfunctional health system in the context of
the Covid-19 pandemic. They highlighted the
lack of medical staff in intensive care units,

366

insufficient Covid-19 care centres, the
shortage of scanners and other medical
equipment, as well as health workers’ unpaid
salaries.
RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
On 12 October, Parliament adopted a law
establishing universal health insurance, with
the stated purpose of ensuring access to
quality healthcare for everyone.

TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Head of state: Paula-Mae Weekes
Head of government: Keith Christopher Rowley
Authorities continued to restrict access to
international protection for asylum seekers.
Women asylum seekers remained at
heightened risk of gender-based violence.
The government failed to abolish the
mandatory death penalty or provide
protection in law for LGBTI people.

BACKGROUND
A state of emergency, including restrictions
on freedom of movement and a curfew, were
put in place during much of the year to curb
the spread of Covid-19.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
As of August, over 20,800 refugees and
asylum seekers had been registered with
UNHCR the UN refugee agency; 86% were
from Venezuela and 7% from Cuba.
Trinidad and Tobago remained one of the
few countries in the Americas to have no
national legislation on asylum. In practice,
this meant that people who applied for
protection or were granted refugee status by
UNHCR, which processes asylum claims in
the country, continued to have limited access
to many of the rights granted under the UN
Refugee Convention and its Protocol, to
which Trinidad and Tobago is party.
Most Venezuelans continued to arrive
irregularly by boat as most legal routes of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

entry were closed to them. However, irregular
entry continued to be criminalized, leaving
many asylum seekers, including children, at
risk of detention and/or refoulement, in
contradiction to international human rights
law and standards.
In a positive development, authorities
granted migrants and asylum seekers access
to Covid-19 vaccines.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women and girls continued to be at risk of
gender-based violence and discrimination.
Venezuelan women seeking international
protection reported that they had been
frequent targets of harassment and sexual
violence during 2020.1 In August 2021,
according to news reports, a Venezuelan
woman was kidnapped and threatened with
rape.
Venezuelan women remained afraid to
report attacks, including because of fear that
perpetrators would report them to the police
or the immigration authorities and, under the
current legal framework, that they could be
detained or deported.
Venezuelan women continued to experience
a range of crimes associated with trafficking
into the sex sector, including deprivation of
their liberty by traffickers, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, labour exploitation
and debt bondage. However, there remained
insufficient resources for anti-trafficking
programmes, including safe shelter,
healthcare and counselling.
Some women seeking asylum sold sex as a
way to support their livelihoods but often had
to work long hours in exploitative work
conditions and had debts to pay off related to
their passage to the country.

DEATH PENALTY
In November, the Attorney General
announced national consultations on the
mandatory death penalty, which remained in
force and was pending a judgment from the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
(JCPC) in the UK, Trinidad and Tobago’s
highest appellate court.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Attorney General also announced
national consultations on legislation which
criminalizes same-sex sexual relationships. A
JCPC ruling which could have implications
for LGBTI rights, was still pending at the end
of the year.
1. Trinidad and Tobago: Protect People Fleeing: Amnesty International
Submission for the UN Universal Periodic Review, 39th Session of the
UPR Working Group, 1-12 November 2021 (Index: AMR
49/4554/2021), 5 August

TUNISIA
Republic of Tunisia
Head of state: Kaïs Saïed
Head of government : Najla Bouden (replaced Hichem
Mechichi in September)
Tunisia's Covid-19 vaccination programme
was initially slow and failed to prioritize the
most vulnerable, but it improved from July.
In July, the President claimed exceptional
powers to legislate and govern. Security
forces continued to respond to peaceful
protests with arbitrary arrests and excessive
force with impunity. The military justice
system increased prosecutions of civilians,
including four people for publicly criticizing
the president. The authorities imposed
arbitrary travel bans on at least 50
Tunisians and placed at least 11 under
arbitrary house arrest. Freedom of
expression was curtailed under vague and
repressive laws. A refugee was returned to
Algeria where he was imprisoned. Domestic
violence against women increased. Security
forces assaulted and harassed LGBTI
activists.

BACKGROUND
In March, parliament approved a bill to
facilitate the creation of a constitutional court,
which the President rejected on the grounds
that the constitutionally mandated deadline
for creating the court had expired.
Since September 2020, there were at least
718,561 officially recorded Covid-19 cases

367

and more than 25,000 deaths in a population
of about 11.7 million. In mid-July 2021,
confirmed daily deaths per million were the
second highest in the world.
On 25 July, the President suspended
parliament and dismissed Prime Minister
Hichem Mechichi, citing emergency powers
under Article 80 of the Constitution. In
September, he issued Decree-Law 2021-117,
which suspended most of the Constitution
and granted him total control of most aspects
of governance, including the right to legislate
through decrees and to regulate the media,
civil society and courts. On 11 October, the
President announced a new government.
The economic crisis deepened, with the
fiscal deficit forecasted to reach 7.6% by the
end of the year; unemployment rates had
reached 18.4% by the third quarter of 2021.
In November, the International Monetary
Fund resumed technical discussions with the
authorities that had stopped in July about a
potential finance programme to overcome the
economic crisis.
In September, the nationwide curfew
imposed in October 2020 to curb Covid-19
was lifted.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In March, the government launched its
Covid-19 vaccination campaign which
proceeded slowly and unevenly due to lack of
vaccines and poor management; only 6% of
the population had been vaccinated by midJuly. While authorities prioritized older people
and frontline health workers in line with WHO
recommendations, they failed to prioritize
other at-risk groups, notably people with
disabilities, those living in extreme poverty,
prisoners and people experiencing
homelessness.1
In July, the president secured significant
vaccine donations from abroad and
transferred oversight to the military. By the
end of the year, at least 46% of the
population had been vaccinated. In
December, a decree-law mandated vaccine
passes for everyone aged 18 and over to
enter many public spaces, and for Tunisian
citizens aged 18 and over to travel abroad.

368

The decree-law obliged employers to
suspend without pay public sector and
salaried private sector workers who lacked a
vaccine pass.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Despite frequent bans on public gatherings
as part of the government’s Covid-19
measures, people staged protests throughout
the year, often in relation to socio-economic
rights. Police arrested more than 1,500
people during the January wave of
demonstrations.
That month, one police union responded to
peaceful protests by announcing a ban on
“all unauthorized protests” in the capital,
Tunis, and threatened to file complaints
against all demonstrators “who humiliated
the police”.
After 25 July, security forces responded to
demonstrations in different ways. For
instance, they used excessive force against a
demonstration in Tunis on 1 September
calling for the reopening of the investigation
into the 2013 political assassinations of two
opposition politicians, but did not disperse
protests in support of the president in
downtown Tunis on 26 September and 10
October.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
During protests in January and February,
police used excessive force, including
beating peaceful protesters and firing tear
gas canisters recklessly.2
On 18 January in Sbeitla city, police fired
tear gas canisters in residential
neighbourhoods, with some landing inside
homes. Haykal Rachdi and Aymen
Mahmoudi were struck on the head by tear
gas canisters fired at close range. Haykal
Rachdi died from his injuries a week later.3
On 8 June, Ahmed Ben Amara died in
hospital shortly after his violent arrest by
police in the Sidi Hassine neighbourhood of
Tunis. His death sparked clashes to which
the security forces responded using unlawful
force, including beatings. The police attacked
15-year-old Fedi Harraghi, stripping off his

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

trousers, kicking him repeatedly and beating
him with batons. The interior ministry first
denied the incident, but subsequently
suspended three officers. None of the officers
was held to account before a court.4

Authorities placed at least 11 people under
house arrest between July and October, in
some cases without a clear explanation. All
the orders had been lifted by the end of the
year.

UNFAIR TRIALS

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

MILITARY TRIALS OF CIVILIANS
From July, the military justice system
investigated and prosecuted at least ten
civilians, including four for criticizing
President Saïed, a significant increase from
previous years.
A military court investigated six members of
parliament (MPs) from the Al Karama party,
along with a lawyer from Tunis, over an
altercation in March with the police at Tunis
international airport.
In July, a military court jailed MP Yassine
Ayari for two months for a 2018 conviction
under Article 91 of the Military Code of
Justice, which criminalizes insulting the
army. After 25 July, he faced a new trial
before a military court on various charges,
including further accusations of insulting the
army and offending the president, after he
criticized President Saïed for staging what he
described as “a military coup”. The court
acquitted him on 27 October.5 Also in
October, a military court investigated
television presenter Amer Ayad and Al
Karama MP Abdellatif Aloui under Penal
Code provisions that criminalize offending the
president, seeking to change state structure,
inciting violence or defaming a public official.

Authorities continued to cite vaguely worded
laws criminalizing insult, defamation and
incitement to violence to investigate and
prosecute people for non-violent speech,
including before military courts.
In January, amid protests over poverty and
police violence, police in Tunis arrested
Ahmed Ghram for Facebook posts critical of
police repression and alleged official
corruption, accusing him of inciting looting.
He was detained for 11 days before a court
acquitted him. Police in Tunis also arrested
activist Hamza Nasri Jerridi while he was
protesting peacefully, accusing him of
insulting a police officer. He was detained for
three days before a judge ordered his release
pending trial.
In April, the health ministry barred all but a
selected list of public sector health workers
from speaking publicly about the Covid-19
pandemic in Tunisia, threatening them with
disciplinary action or criminal prosecution if
they did not comply.7
On 26 July, police in plain clothes raided Al
Jazeera's office in Tunis and confiscated staff
phones and office keys.
In October, the media regulator ordered the
closure of Zitouna TV, a private television
station, three days after police arrested a
presenter and an MP for their on-air criticism
of President Saïed. The regulator said the
station was operating without a licence. The
same month, police closed down private
stations Nessma TV and Al-Quran radio,
saying they were operating without a licence.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
From August, airport police arbitrarily barred
at least 50 Tunisians from travelling abroad,
without providing a court order, time frame or
explanation.6 Under Tunisian law, only
judicial authorities may order travel bans.
President Saïed said on 16 August that the
bans were part of efforts to prevent people
suspected of corruption or posing a security
threat from fleeing the country. By the end of
the year, this practice ceased after the
president called on security forces not to
impose them without a judicial order.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, registered
3,920 refugees and asylum seekers during
2021, a 21% increase from 2020. While
Tunisia’s Constitution guarantees the right to
seek political asylum, its law does not provide

369

a legal and procedural framework for asylum
seekers.
On 25 August, unidentified men abducted
Algerian Amazigh activist and Christian
convert Slimane Bouhafs from his home in
Tunis. A refugee registered with UNHCR, he
was forcibly returned to Algeria, where he
was imprisoned. By the end of the year,
Tunisian authorities had not issued formal
comment on the matter.8

WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Impunity for violence against women
continued. In May, Refka Cherni was fatally
shot by her husband two days after filing a
complaint against him with police for
frequent physical abuse. After she made
repeated complaints, police referred the case
to a prosecutor but did not arrest or issue a
protection order against her husband, a
police officer. The prosecutor also failed to
order any measures to protect Refka Cherni
from potential violence, saying that she had
decided to drop the complaint.
In October, trial proceedings began against
MP Zouhair Makhlouf for sexual harassment,
after his parliamentary immunity was lifted.
Protests against his crimes were led by
feminist groups in front of the court in Nabeul
town. In November, he was sentenced to one
year in prison.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI activists continued to be arrested and
prosecuted under laws that criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual relations,
“indecency” and acts deemed “offensive to
public morals”. Violent attacks against and
harassment of them by the police increased
in 2021.
Transgender people faced arrest under
vague “public decency” articles of the Penal
Code, including Article 226bis.
In February, security forces assaulted,
threatened and verbally harassed LGBTI
activists during protests and harassed them
online, including by posting activists’
addresses, phone numbers and sexual
orientation on social media.

370

In March, a Tunis court sentenced women’s
rights and LGBTI activist Rania Amdouni to
six months in prison for “insulting a public
official”, under Article 125 of the Penal Code,
after she went to a police station to report
police harassment due to her activism.9 At
the station, eight officers insulted and
threatened her because of her gender
expression, while refusing to register her
complaint. When she protested against her
treatment outside the station, officers
arrested her.
In October, two police officers in Tunis
insulted and violently assaulted LGBTI activist
Badr Baabou, who heads the prominent
Tunisian LGBTI rights group DAMJ. As he lay
on the ground, the officers stole his laptop
and mobile phone, and told him the beating
was retaliation for filing complaints against
police and “defending whores” and gay
people, about whom they used homophobic
language.

IMPUNITY
No judgments or verdicts were delivered in
10 trials against members of security forces
for excessive use of force and other abuses
against civilians during Tunisia’s December
2010 to January 2011 revolution. The trials,
which opened in 2018, were held before
specialized courts and based on referrals by
the Truth and Dignity Commission created
after the revolution.10

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences were handed down; there
were no executions.
1. Tunisia: COVID-19 Vaccination Plan Must Be Fair and Transparent
(Index: MDE 30/4459/2021), 15 July
2. “Tunisia: Authorities must refrain from using unnecessary and
excessive force against protesters”, 18 January
3. “Tunisia: Investigate circumstances of a young man’s death following
reckless tear gas use by police”, 28 January
4. “Tunisia: Death following violent arrest highlights cycle of police
impunity”, 18 June
5. Tunisia: Parliamentarian Convicted by Military Court: Yassine Ayari
(Index: MDE 30/4718/2021), 14 September
6. “Tunisia: President must lift arbitrary travel bans”, 26 August

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

7. “Tunisia: Rescind ministerial order censoring health workers over
Covid-19”, 20 April
8. “Algerian refugee deported from Tunisia now imprisoned in Algeria”,
3 September
9. “Tunisia: Release prominent LGBTI rights activist jailed for insulting
police”, 16 March
10. “Tunisia: Struggle for justice and reparation continues for victims 10
years after the revolution”, 14 January

TURKEY
Republic of Turkey
Head of state and government: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
Deep flaws in the judicial system were not
addressed. Opposition politicians,
journalists, human rights defenders and
others faced baseless investigations,
prosecutions and convictions. Turkey
withdrew from the Istanbul Convention.
Government officials targeted LGBTI people
with homophobic rhetoric. Freedom of
peaceful assembly was severely curtailed. A
new law unduly restricted freedom of
association for civil society organizations.
Serious and credible allegations of torture
and other ill-treatment were made. Turkey
hosted 5.2 million migrants and refugees,
but thousands of asylum seekers were
denied entry. Physical attacks against
refugees and migrants increased in the
context of rising anti-refugee rhetoric.

BACKGROUND
The new Human Rights Action Plan and two
Judicial Reform Packages prepared by the
Ministry of Justice failed to address deep
flaws in the judiciary.
In October, parliament extended the
mandate for military operations in Syria and
Iraq for another two years. A threat by the
president to expel 10 Western ambassadors
after they called for the immediate release of
civil society leader Osman Kavala was
withdrawn after several days.

STATE OVERREACH
JUDICIARY AND LAWYERS
In January, the Ministry of Justice granted
permission to open an investigation against

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

12 executives of the Ankara Bar Association.
They were accused of “insulting a public
officer” for criticizing homophobic and
discriminatory remarks made by the
president of the Directorate for Religious
Affairs during a Friday sermon in 2020. In
April, the Ankara court accepted the
indictment. In July, the same permission was
granted for the investigation against members
of the Istanbul and Izmir bar associations for
“insulting religious values”. The investigations
and prosecutions were ongoing at the end of
the year.
In July, parliament approved an omnibus
bill extending emergency powers for another
year and allowing the dismissal of public
servants, including judges and prosecutors,
for having alleged links to “terrorist”
organizations without the possibility of judicial
review.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
In January, the Ankara court accepted a
3,530-page indictment for the prosecution of
108 people, including former and present
members of the People’s Democratic Party
(HDP) and its former co-leader Selahattin
Demirtaş. The indictment contained 29
separate charges including “intentional
killing” and “disrupting the unity and
territorial integrity of the state.” They were
accused of mobilizing masses to commit
violence during protests on 6-8 October 2014
under the instructions of the Kurdistan
Workers Party (PKK). Dubbed the “Kobani
trial”, proceedings were ongoing at the end of
the year.
In March, human rights defender and
opposition parliamentarian Ömer Faruk
Gergerlioğlu was stripped of his immunity
and imprisoned after the Court of Cassation
upheld his two-and-a-half-year prison
sentence for sharing a tweet in 2016. He was
released after almost three months in custody
following a ruling in July by the Constitutional
Court that his rights to liberty and to
participate in political life had been violated.
In April, in another case against Selahattin
Demirtaş, the Court of Cassation upheld his
four years and eight months’ prison sentence

371

for “making propaganda for a terrorist
organization”. In September and December,
the Council of Europe’s Committee of
Ministers monitoring the implementation of
the December 2020 Demirtaş v Turkey
decision by the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR), reiterated its call for his
immediate release.
In September, the Eruh Criminal Court of
First Instance sentenced Zana Aksu, a
conscientious objector and former director of
the Human Rights Association’s (IHD) Siirt
branch, to 18 months’ imprisonment and a
fine of 10,000 TL (€700) for “desertion”. The
case was pending before the Diyarbakır
Regional Appeals Court at the end of the
year. Zana Aksu had previously been
convicted on the same charge in 2018 and
acquitted in a separate case in 2020 on the
grounds of double jeopardy.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, the ECtHR ruled that the rights to
freedom of expression and to liberty and
security of journalist Ahmet Altan had been
violated. The following day, the Court of
Cassation overturned the verdict but ordered
his immediate release based on the excessive
length of his imprisonment. The verdict for
his co-defendant, Nazlı Ilıcak, was also
overturned. Their case was returned to the
lower court for retrial. In December, the
ECtHR similarly found that Nazlı Ilıcak's
rights to liberty and security and freedom of
expression had been violated.
In September, a Diyarbakır court sentenced
human rights lawyer Nurcan Kaya to a
suspended sentence of one year and three
months’ imprisonment for “making
propaganda for a terrorist organization”
concerning a tweet about the Islamic State
siege of Kobani in 2015.
In October, the Malatya court sentenced
Kurdish writer and Kurdish Pen member
Meral Şimşek to one year and three months’
imprisonment for “making propaganda for a
terrorist organization”, relating to her writings,
the awards she received and the content of
wiretapped conversations. In July, Meral

372

Şimşek had been tortured and violently
pushed back by Greek border forces.
In October, in the landmark decision Vedat
Şorli v Turkey, the ECtHR found that Article
299 of the Criminal Code, which criminalizes
insulting the president, was incompatible with
the right to freedom of expression, and urged
the government to align the legislation with
Article 10 of the European Convention on
Human Rights.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In January, the Istanbul Regional Appeals
Court overturned the February 2020
acquittals of Osman Kavala and eight other
civil society figures in the Gezi Park trial. In
February, judicial authorities merged Osman
Kavala’s prosecution for “attempting to
overthrow the constitutional order” and
“espionage” with the Gezi Park prosecution
for “attempting to overthrow the
government”. In August, it was further
decided to merge these combined
prosecutions with the retrial in the unrelated
Çarşı case, in which 35 football supporters
were prosecuted for their alleged
participation in the 2013 Gezi Park protests.
Although all 35 had been acquitted in
December 2015, in March the Court of
Cassation overturned the acquittals,
recommending the merger of the case with
the Gezi Park trial. In December, the Council
of Europe’s Committee of Ministers formally
notified Turkey of its intention to initiate
infringement proceedings for its failure to
comply with the ECtHR judgment to release
Osman Kavala.
In February, human rights lawyer and
defender Eren Keskin was sentenced to six
years and three months’ imprisonment for
“membership of a terrorist organization” in
the Özgür Gündem newspaper trial, for
participating in a solidarity campaign. The
case was pending appeal at the end of the
year.
The retrial of Şebnem Korur Fincancı and
Erol Önderoğlu for their one-day editorial
support of Özgür Gündem restarted in
February after their 2019 acquittals were
overturned on appeal.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

In March, Öztürk Türkdoğan, co-chair of the
IHD, was arrested during a police raid in his
home on suspicion of “membership of a
terrorist organization”. He was released the
same day with judicial control measures.
In March, the prosecutor at the Court of
Cassation issued his opinion asking for the
conviction of Taner Kılıç, the former Chair of
Amnesty International Turkey, to be upheld
without justification, while requesting that the
convictions of Özlem Dalkıran, Idil Eser and
Günal Kurşun be overturned. The case was
pending before the Court of Cassation at the
end of the year.
In September, Raci Bilici, former chair of
the IHD’s Diyarbakır branch, was retried after
the Regional Appeals Court overturned his
conviction in December 2020. The Diyarbakır
court again sentenced Raci Bilici to six years
and three months’ imprisonment for
membership of a terrorist organization. The
case was pending on appeal at the end of the
year.
In October, human rights defender Mehmet
Selim Ölçer was sentenced to two years and
one month’s imprisonment for “supporting a
terrorist organization” based on his
membership of the Diyarbakır-based
Sarmaşık Association, a civil society
organization fighting against poverty which
was closed down by executive decree in
2016.
The trial of three police officers and an
alleged member of the armed PKK accused
of killing human rights lawyer Tahir Elçi
continued in Diyarbakır. The officers faced
charges of gross negligence manslaughter.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 20 March, by presidential decision,
Turkey withdrew from the Council of Europe
Convention on combating and preventing
violence against women and domestic
violence (Istanbul Convention), depriving
women and girls of a vital instrument of
protection from all forms of violence, without
discrimination. The announcement coincided
with a surge in domestic violence cases
during the Covid-19 pandemic, and sparked
countrywide protests. The withdrawal entered

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

into force on 1 July. According to
independent women’s rights organizations,
280 women were killed during the year as a
result of gender-based violence and 217
women were found suspiciously dead.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In a tweet in January, the minister of interior
referred to four Boğazici University students
as “LGBT perverts”. He was commenting on
the students’ arrest in relation to a campus
art exhibition depicting a religious site with
symbols of the LGBTI community.
In March, the government attempted to
justify the withdrawal from the Istanbul
Convention by claiming that the Convention
was instrumentalized to “normalize
homosexuality” and that this was
“incompatible with Turkey’s social and family
values”.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Police used unnecessary and excessive force
while detaining hundreds of students during
peaceful assemblies protesting at the
presidential appointment of Professor Melih
Bulu as rector of Boğaziçi University. At least
11 students were remanded in pretrial
detention and 31 others put under house
arrest, along with hundreds subjected to
judicial controls and prosecutions for violating
the Law on Meetings and Demonstrations.
Seven students faced prosecution on charges
of “inciting the public to enmity and hatred”,
and prison sentences of up to three years in
relation to the Boğazici campus exhibition. By
the year’s end, two students had been
remanded in pretrial detention for protesting
against the new rector who replaced Melih
Bulu in August.
In March, the trial began of 46 individuals,
including human rights defenders, political
activists, journalists, and relatives of victims
of enforced disappearances dubbed the
“Saturday Mothers/People.” The defendants
faced charges under the Law on Meetings
and Demonstrations for refusing to disperse
during their 700th weekly vigil on 25 August
2018. The case remained pending.

373

Seventeen women participating in the Night
March marking International Women’s Day
on 8 March were detained and later released
under judicial control measures for “insulting
the president” and violating the Law on
Meetings and Demonstrations. In August, an
Istanbul court accepted the indictment
requesting that each receive up to eight
years’ imprisonment.
In April, the gendarmerie responded with
tear gas to a protest by villagers in İkizdere, in
the province of Rize, against the decision to
open a stone mine in the village which they
argued would destroy the environment and
pollute drinking water. Some villagers were
detained and later released. Protests
continued despite banning orders by the Rize
Governorship.
In June, the annual Istanbul Pride march
was banned for the sixth consecutive year.
Police used unnecessary and excessive force
to disperse protesters and detained at least
47 people, including the journalist Bülent
Kılıç. All were released later that day. The first
hearing in the prosecution of eight protesters
under the Law on Meetings and
Demonstrations was held in November.
After two years on trial for taking part in a
Pride march on campus, 18 students and
one academic at the Middle East Technical
University in Ankara were acquitted in
October. The prosecutor appealed against the
decision. The case was pending appeal at the
end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The new Law on the Prevention of the
Financing of the Proliferation of Weapons of
Mass Destruction negatively affected the
work of civil society organizations. In October,
the Financial Action Task Force added Turkey
to its “grey list” for increased monitoring. It
cited Turkey’s failure to address serious
deficiencies in its efforts to combat money
laundering and financing terrorism, including
its failure to apply a risk-based approach to
supervision of the not-for-profit sector.
In June, the Constitutional Court accepted
the indictment by the Chief Prosecutor of the
Court of Cassation requesting the closure of

374

the HDP and a five-year political ban for its
451 executives and members. The HDP was
accused of becoming the focus point of
actions contrary to the state’s integrity, based
on criminal prosecutions and convictions
against 520 individuals under overly broad
anti-terrorism laws.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In January, a Diyarbakır criminal peace
judgeship rejected an appeal by Mehmet
Sıddık Meşe against the decision not to
prosecute allegations that he was severely
beaten by guards in Diyarbakır T-type Prison
No.3 in December 2020. The Diyarbakır Bar
Association received similar torture
allegations from inmates of the same prison
throughout the year. The European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture
visited the prison in January; their report had
not been published by the end of the year.
In December, a criminal prosecution was
initiated against Osman Şiban for
“membership of a terrorist organization”. He
was allegedly tortured by soldiers in Van in
2020. The prosecution of four journalists who
covered the torture case continued at the
year’s end.
In December, Garibe Gezer, held on
terrorism-related charges in Kandira prison,
was found dead in an alleged suicide in her
cell while in solitary confinement. She had
reported being systematically tortured and
sexually assaulted by prison guards prior to
her death. The prosecutor’s office had
dismissed an investigation into the
allegations.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Hüseyin Galip Küçüközyiğit, former legal
adviser at the Prime Ministry accused of links
with the Fettullah Gülen movement,
reappeared in Ankara prison in September,
nine months after he was forcibly
disappeared. The authorities had denied that
he was in official custody. Details of his fate
and whereabouts during those months
remained unknown at the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

The fate and whereabouts of Yusuf Bilge
Tunç, missing since August 2019, remained
unknown at the end of the year.

Syrian journalist Majed Shamaa was among
those targeted for arrest.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

TURKMENISTAN

According to Turkish immigration authorities,
as of November Turkey hosted around 5.2
million refugees and migrants, including 3.7
million Syrians with temporary protection
status.
In July, the authorities announced the
extension of the existing wall at the border
with Iran. In the same month, the Van
Governorship announced that 34,308 people
had been prevented from entering the
country at that border since January. Reports
emerged that Turkey continued to push back
to Iran Afghans attempting to enter the
country irregularly. In August, following the
Taliban takeover of Afghanistan, the Turkish
authorities declared they would not allow
arrivals of large number of Afghans.
In August, 145 Afghans were rounded up in
police raids and transferred to a return centre
in the district of Tuzla in Istanbul. In the same
period, 30 Afghans were arrested in Ankara
and detained by immigration authorities
pending deportation.
In September, immigration authorities
terminated the registration of Syrians for
temporary protection in Ankara and
announced the deportation of irregular
migrants without protection status or
residence permits.
Violent attacks targeting Syrians increased.
In August, a large crowd attacked the homes
and properties of Syrians in the Altındağ
district of Ankara following the fatal stabbing
of a young Turkish national during a street
fight between Turkish and Syrian youths.
In October and November, immigration
authorities arrested and detained, for the
purpose of deportation, 45 Syrian refugees
for taking part in a social media trend
involving sharing videos of themselves eating
bananas. The trend, which emerged as a
reaction to a viral video in which a Syrian
woman was berated by locals claiming they
could not afford bananas, was described by
the authorities as being wilfully provocative.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Turkmenistan
Head of state and government: Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov
Turkmenistan’s human rights record
remained abysmal. Critics of the
government were subjected to arbitrary
detention and conviction under politically
motivated criminal charges. Freedom of
expression was severely limited as was
freedom of religion. Consensual sex
between men remained a criminal offence.
Forced labour during the cotton harvest
continued. The fate and whereabouts of at
least 120 prisoners subjected to enforced
disappearance remained unknown.

BACKGROUND
Turkmenistan remained effectively closed to
human rights and other international
monitors. The authorities continued to deny
the occurrence of any Covid-19 cases, yet in
July they introduced a mandatory vaccination
programme for all adults. The economic
crisis of the previous three years continued,
leading to increased food prices and
shortages of basic foods. In mitigation, the
government distributed subsidized food
packages to all households. In September,
the frequency of these packages was
reduced from three times to once per month,
which proved inadequate for those most in
need.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities continued to stifle peaceful
expression of dissent or criticism.
At the end of June, blogger Murat
Dushemov filmed an interview with a doctor
in a state clinic, in which he asked about the
real situation concerning Covid-19 in the
country. On 7 July, he was stopped by police
at a checkpoint and asked to show proof of a
negative Covid-19 test. When he asked for

375

the legal grounds for the request, he was
held at the checkpoint for four hours then
sentenced to 15 days’ administrative
detention after he blocked the road with his
car in protest. Murat Dushemov was further
charged with assault for purportedly attacking
his cell mates – a charge he denied. On 16
August, he was sentenced to four years’
imprisonment for “intentional medium bodily
harm” and “intimidation”, and for having
attempted to bribe a doctor.
The authorities attempted to stop protests
abroad by putting pressure on
demonstrators. On 1 August, a legal protest
outside the Turkmenistani consulate in
Istanbul, Turkey, was disrupted when
consulate staff called police claiming that the
protesters were terrorists. Ten were detained
for five days. Farhad Durdiev, a blogger and
activist, described how two men offered him
a lift to the protest in a car with Turkmenistani
licence plates but then threatened him and
drove him to the back entrance of the
consulate where he was beaten by them and
Turkmenistani diplomats. He was released a
few hours later when Turkish police
intervened.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 15 July the case of Khursanai
Ismatullaeva – a doctor who had been
attempting to gain redress for being unjustly
dismissed from her job at a neonatal clinic in
the capital, Ashgabat, in 2017 – was raised at
an event organized by the EU
parliament. She was arrested the following
day and subjected to an enforced
disappearance for two weeks until it was
revealed that she was being held in a pre-trial
detention centre. She was charged with fraud
in connection with the sale of the apartment
of a man she had cared for, and whose family
had agreed to pay her US$600 for looking
after him.
Access to the internet remained severely
restricted and the authorities blocked
numerous sites including Facebook,
YouTube, Twitter and those offering virtual
private networks (VPNs). Internet users
reported in August that they were being

376

forced to swear on the Qur’an that they would
not use VPNs to access the internet.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained a criminal offence punishable by
up to two years’ imprisonment, and at least
one case was reported of a man being
arrested and charged in August in the city of
Turkmenabat.
In Turkmenistan’s Third Periodic Report to
the UN Human Rights Committee published
in 2020, the government had undertaken to
consider decriminalizing consensual sexual
relations between men, but no progress was
made towards this.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Freedom of religion remained severely
restricted and conscientious objectors faced
criminal prosecution. In January, six
Jehovah’s Witnesses were convicted and
imprisoned. A further conviction in March
brought the total number of Jehovah’s
Witnesses imprisoned for conscientious
objection to 16. On 8 May, all 16 – who were
serving sentences of between one and four
years – were released under an amnesty.
There remained no genuine civilian
alternative to military service.
The NGO Forum 18 reported that on 21
July, the first day of the Muslim festival of Eid
al-Adha, state security officers raided homes
in at least four towns in the eastern Lebap
Region and confiscated all Muslim religious
literature except the Qur’an.

FORCED LABOUR
At an International Labour Conference in
May-June, the ILO Committee of Experts
expressed “deep concern at the continued
practice of forced labour in the cotton sector”
and urged the government to eliminate its
use. In response, the government denied the
use of forced labour.
However, in a report published in March,
turkmen.news and the NGO Turkmen
Initiative for Human Rights documented the
use of forced labour, including child labour,
during the cotton harvest in 2020. Women

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

were at particularly high risk as they were
more likely to be in poorly paid jobs and
unable to participate in the practice of paying
for other pickers to take their place. Children
aged between 10 and 16 were often hired in
place of adults. Furthermore, according to
media reports in September, schoolchildren,
teachers, public sector workers and others
were forcibly sent to pick cotton for the 2021
harvest.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The fate and whereabouts of at least 120
prisoners subjected to enforced
disappearance remained unknown. Some
were imprisoned after an alleged
assassination attempt on then President
Saparmurat Niyazov in November 2002.

UGANDA
Republic of Uganda
Head of state and government: Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni
Security forces used intimidatory tactics to
suppress political opposition members and
supporters in the context of the January
elections, including arbitrary arrests,
abductions, prolonged incommunicado
detention, enforced disappearances and
prosecutions. The rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association were severely restricted; the
authorities targeted organizations working
on human rights and shut down the internet
for five days. The High Court lifted the
house arrest of the main opposition leader.
The vaccination roll-out was slow. The
government ordered agribusiness companies
to halt the evictions of thousands of people,
and the Constitutional Court found that
Indigenous peoples had been illegally
evicted from their ancestral land. The
president refused to assent to legislation
which, if enacted, could provide greater
protection for survivors of sexual violence
but criminalized consensual same-sex

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

sexual relations. Uganda continued to host
the largest refugee population in Africa.

BACKGROUND
In 2020, dozens of people were killed in the
context of electoral campaigning ahead of the
January 2021 general election, most of them
by police and other security forces. On 16
January, two days after polling day, the
Electoral Commission of Uganda declared
Yoweri Museveni, who had served as
president for 35 years, the presidential
winner with 58.6% of the votes. His leading
opponent, Robert Kyagulanyi, head of the
National Unity Platform (NUP) party, received
34.8% of the votes and disputed the results,
filing a legal challenge with the Supreme
Court. He withdrew this on 22 February,
claiming the judges were biased.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
On 4 March, the NUP claimed that 458 of its
followers had been abducted by security
forces in connection with the January
elections and that their whereabouts
remained unknown. On 14 February, the
Ministry of Information and Communications
Technology and National Guidance
announced that President Museveni had
instructed the police and the Uganda
Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) to provide
detailed updates about anyone they had
arrested in the run up to, during and after the
elections. On 24 February, the then speaker
of parliament instructed the Minister of
Internal Affairs to present to parliament “a full
list of all those in custody, whether under the
UPDF or police”. On 4 March, the minister
presented 177 names of people who were
alleged to be missing, 171 of whom he
confirmed were detained under charges
including participating in riots, possessing
military stores, and involvement in meetings
to plan post-election violence; the other six
had already been released on bond. At the
end of the year, the state had not publicly
disclosed official data on the numbers of all
those still in detention in relation to the
elections.

377

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
On 20 August, the NGO Bureau, an official
body responsible for regulating NGOs,
ordered the immediate suspension of 54
organizations, claiming that they had failed to
comply with NGO legislation, including by
operating under expired permits, or by failing
to file accounts or registering with the
Bureau. The independent Uganda National
NGO Forum said that most of the
organizations were not informed of the
Bureau’s decision or given an opportunity to
respond.1
Also, on 20 August, the NGO Bureau
suspended the activities of the Africa Institute
for Energy Governance. Between 6 and 13
October, the police arrested four of its staff in
Hoima city and Buliisa town in the west, and
in the capital, Kampala. They were all
released the same day without charge. On 22
October, on the NGO Bureau’s instructions,
police in Kampala arrested another six
members of staff for operating without a
permit. They were released three days later.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 9 January, Facebook shut down dozens of
accounts it claimed were linked to the
ministry of ICT. The company said the
ministry had used “fake and duplicate
accounts”, to enhance its popularity ahead of
the elections. On 12 January, President
Museveni accused Facebook and others of
interfering with the electoral process; and the
executive director of the Uganda
Communications Commission ordered
telecommunications companies to
“immediately suspend any access and use”
of social media and online messaging
platforms. Service providers such as Airtel
and MTN Uganda texted their subscribers
announcing the suspension.2 The same day,
the government blocked the internet for five
days.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
On 25 January, the High Court of Uganda
lifted the house arrest of Robert Kyagulanyi
and his wife, Barbara, after security forces
had surrounded their house on 14 January.

378

The court ruled that if the state had evidence
against them, it should charge them in court
rather than detain them “unjustifiably”. The
police spokesman said that Robert
Kyagulanyi had been placed under
“preventive arrest” because he had “planned
to disrupt public order” but did not specify
what was being planned.3
Prior to the ruling, security personnel
blocked access to Robert Kyagulanyi and his
family even when they ran out of food. The
US embassy in Uganda said that on 18
January, their ambassador was prevented
from visiting the family. The same day,
security forces raided the NUP party
headquarters.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
On 14 June, a military court in Kampala
released 17 NUP supporters and associates
on bail of UGX 20 million (about US$5,670)
after they had spent 166 days in military
detention. They were among 126 NUP
supporters and staff arrested in December
2020 in Kalangala town, central Uganda. The
Chief Magistrate had granted them all bail on
4 January, but 17 of them were re-arrested
the same day and held for several days. They
were charged with illegal possession of
ammunition and remanded at Kitalya prison
in Wakiso district.
On 10 September, the Director of Public
Prosecutions withdrew trumped-up moneylaundering charges against Nicholas Opiyo,
executive director of human rights
organization Chapter Four Uganda. He had
been arrested on 22 December 2020,
detained at the police Special Investigations
Unit in Kireka, Kampala, and later remanded
to Kitalya prison.4 He was released on bail
eight days later.
On 28 December, armed security operatives
arrested author Kakwenza Rukirabashaija in
Kampala, after he posted online comments
about the commander of the UPDF’s Land
Forces, also the president’s son. He
remained in incommunicado detention at the
end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO HEALTH
On 5 March, the Ministry of Health received
the first batch of AstraZeneca Covid-19
vaccines from COVAX. It aimed to vaccinate
49.6% of the population, about 22 million
people, in stages by the end of the year, but
only 9,763,030 vaccine doses had been
administered by 31 December. In October,
the health minister said that limited access to
rural areas had hampered progress in the
vaccination programme. On 23 December,
the government announced it had approved
the use of a Covid-19 vaccine booster shot.

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Intermittent Covid-19 lockdowns led to full or
partial school closures. Despite a phased
reopening for some grades in February,
schools were closed again in June although
the government announced plans to reopen
them in January 2022. The National Planning
Authority predicted that more than 30% of
learners would not return to school.5

FORCED EVICTIONS
Between 2017 and January 2021, security
forces had forcibly evicted more than 35,000
people (over 2,300 families) from their
homes in the western Kiryandongo district, to
make way for industrial farming projects.6
Between 12 February and the end of the
year, at least 22 residents were arrested and
released on bond or bail in connection with
protests against evictions and land disputes.
In April, the Minister of Lands, Housing and
Urban Development ordered two
multinational agribusiness companies to halt
any further evictions affecting 10,000
residents from a 5,155-hectare piece of land
in Kiryandongo’s Ndoi village, pending a
decision on whether due process had been
followed.
In August, Uganda’s constitutional court
found that the Uganda Wildlife Authority had
illegally evicted the Batwa Indigenous people
from their ancestral land in the Mgahinga
forest in the south-west. The court ruled that
the Batwa people owned the whole or part of
the area on which the forest is located “in
accordance with their customs and/or

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

practices” and the fact that they had
inhabited the forest for many generations. It
directed that the evicted Batwa people
should be given appropriate compensation to
improve their situation following evictions,
saying that the government had not
adequately compensated them, and had left
them a “landless, destitute… disadvantaged
and marginalized people”.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND
DISCRIMINATION
In August, President Museveni refused to
give his assent to the Sexual Offences Bill
2021 on grounds that it should be reviewed
to address redundant provisions already
provided for in other legislation. The bill,
which was passed by parliament in May,
proposed several provisions for the
prevention of sexual violence, including
greater punishment for sexual offenders, and
the protection of survivors during trials
concerning sexual offences and other crimes.
The proposed law, however, criminalized
consensual same-sex sexual relations, sex
work and HIV transmission and provided for
a sex offenders’ register that would include
people accused, even retrospectively, of
consensual same-sex sexual relations and
sex work.
In September, Cleopatra Kambugu
announced on social media that she had
become the first trans woman to obtain a
Ugandan national identification card and
passport which recognized her female
gender.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to the Office of the Prime Minister
and UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
Uganda was hosting 1,563,604 refugees at
the end of the year, the largest refugee
population in Africa. These included 953,630
people from South Sudan, about 61% of the
country’s refugee population; and 452,287,
almost 29%, from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; people from other countries,
including Burundi, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Rwanda,
Somalia and Sudan made up about 10%.

379

On 17 August, the government announced
plans to welcome 2,000 refugees from
Afghanistan following the Taliban takeover in
August (see Afghanistan entry).
1. Uganda: End Repression of Civil Society: Joint Statement on Uganda’s
NGO Bureau Suspension of 54 NGOs in the Country (Index: AFR
59/4652/2021), 27 August
2. “Uganda: Authorities must lift social media block amid crackdown
ahead of election”, 13 January
3. “Uganda: End politically motivated detention of Robert Kyagulanyi
and his wife”, 20 January
4. “Uganda: Museveni’s latest government must reverse decline on
human rights”, 12 May
5. “Address the Access Issue and the Pandemic Will Be Managed
Tomorrow”: Global Vaccine Inequity’s Impact in East Africa (Index:
AFR 04/5084/2021), 14 December
6. Uganda: 13 Years in Limbo: Forced Evictions of the Benet in the
Name of Conservation (Index: AFR 59/4138/2021), 8 November

UKRAINE
Ukraine
Head of state: Volodymyr Zelensky
Head of government: Denys Shmyhal
Impunity for torture remained endemic.
Gender-based violence remained
widespread, although a new law removed
legal obstacles to prosecuting military
personnel and police for domestic violence.
Homophobic attacks by groups advocating
discrimination and violence continued. The
investigation of attacks against journalists
and human rights defenders was slow and
often ineffective. A draft law on the security
services envisaged additional powers of
surveillance without legal safeguards. The
crackdown on dissent and human rights
defenders in occupied Crimea continued.
Violations of international humanitarian law
by both sides in eastern Ukraine remained
uninvestigated.

BACKGROUND
The economy made a partial recovery after
losses in 2020 caused by the Covid-19
pandemic and the ongoing conflict in the
Donbas region. Concerns over corruption
persisted: the Pandora Papers, a leaked

380

cache of data on secretive offshore deals,
named the current President as a former
beneficiary of offshore companies, along with
37 other Ukrainian politicians. In October,
parliament replaced the speaker after he
opposed the swift passing of legislation to
limit the influence of oligarchs. In December,
former President Petro Poroshenko was
named as a criminal suspect in a state
treason case.
Vaccination against Covid-19 was widely
and freely available, but the uptake was low,
covering only around a fifth of the adult
population in government-controlled territory.
In May, parliament adopted changes to the
Criminal and Criminal Procedure Codes to
align them with international criminal law,
extending the definition of aggression, crimes
against humanity and other specific war
crimes, lifting their statute of limitation and
providing for universal jurisdiction. The
President did not sign these changes into law
by year’s end, however, and the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court
remained unratified.
Government forces and Russia-backed
armed groups in Donbas repeatedly traded
accusations of ceasefire violations. Russia
refused to extend the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission’s mandate at two border
crossings it controlled, and repeatedly
massed its troops near Ukraine’s border
prompting concerns of Russian invasion. The
territory of Crimea remained under Russian
occupation.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Some progress was reported in prosecutions
relating to deaths during the EuroMaydan
protests in 2014, including the trial of several
titushki (agents working for the police) and of
a handful of former police officers (some in
absentia). However, justice remained elusive
for most victims of police abuses during
these events.
Impunity for torture and other ill-treatment
in general remained endemic. Investigations
into more recent allegations remained slow
and often ineffective. The Prosecutor
General’s Office (PGO) reported opening 79

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

new cases of alleged torture and 1,918 of
alleged abuse of authority by law
enforcement officers, from January to
December, resulting in 51 individuals being
charged with relevant crimes.
In January, two young men were assaulted
in Zhytomyr Region by a mob who accused
them of car theft. A police officer arrived at
the scene and joined the assailants,
subjecting one of the victims to a mock
execution with his pistol. In July, prosecutors
submitted to court charges of torture against
the police officer and three other persons;
another police officer was charged with false
testimony.
In March, the PGO reported that the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)
had to date ruled in the applicants’ favour,
and against Ukraine, in 115 cases regarding
conditions of detention amounting to torture
or other ill-treatment, of which 71 under the
supervision of the Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe remained
unaddressed; 120 cases were awaiting a
decision.
In May, in the case of Debelyy and Others v.
Ukraine, the ECtHR found that police in
Ukraine had subjected the three applicants –
Andrey Debelyy, Roman Korolev, and
Oleksandr Rafalsky – to inhuman and
degrading treatment.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence and discrimination –
particularly against women – and domestic
violence remained widespread. Support
services for the survivors as well as legislative
and policy measures intended to combat
domestic violence, although improved in
recent years, remained insufficient. No
progress was made in ratification of the
Council of Europe Convention on combating
and preventing violence against women and
domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).
From January to December, the authorities
opened 2,432 criminal investigations into
domestic violence, designated 2,176
individuals criminal suspects and submitted
2,136 cases to court. Administrative
proceedings were opened against 54,890

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

individuals for domestic violence from
January to June.
In July, a new law was enacted, which
removed the legal obstacles that had
effectively exempted military personnel and
police officers from administrative and
criminal prosecution for domestic violence; it
also strengthened the provisions
underpinning emergency protection orders.
The law extended to six months the statute of
limitation for domestic violence as an
administrative offence, and introduced new
penalties including compulsory labour and
detention for up to 10 days.
However, an investigation into allegations by
Lieutenant Valeria Sikal – who in 2018 was
the first Ukrainian ex-servicewoman to report
sexual harassment by a commanding officer
in the Armed Forces – was ineffective, and
further delayed by its referral to the State
Investigation Bureau of Khmelnitsky Region
where no further investigative activities took
place.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A draft bill tabled in parliament in May
proposed expanding the definition of hate
crimes to cover those motivated by sexual
orientation and gender identity. However,
homophobic attacks by groups advocating
discrimination and violence continued
throughout the year with the perpetrators
rarely held accountable.
In March, four individuals daubed the
community centre of the NGO Sphere with
mud; in August, the centre’s façade was
vandalized with homophobic graffiti.
At least four such attacks took place in May
alone. On 27 May, a mob smashed the
window of the venue where the KyivPride
group had organized a film screening, and
threw a flare and a gas canister inside. Police
opened a criminal investigation into
“hooliganism” but failed to qualify the
incident as hate crime.
On 29 May, a mob attacked the community
centre of the LGBTI group Insight in the
capital, Kyiv. The same day in Odessa, a mob
disrupted and ended a feminist lecture by
Insight’s leader Olena Shevchenko; elsewhere

381

in the city, seven masked men in black threw
stones at the office of the LGBTI association
LIGA and damaged one of its CCTV cameras.
Police refused to open a criminal
investigation into either incident until activists
filed a complaint about police inaction.
The six perpetrators of the 2018 attack
against human rights defender Vitalina Koval
– in which she was doused with red paint
causing chemical burns to her eyes –
continued to enjoy impunity. In March, a
court ruled that the statute of limitation had
expired on the charge of “causing minor
bodily harm” against two female attackers,
and closed the relevant proceedings. A
parallel investigation into a hate crime
(“violation of citizens’ equality”) was pending
but apparently stalled. No charges were ever
brought against four male co-attackers.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The media were generally free and diverse,
although a handful of outlets were selectively
targeted by the authorities in connection with
their perceived pro-Russian editorial policies,
and accused by the Security Service of
Ukraine (SBU) of waging an “information
war” against Ukraine.
The National Security and Defence Council
(an advisory state body) introduced so-called
“personal sanctions” against parliamentarian
Taras Kozak, which targeted his commercial
assets including three TV channels that were
stripped of broadcasting licences. The
decision, approved by the President, drew
criticism over its extrajudicial nature and
arbitrary focus on media enterprises – as well
as its application, against a Ukrainian
national and his Ukraine-based businesses,
of a law intended for sanctioning foreign
commercial entities.
Unfounded criminal proceedings against
former prisoner of conscience, journalist Vasil
Muravitskyi, were ongoing. The risk of
imprisonment and physical harm by groups
advocating discrimination and violence
forced him to leave Ukraine.
In November, the owner of the independent
Kyiv Post newspaper suspended its
publication with immediate effect. The staff

382

announced that they had thereby been fired
for their independent journalism.
Commentators alleged that pressure on the
owner by the Presidential Administration had
led to his decision.
The investigation of attacks – including
killings – against journalists and human rights
defenders was slow and often ineffective.
Court hearings continued in the high-profile
case against three persons accused of
planting a car bomb that killed BelarusianRussian-Ukrainian journalist Pavlo Sheremet
(Pavel Sharamet) in July 2016.
Commentators and journalists raised doubts
over the credibility of the investigation. The
defendants denied the charges, insisting that
they were politically motivated. In January,
evidence was published suggesting that the
killing had been planned by the Belarusian
authorities.
Prominent Belarusian exile Vital Shyshou,
head of the Belarusian House in Ukraine,
was found hanged in a park in Kyiv on the
morning of 3 August. He had previously
complained to his colleagues of being
followed and threatened with reprisals by
Belarusian security services.1 The Ukrainian
authorities investigated his death as
suspicious, although no outcome was
reported by year’s end.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
While the right to freedom of peaceful
assembly was generally enjoyed without
constraint, LGBTI activists and others
targeted by violent groups had to rely on the
authorities’ willingness to protect peaceful
demonstrators during and after their rallies.
On 8 March, violent counter-protesters
attacked participants of the International
Women’s Day march in Kyiv. After the rally,
unidentified individuals pushed and verbally
insulted women’s rights activists, and tried to
snatch away their posters. The activists
complained to the police who refused to open
proceedings until lawyers stepped in. A
formal investigation was still ongoing at year’s
end.
Annual rallies in support of LGBTI rights
took place from July to September in several

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

cities, including Kryvyi Rih, Odessa, Kharkiv
and Kyiv. They proceeded peacefully under
effective protection by the police, despite an
ongoing atmosphere of intimidation and
homophobic attacks and the risk that
individuals leaving the rallies would be
assaulted. On 30 July, LGBTI activists held a
pride event outside the Presidential Office in
Kyiv.

DISCRIMINATION
In July, the government approved a national
strategy to 2030 to address discrimination
against the Roma community. However, the
ongoing Covid-19 pandemic had a
disproportionate effect on this community as
many relied on the informal economy for
irregular earnings.
Past attacks against Roma were not
effectively investigated, including the
destruction of a campsite and physical
violence against Roma at Lysa Hora park in
Kyiv in August 2018. In August, the
Prosecutor General’s Office informed
Amnesty International that it had overruled a
decision to halt the investigation, but no
further progress was reported.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
A draft law on reform of the SBU was
approved at its first reading. While addressing
some of the long-standing issues of concern
– for instance, removing its investigative
function by 2025 – the bill confirmed the
agency’s wide powers of arrest, detention and
interrogation of individuals, and the use of
lethal force, without introducing new and
more effective accountability mechanisms.
The bill also gave the SBU additional powers
of surveillance, including intercepting and
storing public and private communications
and information from individuals and
organizations, without due legal safeguards to
prevent abuse and ensure the right to
privacy. It also granted the power to block
online resources extrajudicially in some
cases.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CRIMEA
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The de facto authorities continued a
crackdown on free expression and all
vestiges of dissent. Free media were
suppressed, and those working for them
faced severe reprisals.
Freelance reporter Vladyslav Yesypenko was
arrested on 10 March by the Russian Federal
Security Service (FSB), on allegations of
spying and carrying ammunition. On 18
March, a Russian state TV channel in Crimea
broadcast an “admission” by him that he had
shared his media footage with Ukrainian
intelligence services. He was denied access
to an independent lawyer for 27 days, until a
remand court hearing where Vladyslav
Yesypenko alleged that a grenade had been
planted by his captors in his car and that he
had been subjected to torture and other illtreatment to extract his “confession” on
video.
According to human rights monitors, access
to at least 27 online media was completely
blocked in Crimea, along with access to the
websites of organizations arbitrarily banned
as “extremist” in Russia. These included the
Mejlis (representative assembly) of the
Crimean Tatar People and the Jehovah’s
Witnesses; any association with them was a
criminal offence.
In April, a court fined Bekir Mamutov,
activist and editor-in-chief of the Crimean
Tatar-language newspaper Qirim, for
“abusing media freedom” under the Russian
Code of Administrative Offences. He had
published the UN Secretary-General’s 2020
report on the situation regarding human
rights in Crimea, which mentioned the Mejlis,
but failed to insert the mandatory disclaimer
under Russian law that the organization was
deemed “extremist” in Russia.
Other remaining critical voices in Crimea
were also prosecuted and jailed. In
September, Nariman Dzhelyal, a Crimean
Tatar rights activist and previously the most
senior member of the banned Mejlis
remaining in Crimea, was arbitrarily detained
in connection with purported damage to a
gas pipeline.

383

Crimean Tatar human rights defenders and
prisoners of conscience, Emir-Usein Kuku
and Server Mustafayev, remained behind
bars in Russia, as did dozens of other victims
of politically motivated prosecutions by the de
facto Crimean authorities – often in inhuman
and degrading conditions.
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Not a single case of enforced disappearance
from 2014 – the start of the Russian
occupation of the territory – was effectively
investigated. The fate and whereabouts of
those forcibly disappeared remained
unknown.

DONBAS
Repression of dissent and restrictions on civil
society persisted in the territories of eastern
Ukraine controlled by Russia-backed armed
groups. The UN Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine (UNMMU) reported an
absence of the necessary services and
support for survivors of domestic violence,
and noted the personal risks, including of
arrest and prosecution, faced by activists
defending the rights of women. The UNMMU
also reported arbitrary arrests and prolonged
incommunicado detention, and ongoing
unlawful imprisonment, of women and men
by the de facto authorities. It was denied
access to places of detention in nongovernment controlled territories despite “the
widespread and credible allegations of torture
and ill-treatment in a number of facilities”.
The UNMMU also reported at least nine new
cases of arbitrary arrest of civilians by SBU
officers.
IMPUNITY
Numerous previously reported violations of
international humanitarian law by both sides
to the conflict remained uninvestigated.
No progress was made in attaining justice
for victims of enforced disappearance, torture
and unlawful detention by the SBU in eastern
Ukraine from 2014 to 2016, and the practice
of using secret prisons continued to be
officially denied. An ongoing investigation still
failed to identify a single alleged perpetrator.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The continuing lack of independent
information from and access to the territories
controlled by armed groups in Donbas
hampered attempts to control Covid-19
infections. The Ukrainian government made
free vaccination available to visitors from
across the conflict line, including through
vaccination centres at crossing checkpoints.
However, the de facto authorities continued
to impose arbitrary restrictions on travel into
government-controlled territories. They also
recognized and relied exclusively on Russiansupplied vaccines, deliveries of which were
reportedly greatly insufficient. A spike in
patients requiring intensive care in
September reportedly overwhelmed the local
medical facilities, which also suffered from a
profound shortage of medical personnel and
supplies.
1. “Ukraine: Authorities must conduct effective investigation into
suspicious death of prominent Belarusian exile”, 3 August

UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
United Arab Emirates
Head of state: Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan
Head of government: Mohammed bin Rashed Al
Maktoum
The government continued to commit
serious human rights violations, including
arbitrary detention, cruel and inhuman
treatment of detainees, suppression of
freedom of expression, and violation of the
right to privacy. The right to health was
partially fulfilled. The United Arab Emirates
(UAE) continued to deprive stateless
individuals of the right to nationality,
impacting their access to a range of
services. Courts passed death sentences
and executions were reported.

BACKGROUND
In January, the UAE announced it was
ending an economic and travel blockade on

384

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Qatar, and restored trade links in subsequent
months. The UAE continued to be involved
as a party to the conflict in Yemen, which saw
a range of egregious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law (see
Yemen entry). It also continued its
involvement with the conflict in Libya through
its support for the Libyan Arab Armed Forces,
which committed violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law (see
Libya entry). Following the previous year’s
controversial deal, UAE trade with Israel
reached over US$500 million.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
The UAE continued to arbitrarily detain
Emirati and foreign nationals. In January,
authorities transferred the arbitrarily detained
Syrian national AbdelRahman al-Nahhass to
al-Wathba prison in Abu Dhabi emirate after
holding him incommunicado in pre-trial
detention in an unknown location for 13
months. The Office of Public Prosecution and
AbdelRahman al-Nahhass’s governmentassigned lawyer refused to give the charges
in writing to his family.
The UAE continued to hold detainees past
completion of their prison terms based on
court orders under its “counter-extremism
counselling” law which cannot be appealed.
Four out of 11 such prisoners were released
under Ramadan pardons in April: Faisal Ali
al-Shehhi (three years, 11 months after the
end of sentence), Ahmed al-Molla (three
years, 11 months), Saeed Abdullah alBuraimi (three years, one month) and
Mansoor Hassan al-Ahmedi (one year, five
months). The other seven remained in
prison, despite having completed their
sentence.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
continued in prisons. Human rights defender
Ahmed Mansoor remained in solitary
confinement since 2017 without any bedding
other than two thin, dirty blankets and
without adequate personal hygiene items. In
September, the European Parliament called

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

on the UAE to end Ahmed Mansoor’s cruel
and inhuman treatment.
In a rare move, in terms of scale, the
authorities arbitrarily detained at least 375
African male and female migrant workers and
took them to al-Wathba prison overnight on
24/25 June. They were held incommunicado
for up to six weeks in overcrowded cells
without enough beds or toilets, and deported
without due process or legal representation.
Police and guards mistreated at least 18 of
these detainees, including with racist insults
and forced nudity. Police beat and used
tasers against detainees who resisted arrest,
and placed leg shackles for a week on
women detainees who refused to eat. They
were deprived of their property upon
deportation, including personal identity
documents.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government continued to exercise tight
control over expression. At least 26 prisoners
remained behind bars because of their
peaceful political criticism.
The government website on “Enforcement
of law to contain the spread of Covid-19”
continued to warn that publishing “rumours”,
“fake news”, or “false” or “misleading healthrelated information” was punishable by law.
In June, the government announced that
regulation of the media would be partially
transferred from the National Media Council
to a new agency, the Media Regulatory Office
under the Ministry of Culture and Youth.
When NGOs and journalists reported the
arbitrary detention of hundreds of African
nationals (see above), the Ministry of Interior
called on the media “not to circulate or
disseminate any information not published by
the relevant authorities”.
In April, the government sentenced
prisoners Maryam al-Balushi and Amina alAbdouli to three more years in prison for
“publishing information that disturbs the
public order”, after they had released voice
recordings of their grievances about prison
conditions.

385

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

In July, UAE was revealed as one of 11
countries that were clients of NSO Group, a
company specializing in cyber surveillance.
Amnesty International, as part of the Pegasus
Project carried out cutting-edge forensic tests
on mobile phones to identify traces of
Pegasus spyware.1 It found that Pegasus had
been used to compromise the phone of David
Haigh, a UK national in contact with Sheikha
Latifa, a daughter of Dubai’s ruler, who was
captured at sea by Indian and Emirati
commandos when she tried to flee the UAE
in March 2018.
In May, the UK High Court of Justice’s
Family Division found that the Emirati prime
minister had ordered NSO Group hacking of
the devices of his ex-wife and her two lawyers
in the UK. In September, the research
organization Citizen Lab confirmed that NSO
Group’s spyware was used against Emirati
dissident Alaa al-Siddiq, who died in a car
crash in the UK in June.

The UAE lobbied for a rollback of oil
production cuts agreed between global oil
producers during the pandemic, aiming to
recapture market share that it had lost due to
reduced petroleum use in 2020. Such
expansion of production runs contrary to the
conclusion of UN-sponsored research that
countries need to steadily cut oil production
to meet the goals set by the Paris Agreement
on climate change, to which the UAE is a
party.

RIGHT TO HEALTH

Courts continued to issue new death
sentences, primarily against foreign nationals
for violent crimes. New executions were
reported.

The UAE offered an extensive roll-out of
Covid-19 vaccines in 2021, available free of
charge to Emiratis and migrants with valid
Emirati IDs. However, until June, those with
expired identity documents were ineligible,
denying migrants with expired visas and
stateless people access to vaccines. In June,
the government extended eligibility for free
vaccination to everyone, including those with
expired documents.

DISCRIMINATION
The estimated 20,000-100,000 stateless
people born in the UAE but denied nationality
continued to be deprived of equal access to
rights covered for Emirati citizens at state
expense, such as comprehensive healthcare,
housing and higher education, as well as jobs
in the public sector. Stateless individuals only
became eligible for Covid-19 vaccinations in
June – six months after the beginning of the
campaign roll-out.

386

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
2021 was the first year in which Article 356
of the Penal Code did not criminalize
consensual sexual acts. However, vague
language criminalizing “scandalous act[s]
offending modesty” remained under Article
358. Unlike the previous year, there were no
documented prosecutions of consensual
sexual acts in 2021.

DEATH PENALTY

1. Forensic Methodology Report: How to Catch NSO Group’s Pegasus
(Index: DOC 10/4487/2021), 18 July

UNITED KINGDOM
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Head of state: Elizabeth II
Head of government: Boris Johnson
The government promised an inquiry into its
handling of the Covid-19 pandemic and
significantly cut a welfare benefit received
by 6 million people. The rights of refugees
and migrants were routinely violated. A new
policing bill seriously endangered the rights
to freedom of peaceful assembly and nondiscrimination. A bill on judicial review and
a review of the Human Rights Act caused
concern. Certain areas of Northern Ireland
still lacked adequate access to abortion.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Accountability for past violations in
Northern Ireland and for UK complicity in
the US-led secret detention programme
remained unrealized. A court decision
blocking Julian Assange’s extradition to the
USA was overturned on appeal. Detention
conditions in Scotland fell below necessary
standards.

BACKGROUND
The Covid-19 pandemic escalated in 2021
with steep rises in cases and significant
pressure on hospitals. The government
imposed a national lockdown on 5 January
and parliament renewed Covid-19-related
emergency powers twice. Most restrictions
imposed in response to the Covid-19
pandemic were lifted in July and August. In
late December, daily Covid-19 infections
exceeded records and some restrictions were
reimposed in Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By December, the UK had recorded the
second-highest death toll from Covid-19 in
Europe. Life expectancy for men fell for the
first time since records began due to the
pandemic. By the end of the year, 82.4% of
the population aged 12 and over had been
fully vaccinated against Covid-19. The UK
had a large surplus of vaccine doses by the
end of the year, which were not sufficiently
redistributed to low and lower-middle income
countries in need of vaccines.1
In May, the Prime Minister announced that
an independent public inquiry into the
government response to the Covid-19
pandemic would not begin until the second
quarter of 2022. Bereaved families, unions,
health workers and other groups demanded
that the government launch the inquiry
immediately.
The widespread use of Do Not Attempt
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (DNACPR)
orders during the pandemic was criticized in
a report by an independent regulator in
March. Older people and people with
disabilities were not sufficiently supported or

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

given adequate information before DNACPR
orders were put in place.

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In October, the government withdrew a £20
per week increase to social security
payments received by 6 million low-income
or unemployed people; it had been
introduced in April 2020 in response to the
pandemic. It was estimated that the cut
would push 500,000 people into poverty
amid increasing energy and food prices.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Amid an increase in people crossing the
Channel by boat to seek asylum in the UK,
the government introduced changes to the
UK’s Immigration Rules and proposed new
legislation that would make it harder to seek
asylum in the UK. The Nationality and
Borders Bill includes provisions penalizing
asylum seekers based on how they arrive in
the UK and when they claim asylum, and
amendments further criminalizing people
seeking asylum. The bill will correct
discrimination that excludes many British
people from citizenship rights, but also
includes provisions that allow the government
to deprive a person of their British citizenship
without notice.
The Home Office announced an increase in
government-chartered mass deportation
flights from July. People on these flights were
often deported before accessing adequate
legal advice and having their claims fully
considered.
The government failed to adequately protect
Afghans fleeing the human rights crisis in
Afghanistan. In addition to an existing
scheme for Afghans employed by the UK
government, the government announced the
Afghan Citizens' Resettlement Scheme in
August, but admitted in late October that the
scheme was still not in operation, despite the
urgency of the crisis.2 Official data showed
that of 1,055 Afghans whose asylum claims
were determined in the year to September,
only 484 were granted protection.
People seeking asylum continued to be held
in inhumane conditions, including in former

387

army barracks where outbreaks of Covid-19
occurred.3

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In June, prosecutors decided not to
prosecute people who had participated in
Black Lives Matter protests in Belfast and
Derry-Londonderry in June 2020. The Police
Service of Northern Ireland also took steps to
refund 72 fines for infringement of Covid-19
restrictions issued to the protesters.
The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts
Bill (the PCSC Bill) would drastically curtail
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly,
including by expanding police powers to ban,
limit or impose undue restrictions on “noisy”
or “disruptive” protests, creating new
offences of “locking on” and “being
equipped for locking on”, and allowing courts
to impose broad restrictions on individual
protesters. The bill also includes criminal
penalties for people who unwittingly breach
police-imposed conditions on protests and
increases criminal penalties for organizers
who disobey such conditions.4 More than
350 organizations condemned the proposals
and thousands of people joined
demonstrations.
In March, police used unnecessary and
excessive force to disperse a vigil in the
capital, London, predominately attended by
women, for Sarah Everard, who was raped
and murdered by a police officer. Police
claimed that the gathering violated Covid-19related regulations.

DISCRIMINATION
In February, a coalition of 17 organizations
declared a boycott of the government’s review
of Prevent, its counter-radicalization strategy,
after the appointment of William Shawcross
as its chair despite his record of expressing
Islamophobic views.5
In March, the Commission on Race and
Ethnic Disparities, appointed by the
government after the 2020 Black Lives
Matter protests, published a report rejecting
the existence of institutional racism in the UK
and arguing that there was a “repeated use
and misapplication of the term ‘racism’ to

388

account for every observed disparity”. The
UN Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent said the report “repackaged
racist tropes and stereotypes into fact,
twisting data and misapplying statistics and
studies into conclusory findings”.
The PCSC Bill contained provisions to
extend the use of police stop-and-search
powers with newly proposed Serious Violence
Reduction Orders and to criminalize “residing
on land without consent in a vehicle”. A new
statutory duty to reduce serious violence
would further empower police and ministers
to request information about individuals from
public bodies, eroding existing safeguards on
data sharing. The government conceded that
these provisions were likely to impact Black
men and Gypsy, Roma and Traveller
communities disproportionately.
In June, a police officer was found guilty of
the manslaughter of Dalian Atkinson, a Black
man, in 2016. The officer had fired a Taser at
him for 33 seconds and kicked his head
twice. Data released by the Independent
Office for Police Conduct in August found
that Black people were Tasered with
disproportionate frequency and more likely to
be Tasered for prolonged periods by police.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In November, the Northern Ireland
government agreed to establish an
independent public inquiry, along with other
measures co-designed with survivors, into
“mother and baby homes”, Magdalene
Laundries and work houses, which operated
between 1922 and 1990. Many women and
girls who became pregnant outside marriage
were sent to these institutions and suffered
arbitrary detention, forced labour, illtreatment and the forced adoption of their
babies.6
In July, the government announced a plan
to address the legacy of the conflict in
Northern Ireland. The plan included a statute
of limitations for all conflict-related incidents
and an end to all criminal, civil and coronial
judicial activity related to the period,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

amounting to a de facto amnesty for human
rights violations during the conflict.
In July, the government also introduced the
Judicial Review and Courts Bill, which
contains provisions that would decrease the
likelihood of victims obtaining effective
remedies for human rights violations through
legal challenges and remove proper judicial
oversight over certain tribunal decisions
particularly impacting asylum seekers and
migrants.
A government-commissioned review of the
Human Rights Act 1998 ended in October.
The government subsequently proposed farreaching changes to the Act that would
significantly erode human rights protection in
the UK, including by increasing deviation
from European Court of Human Rights
judgments and making it harder for people to
bring human rights claims.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The ongoing failure to deliver fully
commissioned and funded abortion services
in Northern Ireland in line with the new
legislative framework left access to healthcare
in a fragile state and created a “postcode
lottery” for those needing early medical
abortion provision. Services were withdrawn
in one health trust as a consequence of the
lack of commissioning. In July, the Secretary
of State for Northern Ireland directed the
Northern Ireland health department to make
abortion services available by 31 March
2022.

IMPUNITY
In April, the Overseas Operations (Service
Personnel and Veterans) Act 2021
introduced restrictions on legal proceedings
related to overseas military operations. It
imposed time limits for civil claims against
the Ministry of Defence and introduced a
presumption against prosecution for offences
committed over five years ago, other than
certain serious crimes.
In February, Guantánamo Bay detainee
Mustafa al-Hawsawi filed a complaint before
the Investigatory Powers Tribunal regarding
UK complicity in his torture and other ill-

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

treatment at secret CIA detention facilities
between 2003 and 2006. In April, another
Guantánamo Bay detainee, Abu Zubaydah,
filed a petition against the USA, the UK and
five other countries before the UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The USA government appealed a UK court
decision, issued in January, to refuse its
request to extradite Julian Assange. The USA
successfully widened the scope of its appeal
in August. In December, the High Court
granted the appeal and ordered Assange's
extradition, accepting diplomatic assurances
from the USA that Assange would not be held
in solitary confinement. Assange appealed
that decision in late December seeking
review by the UK Supreme Court.7 Assange
faced prosecution in the USA for the
publication of disclosed documents as part of
his work with Wikileaks.
In May, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled that the UK government’s bulk
interception of communications powers did
not contain sufficient safeguards against
abuse, thus violating the rights to privacy and
freedom of expression.8
In September, the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal ruled in favour of an activist, Kate
Wilson, who had been deceived into a longterm sexual relationship with an undercover
male police officer spying on her and her
associates’ peaceful political activities. Kate
Wilson had been subjected to inhuman and
degrading treatment, sex discrimination and
violations of her rights to private and family
life, freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association. A public inquiry
into the infiltration of social justice and
environmental groups by undercover police
continued to hear evidence in April and May,
including from other women deceived into
sexual relationships.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
In August, the UK National Preventive
Mechanism issued a report regarding
persistent issues in places of detention in
Scotland, including overcrowding and

389

detention in police custody for more than 24
hours.
1. “Covid-19: Big Pharma fuelling unprecedented human rights crisis –
New report”, 21 September

of electoral irregularities, which destabilized
the peaceful transfer of power in January
through the encouragement of violent
political protests aimed at overturning the
election results.

2. “UK: Afghanistan resettlement scheme is ‘too little, too late’”, 18
August

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

3. “UK: Napier Barracks Covid outbreak shows Home Office ‘just doesn't
care’ about people seeking asylum”, 12 August
4. “UK: MPs should vote down ‘dystopian’ policing bill”, 4 July
5. “UK: NGOs condemn appointment of William Shawcross and
announce civil society-led review of Prevent”, 16 February
6. “Northern Ireland: Mother and Baby Home public inquiry welcome
step towards truth and accountability”, 15 November
7. “US/UK: ‘Drop the charges, stop the extradition and free Julian
Assange,’ says Amnesty Head”, 25 October
8. “UK: Europe’s top court rules UK mass surveillance regime violated
human rights”, 25 May

UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
United States of America
Head of state and government: Joseph Biden (replaced
Donald Trump in January)
The Biden administration stated its
intention to restore the US human rights
record, but the results in policy and
practice were mixed. While it re-engaged
with UN international human rights
institutions and multilateral efforts to
combat climate change, the administration
failed to adopt human rights-respecting
immigration and asylum policies on the
USA-Mexico border or realize its human
rights-related agenda on the domestic level.

BACKGROUND
Domestic politics continued to hinder
effective government action to address
climate change, discriminatory attacks on
voting rights, or unlawful state-level
restrictions on rights, including the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly and
reproductive rights. Some opposition
politicians continued to challenge the 2020
election results with unsubstantiated claims

390

The Biden administration took steps to repeal
the previous administration’s discriminatory
policies towards LGBTI people, including
overturning a ban on transgender people
serving in the military and restoring
protections for students against
discrimination based on sexual orientation
and gender identity. Nonetheless, hundreds
of state-level bills were introduced that would
curtail the rights of LGBTI people. Multiple
states enacted anti-LGBTI rights laws,
including a ban on gender-affirming
healthcare for transgender minors in
Arkansas.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The Biden administration repealed the Global
Gag Rule, a policy limiting US foreign aid to
foreign organizations that provide
information, referrals or services for legal
abortion.
State governments continued intensified
efforts to curtail sexual and reproductive
rights by seeking to criminalize abortion and
limit access to reproductive health services,
enacting more abortion restrictions in 2021
than in any other year.
In Texas, a law was enacted criminalizing
abortion as early as six weeks into pregnancy
– before most people know they are pregnant
– and privatizing enforcement against
abortion providers or anyone “suspected” of
assisting the person in obtaining an abortion.1
In September, the US Supreme Court
declined to enjoin the Texas law, and allowed
it to enter into force. In December, the Court
heard oral arguments regarding a Mississippi
law which bans most abortions after 15
weeks, directly challenging existing federal
protections of abortion rights under Roe v.
Wade.2

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Indigenous women continued to experience
disproportionately high levels of rape and
sexual violence and lacked access to basic
post-rape care. Additionally, Indigenous
women continued to experience high rates of
disappearance and murder. The exact
number of Indigenous women victims of
violence or who went missing remained
unknown as the US government did not
collect data or adequately coordinate with
Tribal governments.
Rates of intimate partner violence showed
no signs of slowing from their increases due
to the Covid-19 pandemic and ensuing
lockdowns, yet the main legislative
mechanism for funding violence response
and prevention remained lapsed as Congress
again failed to reauthorize the Violence
Against Women Act (VAWA).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to drastically limit
access to asylum at the USA-Mexico border,
resulting in irreparable harm to many
thousands of people, including children, who
were seeking safety from persecution or other
serious human rights violations in their
countries of origin.3
Border control officials carried out
unnecessary and unlawful pushbacks of
nearly 1.5 million refugees and migrants at
the USA-Mexico border, both at and between
official ports of entry, using as a pretext
public health provisions under Title 42 of the
US Code during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Returnees were summarily expelled without
access to asylum procedures, legal remedies,
or individual risk assessments. Upon his
resignation, a senior legal adviser to the US
Department of State denounced the mass
expulsions of Haitian asylum seekers as
constituting unlawful forced returns.
Although the Biden administration
exempted unaccompanied migrant children
from expulsions under Title 42, US Border
Patrol misused an anti-trafficking law to
continue to summarily repatriate thousands
of unaccompanied Mexican children (over
95% of those apprehended), without

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

providing them with adequate access to
asylum procedures or effective screenings for
the harm they could face upon return.4

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Thirty-nine Muslim men remained arbitrarily
and indefinitely detained by the US military in
the detention facility at the US Naval Base in
Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, in violation of
international law. The authorities made little
progress in closing the facility, despite the
Biden administration´s stated intention to do
so.
In October, two detainees held in
Guantánamo Bay were approved for transfer
by the Periodic Review Board, bringing to 12
the number of detainees who remained at the
facility after being cleared for transfer, some
for over a decade. Only two detainees had
been transferred out of the facility since
January 2017, including just one since
Joseph Biden took office. None of the
remaining detainees had access to adequate
medical treatment and those who survived
torture and other ill-treatment by US agents
were not given adequate rehabilitative
services.
Ten of them faced charges in the military
commission system, in breach of
international law and standards relating to fair
trials, and could face the death penalty if
convicted. The use of capital punishment in
these cases, after proceedings that did not
meet international standards, would
constitute arbitrary deprivation of life.
The trials of those accused of crimes related
to the 11 September 2001 attacks were
scheduled to begin on 11 January 2021, but
after the suspension of hearings in 2020 and
most of 2021, the cases were nowhere near
ready for trial, following nine years of pretrial
hearings.5

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Authorities failed to adopt and implement
significant police oversight and accountability
measures promised by the Biden
administration in response to nationwide
protests against police violence in 2020,

391

which were marked by widespread excessive
use of force by law enforcement agencies.
Instead, lawmakers in at least 36 states and
at the federal level introduced more than 80
pieces of draft legislation limiting freedom of
assembly, with nine states enacting 10 such
bills into law in 2021. At the end of the year,
a further 44 such bills were pending in 18
states. Proposed legal restrictions on freedom
of assembly included increased penalties for
acts of civil disobedience relating to
infrastructure projects such as pipelines,
obstructing roads and defacing monuments.
Other laws sought to prevent reductions to
policing budgets by local governments and
remove civil liability for car drivers who hit
protesters blocking streets, among other
things.
By contrast, the California state legislature
enacted new laws providing broad
protections to journalists reporting on public
assemblies, who were often targeted for
arrest and violence by law enforcement
officials in 2020, and creating statewide
standards and regulations for law
enforcement’s use of kinetic impact projectile
weapons and chemical agents during public
assemblies.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
At least 1,055 people were reported killed by
police using firearms in 2021, a slight
increase from previous years. The limited
public data available from 2015 to 2021
suggested that Black people were
disproportionately impacted by police use of
lethal force. The federal government’s
programme to track how many such deaths
occur annually remained unimplemented.
In April, the Maryland state legislature
passed and overrode the governor’s veto of a
use-of-force statute, leaving just six states
without such statutes to regulate police use of
force. However, no state laws governing the
use of lethal force by police – where such
laws exist – complied with international law
and standards.
The US Senate failed to introduce the
George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, a bill

392

providing a bipartisan set of proposals to
reform certain aspects of policing.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The annual Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices issued by the US State
Department were accompanied by public
recognition by the Secretary of State of the
importance of, and risks faced by, human
rights defenders. The Biden administration
also re-published its policy on US Support for
Human Rights Defenders, which had been
sidelined for several years.
In May, news media revealed that US
authorities tracked and harassed human
rights defenders active in the USA-Mexico
border area during 2018 and 2019, including
through an illegal US watchlist of activists,
detailed in Amnesty International’s 2019
report, ‘Saving Lives is not a Crime’: Politically
Motivated Legal Harassment against Migrant
Human Rights Defenders by the USA.
Human rights defenders and journalists
continued to report intimidation and
harassment by authorities when crossing the
border or when conducting their work in
Mexico, which impacted both their ability to
do their work and their overall well-being. In
September, the Office of Inspector General of
the Department of Homeland Security issued
a report confirming that agency officials
unlawfully harassed journalists and border
activists without an appropriate legal basis
and, in some cases, apparently covered up
their violations by destroying evidence of their
communications and coordination with
Mexican authorities in those abuses.

DEATH PENALTY
In March, Virginia became the 23rd US state
to abolish the death penalty.
During the final days of the Trump
administration in January, the federal
government carried out three executions,
continuing the reversal since 2020 of a 17year moratorium on federal executions. In
July 2021, the US Department of Justice
placed a moratorium on federal executions
amid a review of department policies related
to capital punishment. However, the federal

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

government continued to pursue death
sentences in certain cases. State executions
resumed in 2021 following a lull in 2020 due
to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic as well as
the conclusion of litigation over the execution
protocols in certain states.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
A decade after dozens of detainees were held
in a CIA-operated secret detention system –
authorized from 2001 to 2009 – no one had
been brought to justice for the systematic
human rights violations committed under that
programme, including enforced
disappearance, torture and other illtreatment. The Senate Intelligence
Committee’s report on CIA torture remained
classified, years after the limited
investigations conducted into those crimes
were closed without charges being brought
against anyone.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
The US Congress did not pass any
regulations on access to firearms in 2021.
The government’s ongoing failure to protect
people from persistent gun violence
continued to violate their human rights,
including the rights to life, security of the
person and freedom from discrimination,
among others.
A surge in gun sales during the Covid-19
pandemic, unfettered access to firearms, a
lack of comprehensive gun safety laws
(including effective regulation of firearm
acquisition, possession and use), and a
failure to invest in adequate gun violence
prevention and intervention programmes,
perpetuated this violence.
At least 44,000 people were estimated to
have been killed by gun violence in 2020.
During the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 and
2021 some state government authorities
exacerbated gun violence by designating gun
stores as “essential businesses”.
In May, the US Department of Justice
proposed a regulation that would update the
definitions of “firearm” and related firearm
components for the first time since 1968,

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

noting that 23,000 un-serialized firearms
(known as “ghost guns”) were reported to
have been recovered by law enforcement
from potential crime scenes between 2016
and 2020.
In November 2021, the US Supreme Court
heard its first case regarding gun rights in
over a decade. The eventual decision in this
case could determine whether individuals
may carry a firearm in public without
demonstrating “proper cause” or meeting
licensing thresholds.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS OF CIVILIANS
The US government repeatedly used lethal
force in countries around the world, including
with armed drones, in violation of its
obligations under international human rights
law and, where applicable, international
humanitarian law. NGOs, UN experts and the
news media documented how such strikes
inside and outside zones of active armed
conflict resulted in injuries or arbitrarily
deprived protected individuals, including
many civilians, of their right to life, in some
cases constituting war crimes.
The US government weakened protections
for civilians during lethal operations, which
increased the likelihood of unlawful killings;
impeded the assessment of the legality of
strikes; and prevented accountability and
access to justice and effective remedies for
victims of unlawful killings and civilian harm.
The government continued to withhold
information regarding the legal and policy
standards and criteria applied by US forces
when using lethal force, despite calls by UN
human rights experts to clarify such points.
Authorities also failed to provide reparations
for civilian killings. The Biden administration
commenced a review of lethal force policies,
yet failed to provide any information about
how or whether those policies would change.
Meanwhile, US forces continued to engage in
drone strikes, resulting in the unlawful killing
and wounding of civilians.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In March, the Biden administration accepted
UPR recommendations by the UN Human

393

Rights Council to guarantee the right to
housing and combat homelessness.
However, as federal and state-level
moratoriums on evictions during the Covid-19
pandemic began to expire in the second half
of 2021, the US Supreme Court struck down
efforts by the Biden administration to extend
the federal moratorium on public health
grounds during the ongoing pandemic.
Simultaneously, some state and municipal
governments ended temporary special
measures to house those experiencing
homelessness and some cities resumed or
expanded the demolition of homeless
encampments.
Members of the US Congress reintroduced
the Housing is a Human Right Act to address
the root causes of homelessness and
transition the growing number of people
experiencing homelessness into housing and
other shelter.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The Biden administration rejoined the Paris
Agreement and sought to reverse hundreds
of laws and policies passed during the
preceding administration to deregulate the
environmental and energy sectors. Those
laws included the rolling back of rules on coal
ash and coal-fired power plants. However,
the administration did not successfully roll
back all regressive measures and continued
to approve oil drilling projects on federal land.
During 2021, frequent climate changerelated natural disasters across the USA
resulted in destruction and death, including
record-breaking wildfires, hurricanes and
flooding in coastal areas.

INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS
MECHANISMS AND TREATIES
The Biden administration took a number of
positive measures during its first year in office
to endorse and support the international
human rights framework and oversight
mechanisms.
In March, the administration accepted the
majority of recommendations by the Human
Rights Council following the USA’s third UPR,

394

though noted that it only supported some
recommendations in principle that it might
not implement, including closing the
Guantánamo Bay detention facility.
In April, the government rescinded
sanctions against ICC personnel imposed by
the previous administration, though it
continued to reject ICC jurisdiction over
alleged US war crimes in Afghanistan, Iraq or
elsewhere.
In October, the USA rejoined the UN
Human Rights Council, three years after the
preceding administration abandoned its seat
on the body, and issued a standing invitation
to UN Special Procedures. In November, the
UN Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues
conducted a country visit to the USA, which
was the first such mission by a UN Special
Procedure since 2017.
1. “USA: Texas violently strips away right to abortion”, 1 September
2. “USA: Senate must take action to protect human rights”, 1 December
3. Americas: Amnesty International Submission to the United Nations
(UN) Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants (Index:
AMR 01/3658/2021), 8 February
4. Pushed into Harm’s Way: Forced Returns of Unaccompanied Migrant
Children to Danger by the USA and Mexico (Index: AMR
51/4200/2021), 11 June
5. “Right the wrong: decision time on Guantánamo”, 11 January

URUGUAY
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto LacallePou
After initial delays, the Covid-19
vaccination programme made progress.
Nevertheless, policies to address the
pandemic were not able to reverse preexisting structural inequalities, which were
exacerbated and had a particular impact on
the economic, social and cultural rights of
the most vulnerable sections of the
population. Record rates of imprisonment
often resulted in inhumane prison
conditions. The year saw the highest
number of deaths in prison in recent
history. Violence against women continued
to escalate, with a rise in the number of

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

reported femicides. Although several
military personnel were prosecuted for
crimes against humanity committed during
the civil-military regime (1973-1985), no
substantive progress was made in clarifying
the fate of those forcibly disappeared under
that regime. There were obstacles to
accessing public information, particularly
regarding sexual and reproductive health.

a backward step in terms of transparency
and freedom of information.
Civil society organizations questioned official
statistics regarding crime and expressed
concern that the reduction in crime rates was
the result of public security policies that did
not take into account academic evidence
showing the impact of the pandemic in
lowering crime rates.

BACKGROUND

INHUMANE PRISON CONDITIONS

The political and social agenda was
dominated during the year by social
mobilization to collect sufficient signatures to
trigger a referendum to derogate 135 articles
of the Urgent Consideration Act
(LUC),approved in 2020. National and
international human rights organizations
expressed concern about the impact of the
Act’s broadly worded provisions, which could
negatively impact human rights, in particular
public security, the rights of prisoners and
freedom of expression.

Already harsh prison conditions deteriorated
during the year. According to official data
provided by the Parliamentary Commissioner
for the Penitentiary System, the prison
population increased steadily, reaching
13,852 inmates in December. According
to the World Prison Brief, in 2021, Uruguay
had the highest rate of incarceration per
capita in South America. In the context of
intense overcrowding and insanitary
conditions, the number of people who died in
prison from natural causes rose by 154% in
2021 compared to the previous year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Eight journalists faced legal actions for the
content of their reports, mostly initiated by
members of parliament or the government.
In June, the House of Representatives
approved an “emphatic rejection” of a report,
published by the German news network
Deutsche Welle, that alleged that freedom of
the press was under threat in Uruguay and
that there were restrictions on the right of
access to public information.

RIGHT TO INFORMATION
Several public information requests received
no or unsatisfactory responses.
Information about sexual and reproductive
rights, previously issued periodically, was not
published in 2021.
Authorities refused access to the contracts
with the Covid-19 vaccine providers.
A bill to amend Law No.18.381 on access to
public information was under consideration
by parliament at the end of the year. If
approved, the amendments would put
additional conditions on requests for, and so
restrict access to, information and represent

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Seventeen current or retired members of the
military and police were convicted of torture,
kidnapping and killing under the civil-military
regime in the 1970s and 1980s. No
substantive progress was made in the search
for victims of enforced disappearances
during that time as no new evidence was
found at the excavation zones and those
suspected of criminal responsibility did not
provide any new information.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
According to the Centre for Economic
Research and the UN Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean, the
policies adopted by the government were
insufficient to redress the impact of the
pandemic on poverty, employment and
economic activity. In addition, decisions over
cuts in public spending, public wages and
pensions led to lower real wages, and cuts in
public spending had a significant impact on

395

people’s well-being, especially those living in
situations of vulnerability.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Although the roll-out of the vaccination
programme was delayed due to the late
purchase of supplies, it managed to reach
78% of the population with at least with one
dose and 75% with two doses. This led to a
lifting of restrictions and a reduction in the
number of patients in intensive care and
coupled with the country’s robust universal
health system, resulted in a positive health
situation as regards Covid-19 towards the
end of 2021.
Public policy failed to address increasing
mental health needs, despite calls for
improvements in this area by specialists.
According to the Ministry of Health, in 2021
there was a 20% increase in the suicide rate
compared to the mean average of the
previous five years.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Pregnancies in girls under 15 remained a
largely unacknowledged problem, despite 60
births and 47 abortions involving girls in that
age group in 2020, the latest year for which
statistics were available.
Although there was a protocol in place for
the care of children under 15 who are
pregnant and a notification system for health
teams dealing with such cases, public policy
in this area remained inadequate. In addition,
comprehensive sexuality education was not
implemented in a comprehensive and
consistent manner.
The abortion law in Uruguay, which was
changed in 2012, allows first trimester
abortion on request. However, difficulties in
accessing abortion persisted in rural areas,
where health centres were less accessible,
and medical professionals refused to perform
abortions on grounds of conscience. In
addition, political figures made speeches
seeking to discourage abortion among people
living in poverty; such discriminatory
statements could signal a major setback for
sexual and reproductive rights in the country.

396

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the Observatory on GenderBased Violence and Access to Justice, the
number of femicides increased in 2021; 30
femicides were recorded. Changes by the
Ministry of the Interior in the way reports of
gender-based violence are registered had a
direct impact on statistics, as repeated
offences by the same individuals were no
longer recorded as separate incidents, but
rather as a single complaint.
There were also obstacles to the
implementation of the law on gender-based
violence (Law No. 19.580) because of the
failure to allocate the resources needed to
establish multipurpose courts able to deal
with all matters related to gender-based
violence.

UZBEKISTAN
Republic of Uzbekistan
Head of state: Shavkat Mirziyoyev
Head of government: Abdulla Aripov
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly
remained tightly restricted. Major progress
was reported in the eradication of forced
labour in the cotton sector. Some
safeguards against torture and other illtreatment were introduced, although reports
of such abuse continued. Over 2,000
people remained imprisoned for their
peaceful religious beliefs. Violence against
women remained widespread. Consensual
sexual relations between men remained a
criminal offence.

BACKGROUND
Ongoing reforms slowed or were rolled back.
Political and civil activists complained of
harassment, surveillance and threats ahead
of the presidential election, from which
independent candidates were effectively
barred. A new draft criminal code was
published in February but not adopted before
the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Lack of transparency in the disbursement of
the government’s US$1 billion fund
designated to address the Covid-19
pandemic, a budget which increased severalfold within months, raised concerns over
corruption. Vaccination was made mandatory
for several categories of workers, military
personnel and government officials, with
employees threatened with suspension for
refusing.
Other developments also took a further toll
on the economy, including a drought.
The Taliban seizure of power in
neighbouring Afghanistan reignited concerns
about radical Islam.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Restrictions on the right to freedom of
expression continued. The draft criminal
code retained defamation and insult as
crimes, as well as the broadly defined
offences of production or dissemination of
“materials containing ideas of religious
extremism, separatism and fundamentalism”.
In March, insulting the president became a
crime punishable by five years’
imprisonment.
Media outlets exercised self-censorship and
faced new legislative restrictions and other
constraints, with official pre-approval
reportedly expected before publication of
sensitive material. Prosecution, fines and
imprisonment of critical voices, typically
bloggers, served to intimidate others.
In May, anti-corruption blogger Otabek
Sattoriy was sentenced to six and a half
years’ imprisonment on questionable charges
of slander and extortion. Following an
argument with the judge over media
coverage, three journalists and a
businesswoman who published a video of the
dispute, were themselves convicted in
November of libel and insulting and
disobeying the authorities. One journalist was
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment, the
others received non-custodial sentences.
Blogger Valijon Kalonov was detained in
August and charged with insulting the
president, after he called for an election

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

boycott; he remained in detention pending
trial at the end of the year.

FORCED LABOUR
In January, the ILO reported “major progress”
in the eradication of abusive practices in the
2020 cotton harvest. With only isolated
instances of child labour reported, the
number of people “subject to direct or
perceived forms of coercion” declined by
33% compared to 2019, to 4% (of a total of 2
million cotton pickers, two-thirds of them
women).

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The draft criminal code aligned the definition
of torture following UN bodies’
recommendations, but left controversial
provisions allowing for a statute of limitations,
amnesties and victim-perpetrator
“reconciliation”. Additional safeguards
against torture were introduced in June,
including creating “public groups” under the
Parliamentary Human Rights Ombudsman
for independent monitoring of penitentiary
and other closed institutions.
However, independent human rights experts
remained concerned that institutional
problems were unaddressed and torture in
custody remained widespread, even if less
often publicly reported. Of the reported
deaths in custody, allegations of torture in
two districts – from Nishan (May) and
Takhiatash (July) – were “checked” internally
by the Interior Ministry and dismissed as
unfounded. A similar report from Denau
district (July) resulted in the arrest of two
police officers, but they were later cleared of
charges. In December, two road traffic police
officers from Samarkand region were each
sentenced to two years and 10 months’
imprisonment, for causing death by
negligence and abuse of authority, following
the death of a driver in their custody.
A human rights group reported in April that
the infamous Jaslyk prison, officially closed in
2019, could still be holding up to 100
prisoners.
In May, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention concluded that imprisoned former

397

diplomat Kadyr Yusupov had been arbitrarily
deprived of his liberty and that his “credible
allegations of torture and ill-treatment” had
not been duly investigated. However,
Uzbekistan ignored its call for his immediate
release and compensation. The authorities
failed to respond promptly to complaints by
Kadyr Yusupov that he had been beaten by
other prisoners in September and October.
International NGOs reported that men
arrested for alleged consensual same-sex
relationships were still being subjected to
forced anal examinations.

Obstacles to the registration of organizations
remained.
NGOs and political parties in particular
continued to face arbitrary denial of
registration for minor or questionable
technical infringements. In August, the
Justice Ministry arbitrarily rejected the
registration of Human Rights House,
submitted by Agzam Turgunov and his
colleagues for the eighth time since 2019. In
September, the group appealed the decision
in court and resubmitted the application.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF

Violence against women, including domestic
violence, remained widespread, but no
comprehensive statistics were available. In
January, the Interior Ministry released
information on the use of protective orders in
2020, the year they were first introduced. A
total of 14,774 women had received such
orders, 73% of which had been granted on
account of physical and other domestic
violence. However, in June the Ministry
rejected a request by the NGO NeMolchi for
information on prosecutions for violence
against women, claiming it was “to no
purpose”.

A new law On Freedom of Conscience and
Religious Organizations was enacted in July,
without prior public consultation. It made
some improvements, such as simplifying
registration of religious organizations and
removing the administrative penalty for
wearing religious clothing in public. The
same month, however, five UN Special
Rapporteurs expressed concern at the
continuing ban on missionary activities and
non-state-approved religious education, and
effective censorship of religious literature.
The production and distribution of religious
materials was not included as a crime in the
draft criminal code, but remained an
administrative offence.
The US Commission on International
Religious Freedom reported in October “that
over 2,000 individuals remain[ed] imprisoned
by the Uzbekistan government for peacefully
practicing their religious beliefs”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
In the draft criminal code, violating the
unduly restrictive rules on public assemblies
and the “unlawful formation of a public
association or religious organization”
remained crimes punishable by
imprisonment.
In March, two policy documents were
approved committing the government to
provide administrative and financial support
to civil society organizations and to improve
the legal framework for their operation.

398

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
“Sodomy” remained a crime, including in the
draft criminal code. In response to a media
query from Qalampir.uz, in April the Interior
Ministry reported that 49 individuals were
serving prison terms for this “crime” and
receiving regular “psychological services” to
prevent them committing this “offence”
again. Forty-four individuals were convicted
of “sodomy” between 2016 and 2020.

VENEZUELA
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Head of state and government: Nicolás Maduro Moros
The ongoing human rights crisis was
compounded by the effects of the Covid-19
pandemic. The policy of repression
implemented by the government of Nicolás

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Maduro continued, including further reports
of extrajudicial executions, excessive use of
force, arbitrary detentions and torture and
other ill-treatment against those perceived
as critical of the government. Human rights
defenders, journalists and activists were
subjected to intimidation, harassment,
attacks and detention. The humanitarian
emergency worsened and violations of
economic, social, cultural and
environmental rights persisted, with an
increasingly weakened healthcare system
and shortages of water, fuel, food and
electricity. Impunity for human rights
violations remained the norm. The UN FactFinding Mission (FFM) on Venezuela
documented and condemned systemic
impunity, and the ICC Office of the
Prosecutor found there were grounds to
believe that crimes against humanity had
been committed in Venezuela and
announced the opening of a formal
investigation.

rights defenders and others perceived as
opponents of the Maduro government.
Roland Carreño, a journalist and member of
the Popular Will party arbitrarily detained in
October 2020, remained held charged with
“terrorism” and other offences under the
Organic Law on Organized Crime and
Financing of Terrorism.
At least two people who had been arbitrarily
detained – Salvador Franco, a member of the
Pemon Indigenous people, and Gabriel
Medina, who had had health problems for
over a month – died in detention without
adequate medical attention, according to
Foro Penal.
The family and lawyer of Raúl Isaías Baduel,
who died in October, allegedly due to
Covid-19 complications, in the custody of the
Bolivarian National Intelligence Service
(SEBIN), called for a full investigation into the
circumstances surrounding his death.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS

A new criminal investigation into the enforced
disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture
and death of Rafael Acosta Arevalo in 2019
failed to include any chain-of-command
responsibility.
In September, the FFM reported that the
authorities routinely failed to investigate
allegations of torture. In 67 of the 183 cases
it documented, prisoners were brought to
court with visible signs of ill-treatment. In
some cases, torture allegations did not
appear in the court records, while in others
the Public Prosecutor’s Office was ordered to
initiate a formal investigation. However,
families and defence lawyers told the FFM
that they were not aware of any progress in
these proceedings.
The FFM also documented the practice of
kidnapping or detaining the relatives of
people targeted as part of the strategy of
repression to force them to present
themselves to the authorities (known as
“Sippenhaft”).
Allegations of torture and other ill-treatment
during initial periods of enforced
disappearance were common.

The security forces, including the Special
Action Forces of the Bolivarian National
Police (FAES), continued to carry out
extrajudicial executions. In January, 14
people were killed during a security operation
in the La Vega neighbourhood of Caracas, the
capital, in circumstances suggesting that they
had been extrajudically executed.1
According to the UN Fact-Finding Mission
(FFM), by March, more than 200 people had
been killed by police forces. The FFM stated
it would investigate the circumstances of the
killings and FAES involvement.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Politically motivated arbitrary detentions
continued as part of a government policy of
repression. According to the human rights
organization Foro Penal (Penal Forum), a
further 44 people were detained, bringing the
total number of people held in politically
motivated arbitrary detention at the end of
the year to 244. Among them were political
activists, students, military personnel, human

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES,
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

399

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Several security operations against criminal
gangs took place in Caracas during which
police and military forces used unlawful and
unnecessary force. There were reports of
several deaths caused by stray bullets in two
operations in January and July.

IMPUNITY
Impunity prevailed for human rights violations
and crimes under international law.2 The
FFM expressed deep concern about the
state’s willingness to prosecute those
suspected of criminal responsibility for
human rights violations, stating: “the State is
not taking tangible, concrete and progressive
steps to remedy violations, combat impunity
and redress the victims through domestic
investigations and prosecutions.”
Authorities announced the establishment of
a commission for judicial reform. However,
the person appointed to lead this had been
named by the FFM as probably responsible
for crimes against humanity and was a
National Assembly representative, casting
doubt on his independence and impartiality.
The military officer charged in connection
with the death in 2017 of David Vallenilla
during a peaceful demonstration was
acquitted in September. However, the
Attorney General Office appealed against this
and in October he was sentenced to 23
years. The command responsibility was yet to
be investigated.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Criminal proceedings and courts continued to
be misused to silence dissent. The use of
military jurisdiction for civilians and special
“terrorism” courts was common. Authorities
denied detainees visits from families and
lawyers on the pretext of Covid-19
restrictions, leaving many in incommunicado
detention and without adequate time to
prepare their defence.
In its report, the FFM stated that the justice
system “played a significant role in the State’s
repression of Government opponents. The
effects of the deterioration of the rule of law

400

extend beyond those directly affected and
impact society as a whole.”

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Efforts to seek truth, justice and reparation
through international mechanisms, in the
absence of effective national remedies,
continued to be thwarted by the authorities’
attempts to avoid international scrutiny. The
Maduro government did not recognize the
jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights or the oversight of the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
(IACHR), despite several rulings and
recommendations from both organizations.
Although the OHCHR maintained the
mandate for technical cooperation with
officials in the Maduro government and
oversight of the human rights situation,
invitations to special rapporteurs and treaty
bodies such as the Special Rapporteurs on
human rights defenders, on freedom of
assembly and on extrajudicial killings, and
the Working Group on Arbitrary Detentions,
among others, to visit the country remained
pending. In February, the Special Rapporteur
on the Negative Impact of Unilateral Coercive
Measures on the Enjoyment of Human Rights
visited Venezuela.
In November, the ICC Office of the
Prosecutor opened an investigation into the
situation of Venezuela. In a visit to Caracas,
the Prosecutor signed a memorandum of
understanding with the authorities, who
committed to fully cooperate with the
investigations, although they did not agree
that the criteria had been met to move the
investigation forward.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Political opponents, real and perceived, of
the Maduro government faced constant
attacks and harassment and were at risk of
arbitrary detention, torture and other human
rights violations, as part of a long-standing
policy of repression.
In July, Freddy Guevara, a high-profile
member of Popular Will, was arbitrarily
detained in Caracas and held for over a

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

month. Although the government
subsequently allowed him to join negotiations
between the Maduro government and the
opposition in Mexico City, his detention was
emblematic of the ongoing repression.
Media outlets close to the governing party,
such as the national TV programme Con El
Mazo Dando, continued to stigmatize and
attack human rights defenders and others
perceived as government opponents.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
According to the Venezuelan Observatory of
Social Conflict, a local NGO, between January
and June, there were 3,393 protests. These
were largely over economic, social and
cultural rights, such as labour rights,
healthcare services, high food prices and
lack of basic services, including fuel. At least
59 protests were attacked by the police,
military or pro-government armed groups,
resulting in the death of one protester and
injuries to seven others.
The Venezuelan NGO Espacio Público
(Public Space) reported that between
January and August there were more than
292 attacks on the press and journalists,
including harassment and intimidation,
arbitrary detention, censorship and digital
attacks. These attacks compounded the lack
of transparency regarding epidemiological
data on the Covid-19 pandemic.
The National Telecommunications
Commission (Conatel) banned several
programmes, including Punto de Corte Radio
aired on Radio Fe y Alegría, and one of the
country’s main newspapers.
A court ruled against one of the main
newspapers in Venezuela, El Nacional, which
was fined the equivalent of US$13 million
after losing a court case for defamation
relating to Diosdado Cabello, a high-ranking
government official.
In October, police raided the home of
journalist Roberto Deniz, from the Armando
Info portal; he and his family had been
granted precautionary measures by the
IACHR in 2020.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Journalist Luis Carlos Díaz remained subject
to severe restrictions and prosecution.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The crackdown on and criminalization of civil
society and human rights defenders
intensified.
In January, five members of Azul Positivo, a
humanitarian organization, were arbitrarily
detained and charged with offences including
“terrorism”. They were conditionally released
in February, but remained subject to
restrictions and prosecution at the end of the
year.
In March, the government approved an
administrative regulation requiring local
NGOs to register with an “anti-terrorism”
oversight organization and disclose
confidential and sensitive information about
victims of human rights violations and how
the NGOs are funded and function. Following
international pressure, the government
reversed some of these provisions. However,
the regulation remained in place and local
organizations risked criminalization under the
Organic Law on Organized Crime and
Financing of Terrorism if they failed to
register. National and international
organizations viewed this administrative
regulation as a clear crackdown on human
rights defenders and humanitarian workers.
In July, Javier Tarazona, Rafael Tarazona
and Omar de Dios García, members of the
local NGO FundaREDES, were arbitrarily
detained by SEBIN officers. They were
charged with inciting hatred, treason and
“terrorism”. Despite numerous requests, their
chosen legal representatives were denied
accreditation to appear before the court. All
three were awaiting initial pre-trial hearings at
the end of the year. Rafael Tarazona and
Omar de Dios García were conditionally
released in October. Javier Tarazona, who
had a serious health condition that required
urgent attention, remained in detention.
According to the Centre for Human Rights
Defenders and Justice, in 2021 there were
743 attacks against human rights defenders,
an increase of 145% compared to 2020.

401

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Despite border closures and restrictions on
movement due to the pandemic, the number
of Venezuelans fleeing the country to escape
mass human rights violation continued to
rise, reaching 6 million by the end of the
year. Many continued to use unofficial
crossings, including by sea in precarious
vessels and overland via hazardous routes,
leading to reports of deaths at sea as well as
at border crossings. (For violations of the
rights of Venezuelan refugees in Curaçao, see
Netherlands entry.)

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The complex humanitarian emergency in the
country continued to intensify.
According to the OHCHR, access to basic
services during the pandemic, including
medical assistance, water, gas, food and
gasoline, was limited and deteriorating.
The UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs announced that 2.7
million people had received aid of some kind
by 31 August as part of the Humanitarian
Response Plan.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The infrastructure of the healthcare system
continued to deteriorate.
Public data related to Covid-19 was unclear.
The local NGO Médicos Unidos (United
Doctors) reported that more than 815 health
professionals had died of Covid-19 since
March 2020; authorities withheld detailed
figures of deaths of health workers.
Access to Covid-19 vaccines was one of the
main challenges, as well as the use of
vaccines that had not been deemed safe and
effective by objective and independent
regulatory agencies. No national vaccination
plan was published. Health personnel
continued to demand protective equipment
as well as salary increases.
The shortage of antiretrovirals stood at
58.68% between January and June,
according to the NGO Acción Ciudadana
Contra el SIDA (Citizen Action Against AIDS).
Civil society organizations continued to
demand the reactivation of the Organ

402

Procurement Programme, suspended four
years earlier.
The WHO registered a yellow fever
outbreak.
RIGHT TO FOOD
The OHCHR noted that a third of
Venezuelans suffered from food insecurity.
The Centre for Documentation and Analysis
for Workers calculated the cost of the basic
basket of goods at US$260.77 a month in
October, while the monthly minimum wage
was US$1.66.
In July, the World Food Programme
announced assistance for children under six
in areas it identified as most affected by food
insecurity.
The food distribution system, Local Supply
and Production Committees, continued
operating but did not meet nutritional needs,
according to Bengoa Foundation.
According to the National Survey of Living
Conditions, 94.5% of the population was
living in poverty while 76.6% was living in
extreme poverty.
RIGHT TO WATER
Failures in the supply of drinking water and
sanitation continued, sparking protests in
local communities.
In June, the National Assembly approved
the Draft Organic Water Law; there were
concerns about the law’s lack of a human
rights perspective.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Lack of access to sexual and reproductive
health services remained a concern.
High costs and restrictions related to the
pandemic prevented access to contraception.
The UN Population Fund carried out
activities in some communities to help
reduce maternal mortality and facilitate
access to contraceptives.
The IACHR urged Venezuela to eliminate
barriers preventing access to sexual and
reproductive health services and to review its
restrictive legislation on abortion.
Vannesa Rosales, a human rights defender
in Merida state – arbitrarily detained in
October 2020 for providing a 13-year-old girl,
who was pregnant as a result of rape, with

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

information on abortion – was released on 21
July after spending nine months detained, six
of them under house arrest.3

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Lack of medical care, adequate food and
drinking water, unsanitary conditions,
overcrowding and violence in prisons and
other detention centres persisted.
Malnutrition and tuberculosis were the main
causes of deaths in prisons, according to the
Venezuelan Observatory of Prisons and A
Window to Freedom, two local NGOs.
According to the Venezuelan Observatory of
Prisons, 94 detainees died in custody, most
due to malnutrition.
A Window to Freedom reported
overcrowding in preventive detention centres
of 292%, while the Venezuelan Observatory
of Prisons pointed out that overcrowding in
other prisons reached 198% and that 56% of
the prison population was held in pre-trial
detention.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
There was a lack of legislation and public
policies guaranteeing the rights of LGBTI
people. The IACHR called on the state to take
effective measures to recognize the rights of
LGBTI people and to eradicate
discrimination, violence and situations of
vulnerability to which they are exposed.
WOMEN
The Attorney General’s Office announced that
there were 72 prosecutorial offices
nationwide specializing in criminal
investigations into gender-based violence.
Local NGOs continued to report that
prosecutors, judges, police officers and other
officials remained ill-equipped to protect
women's rights and women were often revictimized as a result of institutional violence.
The lack of detailed official data made it
difficult to assess the situation of genderbased violence. However the Centre for
Justice and Peace (CEPAZ) documented 235
femicides in Venezuela between January and
October.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

CEPAZ criticized the lack of state protection
for breast cancer survivors, requested by the
IACHR in 2020.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
The situation of the Orinoco Mining Arc and
illegal mining remained of concern and
continued to seriously affect the rights of
Indigenous peoples, who were subjected to
abuses including labour exploitation and
gender-based violence.
Covid-19, malaria, tuberculosis, hepatitis
and gastrointestinal and respiratory diseases,
as well as a measles epidemic, were among
the health issues affecting Indigenous
peoples during the year, according to civil
society organizations.
1. Venezuela: Impunity in the Face of Lethal Policy of Social Control
(Index: AMR 53/3632/2021), 18 February
2. Venezuela: Human Rights Lose Whilst Impunity Prevails: Amnesty
International Submission for the UN Universal Periodic Review, 40th
Session of the UPR Working Group, January 2022 (Index: AMR
53/4488/2021), 23 July
3. Venezuela: Urgent Action: Women and Girls’ Rights Defender is Free
(Index: AMR 53/4508/2021), 22 July

VIET NAM
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
Head of state: Nguyễn Xuân Phúc (replaced Nguyễn
Phú Trọng in April)
Head of government: Phạm Minh Chính (replaced
Nguyễn Xuân Phúc in April)
A severe crackdown on both online and
offline dissent occurred during the
Communist Party of Viet Nam (CPV)
National Conference and national elections.
Independent journalists, publishers and
other government critics were arrested and
charged under repressive laws. Human
rights defenders were subjected to
widespread harassment, unlawful digital
surveillance, arbitrary arrest and politically
motivated prosecution. Torture and other illtreatment continued to be reported. Harsh
lockdown measures to curb the spread of
Covid-19 disproportionately impacted the
most vulnerable and authorities meted out
harsh penalties against those who violated

403

Covid-19 regulations. Informal workers
faced acute pandemic-related hardship due
to inadequate social assistance, and young
LGBTI people were at heighted risk of
discrimination.

BACKGROUND
A new Party Central Committee and Politburo
was elected at the 13th National Congress of
the CPV in January to lead the party and the
country for the next five years. The election
results meant continuity of the ruling party’s
repressive approach to dissent and human
rights. National Assembly elections followed
on 23 May. They confirmed the formal
election of legislators and the re-election of
Prime Minister Phạm Minh Chính.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Intolerance of dissent hardened further
throughout the year and the right to freedom
of expression continued to be restricted.
Arbitrary arrests and prosecutions of
journalists, publishers and others who
criticized the government or the CPV
increased.
Before the National Assembly elections in
May, the authorities initiated a crackdown on
independent election candidates and those
critical of the election process. In March,
political commentator Trần Quốc Khánh and
citizen journalist Lê Trọng Hùng were
arrested under Article 117 of the 2015
Criminal Code, which criminalizes “making,
storing or spreading information, materials or
items for the purpose of opposing the State of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam” and
carries a sentence of up to 20 years’
imprisonment. Both had applied to be
independent (or “self-nominated”)
candidates for the National Assembly
elections. On 31 December, Lê Trọng Hùng
was sentenced to five years in prison and five
years’ probation. In March, police arrested
medical doctor Nguyễn Duy Hướng for
writing articles on his Facebook account that
were critical of government policies.1
Critics of the government’s response to the
Covid-19 pandemic also faced harsh

404

punishments. In early August, police arrested
Trần Hoàng Huấn for sharing criticism of the
government’s Covid-19 response on
Facebook. On 2 September, police fined
Facebook user Nguyễn Thùy Dương 5
million Vietnamese Dong (approximately
US$210) after she shared an online post
criticizing the authorities for neglecting Ho
Chi Minh City residents and allowing them to
go hungry during Covid-19 lockdowns. In
October, four people were arrested and
charged under various articles of the Criminal
Code for posting comments on Facebook that
were critical of the government’s response to
Covid-19. They remained in detention at
year’s end.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In February, an investigation by Amnesty
International revealed a campaign of unlawful
surveillance targeting human rights
defenders conducted between February
2018 and November 2020. The spyware
attacks were attributed to a group known as
Ocean Lotus, and targeted Vietnamese
activists both inside and outside the country.
Among them was Bùi Thanh Hiếu, a blogger
and pro-democracy activist residing in
Germany. The Vietnamese Overseas Initiative
for Conscience Empowerment (VOICE), a
non-profit organization supporting
Vietnamese refugees and promoting human
rights in Viet Nam with offices in the USA and
the Philippines, was also targeted.2
Prominent journalist, author and human
rights defender Phạm Đoan Trang, who was
arrested in October 2020, was sentenced to
nine years’ imprisonment by The People’s
Court of Hanoi on 14 December 2021. She
was charged under Article 88 of the 1999
Penal Code for “storing, distributing or
disseminating information, documents and
items against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam”, in relation to articles she had written
about the environment and human rights,
and interviews she gave to foreign media
outlets. Prior to her trial, Phạm Đoan Trang
had been held in incommunicado detention
for over a year.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

Another prominent human rights defender,
Nguyễn Thúy Hạnh, was arrested on 7 April
and charged under Article 117 of the
Criminal Code. She is the founder of the
“50K Fund”, which fundraises to provide
support for the families of unlawfully detained
persons in Viet Nam, and she frequently
discussed human rights issues on Facebook.
On 5 May, two land rights activists, Cấn Thị
Thêu and her son Trịnh Bá Tư, were
convicted under Article 117 of the Criminal
Code and sentenced to eight years’
imprisonment followed by three years’
probation for their peaceful advocacy of land
rights. They had been arrested in June 2020
together with Trịnh Bá Phương (another son
of Cấn Thị Thêu) and fellow land rights
activist Nguyễn Thị Tâm. The four had
spoken out about a high-profile land dispute
in Đồng Tâm village near the capital, Hanoi,
in which a clash during a police raid in
January 2020 resulted in the deaths of an
84-year-old village leader and three police
officers. In December, Trịnh Bá Phương and
Nguyễn Thị Tâm were sentenced respectively
to 10 years in prison with five years’
probation, and six years’ imprisonment with
three years’ probation. Before his trial, Trịnh
Bá Phương was held incommunicado for 16
months, with all requests for family visits
denied by authorities.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment of
prisoners remained widespread. In March,
Amnesty International revealed that political
activist Nguyễn Văn Đức Độ, who was
serving an 11-year prison sentence, had
been kept in solitary confinement since May
2020 in inhumane conditions at Xuân Lộc
prison in Đồng Nai province. His prolonged
solitary confinement and ill-treatment by
prison guards severely affected his mental
health.3

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Responding to a surge in Covid-19 infection
rates in late August, the authorities imposed
harsh and disproportionate lockdown
measures in the hardest-hit regions. There

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

were several lockdowns in Ho Chi Minh City
under which residents were not permitted to
leave their homes for a total of 16 weeks.
This included a four-week-long militaryenforced lockdown starting in late August
when, forced to rely on the military to deliver
food and other supplies, many people,
especially the already vulnerable, were left in
a position of severe food insecurity and
hunger.4
The authorities also imposed criminal
punishments against individuals who failed to
abide by lockdown regulations. On 6
September, the People’s Court in Cà Mau
province sentenced Lê Văn Trí to five years’
imprisonment for breaking Covid-19
regulations and “spreading the virus”. On 30
March, the People's Court of Ho Chi Minh
City handed a two-year suspended prison
term to flight attendant Dương Tấn Hậu
under the same charge of “spreading
dangerous infectious diseases”.

DISCRIMINATION
The Covid-19 pandemic affected all sectors
of Vietnamese society, but some groups were
disproportionately affected, including LGBTI
people, and women migrant workers
including informal sector workers.
Some young LGBTI people reported
undergoing intense difficulties as a result of
being confined in their family homes during
lockdowns, where they faced discrimination
and violence from relatives because of their
sexual orientation or gender identity.
Government-supported research revealed
that women migrant workers from within Viet
Nam, including street vendors, suffered
especially severe economic effects. Many
reported experiencing food insecurity and
struggling to meet other basic needs because
of a lack of work opportunities and
inadequate social assistance from the
government.
1. “Viet Nam: Fresh crackdown as National Assembly election looms”, 1
April
2. “Viet Nam: Click and Bait: Vietnamese human rights defenders
targeted with spyware attacks”, 24 February

405

3. Viet Nam: Activist Tortured, Held in Solitary Confinement for Over 300
Days (Index: ASA 41/3878/2021), 23 March
4. “Viet Nam: As Ho Chi Minh City extends Covid-19 restrictions,
militarized response must respect human rights”, 13 September

YEMEN
Republic of Yemen
Head of state: Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi
Head of government: Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed
All parties to the conflict in Yemen
continued to commit violations of
international humanitarian and human
rights law with impunity. The Saudi Arabialed coalition, supporting the internationally
recognized Yemeni government, and Huthi
forces continued to carry out attacks that
unlawfully killed and injured civilians and
destroyed civilian objects, including food
infrastructure. Southern Transitional
Council (STC) forces carried out summary
killings. Parties to the conflict carried out
harassment, arbitrary detentions, enforced
disappearances, torture and other illtreatment, and unfair trials, against
individuals on the basis of their political,
religious or professional affiliations, their
peaceful activism or their gender. All parties
perpetrated gender-based violence and
discrimination. The government and STC
used lethal violence to repress largely
peaceful protests demanding measures to
address the deteriorating economic
situation. Parties to the conflict impeded
the flow of food, medicine, fuel and
humanitarian aid. The Huthi de facto
authorities prevented Covid-19
vaccinations. Saudi Arabia and Bahrain
lobbied state members of the UN Human
Rights Council (HRC) against renewing the
Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen (UN GEE),
forcing the termination of the only
international, impartial investigative
mechanism for Yemen. All parties to the
conflict contributed to environmental
degradation. Death sentences were handed
down and executions carried out.

406

BACKGROUND
The armed conflict continued throughout
2021, markedly escalating in February and
September when Huthi forces launched
offensives against government forces in
Ma’arib, Dahle’, al-Bayda and Shabwa
governorates. This resulted in unprecedented
territorial gains for Huthi forces, who by the
end of 2021 were closing in on Ma’arib city.
These and other fronts witnessed
displacement of 573,362 people, according
to the International Organization for
Migration.
Fighting also continued in Aden, Abyan and
Shabwa governorates, including in heavily
populated areas, between the United Arab
Emirates-backed STC and government
forces, between STC factions, and between
STC forces and local tribes. Although STC
and government representatives restated
their commitment to the Riyadh powersharing agreement, it was still not fully
implemented and STC forces remained
outside of government control.
Despite promising signs of a breakthrough
in political talks between the parties in 2020,
by the end of 2021 the newly appointed UN
Special Envoy for Yemen noted that discord
between the parties was deepening.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition and Huthi
forces continued to conduct indiscriminate
attacks, which killed and injured civilians and
destroyed and damaged civilian objects,
including food distribution facilities.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition carried out
air strikes that killed or injured civilians and
damaged civilian objects. On 21 March, in
Hodeidah governorate, two air strikes hit Salif
grain port, damaging facilities and injuring
five employees. On 14 June, in Khamir
district, Amran governorate, two poultry farms
were hit by missiles that the UN GEE
concluded were likely fired by the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition. The UN GEE expressed
concern that the coalition was failing to take
all feasible measures to protect civilians.
Huthi forces continued to use imprecise
heavy weaponry. Throughout March, they

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

regularly fired such weaponry into the Meel,
Tawasol and Kheir camps for internally
displaced people, close to Ma’arib city,
1-3km from the front line. This killed six
women and three children. On 3 April, in
Rawda neighbourhood, Ma’arib city, a rocket
launched from a Huthi-controlled area killed
one boy and one man and injured three boys.
The UN GEE concluded that these attacks
amounted to war crimes.
In Hodeidah, government forces occupied
the Thabit Brothers food production facility,
using it for military purposes and therefore
rendering it a military target. On 6 and 19
June, Huthi forces shelled the facility,
causing civilian casualties and damaging
food production and water supply.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In Aden, a governorate controlled by STC
forces, there were 38 assassinations or
attempted assassinations of civilians in 2021,
according to SAM for Rights and Liberties.
On 8 September, at al-Farsha checkpoint,
Tur al-Bahah, Lahij governorate, STC forces
stopped and killed a doctor. On 4 October,
unidentified armed men at another
checkpoint in Tur al-Bahah, in an area
controlled by STC forces, stopped and killed
a nurse working for Doctors Without Borders.

ARBITRARY DETENTION, TORTURE AND
UNFAIR TRIALS
All parties to the conflict continued to detain,
forcibly disappear and torture individuals on
the basis of their political, religious or
professional affiliations, their peaceful
activism or their gender.
HUTHI DE FACTO AUTHORITIES
Huthi de facto authorities continued to
arbitrarily detain hundreds of migrant men,
women and children, mostly Ethiopian and
Somali nationals, in poor conditions for
indefinite periods in Sana’a city. On 7 March,
detainees conducted a hunger strike in
protest. Authorities responded by corralling
350 detainees in a locked hangar and firing
projectiles into the building, igniting a fire that
killed 46 detainees and injured 202 others.
The Huthi Ministry of Interior stated that they

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

had started an investigation, found the police
were responsible and arrested 11 personnel.
Huthi de facto authorities continued to
detain four journalists on death row. Amnesty
International documented how journalists
from the same group of detainees, but who
were released in 2020 along with men from
the Baha’i community, were subjected to
enforced disappearance and torture during
their detention, before being forced into exile
as a condition of their release.1
Huthi de facto authorities continued legal
proceedings targeted against Baha’i on the
basis of their religion, and froze or
confiscated assets belonging to 70 members
of the community. They also continued to
arbitrarily detain, since March 2016, a Jewish
man on the basis of his religion, despite
judicial rulings requiring his release.
STC FORCES
In early 2021, in Aden, STC forces arbitrarily
detained two men for criticizing the STC. In
May, in Aden, STC counter-terrorism forces
detained a man whose fate remained unclear
at the end of the year. In September, they
abducted four university students returning
from a trip abroad, while they were transiting
Aden airport. They were released at the end
of September.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND
DISCRIMINATION
All parties to the conflict continued to impose
and exploit patriarchal gender norms, used
gender-based violence and discrimination to
further their objectives, and maintained a
wide range of discriminatory and oppressive
customary and statutory legal provisions.
Yemen was ranked second to worst in the
2021 Global Gender Gap Index.
HUTHI DE FACTO AUTHORITIES
Huthi de facto authorities continued their
campaign of arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearance of women and girls,
particularly women human rights defenders
and those perceived to be challenging Huthienforced gender norms. In 2021 alone, they
detained at least 233 women and girls in
facilities in Sana’a, accusing them of
supporting the coalition, “sex work” or crimes

407

of “immoral acts”. Women, girls and LGBTI
people in these facilities have in the past
been subjected to systematic torture,
including rape and other forms of sexual
violence; cruel and inhuman treatment; and
forced recruitment.
In February in Sana’a, Huthi de facto
authorities arbitrarily detained and forcibly
disappeared actress and model Intisar alHammadi.2 During her detention, she was
interrogated while blindfolded, and physically
and verbally abused. On 5 May, Huthi de
facto authorities asked her to take a “virginity
test”, which she refused. In November, she
was sentenced to five years in prison on
charges of committing an “indecent act”.
In January, the Huthis restricted permission
to purchase contraceptives to “husbands”,
congruent with the stated aim of increasing
the birth rate to serve their military cause.
GOVERNMENT OF YEMEN
In January, the government’s political security
forces in Ma’arib arbitrarily arrested a woman
because her brother had worked for the
Huthis and she later died in custody,
according to the Women’s Solidarity Network.
In July and August, government armed
forces in Ta’iz harassed and assaulted two
women human rights defenders, one of them
living with disabilities, and accused them of
“prostitution” as well as working for the
Huthis. In September, according to Mwatana
for Human Rights, political security forces in
Ma’arib arbitrarily detained and forcibly
disappeared another woman, a human rights
activist and humanitarian worker, for a
month.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
All parties continued to curtail free speech
and assembly of human rights defenders,
journalists, political opponents and perceived
critics.
Throughout September, peaceful protests
were staged against the government and STC
in Aden, Ta’iz and southern governorates,
demanding they address the economic crisis
and deteriorating living conditions. According
to Mwatana for Human Rights, the

408

government and STC violently repressed
these protests, including with gunfire and
grenades. This resulted in STC forces in
Aden killing one man and injuring three boys,
and government forces killing a man and a
boy and injuring another boy in Hadramout
governorate, as well injuring a man in Ta’iz.
The survivors all sustained life-changing
injuries.

RIGHT TO FOOD
The economy continued to collapse.
Devaluation of the Yemeni rial resulted in a
36-45% rise in the cost of living. Prior to this
rise, around 47,000 Yemenis were already
living in famine-like conditions, with 2021
being the first time such conditions emerged
since the beginning of the conflict. More than
50% of the population – around 16.2 million
people – were estimated to be food insecure,
according to the World Food Programme.
All parties to the conflict continued to
impose siege-like conditions, blockades,
obstructions on imports and unnecessary
bureaucracy or restrictions on movement,
which inflated the cost of food, impeded
humanitarian aid and fuelled food insecurity.
The actions undermined famine prevention
and contributed to famine-like conditions.
Between March and June, the Saudi
Arabia-led coalition denied entry to 13
vessels carrying 350,000 tonnes of fuel
derivatives. During 2021, two vessels carrying
fuel derivatives were left waiting for clearance
for approximately 200 days. In addition to
contributing to fuel shortages, which
impacted food production and distribution,
the loss of revenue threatened authorities’
capacity to pay public sector salaries.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The health system continued to be severely
impacted by the armed conflict, economic
and institutional crises, and exacerbated by
Covid-19. Only 50% of health facilities were
fully functional and over 80% of the
population faced difficulties in accessing
healthcare services.
Restrictions by all parties to the conflict
impeded access to medication and medical

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

treatment, including Covid-19 vaccines and
treatment. The continued closure of Sana’a
airport by the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
denied Yemenis life-saving medical
treatment. Covid-19 health surveillance was
limited throughout Yemen, compounded by
Huthi authorities’ refusal to collect or
disseminate data on cases and deaths,
despite healthcare providers identifying
waves of infections and deaths. Huthi
authorities publicly denied the existence of
Covid-19 and spread disinformation about its
seriousness. They refused to carry out
vaccinations and rejected COVAX-initiative
vaccines allocated to them by the
government.
The spread of Covid-19, and inaction or
mismanaged preventative measures by all
parties, compounded structural inequalities,
disproportionately impacting women, girls
and those from marginalized communities.
Only 20% of maternal and child health
services were functioning, according to the
UN Population Fund, leaving 48,000 women
and girls at risk of death during pregnancy or
childbirth.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Intensive Saudi-led lobbying throughout
2021, as well as Bahraini-led opposition to
the renewal of the UN GEE’s mandate at the
HRC in October, resulted in the termination
of the only international, impartial
investigative mechanism for international
humanitarian law violations in Yemen. The
final report of the UN GEE urged the UN
Security Council to refer the situation in
Yemen to the ICC, and called for the creation
of an international criminal investigative body
on the conflict in Yemen.3
In January, the Italian government
permanently stopped issuing export licences
for armaments to be used in Yemen, and
cancelled shipments to Saudi Arabia. The
Rome Public Prosecutor recommenced
investigations into the complicity of the Italian
National Authority for Export of Armaments
and arms manufacturer RWM Italia SpA in a

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

2016 Saudi Arabia-led coalition air strike that
killed six civilians.
In August, lawyers filed a submission on
behalf of Yemeni complainants to the ICC,
requesting an investigation into the criminal
liability of the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
leadership and mercenaries employed by a
US military contractor, for unlawful air strikes
that killed civilians, torture and murder. In
October, they filed the same complaint to the
UK’s Metropolitan Police.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Parties to the conflict were responsible for
environmental degradation across Yemen
through poor governance, cancelling
programming, neglect of legally protected
areas, mismanagement of oil infrastructure,
and placing economic pressure on civilians.
Yemenis resorted to environmentally
damaging coping mechanisms, including
reliance on charcoal, unsustainable fishing
and unsustainable development. This
resulted in increased pollution, deforestation,
soil erosion and loss of biodiversity, which
adversely impacted enjoyment of the rights to
health, food and water.
In June, at Bir Ali oil terminal, Shabwa
governorate, mismanagement of oil
infrastructure led to a pipeline discharging oil
into the sea for four days, close to
an environmentally sensitive coastline. Also in
June, Huthi authorities refused to grant
security assurances to the UN-led technical
assistance team for the tanker FSO Safer.
This left the tanker off the coast of Hodeidah
at increasing risk of spilling its cargo of
1.14m barrels of oil, which would have
devastating consequences for the biologically
sensitive Red Sea coastline, as well as water
scarcity, health, and the food security and
livelihoods of millions of Yemenis and
Eritreans reliant on Red Sea fishing.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences were handed down and
executions took place, including public
executions.

409

1. Yemen: Released and Exiled: Torture, Unfair Trials and Forcible Exile
of Yemenis under Huthi Rule (Index: MDE 31/3907/2021), 27 May
2. “Yemen: Actress arbitrarily detained at risk of forced ‘virginity
testing’”, 7 May
3. “Yemen: Saudi Arabia forces an end to mandate of only international
mechanism to investigate HR abuses”, 7 October

ZAMBIA
Republic of Zambia
Head of state and government: Hakainde Hichilema
(replaced Edgar Chagwa Lungu in August)
Inter-party tensions escalated in the run-up
to the elections; party supporters subjected
their opponents to extreme violence and
there were political killings. Police used live
ammunition against pre-election protesters.
One police officer went on trial in
connection with the 2020 killing of two
unarmed protesters, but many others
continued to enjoy impunity. The authorities
weaponized laws and state institutions to
restrict human rights and intimidate critics.
Medical professionals were harassed and
prosecuted for protesting against poor
working conditions. Persons with albinism
suffered violent attacks. Girls were at
particular risk of widespread gender-based
violence.

BACKGROUND
The United Party for National Development
(UPND), the main opposition party, defeated
the Patriotic Front (PF) in the 12 August
general elections, breaking the PF’s 10-year
rule.
According to the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification, around 1.18 million
people faced acute food insecurity in the
third quarter of the year. By September,
Zambia’s external debt was US$12.91 billion.
Inflation rocketed and, after the elections, the
Zambian kwacha appreciated.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
POLITICAL OPPONENTS
The authorities continued to crack down on
the right to freedom of expression and

410

suppress the human rights of perceived
political opponents. In April, PF supporters
publicly called for the arrest of Sishuwa
Sishuwa, a University of Zambia academic,
on sedition charges. The calls came after he
published an article in online newspaper
News Diggers about the possibility of public
unrest during the August elections. Later that
month, the university announced erroneously
that he was not one of their employees.
The state weaponized criminal defamation
laws to intimidate and silence government
critics. In January, brothers Victor and
Nicholas Sankisa from the Western Province
were arrested for allegedly using insulting
language against the president. The same
charges were brought against Chilufya Tayali,
a leader of the Economic and Equity Party, in
May after he posted a video accusing the
president of encouraging turmoil ahead of the
elections.
Fred Manyaa and Steven Phiri were
sentenced in April to a three and a one-year
prison sentence, respectively, with hard
labour, for insulting then President Lungu.
Their convictions related to incidents in
March 2018 and March 2019, respectively.
In March, the president enacted the Cyber
Crimes and Cyber Security Act. It was widely
criticized for containing provisions which may
be used to target government critics,
suppressing the right to freedom of
expression, and allowing the policing of
cyberspace. In April, five civil society
organizations petitioned the Constitutional
Court, arguing that the law violated the
human rights guaranteed under the
constitution.
The Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting Services
threatened to close down the internet ahead
of polling day. On election day, there was a
partial shutdown and social media apps like
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp
were disrupted. Civil society organizations
challenged the move and the high court
ordered the restoration of internet services on
13 August.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

JOURNALISTS AND MEDIA
The authorities continued to attack,
intimidate and harass radio broadcasters that
hosted opposition figures, in some cases
damaging their property. In February, PF
cadres attempted to disrupt a Liberty Radio
programme which featured Harry Kalaba, the
leader of the Democratic Party, causing
damage to property. In the same month, they
disrupted a live Radio Luswepo programme
which was hosting Harry Kalaba, again
damaging the studio’s property. In March,
they fired tear gas into the Radio Chete studio
in Nakonde for airing a programme which
featured the UPND provincial chairman. In
June, unidentified people set fire to
Kalungwishi radio station in Chiengi district in
the early hours of the morning.
The authorities continued to try and close
leading private media outlets by using the
Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) to
intimidate, harass and threaten them with
closure for hosting discussions with
opposition political parties, saying it was
“unprofessional conduct”. The IBA issued
several warnings against Muvi TV and in May
it was given a final warning.
In May, journalists Francis Mwiinga and
Nancy Malwele, who covered PF intra-party
factional disputes, were injured in an attack
by PF supporters, who also seized their
equipment. In July, UPND cadres attacked
journalist Victor Mwila, from Ikelen’gi district.
The authorities later replaced the equipment
that had been taken from him by his
attackers.
In August, the IBA granted Prime Television
an operating licence, 16 months after
withdrawing it on “public interest” grounds.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Former police officer Jeyson Musonda was
arrested on 2 June for staging a one-man
demonstration against the Inspector General
of Police and his use of police officers to
abuse people.
The police threatened to arrest Brian
Sampa, president of the Resident Doctors
Association of Zambia (RDAZ), after he
convened a meeting on 19 May calling for

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

strike action over poor working conditions
and arrears in the payment of doctors’
salaries and allowances. On 30 May, when
the strike began, police arrested Chikonde
Mukula, Secretary General of RDAZ, and
charged him with espionage. The charges
were later dropped after civil society activists
intervened. In June, Brian Sampa was
sacked from a government post by the
Ministry of Health, for inciting doctors to
participate in a week-long go-slow. In the
same month, the Police Inspector General
threatened to arrest anyone attending Zoom
meetings, under the newly enacted cyber
crimes law.
Tensions escalated ahead of the elections,
with violence by both PF and UPND cadres.
Police used live ammunition and tear gas on
5 June in the Copperbelt Province to disperse
unarmed UPND supporters who were
escorting the party leader Hakainde
Hichilema’s convoy. On 15 June, the
Electoral Commission of Zambia suspended
electoral campaigns for 14 days in the
Lusaka, Mpulungu, Nakonde and Namwala
districts.
In July, a Socialist Party council candidate
was murdered by unidentified people who
then set fire to his body. Later that month,
two PF youths were murdered in Kanyama
township by suspected UPND supporters.
Following their deaths, President Lungu
deployed the army, air force and national
service to assist police with law and order in
the election run-up. On election day, the PF
Provincial Chairperson for the North West
Province, Jackson Kungo, was murdered. His
killers were suspected to be UPND cadres.
Several other people, accused of trying to rig
the election in Solwezi, were manhandled
and injured.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS AND IMPUNITY
In February, police constable Fanwell
Nyundu was arrested on two counts of
murder and went on trial in November. The
charges related to the December 2020 killing
of two unarmed protesters after police
opened fire on UPND supporters who had

411

gathered in solidarity with Hakainde
Hichilema in the capital, Lusaka.
In June, the coroner found that the police
were responsible for the unlawful killing of
14-year-old Frank Mugala when he was on
his way home from school in Lusaka in
February 2020. Although the court ordered
action to be taken against the accused, no
one had been arrested at the end of the year.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Zambia Medical Association disclosed
that 16 doctors died of Covid-19 between
January and March. Zambia faced difficulties
in receiving Covid-19 vaccines due to a
global shortage, delaying the vaccination
programme which eventually began on 14
April after the country received 228,000
doses. Frontline health workers were
prioritized for vaccination. The second batch
of vaccines did not arrive until July during the
pandemic’s third wave.

DISCRIMINATION
PERSONS WITH ALBINISM
Persons with albinism continued to be
subjected to violent attacks and mutilation
due to superstitious misconceptions about
albinism. In June, organized criminals posing
as police officers attacked a home in the
Senga district, mutilating a two-year-old child.
In July, a nine-year-old boy from Chasefu
district had his finger chopped off by a
relative and another man. One of the men
fled and the other was arrested and detained
awaiting trial.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to a report by the Zambia Police
Service, there were 4,000 cases of genderbased violence reported in the first half of the
year, of which 804 were sexual offences. Of
those, 590 were committed against girls and
there were 576 cases of “defilement”, 571 of
which were against girls and five against
boys.
In what appeared to be a politically
motivated case, a woman was raped on a bus
going to Kafue by unidentified men who
claimed to be punishing the PF government.

412

ZIMBABWE
Republic of Zimbabwe
Head of state and government: Emmerson Dambudzo
Mnangagwa
The human rights situation continued to
deteriorate, with the government
demonstrating hostility to human rights
defenders, protesters, political activists and
journalists. They were harassed, arrested,
prosecuted and subjected to prolonged
pretrial detention; one activist was killed
allegedly by supporters of ZANU-PF, the
ruling party. The state weaponized Covid-19
lockdowns to restrict political activity.
Security forces carried out unlawful killings.
The Supreme Court quashed a 20-year
prison sentence against two opposition
supporters. Thousands were forcibly evicted
from their land. Public hospitals remained
underfunded and poor healthcare
infrastructure put women’s and girls’ health
at risk. Many people were at risk of
becoming stateless.

BACKGROUND
The government enacted two constitutional
amendments which were heavily criticized for
undermining the judiciary’s independence. In
April, parliament passed Constitution
Amendment 1 of 2017 allowing the president
to appoint the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief
Justice and High Court Judge President
without open selection processes. In May, it
passed Amendment 2 enabling the president
to appoint sitting judges to vacancies in the
higher courts, without open selection
processes.
The cost of living increased and the
government failed to meet its target to
provide 1 million people with social protection
and discontinued its Covid-19 social welfare
package during the third wave from June to
August.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities were increasingly hostile
towards people who expressed dissenting

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

views. In October, Spenser Chiteera, a police
officer in Mount Darwin, underwent
disciplinary action for his online endorsing of
Nelson Chamisa, president of the opposition
Movement for Democratic Change-Alliance
(MDC-A), with the campaign slogan
“Ngaapinde Hake Mukomana” (“let the lad
lead”).
In the same month, police arrested Maxwell
Guvava, also a police officer, for insulting or
undermining the president’s authority after he
told ZANU-PF supporters that “the country is
rotten” (“nyika yaora”).
In August, the Cybersecurity and Data
Protection Bill was reintroduced to parliament
after errors were identified in its text. The Bill
was substantively different from the gazetted
version which had been presented to citizens
during public hearings; the government was
criticized for disregarding the public
consultation process in formulating the
legislation.
JOURNALISTS AND MEDIA WORKERS
At least 15 journalists were detained, arrested
or assaulted by security forces while carrying
out their work. In January, Michael
Magoronga was arrested in Kwekwe for using
an expired accreditation card issued by the
Zimbabwe Media Commission. Samuel
Takawira of 263Chat online media forum was
assaulted in April by anti-riot police while he
was covering the sentencing at the
Magistrates Court of Makomborero
Haruzivishe, an MDC-A youth activist (see
below, Arbitrary arrests and detentions).
Freelance journalist Jeffrey Moyo was
arrested on 26 May for violating the
Immigration Act by helping two New York
Times journalists to obtain media
accreditations. He was denied bail but
released on 15 June. In September, nine
journalists were arrested for covering an
MDC-A demonstration at the Zimbabwe
Electoral Commission offices. Following legal
intervention, they were released without
charge.
Also in September, Gilbert Munetsi was
arrested and detained for violating a Covid-19
curfew when he was on his way home from
work. He was released the next day after his

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

lawyer intervened. The same month, two
journalists were detained when they were
covering the MDC-A anniversary
commemorations in Bulawayo.
Eight community radio stations were
granted operating licences in September.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The authorities curtailed the right to protest
by weaponizing Covid-19 regulations to target
political activists, human rights defenders
and other people holding dissenting views.
On 2 February, MDC-A activists Cecilia
Chimbiri and Joanah Mamombe were
arrested and detained at Chikurubi Maximum
Security Prison, accused of undermining
police authority during a national lockdown
under Section 11 of Statutory Instrument 83
of 2020. They were granted bail on 8
February.
Makomborero Haruzivishe was arrested on
17 February after plain-clothed men shot at
him. He was accused of inciting public
violence for blowing a whistle during a protest
in February 2020 outside the Zimbabwe
Electoral Commission in the capital, Harare.
In April, he was sentenced to 36 months in
prison of which 16 were suspended. He
appealed against the sentence and in July
was given bail, which was promptly revoked
by a magistrate who ordered that he remain
in detention pending other charges against
him. After Joanah Mamombe and Cecilia
Chimbiri addressed a press conference in
solidarity with him, they were re-arrested on 6
March. They were arrested at a police station
where they had gone as part of their bail
reporting conditions and accused of violating
Covid-19 regulations. They were denied bail
but released on 5 May.
In March, police raided the house of civil
society activist Prosper Tiringindi in Masvingo
in search of evidence of his involvement in
spraying graffiti messages calling for a
reversal of the 500% increase in inflation. He
was arrested and later released without
charge. On 6 April, four armed security
agents raided his house again in search of
him.

413

Nine Masvingo Residents Forum members
were arrested on 23 April for protesting about
the two-month water shortage affecting
Masvingo. They were charged under Section
37 of the Criminal Law Codification with
participating in an unlawful gathering with the
intent to promote public violence and
acquitted on 24 September.
Alice Kuvheya, director of Chitrest, a
residents’ trust, was arrested on 14 June and
charged with “inciting participation in a
gathering with intent to promote public
violence” and “incitement to commit public
violence”, after she had accused the local
authority of colluding with the police to evict
informal traders. Shortly before this, she had
won a court case which blocked the
demolition of premises belonging to informal
traders. A court dismissed the charges on 28
June and in November, respectively.
Forty war veterans, arrested on 26 October
in Harare for protesting about meagre
monthly pensions of less than US$100, were
charged with breaching the peace. They were
released on bail four days later.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION

RIGHT TO HOUSING

On 30 June, the Provincial Development
Coordinator for Harare metropolitan province
issued a directive requiring NGOs to submit
work plans prior to carrying out activities in
Harare. On 3 August, the High Court ruled
that the directive was unconstitutional.
On 5 November, an amendment to the
Private Voluntary Organizations Act
regulations was published in the official
gazette, allowing for the closure of
organizations suspected of funding of or
campaigning for politicians during elections.
After the Covid-19 restrictions were lifted in
September, Nelson Chamisa (see above,
Freedom of expression) began his meet-thepeople tour in October. In Masvingo province
and other places, ZANU-PF supporters
disrupted the tour, damaging vehicles and
beating villagers who came out to support
him. They forced his supporters, including
older people, to publicly denounce him. On
20 October, his car was shot at in
Manicaland province.

Thousands were made homeless as a result
of the authorities’ demolitions of homes built
on what the government termed “illegal
settlements”.
In rural areas many communities were
threatened with forced eviction or evicted for
resisting “economic investment” initiatives.
For example, thousands of villagers were
driven off their land in Chisumbanje in
Manicaland province and their crops
destroyed to make way for a fuel company to
expand its sugar cane plantation.
In March, the government published
Statutory Instrument 72A of 2021,
withdrawing its plans for the imminent
evictions of 12,000 residents from their land
in Chilonga to make way for a company to
produce lucerne grass (alfalfa). It was
introduced one day before the High Court
was due to hear the community’s challenge
to the evictions. The government submitted
opposing papers to the court acknowledging
it had not properly consulted with the

414

On 16 January, six soldiers shot at four
villagers on the outskirts of Gweru, killing one
and injuring others after the locals confronted
them for assaulting villagers during a search
for copper cable thieves. The six soldiers
were arrested, charged with murder and
remanded on bail pending trial.
MDC-A supporter Nyasha Mawere died in
November after being beaten in Gutu by
suspected ZANU-PF supporters in October.
His wife and other relatives were charged
with defamation after they accused ZANU-PF
members of being responsible. No one was
arrested for the killing.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
On 4 June the Supreme Court acquitted and
ordered the immediate release of two MDC-A
supporters Last Tamai Maengahama and
Tungamirai Madzokere from Chikurubi
Maximum Security Prison. They had been
sentenced to 20 years in prison in 2016 for
the murder of a Zimbabwe Republic Police
officer.

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

community and that it would not carry out
evictions until it had found ways to
compensate them and provide them with
alternative land.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In January, the Zimbabwe chapter of the
Media Institute of Southern Africa took the
government to court over its failure to
disseminate comprehensive Covid-19
information on private and public testing,
isolation measures and treatment.
The vaccine shortage arising from the global
shortfall continued. Although 35,000 Covaxin
doses were donated by India, ongoing
shortages prevented some people from
receiving a second jab. In June, as the third
wave began, the authorities wrote to
Afreximbank, refusing receipt of three million
doses of Johnson and Johnson vaccines,
citing concerns about possible side effects
and storage problems. Meanwhile, the
authorities implemented a home-based care
policy arguing that the majority of people with
Covid-19 did not require hospitalization.
Consequently, public hospitals turned away
people with Covid-19 symptoms and
treatment was increasingly privatized. Private
hospitals charged between US$2,000 and
US$5,000 for necessary care, an average of
US$3,500 for each admission, far above the
average monthly income of US$130-US$300.
By August, 78 health workers had died after
contracting Covid-19. In September, the
government instituted a “Jabs for Jobs”
policy. A month later, it issued a circular
barring unvaccinated government workers
from reporting to their place of work. They
could face disciplinary action and no pay if
they flouted the directive.

charged with rape and obstructing justice,
respectively.
Pregnant women and girls remained at risk
of life-changing childbirth-related injuries,
including obstetric fistula, as many avoided
public healthcare facilities in favour of home
deliveries, due to inadequate health
infrastructure, cultural practices and high
hospital costs.

RIGHT TO A NATIONALITY
Hundreds of thousands of Zimbabweans
were at risk of becoming stateless. They
waited months to receive national registration
documents from the Registrar General’s
Office, due to a huge backlog of applications.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In March, the government announced that in
the first two months of the year, 4,959 girls
had become pregnant, and that at least
1,774 girls got married before they reached
18. In July, a 14-year-old girl died after she
gave birth at a church shrine in Manicaland
province. Following a public outcry, her
husband and father were arrested and

Amnesty International Report 2021/22

415

