AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
Amnesty International is a movement of 10 million people which
mobilizes the humanity in everyone and campaigns for change so we
can all enjoy our human rights. Our vision is of a world where those in
power keep their promises, respect international law and are held to
account. We are independent of any government, political ideology,
economic interest or religion and are funded mainly by our
membership and individual donations. We believe that acting in
solidarity and compassion with people everywhere can change our
societies for the better.
Amnesty International is impartial. We take no position on issues of
sovereignty, territorial disputes or international political or legal
arrangements that might be adopted to implement the right to selfdetermination. This report is organized according to the countries we
monitored during the year. In general, they are independent states
that are accountable for the human rights situation on their territory.

First published in 2023 by
Amnesty International Ltd
Peter Benenson House,
1, Easton Street,
London WC1X 0DW
United Kingdom
© Amnesty International 2023
Index: POL 10/5670/2023
ISBN: 978-0-86210-502-0
Original language: English

Except where otherwise noted,
content in this document is
licensed under a
CreativeCommons (attribution,
non-commercial, no derivatives,
international 4.0) licence.
https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/legalcode
For more information please visit
the permissions page on our
website: www.amnesty.org
amnesty.org

ii

This report documents Amnesty
International’s work and concerns
through 2022.
The absence of an entry in this
report on a particular country or
territory does not imply that no
human rights violations of
concern to Amnesty International
have taken place there during the
year. Nor is the length of a
country entry any basis for a
comparison of the extent and
depth of Amnesty International’s
concerns in a country. The
identification of the head of state
and head of government in a
country entry does not in any way
imply a statement of a governing
entity’s legitimacy.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2022/23
THE STATE OF THE WORLD’S HUMAN RIGHTS

iv

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

CONTENTS
ANNUAL REPORT 2022/23
Abbreviations vii
Preface ix
Global analysis 14
Africa regional overview 21
Americas regional overview 29
Asia-Pacific regional overview 37
Europe and Central Asia regional
overview 45
Middle East and North Africa
regional overview 54
Country entries 63
Afghanistan 64
Albania 67
Algeria 68
Andorra 71
Angola 72
Argentina 74
Armenia 77
Australia 78
Austria 79
Azerbaijan 81
Bahrain 83
Bangladesh 85
Belarus 89
Belgium 91
Benin 93
Bolivia 94
Bosnia and Herzegovina 95
Botswana 97
Brazil 98
Bulgaria 103
Burkina Faso 105
Burundi 107
Cambodia 110
Cameroon 112
Canada 114
Central African Republic 116
Chad 118
Chile 120
China 122
Colombia 129
Congo 133
Côte d’Ivoire 135
Croatia 137

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Cuba 138
Cyprus 140
Czech Republic 141
Democratic Republic of the
Congo 142
Denmark 146
Dominican Republic 147
Ecuador 148
Egypt 150
El Salvador 155
Equatorial Guinea 157
Eritrea 158
Estonia 160
Eswatini 160
Ethiopia 162
Fiji 164
Finland 165
France 166
Gambia 169
Georgia 171
Germany 173
Ghana 175
Greece 177
Guatemala 179
Guinea 181
Haiti 183
Honduras 184
Hungary 185
Iceland 187
India 188
Indonesia 192
Iran 196
Iraq 201
Ireland 205
Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories 206
Italy 211
Japan 213
Jordan 215
Kazakhstan 217
Kenya 220
Kosovo 222
Kuwait 223
Kyrgyzstan 226

v

Laos 228
Latvia 229
Lebanon 230
Lesotho 233
Libya 235
Lithuania 239
Madagascar 240
Malawi 242
Malaysia 243
Maldives 245
Mali 246
Malta 248
Mexico 250
Moldova 254
Mongolia 256
Montenegro 257
Morocco/Western Sahara 258
Mozambique 261
Myanmar 263
Namibia 267
Nepal 268
Netherlands 270
New Zealand 271
Nicaragua 272
Niger 274
Nigeria 276
North Korea 280
North Macendonia 282
Norway 283
Oman 284
Pakistan 285
Palestine (State of) 288
Papua New Guinea 291
Paraguay 292
Peru 295
Philippines 297
Poland 299
Portugal 302
Puerto Rico 302
Qatar 304
Romania 306
Russia 307
Rwanda 312
Saudi Arabia 315
Senegal 318
Serbia 320
Sierra Leone 322
Singapore 324
Slovakia 325
Slovenia 326

vi

Somalia 327
South Africa 331
South Korea 334
South Sudan 336
Spain 340
Sri Lanka 343
Sudan 345
Sweden 348
Switzerland 349
Syria 350
Taiwan 355
Tajikistan 356
Tanzania 358
Thailand 361
Togo 363
Trinidad and Tobago 365
Tunisia 366
Türkiye 369
Turkmenistan 373
Uganda 375
Ukraine 377
United Arab Emirates 382
United Kingdom 384
United States of America 387
Uruguay 392
Uzbekistan 394
Venezuela 396
Viet Nam 401
Yemen 403
Zambia 406
Zimbabwe 409

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ABBREVIATIONS
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations

European Convention on Human Rights
(European) Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms

AU
African Union

GDP
Gross domestic product

CEDAW
UN Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women

ICC
International Criminal Court

CEDAW Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women
CERD
International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination
CERD Committee
UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination
CIA
US Central Intelligence Agency
COP27
27th Conference of the Parties to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States

ICCPR
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
ICESCR
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
ICRC
International Committee of the Red Cross
ILO
International Labour Organization
International Convention against enforced
disappearance
International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
LGBTI
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex

Escazú Agreement
Regional Agreement on Access to
Information, Public Participation and Justice
in Environmental Matters in Latin America
and the Caribbean

NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization

EU
European Union

NGO
Non-governmental organization

European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture
European Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

OAS
Organization of American States

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

NDC
Nationally determined contribution

vii

OCHA
United Nations Office for the Co-ordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
OHCHR
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights

UN Special Rapporteur on violence against
women
Special rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency
Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

OSCE
Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe

UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund

UK
United Kingdom

UPR
UN Universal Periodic Review

UN
United Nations

USA
United States of America

UN Convention against Torture
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment

WHO
World Health Organization

UN Refugee Convention
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty
and human rights
UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of
expression
UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression
UN Special Rapporteur on racism
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance
UN Special Rapporteur on torture
Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment

viii

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

PREFACE
For more than a decade, human rights organizations have warned that a
persistent deterioration of respect for human rights and the rule of law was
underway. Where does 2022 fit in that descent? Was it yet another disastrous
year for human rights? Has the breakdown of international norms reached a
new nadir? And if so, what must the global community do about it?
In February 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine, unleashing military destruction
on a people and country at peace. Within months, civilian infrastructure had
been destroyed, thousands killed and many more injured. Russia’s action
accelerated a global energy crisis and helped weaken food production and
distribution systems, leading to a global food crisis that continues to affect
poorer nations and racialized people disproportionately.
Less than a week after the invasion, the Chief Prosecutor of the ICC
announced an investigation into war crimes committed in Ukraine. On 2
March, an overwhelming majority of countries at the UN General Assembly
voted to condemn Russia’s invasion as an act of aggression. Meanwhile,
European countries that long had rejected refugees opened their borders to
Ukrainians seeking safety.
Throughout 2022 international calls for justice and support to war crimes
investigations were strident. Possibly riding this wave, at the General
Assembly, UN member states adopted a resolution to counter the power of
the veto at the UN Security Council, a major source of its systemic weakness.
Could Russia’s aggression against Ukraine also act as a broader wake-up
call? Could it work to unite the world around human rights and universal
values?

MORE CONFLICTS, MORE DEADLY
The war in Ethiopia raged on in 2022, claiming hundreds of thousands of
lives by some estimates, making it one of the deadliest conflicts in recent
memory. But much of this carnage was hidden from view, meted out in a
largely invisible campaign of ethnic cleansing against Tigrayans in Western
Tigray.
2022 was the deadliest year in a decade for Palestinians in the West Bank,
with at least 151 people, including dozens of children, killed by Israeli forces,
most in the context of more frequent military raids and arrest operations. The
military of Myanmar systematically punished the country’s Karen and Karenni
civilians with the result that hundreds died and at least 150,000 were
displaced. The people of Haiti, Mali, Venezuela, Yemen, and many other
places too, were plagued by armed conflicts or systemic violence and
associated human rights violations.

MORE CLIMATE CATASTROPHES, MORE OIL, LESS REMEDY
The devastating costs of the unchecked climate crisis were made
abundantly clear in 2022. Floods, droughts, heatwaves and fires led to
deaths, loss of housing and livelihoods, and increasing food insecurity.
Yet, in the face of these disasters, when the world’s leaders met for COP27
in Egypt, they failed to take the measures needed to keep the rise in global

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ix

temperature below the 1.5°C threshold. States further refused to tackle global
warming’s number one driver – the production and use of fossil fuels.
Global cooperation to stem this temperature rise was ineffective and
negotiations failed to secure vital commitments to the phasing out of all fossil
fuels. There was a breakthrough on funding for countries hit hardest by
climate disasters: the establishment of the Loss and Damage fund is a ray of
hope for people living on the frontlines of the climate crisis. However, the fund
is far from operational and the annual USD 100 billion in climate-related
funding, which wealthy countries have been promising to developing nations
since 2009, has yet to be delivered.
Meanwhile, the six largest Western oil companies achieved record breaking
pre-tax profits of over USD 200 billion in 2022. This extraordinary
accumulation is not just a product of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine
driving up energy prices. It reflects the fossil fuel industry’s knowing disregard
for the damage their business has on the world’s climate and the
environment, and their recalcitrant approach to compensation and remedial
action for that damage.

DOUBLE STANDARDS
The Covid-19 pandemic, and now the Ukraine war, have exacerbated
double standards. Wealthy nations hoarded Covid-19 vaccines and weakened
multilateral redistribution systems, contributing to deepening inequality. In
2022, there was little evidence of that being reversed. Wealthy countries failed
to take action to relieve developing countries of their crushing debt burdens.
Russian aggression against Ukraine is also a war against universal values,
and the multilateral systems designed to uphold them. To win that war, the
Western world cannot effectively condone similar aggression in other
countries just because their interests are at stake. In fact, the double
standards of the West were showcased by their deafening silences on human
rights violations in Saudi Arabia and Egypt, and their inconsistent responses
to the grave human rights impact of other conflicts, some amounting to
crimes against humanity, and to the protection of refugees fleeing them.
In Israel and the Occupied Territories, 2022 saw the system of apartheid
solidified. Successive Israeli governments rolled out measures forcing more
Palestinians from their homes, expanding illegal settlements, and legalizing
existing settlements and outposts across the occupied West Bank. Rather
than demand an end to that system of oppression, many Western
governments chose instead to attack those denouncing Israel’s apartheid
system. The EU’s open doors for Ukrainian refugees fleeing Russian
aggression remained closed to those fleeing war and repression in
Afghanistan and Syria. Between September 2021 and May 2022, the USA
expelled more than 25,000 Haitians and detained and subjected many to
torture and other ill-treatment rooted in anti-Black racism.
Such examples confirmed to the rest of the world that the West’s support for
human rights is selective and self-interested, and undermined global support
for Ukraine. Those double standards do not benefit Western power alone.
China continued to evade international condemnation by the UNGA and the
UNHRC despite massive human rights violations, amounting to crimes
against humanity, against the Uighurs and other Muslim minorities.

x

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

PROTECTING RIGHTS NATIONALLY
Any argument that the world’s response to Russian aggression marks out a
new era for a values-based international system and the rule of law is also
weakened by the palpable deterioration in states’ protection of human rights
at home.
Indigenous peoples’ rights were violated when states failed to protect them
from corporate or state expropriation of their lands, in Brazil, Canada,
Sweden, Tanzania, Viet Nam and elsewhere.
The USA’s Supreme Court overturned a long-standing constitutional
guarantee of abortion access, thereby threatening the exercise of critical
rights, including the right to life, security and non-discrimination for millions of
women, girls, and other people. In Afghanistan, the Taliban imposed
draconian restrictions, denying women and girls the rights to education, work,
and autonomy, while publicly proclaiming women’s subservience to men. In
Iran, the “morality police” murdered Mahsa Amini for wearing her headscarf
the wrong way, sparking nationwide protests in which more women and girls
were injured, detained or killed.
The erosion of our freedoms to protest and to express ourselves became, in
2022, a fully-fledged landslide. Russian media houses were taken to court
and shut down for simply mentioning the war in Ukraine. Journalists were
imprisoned in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Myanmar, Russia and dozens of other
countries across the world. Technology was weaponized against many, to
silence, to prevent public assembly or to disinform. Peaceful protesters faced
an ever-growing armoury of weapons; from batons, tear gas and rubber
pellets, to live ammunition, as we saw in Iran, Peru and Sri Lanka. Corrosive
legislation in the UK increased police power as it diminished the right to
peaceful protest.
We’ve witnessed iconic acts of defiance, including Afghan women taking to
the streets to protest Taliban rule and Iranian women posting videos of
themselves cutting their hair in protest against the country’s abusive and
forced veiling laws. We can take some comfort in knowing that in the face of
such repression thousands of people still came together to write letters, sign
petitions, and take to the streets. It should be a reminder to those in power
that our rights to demand change, and to come together freely and
collectively, cannot be taken away.

IN CONCLUSION
2022 may have been a turning point for the international order. It certainly
saw a renewal of the Atlantic alliance, with a level of cooperation between the
US and other Western powers that a year ago, in the wake of the
chaotic 2021 Afghanistan withdrawal, would have been hard to imagine.
But there was no turning point on the human rights front. Rather, the
descent continued unchecked. Russia’s aggression served to further
destabilize an international multilateral system already weakened by decades
of powerful states flouting international law with impunity. The war diverted
resources and attention away from the climate crisis, other long-standing
conflicts and human suffering the world over.
The West’s response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine also underscored its
own double standards, and its inconsequential reactions to so many other

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

xi

violations of the UN Charter. This in turn further fuelled instability and
impunity.
If Russia’s war of aggression demonstrates anything for the world’s future, it
is the importance of an effective and consistently applied rules-based
international order. Those leading the coalition in support of Ukraine must
step up their efforts, and partner with others, for a renewed commitment to an
international system that benefits the majority of the world’s population.
2023 marks the 75th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, a document created from the ashes of a world war. Let us not wait for
the world to burn yet again to truly live by the freedoms and principles that
came at the cost of millions of lives. 2023 must be a turning point for
upholding human rights: anything less from the world's leaders is a betrayal
which could take the world to the abyss.

Agnès Callamard,
Secretary General Amnesty International

xii

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2022/23
GLOBAL ANALYSIS AND REGIONAL OVERVIEWS

GLOBAL ANALYSIS
The year 2022 saw new or renewed conflicts break out and protracted ones persist. On the
ground, violations of international humanitarian law led to appalling human tragedies.
International responses were inconsistent with regard to the severe human rights impact of
different conflicts and the protection of people fleeing them, as well as other patterns of
egregious violations, some amounting to crimes against humanity. They included heavyhanded repression of the freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly,
including protests. Those defending human rights often bore the brunt of such repression.
Meanwhile, gender-based violence against women, girls and LGBTI people remained a
global issue, despite some action to improve legislative protections, and there were some
notable setbacks and progress on abortion rights. Although many countries began to
emerge from the shadow of Covid-19, others continued to face its effects. Economic crises
associated with the impact of the pandemic, as well as unsustainable debt, conflict and
climate change, fuelled rocketing rises in the cost of living and food insecurity. The
challenges disproportionately affected the most marginalized and led to rising inequality.
These themes emerged most strongly from Amnesty International’s research on 156
countries in 2022 and are deeply interconnected. Repression of dissent facilitated the path
to conflict. Armed conflict and coups in 2021 paved the way to clampdowns on civil
society. Sexual violence against women and girls was a brutal feature of armed conflict.
War, political crises, the rising cost of living, restrictions on the right to abortion, violence
against women and discrimination were important drivers of protests. Within some of these
patterns of violations, Amnesty International’s research revealed evidence of the
increasingly severe harms that arise from the business model of Big Tech and underscored
the pressing need for bolder action to tackle the climate crisis and environmental
degradation.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW AND RIGHTS OF PEOPLE ON
THE MOVE
Across the globe, new or renewed conflicts broke out and protracted ones persisted.
Government forces and armed groups were responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses, in some cases amounting to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
In Europe, Russian forces invaded Ukraine in an act of aggression and, in its assault on the
civilian population, committed extrajudicial executions and indiscriminate attacks, and
targeted the country’s energy infrastructure during winter. In Africa, government forces and
armed groups fighting in Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the Sahel
region, among other places, caused the deaths of thousands of civilians, some in mass
killings. In the Middle East and North Africa, long-standing conflicts in Libya, Syria and Yemen,
as well as the flare-up of armed hostilities between Israel and a Palestinian armed group in
August, were characterized by indiscriminate air strikes or other unlawful attacks that killed
and injured civilians. War crimes were also committed in Afghanistan, where the Taliban
continued its campaign of reprisal killings against members of the former administration and
security forces.
Sexual violence was perpetrated in conflicts in different regions, including as a weapon of
war. In both the Central African Republic and South Sudan, dozens of women and girls

14

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

reported being raped in the context of clashes between government forces and armed groups
or attacks by armed groups. In Ethiopia, Tigrayan forces perpetrated multiple incidents of
conflict-related rape and other sexual violence. In Ukraine, in addition to reports of sexual
violence by Russian forces, women faced other gender-specific threats as attacks on
healthcare facilities contributed to greatly reduced maternal health services.
In positive moves, a majority of states in the UN General Assembly denounced Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine and the UN Human Rights Council moved swiftly to establish a
commission of inquiry following that invasion. In the face of the UN Security Council’s failure to
act on many conflicts, the UN General Assembly raised the political cost of permanent
members of the Security Council using their veto. It did so by adopting a resolution in April
which required the General Assembly to meet automatically every time a veto is used in the
Council.1 The General Assembly subsequently met after Russia abused its veto power to block
a Security Council resolution demanding the reversal of its decision in September to annex
four partially occupied regions of Ukraine. The General Assembly condemned the move and
deemed it invalid and illegal. However, Russia’s self-serving action was not the only selective
approach to violations in conflict situations.
Western states vocally backed efforts by the International Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate
allegations of war crimes in Ukraine; some had not done so in various other situations. The UK
in effect earmarked additional assistance to the ICC and the USA provided political support
despite its own non-ratification of the Rome Statute and its opposition to investigations
involving political allies such as Israel or their own nationals in Afghanistan and Iraq. As it
marked its 20th anniversary, the ICC’s actions begged the question of whether its principles
applied equally to victims of crimes under international law in any situation or region. While it
publicly promoted its absolutely vital large-scale investigation into the situation in Ukraine, it
committed much fewer resources to other investigations, such as those into the situations in
Nigeria and Palestine.2 In another example of inconsistency, the UN Human Rights Council,
while rightly forthright in its condemnation of violations in Ukraine, failed to meaningfully
address the conflict in Yemen, leaving a huge accountability gap.
Some corporate actors facilitated violations in conflict situations, although action was taken
by human rights defenders and organizations, as well as some governments, to confront their
conduct. Amnesty International documented the role of businesses in importing and
distributing aviation fuel that could be used in air strikes by the Myanmar military against
civilians. Subsequently, some implicated companies announced that they were exiting or
suspending business operations in Myanmar. Amnesty International also found that the
algorithms and business practices of Meta (the owner of Facebook and Instagram) had
substantially contributed to grave human rights violations during 2017 by amplifying antiRohingya content and enabling Myanmar military action against them.
Armed conflicts predictably produced large movements of refugees and internal
displacement. The EU’s welcome open-door policy towards Ukrainian refugees fleeing Russian
aggression demonstrated that, as one of the richest blocs in the world, it was more than
capable of receiving large numbers of people seeking protection and ensuring their access to
key services, such as health, education and housing. However, the approach differed
markedly from that taken towards people seeking protection from outside the region,
highlighting deep racism and discrimination. At both land and sea borders, refugees and
migrants were subjected to forcible, summary and sometimes violent returns, despite some of
them experiencing torture and other violations in transit countries such as Libya. Many were
left to die.
In the Middle East and North Africa, refugee protection was undermined. The Lebanese
authorities scaled up so-called “voluntary returns” of Syrians. In the Americas, the lack of
robust systems of international protection in many countries continued to leave unprotected

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

15

the sharply increasing number of people fleeing situations of armed violence and other crises.
Between September 2021 and May 2022, the USA expelled more than 25,000 Haitians and
subjected many to torture and other ill-treatment rooted in anti-Black racism.
Parties to armed conflicts must respect international humanitarian law, investigate
allegations of violations and prosecute suspected perpetrators. All other governments
should consistently pressure them to do so and act to strengthen the implementation of UN
Security Council Resolution 1325, which calls for special measures to protect women and
girls from conflict-related sexual violence, as well as affirming the importance of women’s
full and equal participation in conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The ICC must ensure
that funding for investigations is allocated in a non-discriminatory way. All governments
must ensure all those fleeing persecution have access to safety and international protection
and end double standards in the treatment of people seeking protection.

FREEDOMS OF EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The repression of dissent and civil society remained one of the key human rights trends
globally.
Some crackdowns on the freedoms of expression and association were associated with
armed conflict. In Russia, new legislation effectively barred critical mention of the war in
Ukraine. Thousands of administrative and criminal prosecutions ensued and dozens of
independent media outlets were closed. In Ethiopia, authorities arbitrarily arrested media
workers and stymied efforts by civil society organizations to call for peace.
Other crackdowns followed armed takeovers of government. In Afghanistan, Taliban
authorities subjected journalists to arbitrary detention, as well as torture and other ill-treatment,
for reporting critically on them after their takeover of the country in 2021. In Myanmar, the
military authorities that took over following a coup in 2021 arrested dozens of media workers,
maintained bans on independent media outlets and placed restrictions on the legitimate work
of NGOs, making non-compliance punishable by imprisonment. In Mali, where coups had
occurred in 2020 and 2021, authorities suspended national and foreign broadcasters and
arrested or threatened journalists and others for criticizing the government or the army.
Elsewhere, influential states clamped down on civil society to seek to prevent discussion of
their human rights records both abroad and at home. The Chinese government lashed out at a
strong and long-awaited report by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) documenting potential crimes against humanity against Uyghurs and other Muslim
ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang, where thousands of men and women were believed to be
arbitrarily detained, while imposing ever more pervasive and sophisticated censorship within
the country. The Indian government imposed international travel bans on human rights
defenders.
In Türkiye, parliament passed a new disinformation law enhancing government powers over
social media, while the authorities continued to detain and prosecute dozens of journalists,
human rights defenders and opposition politicians on spurious terrorism-related charges. In
Egypt, the government sought to improve its image in the lead-up to its hosting of the 27th
Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27) in
November, partly by releasing hundreds held for political reasons. However, they arbitrarily
detained around triple the number in the same period for actual or perceived dissent,
including hundreds arrested in connection with calls for demonstrations during COP27.
The events in Egypt were one illustration of the nexus between freedom of expression, on the
one hand, and climate justice and environmental degradation, on the other. Elsewhere,
activists campaigning to protect the environment were killed or threatened. Nowhere was this
more in evidence than in Latin America; in its 2022 report, Global Witness stated that three
quarters of the killings in 2021 of land and environmental defenders occurred in that region.

16

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Around the world, people came together to protest against the failure to tackle climate
change, as well as a range of other concerns including war, political crises, the rising cost of
living, restrictions on the right to abortion, violence against women and discrimination. States
often used unlawful – including sometimes lethal – force to repress protests. This was brutally
demonstrated in Iran: from September, the authorities responded to the unprecedented
uprising against decades of gender-based discrimination, severe repression and, more broadly,
the Islamic Republic itself, with live ammunition, metal pellets and beatings, killing hundreds
of people, including dozens of children. Meanwhile, in Peru, over 20 were killed after security
forces used unlawful force to respond to protests during the political crisis that followed the
ousting of its then-president in December.
Security forces in countries across the world used firearms and a range of less-lethal
weapons, including batons, tear gas and rubber bullets, to police protests. Some security
forces arbitrarily detained protesters and subjected them to torture or other ill-treatment,
sometimes using inherently abusive equipment such as weighted leg chains. The proliferation
and abuse of law enforcement equipment in the context of policing in general was facilitated
by the absence of global human rights controls on their import and export. However, in May, at
the request of the UN General Assembly, a group of governmental experts released a report
that put forward the option of a legally binding instrument to regulate the trade. Argentina, the
EU and Mongolia led a global alliance of more than 60 states promoting a potential treaty.
Human rights organizations proposed key elements to include.3
States suppressed protests by other means. Authorities in countries including Australia,
India, Indonesia and the UK passed new legislation imposing restrictions on demonstrations.
Other governments used states of emergency such as in Sri Lanka, or pretexts such as
Covid-19 in the case of China, or security around elections in the case of Guinea (another
country where a coup took place in 2021), to prevent protesters challenging state policies.
Governments also repressed online civic space to try to thwart protesters. Iran and Myanmar
were among those that shut down or disrupted internet and telecommunications.
The international response to these egregious human rights violations and others that went
beyond the freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly was inconsistent, just
as the response of the UN and ICC was to situations of armed conflict. On the one hand, the
UN Human Rights Council established a Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in
Russia and an investigative mechanism on Iran in the wake of the deadly repression of
protests there. On the other, it voted not to further investigate or even discuss the UN’s own
evidence of potential crimes against humanity in Xinjiang, China, and discontinued a
resolution on the Philippines. Similarly, Israel’s allies firmly rejected conclusions by a growing
chorus of human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, that it had established
a system of apartheid, despite this analysis being endorsed by UN experts. Meanwhile the
international human rights system, one of the three “pillars” of the UN, remained chronically
underfunded, with certain states seeking to weaponize the budgetary process to defeat the
operationalization of needed mechanisms.
Governments must stop using pretexts to repress dissent and prevent discussions of their
human rights records. They must investigate killings, intimidation and harassment of
human rights defenders, stop security forces using unnecessary or excessive force during
protests and repeal or amend legislation violating the right to peaceful assembly. At a
multilateral level, governments should support negotiations to agree a new treaty to control
the trade in law enforcement equipment. They should also consistently set up
accountability mechanisms for all patterns of gross human rights violations.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

17

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Violence against women, girls and LGBTI people remained a global human rights problem.
Some of the violence occurred in armed conflicts, as already mentioned. However, most of it
occurred during peacetime and in domestic settings.
Reflecting a pattern across the Americas, hundreds of feminicides (gender-based killings of
women facilitated by impunity) were recorded in Mexico alone. Venezuelan refugee women
were subjected to gender-based violence and discrimination in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and
Trinidad and Tobago. Indigenous women reported forced sterilization in previous years in
Canada and continued to face disproportionately high levels of rape and sexual violence in the
USA. High levels of violence persisted elsewhere, both offline and online. In Pakistan, several
high-profile murders of women by family members were reported yet the parliament failed to
enact legislation on domestic violence that had been pending since 2021. In India, violence
against Dalit and Adivasi women, among other caste-based hate crimes, was committed with
impunity.
Some governments did take action to improve legislative protections, responding to pressure
from women human rights defenders. In Europe, new rape laws enshrining the principle of
consent entered into force in Belgium, Finland and Spain. In Africa and Asia, new legislation
aimed in part at strengthening protections for women and girls against sexual and genderbased violence was adopted in countries including China, the Congo, Indonesia, Papua New
Guinea and Zimbabwe. However, too often, in these countries and others around the world,
authorities failed in practice to protect women and girls from entrenched gender-based
violence or to address impunity for related crimes. In the Middle East and North Africa,
authorities in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Yemen even subjected women human rights
defenders and activists to prosecution and other forms of harassment for speaking out against
sexual violence.
As always, the backdrop for this violence was continuing widespread discrimination against
women, girls and LGBTI people in law and practice, underscored by discriminatory social
attitudes and norms. Afghanistan witnessed a particularly significant deterioration in the rights
of women and girls. New edicts issued by the Taliban forbade women and girls from travelling
without a male chaperone, banned them from public parks and prohibited them from
attending secondary schools and university or from working for NGOs.
Meanwhile, the year saw both setbacks and progress on abortion rights. Following the ending
of federal protections for abortion rights in the USA in June, several US states passed laws to
ban or curtail access to abortion, while various others voted overwhelmingly to protect it.
Elsewhere in the Americas, abortion remained criminalized in five countries, but a
constitutional court ruling in Colombia decriminalized abortion up to the 24th week of
pregnancy and a new law in Ecuador decriminalized abortion in cases of rape.
Similar trends were observed across Europe. In Hungary, Poland and Slovakia, new
measures were introduced to limit access to abortion, while several other countries, including
Germany and the Netherlands, removed certain restrictions on accessing abortion. Meanwhile,
women human rights defenders faced persecution in countries including Andorra and Poland
for supporting the right to abortion.
Governments must take comprehensive steps to prevent entrenched gender-based
violence against women, girls and LGBTI people, protect and support survivors and address
impunity for related crimes. All states that continue to criminalize abortion must reform
their abortion laws to ensure everybody can access abortion-related information and
services, and post-abortion care, without discrimination or coercion, and with respect for
their reproductive autonomy and other human rights.

18

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
In all regions economic crises associated with the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, as well as
unsustainable debt, conflict and climate change, fuelled rocketing rises in the cost of living
and food insecurity. The International Monetary Fund highlighted in October that over 60% of
low-income countries and over 25% of emerging markets were unlikely to be able to service
their debts. The Russian invasion of Ukraine not only interrupted wheat supplies on which
many countries depended but also resulted in significant increases in fuel costs. The
challenges were exacerbated by the failure of many governments to address structural barriers
to and the underlying causes of, the non-fulfilment of the rights to food, health, social security,
housing and water – such as socio-economic inequalities and low public expenditure on health
and social protection. The challenges disproportionately affected the most marginalized in all
regions.
The African Union had declared 2022 as the Year of Nutrition, but extreme weather
conditions triggered malnutrition in several countries in the region. In Somalia a severe drought
led to a surge in malnutrition cases, while in Nigeria floods precipitated an outbreak of
waterborne diseases, killing hundreds. Economic crises meant 97% of the population of
Afghanistan were living in poverty, up from 47% in 2020, and people in Sri Lanka experienced
serious shortages in food, fuel, medicines and other essential items. In the Middle East and
North Africa, economic crises also heightened food insecurity. In the case of Syria and Yemen,
conflict was a key factor. In the Americas, humanitarian crises saw more than 40% of the
population in Haiti facing emergency hunger levels and most of the population in Venezuela
experiencing food insecurity. Due to the war with Russia, at least a half a million children were
plunged into poverty in Ukraine. Elsewhere in Europe huge spikes in energy prices, partly
resulting from the war, contributed to record inflation and cost of living crises,
disproportionately affecting the most marginalized.
Climate change further contributed to poverty, malnutrition and displacement. Sea level rises
and floods impacted impoverished coastal communities in countries including Bangladesh,
Honduras and Senegal, while rising temperatures, coupled with energy infrastructure projects,
affected Indigenous peoples in Canada and Russia.4 In India and Pakistan, among other
countries, record-breaking heat, coupled with air pollution, took a high toll on those forced to
work outside, such as farmers, street vendors and daily wage earners. Rains and flooding in
Pakistan, made more severe by climate change, also had a catastrophic impact on people’s
lives and livelihoods. Despite all this and the UN General Assembly’s welcome adoption in July
of a resolution recognizing the right to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment,
governments’ climate action remained woefully inadequate. While COP27 delivered the
adoption of a loss and damage fund for those harmed by climate change, it failed to secure
agreement on the phasing out of all fossil fuels.5 Meanwhile, governments’ current emission
reduction pledges would condemn humanity to the devastating impact of 2.5˚C of global
warming.
Across the world, the right to housing was undermined by forced evictions, which often
affected those most subjected to discrimination. In Africa, the Americas and Asia,
governments proceeded with extractive, agricultural or infrastructure projects without obtaining
the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous peoples affected, sometimes leading to
forced eviction from their lands. In Tanzania authorities forcibly evicted Indigenous Maasai
community members from ancestral land to make way for a tourist operation.
Work continued in developing a new UN-sponsored treaty on global taxation of multinational
enterprises, culminating in the passing of a resolution by unanimous consensus at the UN
General Assembly in December. This reflected the fact that the current global tax deal from the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), agreed in 2021, did not go
far enough to correct the imbalance in the allocation of taxing rights between the sources of a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

19

company’s profits, often in countries in the global south, and where it is legally based, often in
countries in the global north. Further active commitments are needed to ensure a fair system
that will deliver vital additional resources, particularly for low-income countries, to better
guarantee people’s economic, social and cultural rights.6
Governments must urgently take steps to mitigate the climate crisis and to keep global
warming to under 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, including by prioritizing the speedy
phase-out of fossil fuels, while guaranteeing a just and human rights-consistent transition
to a zero-carbon economy. They must put in place measures that guarantee the rights of
everyone, including marginalized individuals and groups, to an adequate standard of living,
food, health, social security, housing and water. They must obtain the free, prior and
informed consent of Indigenous people for any projects on their territory.
Wealthy states and international financial institutions must provide urgent debt relief and
contribute funds to international efforts to support countries that need assistance to realize
economic, social and cultural rights, including in the context of the climate crisis. Lowerincome countries should also benefit from greater fairness and inclusivity through the UNsponsored global tax reform that will deliver vital additional resources to this end.

INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS MECHANISMS
2023 marks the 75th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 30th
Anniversary of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action and the 25th anniversary of
the UN Declaration on Human Right Defenders. However, certain patterns of behaviour by
states have undermined those instruments, such as inconsistent or inadequate
implementation of human rights obligations, inconsistent international responses to patterns of
egregious human rights violations, and failure to contribute sufficient financial resources to
international human rights mechanisms.
In this context, states must recommit and take concrete steps to enhance the strength
and resilience of the international human rights architecture. This includes earmarking an
increased budget for the human rights pillar of the UN, prioritizing consistent
implementation of the full scope of states’ international human rights obligations and
promoting coherence and effectiveness in the ability of international mechanisms to
address human rights violations everywhere.
1. “UN: Veto resolution is a vital step towards accountability”, 26 April
2. “The ICC at 20: Double standards have no place in international justice”, 1 July
3. Essential Elements of a Torture-Free Trade Treaty, September, 23 September
4. Any Tidal Wave Could Drown Us: Stories from the Climate Crisis, 3 November
5. “COP27: Loss and Damage fund is welcome but failure to deliver on phasing out fossil fuels is a huge setback”, 21 November
6. Taxation, Illicit Financial Flows and Human Rights, 28 June

20

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

AFRICA REGIONAL OVERVIEW
The scourge of conflict remained entrenched and showed little promise of abatement.
However, there was limited progress across the region towards ensuring victims’ rights to
truth, justice, reparation and accountability for grave violations and abuses of human rights
that may amount to crimes under international law.
Almost all countries in the region contended with the devastating economic impacts of
the Covid-19 pandemic. Recovery efforts were hindered by conflicts, economic disruptions
arising from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and extreme weather conditions, which were
exacerbated by climate change. Consequently, the rights of millions of people to food,
health and an adequate standard of living were seriously undermined.
Authorities across the region deployed various tactics to silence peaceful dissent.
Crackdowns on the right to freedom of peaceful assembly intensified as authorities used
national security or Covid-19 as a pretext to ban, suppress or violently disperse protests.
Human rights defenders, activists, journalists and opposition members faced intimidation
and harassment, including arrests, detention and prosecution as authorities tightened their
grip on the rights to freedom of expression and association.
The number of people fleeing conflict or climate crises continued to rise. Yet,
international funding shortfalls left authorities barely equipped to adequately address
refugees’ urgent basic needs.
The prevalence of violence against women across the region reflected the entrenched
patterns of gender discrimination and other forms of inequality. In some countries, LGBTI
people and people with albinism were not protected from discrimination and violence.
The high risk of environmental degradation or displacement of communities resulting from
planned or existing mining or infrastructural projects persisted.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Armed groups and government forces alike targeted civilians, leaving a trail of death and
destruction. In Burkina Faso, the Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM) and the
Islamic State in the Sahel (ISS) armed groups attacked towns and cities. In Djibo town, more
than 300,000 residents were affected when GSIM destroyed water infrastructure. At least 80
people, mostly civilians, were killed when ISS fighters attacked Seytenga town in June; the
assailants went from house to house killing men. In Cameroon, armed separatist groups in the
Northwest and Southwest regions targeted people, healthcare facilities and schools; armed
groups in the Far North region similarly raided villages, killing and abducting dozens of
civilians. In the Central African Republic (CAR), at least 100 civilians were killed by armed
groups and government forces between February and March. Attacks on civilians also
intensified in eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) where armed
groups killed more than 1,800 civilians.
In Ethiopia, targeted attacks by government forces and armed groups on civilians in the
Oromia, Benishangul-Gumuz, Amhara, Tigray and Gambela regions involved mass killings. In
Mali, GSIM attacks on three villages in the Bankass Cercle in June, resulted in approximately
130 deaths, mostly civilians. In Mozambique, Al-Shabaab armed groups extended their
attacks on civilians from Cabo Delgado to Niassa and Nampula provinces. In May, they
beheaded 10 civilians during an attack on three villages in Cabo Delgado where they also
abducted women and girls and looted and burned houses. In Nigeria attacks by Boko Haram,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

21

which had previously operated mainly in the north-east, spread to some states in north-central
and north-western areas. Boko Haram, the Islamic State’s West African Province and unknown
gunmen killed at least 6,907 people. In Somalia, Al-Shabaab was responsible for 76% of the
167 deaths and 261 injuries arising from attacks on civilians between February and May. In its
deadliest attack, it killed more than 100 people in October in two bomb attacks targeting the
Ministry of Education building and a busy market intersection in Mogadishu, the capital.
Civilians also bore the brunt of indiscriminate attacks. In Burkina Faso, French forces
supporting the national army killed four civilians in February during an aerial strike on the
armed group Ansaroul Islam. Dozens of civilians were killed in similar air strikes by Burkinabe
armed forces in April and August. In CAR, 11 people were killed and 42 injured in 40
improvised explosive device-related incidents between January and October. Multiple airstrikes
by government forces in Ethiopia, including one on a kindergarten, killed hundreds of civilians
in the Tigrayan towns of Dedebit, Mekelle and Adi Daero. In Niger, an air strike by the Nigerian
army in February killed seven children in Maradi region. The Niger army was also accused of
unlawfully killing artisanal gold miners in Tamou in air strikes carried out in October.
Conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV) remained pervasive, leaving survivors facing
psychological and other health complications. In South Sudan, over 130 women and girls were
raped or gang raped between February and May in the southern part of Unity State, in the
context of the clashes between government forces with affiliated militias and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army-In Opposition. The UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic documented 47 cases of CRSV in CAR between June
and October. In DRC, at least six women were raped in May when the Cooperative for the
Development of the Congo armed group attacked a gold mining village in Ituri province. The
UN reported four CRSV incidents in Somalia between February and May. In Ethiopia, four
survivors in Afar region said they were raped and abused by members of the Tigrayan forces.
Blockades and restrictions on humanitarian access continued to be used as a method of war.
In Burkina Faso, GSIM not only blocked access and commercial supplies to several cities in
the north and east, but also attacked civilian supply convoys, even those escorted by the
military. In eastern DRC, relentless attacks by armed groups, military operations, and
deliberate movement restrictions imposed by both government forces and armed groups
further hindered humanitarian access and prevented communities from accessing vital
assistance. In Ethiopia, where restrictions on humanitarian aid deliveries to Tigray were
imposed when the conflict began in November 2020, the government declared a humanitarian
truce in March that allowed a significant increase in the number of aid convoys to the region
but deliveries stopped completely in August, when fighting resumed. In November, following
the signing of the cessation of hostilities (Pretoria) agreement, deliveries resumed.
In Mali, Katiba Serma fighters blockaded the road axis linking the towns of Boni, Douentza,
Hombori and Gossi between May and September, forcing traders to rely on military escorts. In
August, the armed group attacked and burned 19 goods trucks in Hombori.
Parties to armed conflicts must protect civilians by ending deliberate attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and indiscriminate attacks. They must also facilitate the safe
and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance for populations at risk.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
There was limited progress across the region in fighting impunity and ensuring the right to
truth, justice and reparation for victims of crimes under international law and other serious
human rights violations and abuses. In March, Chadian authorities surrendered Maxime
Jeoffroy Eli Mokom Gawaka, an Anti-Balaka armed group leader, to the ICC to face charges of
war crimes and crimes against humanity allegedly committed in 2013 and 2014 in CAR. In

22

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

May, Dutch authorities arrested a former army officer suspected of involvement in the
massacre of the Tutsi in Mugina city, Rwanda, during the 1994 genocide. The trials of Ali
Mohammed Ali, accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur in Sudan, and
Mahamat Said, alleged commander of the Seleka armed group in CAR, opened at the ICC in
April and September, respectively. Other trials concerning crimes committed by members of
armed groups in CAR opened at the Court of Assizes in Bangui, the capital, and at the Special
Criminal Court. In South Sudan, a military tribunal in Yei convicted eight soldiers of rape
committed in the context of the conflict. However, no progress was made in establishing the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan.
Governments must bolster efforts to fight impunity by undertaking thorough, independent,
impartial, effective and transparent investigations into crimes under international law and
bringing suspected perpetrators to justice in fair trials in civilian courts.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
RIGHT TO FOOD
The Russian invasion of Ukraine interrupted wheat supplies that many African countries had
depended on. Meanwhile rising fuel costs, another consequence of the war in Europe, caused
considerable spikes in food prices which disproportionately affected those who were
marginalized and most vulnerable to discrimination. Food insecurity worsened as drought in
several African countries reached unprecedented levels.
Large segments of populations faced acute hunger and high levels of food insecurity,
including in Angola, Burkina Faso, CAR, Chad, Kenya, Madagascar, Niger, Somalia, South
Sudan and Sudan. In Angola, food insecurity in the Cunene, Huíla and Namibe provinces was
among the worst in the world and in some of these areas, adults and children resorted to
eating stalks of grass to survive. In Burkina Faso, OCHA estimated that by September, 4.9
million people were facing food insecurity, including many internally displaced people who had
fled their homes due to the conflict.
Conflict and resulting displacement also heightened food insecurity in Niger affecting 4.4
million people (about 20% of the population). In CAR, 50% were food insecure, and in some
areas, it was as high as 75%. Half of Somalia’s population similarly faced acute food insecurity
and more than 3 million livestock, essential for pastoralists’ livelihoods, perished largely due to
drought. Massive loss of livestock as a consequence of drought was also recorded in Angola.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
While the impact of Covid-19 receded, several countries experienced new disease outbreaks
or epidemics, including an Ebola outbreak in Uganda, declared in September, which resulted
in 56 deaths.
A measles epidemic in Congo’s Pointe-Noire department claimed the lives of 112 children;
and in Zimbabwe more than 750 under-fives died when a measles outbreak in Mutasa district
spread to other areas. In Cameroon, a cholera epidemic affected seven regions, resulting in
298 deaths. At the New Bell prison in Douala, at least 16 prisoners died during two cholera
outbreaks at the prison, including Rodrigue Ndagueho Koufet, who had been arbitrarily
detained since September 2020 for participating in a peaceful protest. In Malawi, a cholera
epidemic affected 26 of its 28 districts and by 31 December, 576 deaths were reported.
In several countries, extreme weather conditions triggered disease outbreaks. In Nigeria,
floods precipitated an outbreak of waterborne diseases, including cholera, which killed over
320 people in Yobe, Borno and Adamawa states. Severe drought in Somalia led to a surge in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

23

malnutrition cases, while suspected cholera and measles cases increased sharply compared
with previous years, according to the WHO.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Forced evictions remained a grave concern in the region.
In southern Angola, the expropriation of communal grazing land for commercial ranching
persisted. In October, the police burned 16 houses and personal belongings in a raid to evict
the Mucubai community from their land in Ndamba area on the outskirts of Moçâmedes,
Namibe Province, to facilitate a land transfer to a commercial rancher.
In Tanzania, authorities forcibly evicted Indigenous Maasai community members from their
ancestral land in Loliondo division, Arusha region, to make way for a tourist operation. Prior to
the evictions, authorities failed to carry out genuine consultations with the residents or give
them adequate notice and compensation.
In urban centres and cities, forced evictions were concentrated in informal settlements. For
example, in June the Greater Accra Regional Security Council in Ghana demolished hundreds
of homes located on land belonging to the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in
Frafraha in the capital Accra. Residents were given only 48 hours’ notice of eviction. In
Nigeria, the Federal Capital Territory Administration and security agencies demolished around
100 structures in the Dubaidna Durumi 3 village in August. Security agents used tear gas,
exposure to which caused two children to faint, and physically assaulted residents during the
demolition. In Zambia, the Chingola municipal council demolished over 300 houses built on
land surrounding the Kasompe Airstrip in Chingola District.
Governments must take immediate action to ensure that the rights to food, health and
housing are guaranteed including through international cooperation and assistance where
necessary. They must also ensure that perpetrators of human rights violations are held to
account.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Crackdowns on the right to freedom of assembly intensified as authorities used national
security or the Covid-19 pandemic as pretexts to ban, suppress or violently disperse protests.
Even so, the people’s determination to claim their right to protest was barely deterred. Large
demonstrations relating to various issues, including spiking food prices, took place in cities
and towns across the region.
The deaths of scores of protesters were reported and attributed to excessive use of force by
security forces in Chad, DRC, Guinea, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia and
Sudan, among other countries. In Chad and Sierra Leone, where at least 50 and 27 protesters
died in October and August, respectively, findings from official investigations into the killings
were not available by the year’s end.
Arrests and detention of protesters remained widespread throughout the region, including
scores in Kenya, Sierra Leone and South Sudan who had protested the rising cost of living.
Sudanese security forces detained hundreds of protesters and forcibly disappeared many
others as part of a broader clampdown on opposition to the 2021 military coup. In Guinea,
Senegal and Uganda, authorities targeted opposition leaders or protest organizers. Ugandan
opposition leader Kizza Besigye was arrested and detained three times for protesting against
inflation and the high cost of living. Six women who protested his detention were also arrested
and charged with inciting violence and holding an illegal protest. In July, organizers and
participants of a banned march in Guinea were prosecuted.

24

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In several countries, including Chad, DRC, Guinea, Lesotho, Niger and Senegal, bans on
demonstrations effectively curtailed the right to protest.
On a positive note, in March the ECOWAS Court of Justice held that a 2011 ministerial order
in Senegal that prohibited demonstrations of a political nature in downtown Dakar (the capital)
violates the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. The court asked
Senegalese authorities to repeal it.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Human rights defenders, activists, journalists and opposition members faced harassment,
intimidation and threats simply for exercising their right to freedom of expression. In Nigeria, a
court in Kano city sentenced two social media celebrities to a week’s detention, flogging and a
fine for allegedly defaming the Kano state governor in a comedy sketch. In Senegal, an
opposition leader and two activists were among those arrested and charged with defamation
and dissemination of false news. In Sudan, a woman in Southern Kordofan was charged with
multiple offences under the Cybercrimes Act, including publishing false information in
connection with a social media post about child recruitment to the Sudan Armed Forces.
Activist and author Kakwenza Rukirabashaija fled Uganda after he was detained in connection
with Twitter posts that the police claimed were intended to disturb the peace of Lieutenant
General Muhoozi Kainerugaba, the president’s son. In Zambia, two men were sentenced to 24
months’ imprisonment with hard labour for insulting the president on TikTok.
Attacks on media freedom remained rife. Security forces raided media premises in Sudan
and Uganda while authorities suspended or shut down media outlets in Ghana, Mali, Nigeria,
Somalia and Tanzania for publishing content deemed critical of or unfavourable to
government. Many individual journalists across the region were also arrested and detained, if
not routinely harassed and intimidated. In Ethiopia, authorities arrested at least 29 journalists
and media workers, many of whom were not formally charged. In Eswatini, Zweli Martin
Dlamini, editor of Swaziland News, was declared a terrorist under the anti-terrorism law. In
Ghana, a radio host was sentenced to two weeks in prison and fined GHS 3,000 (around USD
377) for contempt of court after he published a video alleging that President Akufo-Addo
conspired with judges to influence the 2020 presidential elections.
Journalists and human rights defenders’ rights were repressed in Burundi, DRC,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Somalia and Zimbabwe. In Madagascar,
70-year-old environmental defender, Henri Rakotoarisoa, was stabbed to death in June. In
Mozambique, suspected state agents broke into human rights lawyer João Nhampossa’s office
and stole his computer, flash drives, mobile phones and various documents; and human rights
defender Adriano Nuvunga received death threats.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Authorities in the region tightened their grip on the right to freedom of association, impacting
civil society organizations. For example, ahead of Angola’s general elections, the police
prevented Omunga and the Association for the Development of Culture and Human Rights
from holding a conference on peace building, while authorities in Burundi shut down a press
conference in March. In Guinea, the transitional authorities dissolved the National Front for the
Defence of the Constitution, a coalition of civil society organizations and political parties
demanding the return to constitutional order.
Laws to stifle and control such organizations’ work were also enacted. In Niger, a decree was
promulgated in February, requiring government approval for all NGO-initiated programmes and
projects. Zimbabwe’s Private Voluntary Organization Amendment Bill, which contains
provisions threatening the very existence of civil society organizations and their operations, was
introduced in parliament.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

25

Governments must end the harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders,
journalists and activists, drop all charges against those facing prosecution, and
immediately and unconditionally release anyone arbitrarily detained; and ensure media
freedom is respected, including by allowing media outlets to operate independently.

RIGHTS OF INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE, REFUGEES
AND MIGRANTS
Increasing numbers of people fled their homes due to conflict or climate crises. An additional
600,000 people were internally displaced in DRC, bringing the total to nearly 6 million, the
highest in Africa. As the conflict in Mozambique expanded, the number of displaced people
rose to 1.5 million. Food and water insecurity, malnutrition, precarious health and inadequate
housing marked their living conditions. In Somalia, more than 1.8 million people were
displaced due to drought and conflict.
Uganda continued to host the largest refugee population in Africa with nearly 1.5 million
refugees, almost 100,000 of whom arrived in 2022. Yet, only 45% of Uganda’s funding
requirements were met as of November leaving authorities unable to adequately address
refugees’ urgent needs like healthcare, water, sanitation and education. Sudan continued to
receive new refugees from neighbouring countries – approximately 20,000 from South Sudan
and 59,800 from Ethiopia. But severe international funding shortfalls forced the World Food
Programme to cut refugees’ rations.
Migrants faced a unique set of violations and abuses. Thousands, including 14,000 between
January and May, were violently expelled from Algeria to “Point Zero” on the border with Niger.
In June, 10 migrants were found dead near the border with Libya. In Equatorial Guinea,
dozens of irregular migrants were deported to their home countries without due process and
without access to a lawyer.
Governments must take steps to ensure that refugees, migrants and internally displaced
people are protected and given full access to humanitarian aid, including food, water and
shelter; and immediately halt unlawful deportations and detentions of migrants and
refugees and ensure their protection needs are met. The international community must
address international funding shortfalls by providing long term sustainable and predictable
funding to enable host countries to adequately address refugees’ urgent needs.

DISCRIMINATION AND MARGINALIZATION
WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The exclusion of pregnant girls from schools persisted in Tanzania and Equatorial Guinea. On
the positive side, in September the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child found that Tanzania’s exclusion policy violated the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child and recommended the policy be reviewed. In addition, 800 children,
including pregnant girls and girls who had dropped out of school because of pregnancy, were
reintegrated into schools in Sierra Leone.
Gender-based violence remained prevalent across the region. In South Africa, murders of
women increased by 10.3%, with 989 women killed between July and September, while
sexual offences and rape increased by 11% and 10.8%, respectively. In Eswatini, the brutal
murder of a woman by her former partner led women’s rights organizations to intensify calls for
a national emergency to be declared to combat gender-based violence. In Guinea, victims of
rape continued to experience failures in prevention of and a lack of protection from such

26

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

crimes as well as inadequate access to and availability of medical care, sexual and
reproductive health services and care, psychological support, and legal and social support.
Several countries enacted progressive laws on gender equality. Congo’s parliament passed
the “Mouébara law” on combating domestic and other violence against women. In Sierra
Leone, the Customary Land Rights Act gave women an equal right to own and use family land;
and an equality law included a provision stipulating that 30% of all positions in government be
reserved for women. In Zimbabwe, legislation outlawing early and child marriage was
introduced.
On the flipside, the president of the Permanent Commission of the National Assembly in
Madagascar rejected a proposed law that sought to modify the penal code to decriminalize
abortion. In Nigeria, the National Assembly voted against five bills which aimed to promote
gender equality, and only committed to reconsider three of the bills after women’s groups and
civil society organizations protested. In Rwanda, parliament rejected a bill to allow the
provision of contraceptives to people over 15.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Harassment, arrests and prosecution of LGBTI people was common in many countries. After
being assaulted by her neighbours and motorcycle taxi-drivers, a transgender woman in Benin
was further beaten in a police station, stripped and photographed. She was released without
charge after spending three days in detention, naked and deprived of food. In Zambia,
members of the homophobic #BanNdevupaNdevu #BanHomosexuality movement held a
protest and used WhatsApp to call for the killing of and other violence against people
suspected of being gay. In Uganda, the official NGO Bureau ordered the closure of Sexual
Minorities Uganda, an umbrella organization that operates to protect LGBTI people’s rights.
Several countries introduced or considered new measures to criminalize consensual samesex relations. In Ghana, a bill to further criminalize LGBTI people remained pending in
parliament. In Equatorial Guinea, draft legislation regulating LGBTI people’s rights was being
prepared. In Senegal, however, the National Assembly rejected a proposed bill that would
criminalize LGBTI people.
There was barely any protection of LGBTI people in national courts. In Nigeria, three gay men
were sentenced to death by a sharia court in Ningi, Bauchi state. In Eswatini, the High Court
upheld the Registrar of Companies’ refusal to register the Eswatini Sexual and Gender
Minorities advocacy group as an organization. In Namibia, the High Court dismissed
applications of spouses of Namibian citizens seeking to regularize their immigration status on
the basis of same-sex marriages concluded outside the country. At the regional level, the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights rejected the observer status applications
of three organizations ostensibly because they worked on LGBTI people’s rights.

PEOPLE WITH ALBINISM
Mutilation and other violent attacks against people with albinism continued in parts of Eastern
and Southern Africa, motivated by superstitious misconceptions about albinism. In
Madagascar, the number of violent attacks doubled, with abductions of children with albinism
reported in February and August, while the mutilated body of a six-year-old boy was found in
the Berano community, Amboasary Atsimo district, in March. In Zambia, the vandalized grave
of a 12-year-old boy whose hand had been chopped off was discovered in January in
Mungwalala Village in Chama district, Eastern Province. In June, three men severed a 10-yearold boy’s forefinger in Mkushi district, Central Province.
Governments must take immediate action to protect people from discrimination and
violence, including steps to protect women’s and girls’ rights to equality and nondiscrimination, and to allow them to live free of gender-based violence, including by

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

27

ensuring survivors’ comprehensive access to sexual, reproductive and other healthcare,
psychological support, and legal and social support.

CLIMATE CRISIS AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The region continued to bear the brunt of extreme weather conditions exacerbated by climate
change. The Horn of Africa suffered its worst drought in 40 years while parts of Southern
Africa experienced extreme rainfall. In Madagascar, six tropical storms and cyclones made
landfall between January and April, killing more than 200 people. In South Africa’s KwazuluNatal province, local government’s poor spatial planning and infrastructure maintenance
worsened the impact of floods which destroyed thousands of houses. In West Africa, Nigerian
authorities failed to implement sufficient measures to mitigate the impact of floods which killed
at least 500 people and affected more than 1.9 million people across 25 states. In Senegal,
the rising sea level continued to cause erosion in fishing villages, including in Guet-Ndar in
Saint-Louis, threatening livelihoods and forcing communities to further move inland.
The high risk of environmental degradation or displacement of communities as a result of
planned or existing mining or infrastructural projects persisted in several countries. In
Namibia, the High Court dismissed an urgent application made by several organizations to
stop a Canadian mining company from continuing its exploration in the Kavango regions.
Tanzania and Uganda continued to participate in plans to construct the 1,443km East African
Crude Oil Pipeline which would pass through human settlements and wildlife areas,
agricultural land and water sources.
Several countries initiated new measures to tackle climate crisis or address environmental
degradation. Guinea’s prime minister instructed a bauxite mining company accused of serious
pollution to comply with international pollution control standards. In Somalia, the federal
government created the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change and appointed a special
presidential envoy for drought response. South Africa’s climate change bill was tabled in
parliament, but there were concerns that it did not go far enough in addressing climate crisis.
In South Sudan, President Kiir reportedly ordered all dredging related activities in the country
to be suspended, pending completion of assessments on the impact on surrounding
communities and ecosystems.
Governments must take immediate measures to protect individuals and communities
against the risks and impacts of climate change and extreme weather conditions, including
by seeking international assistance and cooperation to take sufficient climate adaptation
and mitigation measures.

28

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

AMERICAS REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Three years after the emergence of Covid-19, the Americas continued to experience the
devastating effects of the pandemic. Authorities failed to guarantee millions of people’s
access to basic rights to food, water and health and healthcare systems remained critically
underfunded. Against the backdrop of an economic downturn, authorities in many countries
intensified their use of repressive tactics to silence dissent and many forms of protest.
Several governments declared states of emergency that led to a series of grave human
rights violations, including arbitrary arrests, unfair trials and unlawful killings. In other
cases, repressive crackdowns included excessive use of force against people exercising
their right to protest, unlawful surveillance and monitoring of activists and attacks against
journalists. Indigenous peoples, Black people and other people facing racial discrimination
continued to be disproportionately affected by human rights violations, including abuses by
the police and torture and other ill-treatment in migrant detention centres. There were
major setbacks regarding sexual and reproductive rights and authorities in various countries
approved measures that undermined access to abortion and banned comprehensive
sexuality education. Violence against women and girls remained widespread and LGBTI
people continued to be at risk, with killings of transgender people reaching record levels in
some countries. In several countries authorities took action to bring to justice some of
those responsible for past crimes, but impunity for grave human rights violations generally
remained entrenched. Governments failed to fulfil their commitments on climate change.
Faced with historic levels of people seeking refuge or a better life abroad, authorities
implemented retrogressive policies that undermined the rights of refugees and migrants
and contravened international law.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
The number of people living in poverty remained above pre-pandemic levels. Many
governments across the region failed to address structural barriers that were responsible for
the crisis unleashed by the pandemic: previous socio-economic inequalities, low levels of
taxation and public expenditure on health and lack of access to other social determinants of
health, namely food security, clean water and basic infrastructure.
Inflation compounded economic hardship. According to the International Monetary Fund,
inflation was particularly marked in Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua
and Venezuela. Millions of people in the region did not enjoy basic rights to food, health and
water. In Brazil, more than half the population lacked adequate and secure access to food,
with Black people and marginalized communities disproportionately affected. In Venezuela,
most of the population experienced food insecurity and, according to the World Bank, by
August the country had the third highest inflation rate for food prices in the world. In Cuba,
food shortages forced people to queue for hours for basic goods and in Haiti more that 40% of
the population faced emergency hunger levels, amid a re-emergence of cholera. In Argentina,
36.5% of the population was living in poverty during the first half of the year.
Authorities in most countries failed to implement measures to strengthen protections to the
right to health, despite evidence from the pandemic that health systems needed major reform.
In Brazil, Congress approved the lowest ministry of health budget in a decade, threatening to
affect access to adequate care and medicine supplies in the country. Countries such as
Guatemala, Honduras and Paraguay continued to allocate critically low levels of public

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

29

spending to health and services were overwhelmed and unable to cover the basic needs of
their populations. In Chile, in September, a large majority of citizens rejected a proposal for a
new constitution that would have strengthened protections for economic, social, cultural and
environmental rights, while proposed reforms regarding rights to health and sexual and
reproductive rights remained pending at the end of the year.
Governments must take immediate action to ensure that maximum available resources are
assigned to guarantee that their minimum core obligations on economic, social and cultural
rights are met.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS, UNLAWFUL KILLINGS AND
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Authorities in many countries continued to violate people’s rights to life, liberty, fair trial and
physical integrity. These violations mainly occurred during government crackdowns in
response to political crises or states of emergency, or as part of more generalized failings of
security forces and justice systems that resulted in unlawful, arbitrary and disproportionate
responses.
Excessive use of force and unlawful killings by security forces were widespread throughout
the region and often targeted low-income and racialized neighbourhoods in countries such as
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, the USA and Venezuela, among
others. In Venezuela, security forces carried out 488 alleged extrajudicial executions in various
parts of the country between January and September. In Brazil, police operations led to the
killings of dozens of people.
Arbitrary detentions remained widespread in Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Mexico, Nicaragua and Venezuela. Those held were often tortured or otherwise ill-treated and,
in some cases, forcibly disappeared. In March, authorities in El Salvador declared a state of
emergency in response to a spike in homicides, allegedly committed by gangs. The measure
resulted in massive human rights violations, more than 60,000 arrests and widespread unfair
trials. In Ecuador, at least 146 people deprived of their liberty were killed amid a crisis in the
prison system. In Ecuador and Mexico, administrative, judicial and legislative decisions were
taken to expand the role of the armed forces in public security tasks.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT AND FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION
In several countries, social movements and activists took to the streets to demand basic
economic and social rights, an end to gender-based violence, the release of those unjustly
detained and to defend the environment. Authorities routinely responded with unnecessary
and excessive force. In Ecuador, at least six people died after security forces used excessive
force against protests by Indigenous peoples over socio-environmental issues. In Colombia, an
Indigenous leader was shot dead in the context of an environmental protest and, in a separate
protest in the capital Bogotá, a protester sustained eye trauma after being hit by a projectile. In
Peru, at least three people died during protests following National Police interventions during
the first half of the year and, during the last weeks of the year, at least 22 people were killed in
protests during the political crisis that followed the ousting of former president Pedro Castillo in
December.
In Bolivia, law enforcement officials violently repressed, and in some cases arbitrarily
detained, coca leaf producers who were protesting against efforts to eradicate their crops. In

30

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

the USA, more than 75 people were arrested in connection with protests following the death of
Jayland Walker, a Black man who was fatally shot by police 46 times in Akron, Ohio, in June.
In Mexico, the government continued to stigmatize feminists and human rights defenders who
protested against government inaction on gender-based violence and, in some states, security
forces violently beat and arbitrarily detained protesters. In Puerto Rico and Cuba, several
reports emerged of excessive use of force by police against protests over electricity outages,
and other social demands, following Hurricane Ian.
In Nicaragua, authorities revoked the legal status of more than 1,000 organizations during
the year, closed at least 12 universities, jailed journalists and harassed political activists and
opponents. In Venezuela, intelligence services and other security forces, with the
acquiescence of the judicial system, continued to arbitrarily detain, torture and otherwise illtreat those perceived to be opponents of the government.
Human rights defenders were killed for their work in Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala,
Honduras, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela. In addition, they were threatened, harassed or
subjected to criminal prosecution or arbitrary arrests in, among others, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay,
Peru and Venezuela. In Colombia, at least 189 social leaders and human rights defenders
were killed during the year. In Venezuela, at least 396 human rights defenders were the targets
of intimidation, stigmatization and threats. In Nicaragua, dozens of detained dissidents and
critics were put on trial in proceedings which lacked basic due process guarantees. In
Paraguay, activists continued to face trumped-up charges for participating in protests against
state health policies. In Guatemala, judges, prosecutors, human rights defenders and
protesters faced unfounded criminal proceedings. And in Bolivia, human rights defenders
faced prosecution for criticizing the government.
Freedom of the press remained at risk across the region. Journalists were killed in Colombia,
Haiti, Mexico and Venezuela. Mexico recorded its most deadly year for the press, with at least
13 journalists killed. In Nicaragua and Venezuela, media outlets were arbitrarily closed down.
In Guatemala, journalists reporting on corruption and impunity often faced unfounded criminal
complaints and smear campaigns, while in El Salvador attacks on dozens of journalists were
recorded.
The use of Pegasus spyware for unlawful surveillance of activists and journalists was
documented in El Salvador and Mexico.
Authorities also used vague and overly broad laws to silence critics. In El Salvador, the Penal
Code was amended to provide for prison sentences of between 10 and 15 years for generating
“anxiety” or “panic” by reporting on gangs. In Nicaragua, the General Law on Regulation and
Control of Non-Profit Organizations was the latest in a series of laws passed since the 2018
crackdown that undermined civil society organizations. In Cuba, a new Penal Code came into
force in December which risked entrenching long-standing limitations on the rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly. In Argentina, the Jujuy provincial government
introduced a bill to amend the provincial constitution to limit protests by prohibiting roadblocks
and the “usurpation of public space”.
Governments must respect, protect and facilitate the exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly, including ensuring that journalists, human
rights defenders and those perceived as political opponents are able to carry out their work
and exercise their rights in a safe and enabling environment free from harassment, violence
and unlawful surveillance.
Governments must ensure that people are able exercise their right to peaceful protest and
that any force deployed by the security services is necessary, proportionate and lawful.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

31

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Authorities in several countries in the region took actions that seriously jeopardized sexual and
reproductive rights. In El Salvador, a total ban on abortion remained in force. At least two
women remained imprisoned on charges related to obstetric emergencies, including one
woman serving a maximum 50-year sentence. In the Dominican Republic, Congress again
failed to table a revised criminal code that decriminalizes abortion.
In June, the US Supreme Court ended federal protections for abortion rights by overturning
Roe v. Wade, reversing nearly 50 years of jurisprudence. The decision was followed by several
US state legislatures passing laws to ban or curtail access to abortions. In contrast, people in
various US states voted overwhelmingly to protect the right to abortion. In Puerto Rico, five bills
seeking to restrict access to abortion were defeated. In Peru, a bill was submitted to Congress
which, if approved, would jeopardize access to abortion. In Argentina, significant obstacles
persisted in accessing abortion services, despite a 2020 law decriminalizing and legalizing
abortion within the first 14 weeks of pregnancy.
Nonetheless, some advances were made on sexual and reproductive rights. A ruling by
Colombia’s Constitutional Court in February decriminalized abortion up to the 24th week of
pregnancy. In Mexico, four more states decriminalized abortion, bringing the total to 11 out of
32 Mexican states. In Ecuador, the president signed into law a bill decriminalizing abortion in
cases of rape, which nevertheless contained certain restrictive elements that limited
reproductive rights.
Authorities in several countries failed to protect the right to comprehensive sexuality
education. Authorities in Argentina (Chaco province), Paraguay, Peru and several US states
continued to curb the use of education on sexuality and gender diversity in educational
settings.
Governments must ensure access to sexual and reproductive rights, including access to
safe abortion services.

VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN,
GIRLS AND LGBTI PEOPLE
Authorities failed to protect women and girls from entrenched gender-based violence or to
address impunity for these crimes. In Argentina, according to figures collected by NGOs, 233
gender-based killings (femicides) were recorded, 91% of them in domestic settings. In Mexico,
there were 858 reported feminicides (gender-based killings facilitated by impunity and
therefore where state and legal structures bear responsibility for the crime) between January
and November. In Venezuela, local organizations reported a total of 199 femicides from
January to September. A civil society observatory in Uruguay recorded an increase in
femicides compared to the previous year and in Peru 124 femicides were recorded.
The US Congress passed, and President Biden signed into law, the previously lapsed
Violence Against Women Act, the main funding mechanism for preventing and responding to
violence against women in the USA.
LGBTI people continued to be at risk of killings, attacks, discrimination and threats and faced
obstacles to legal recognition in various countries in the region. Transgender people were at
particular risk of killings in Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico. Data
published in January showed that for the 13th consecutive year Brazil was the country with the
highest number of killings of transgender people in the world. However, for the first time in the
country’s history, two transgender women were elected to the federal congress.

32

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Several legislative measures were adopted during the year concerning LGBTI people’s rights.
In Colombia, the Constitutional Court recognized a non-binary gender marker for ID
registration, establishing legal precedent for gender diversity. In September, following a
referendum, Cuba approved a new Family Code which legalizes same-sex marriage and allows
same-sex couples to adopt. In October, Tamaulipas State in Mexico legalized same-sex
marriage, thus making it legal in the entire country. In the USA, the Respect for Marriage Act
was enacted in December, providing some federal protection for same-sex marriages.
Conversely, in May, Puerto Rico’s Commission on Human Rights and Labour Affairs dropped
proposals for a bill of rights for LGBTI people.
Governments across the region must take urgent action to prevent femicides and
feminicides and killings of LGBTI people, bring those responsible for these crimes to
justice and ensure non-repetition guarantees are put in place.

DISCRIMINATION AGAINST INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND
BLACK PEOPLE
People historically subjected to racial discrimination continued to be disproportionately
affected by human rights violations. Indigenous leaders were killed in the context of landrelated conflicts in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador and Mexico. In Colombia, Indigenous leaders
and defenders were attacked and killed and, in areas where armed opposition groups
continued to operate, Indigenous peoples and Afro-descendant communities were forcibly
displaced and some faced humanitarian crises. In Paraguay authorities failed to adequately
respond when Indigenous peoples were subjected to forced evictions from their lands. In
Nicaragua, Indigenous peoples were forcibly displaced and subjected to violence by armed
individuals.
In several countries – including Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela – governments went ahead with extractive, agricultural and
infrastructure projects without obtaining the free, prior and informed consent of Indigenous
peoples affected. In Argentina, Indigenous peoples continued to face serious difficulties in
accessing collective land rights. In Ecuador, killings and threats targeting Indigenous leaders
and defenders continued. Indigenous peoples in the Ecuadorian Amazon affected by a large
oil spill in January remained without reparation for that spill as well as an earlier one in 2020.
In the USA, Indigenous women continued to face disproportionately high levels of rape and
sexual violence and lacked access to basic post-rape care; they also experienced high rates of
disappearances and killings. In Canada, Indigenous women from several First Nations and
Innuit communities in Québec reported forced sterilization and other obstetric violence.
Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau officially acknowledged the role of the Catholic Church and
Canadian government in creating, maintaining and operating the residential school system,
which in October the House of Commons unanimously recognized as genocide against
Indigenous peoples.
Black people continued to be disproportionately affected by state violence in several
countries in the region. In Brazil, several police operations resulted in multiple killings, such as
the one in May in the Vila Cruzeiro neighbourhood of Rio de Janeiro in which 23 people were
killed. Civil society data collection revealed that 84% of all people killed by police in Brazil were
Black. Similarly, data on police killings in Puerto Rico showed that people in low-income
racially mixed communities were more at risk of police killings than low-income white
communities. Authorities in the USA subjected Black Haitian asylum seekers to arbitrary
detention and discriminatory and humiliating treatment that amounted to race-based torture.
Also in the USA, the limited public data available suggested that Black people were

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

33

disproportionately impacted by police use of lethal force. The US Senate failed to introduce the
George Floyd Justice in Policing Act. The Act, which seeks to address a wide range of policies
and issues regarding policing practices and law enforcement accountability, was passed by the
House of Representatives in 2021. In Canada, the Toronto Police Service reported
disproportionate use of force and strip searches on racialized, particularly Black, communities.
Authorities must respect Indigenous peoples’ right to self-determination and ensure their
free, prior and informed consent for any projects on their territory. Killings of Indigenous
people must be promptly, impartially and effectively investigated.
Authorities must take decisive action to dismantle the systemic racism present in policing
operations and immigration systems and design systems for collecting data disaggregated
by race with the full and effective participation of affected communities.

IMPUNITY AND LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Authorities in several countries made important yet limited progress in relation to
accountability for human rights violations, including crimes under international law, committed
in previous decades. In contrast, governments generally failed to prosecute those suspected of
responsibility for such crimes and other grave human rights violations committed more
recently and entrenched impunity remained a common characteristic of justice systems across
the region.
Authorities in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala and Uruguay made progress in
investigations or bringing charges for human rights violations committed under former military
regimes or during internal armed conflicts. In Colombia, dozens of former army members had
been charged by the end of the year under the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
However, in El Salvador, authorities failed to make significant progress in prosecuting those
accused of committing crimes and human rights violations during the armed conflict
(1980-1992). In the USA, no one was brought to justice for the CIA-operated secret detention
system (authorized from 2001 to 2009), which involved widespread human rights violations,
including enforced disappearances, torture and other ill-treatment. In Guatemala, authorities
failed to protect judges and prosecutors working on cases relating to the internal armed
conflict (1960-1996) from continuous intimidation, harassment and unfounded criminal
prosecutions.
Impunity persisted for the human rights violations committed by authorities in Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Honduras, Nicaragua and Venezuela during protests that were met with repressive
crackdowns by governments between 2017 and 2021. In Mexico, the total number of people
missing or disappeared since the 1960s reached over 109,000, more than 90,000 of them
since 2006.
Reports by the UN Fact-Finding Mission on Venezuela highlighted the manipulation of the
judicial system to shield police and military officers responsible for violations from justice and
identified chain of command that linked suspected perpetrators to Nicolás Maduro’s
government. The Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC opened an investigation into alleged
crimes against humanity in Venezuela, the first such investigation in the region.
In Chile, people accused of alleged offences during the 2019 mass protests remained in
detention, some on unfounded charges. Meanwhile, the government announced a new
programme to provide reparations to the more than 400 people who sustained eye trauma
during the protests. In Nicaragua, by the end of the year, 225 people remained detained in
connection with the human rights crisis that began in 2018.
In Brazil, the Attorney General requested that the Supreme Court dismiss seven of the 10
investigations opened against President Bolsonaro following the report of a Parliamentary
Commission of Inquiry into the government’s management of the Covid-19 pandemic, which

34

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

had recommended indicting him on charges of charlatanism, malfeasance and crimes against
humanity. Impunity continued to prevail for unlawful killings by Brazilian security forces and
police officers.
Prisons remained chronically overcrowded in Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Uruguay and
Venezuela.
Thirty-five Muslim men remained arbitrarily and indefinitely detained by the US military in the
detention facility at the US naval base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, in violation of international
law.
Authorities must address impunity by undertaking prompt, independent, impartial and
effective investigations into all crimes under international law and other human rights
violations, both past and present. Authorities must prosecute those suspected of criminal
responsibility for crimes under international law and ensure justice, truth and reparation for
victims and survivors.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS AND
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Governments failed to implement sufficient measures to tackle the scale of the climate crisis
and activists and Indigenous peoples protecting the environment were attacked for trying to
address this crisis. Despite the rhetoric of many countries in the region in support of global
emissions reductions, authorities failed to match these words with actions. In its 2022 report,
Global Witness stated that three quarters of the killings in 2021 of land and environmental
defenders occurred in Latin America. Such killings were recorded in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Venezuela.
Latin America, along with Africa, remained one of the regions with the highest rate of net loss
of natural forest cover, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization. In Brazil,
between January and October, the deforestation rate in the Brazilian Amazon reached its
highest level since 2015. In Bolivia, despite the authorities’ commitment to maintain forest
cover and combat illegal deforestation, over a million hectares of land were burned, mostly to
expand agricultural activities.
Several governments adopted commitments and passed legislation on climate change, none
of which matched the scale of the crisis ahead. During the 27th Conference of the Parties
(COP27) in November, Canada and the USA failed to increase their emissions reduction
targets for 2030.
Although the US Congress passed the first package of climate change legislation in US
history, it also reinstated old auctions of oil and gas leases on federal land and the Gulf of
Mexico, which the Biden administration had tried to cancel, and forced the administration to
hold several new auctions, which began in September.
Brazil’s president-elect, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, announced that he would promote the
protection of the country’s biomes with special emphasis on the Amazon, an area that
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports have declared highly vulnerable to
drought and high temperatures. While Colombian President Gustavo Petro announced at
COP27 an energy transition plan that focuses on non-conventional renewable energy sources,
organizations such as Nación Wayuu and Indepaz denounced violations of the right to free,
prior and informed consultation of Indigenous peoples about the development of several wind
farms in the Guajira Department.
Authorities in the region failed to fulfil the commitments they had previously signed up to as
parties to the Paris Agreement and, in some cases, actively supported fossil fuel projects. In
Brazil, authorities submitted an NDC that was insufficient in relation to the county’s

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

35

contribution to climate change. By the middle of the year, Canada’s Export Development
agency had financed CAD 3.4 billion (USD 2.5 billion) to the oil and gas sector in Canada and
abroad. At the same time, Canada launched a plan to phase out public financing for new fossil
fuel projects.
Authorities must take urgent action to curb their carbon emissions, cease funding fossil
fuel projects and ensure Indigenous peoples and human rights defenders are protected in
state policies on the environment. Wealthier countries in the region must also urgently
scale up climate finance to lower income countries and commit to providing additional
dedicated funding for loss and damage.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Profound human rights and humanitarian crises throughout the region led to sharp increases
in the numbers of people leaving their country in search of protection. In June, UNICEF
declared that the number of children crossing the Darién Gap between Colombia and Panama
had reached more than 5,000 since the beginning of 2022, twice the number recorded for the
same period in 2021. By the end of 2022, the Inter-agency Coordination Platform for Refugees
and Migrants from Venezuela estimated that 7.13 million Venezuelans have left their country,
84% seeking protection in 17 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. The number of
people leaving Cuba and Haiti also increased significantly compared to recent years, adding
to the steady number of people fleeing from Venezuela and Central America. Lack of robust
systems of international protection, continued to leave refugees and migrants unprotected in
Argentina, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, and the USA.
US federal courts upheld the Migrant Protection Protocols and Title 42 of the US Code,
resulting in irreparable harm to tens of thousands of asylum seekers who were expelled to
danger in Mexico. Mexican authorities continued to collaborate with US authorities to enable
these policies, which breach the principle of non-refoulement. In the USA, authorities
continued a system of arbitrary, mass immigration detention, with funding to detain 34,000
people daily in 2022. Between September 2021 and May 2022, the USA expelled more than
25,000 Haitians without due process, in violation of national and international law. Mexican
authorities detained at least 281,149 people in overcrowded immigration detention centres
and deported at least 98,299 people, mostly from Central America, including thousands of
unaccompanied children.
Trinidad and Tobago remained one of the few countries in the Americas lacking national
legislation on asylum and the UN expressed alarm at authorities’ practices of pushbacks,
inhumane detention and deportations of Venezuelan asylum seekers. Meanwhile, Venezuelan
refugee women were subjected to gender-based violence and discrimination in at least
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago, where authorities failed to guarantee their
rights to a life free from violence and discrimination. In Peru, the system to process asylum
applications remained suspended.
In Chile, authorities restarted the immediate expulsion of foreign nationals without assessing
whether they needed international protection or the risks upon return. In Argentina,
authorities failed to pass regulations to allow asylum seekers and refugees greater access to
basic rights such as education, work and healthcare.
Authorities must urgently cease unlawful deportations, refrain from detaining refugees
and migrants and ensure their international protection needs are met.

36

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONAL OVERVIEW
There were faint glimmers of hope for human rights in the Asia-Pacific region, with modest
gains in the rights of women and LGBTI people in several countries, a new law
criminalizing torture in Pakistan and the abolition of the death penalty in Papua New
Guinea. Yet, the overall picture remained bleak. Civilians bore the brunt of escalating
armed conflict in Myanmar. The full effects of Taliban rule on human rights in Afghanistan
became increasingly apparent including the particularly devastating rollback of the rights of
women and girls. Economic crises fuelled by pandemic-related recession, economic
mismanagement and armed conflict within and beyond the region severely affected
economic and social rights including in Afghanistan, Laos and Sri Lanka, where food,
healthcare and an adequate standard of living became increasingly inaccessible.
Intolerance of dissent grew as authorities in numerous countries tightened restrictions on
freedom of expression and association and arbitrarily arrested and detained their critics.
People took to the streets across the region to protest against injustice, deprivation and
discrimination, but in countries including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Sri Lanka and Thailand they were met with excessive, sometimes lethal, force. Impunity
was compounded by the inability of the UN Human Rights Council to effectively address
serious concerns in China and the Philippines. Well-established patterns of discrimination,
including against minorities, women and girls, LGBTI people and Indigenous peoples also
persisted. The resumption of executions in Afghanistan and Myanmar represented a major
regression.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
Economic crises severely impacted human rights including the rights to an adequate standard
of living and to health. In Sri Lanka, inflation exceeded 73% in September, making food,
healthcare and other basic needs unaffordable, particularly for day wage workers, many of
whom were women and from Malaiyaha Tamil minorities. High inflation in Laos similarly put
basic commodities out of reach for many. In Afghanistan, the spiralling economic crisis
plunged 97% of the population into poverty, with the vast majority of households experiencing
hunger and increasingly resorting to negative coping strategies to survive – a situation that was
set to worsen further following the Taliban’s December decree banning women from working
for humanitarian and other NGOs. The decree restricted livelihood opportunities for women
and prevented people from accessing services that were previously provided by women
workers.
Elsewhere, inadequate housing protections and house demolitions left thousands of people
homeless and destitute or at risk thereof. In Nepal, the government ignored calls to amend a
2018 housing law, which failed to adequately guarantee the right to housing, leaving hundreds
of families, predominantly from marginalized communities or those living in informal
settlements, at risk of eviction. In India, authorities unlawfully demolished mainly Muslimowned homes and other private property in the capital, New Delhi, and in several states,
raising concerns that this was a form of collective punishment for alleged involvement in intercommunal clashes. In Cambodia and Mongolia, multiple households were made homeless or
lost their livelihoods as a result of urban development projects.
Governments must guarantee economic, social and cultural rights, without discrimination.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

37

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression remained under threat in the region as many governments
intensified crackdowns on dissent and sought to avoid scrutiny.
Attacks on press freedom persisted in multiple countries. In Afghanistan, journalists faced
arbitrary arrest and detention as well as torture and other ill-treatment for reporting that was
critical of the Taliban. In Bangladesh, where journalists experienced physical assaults, judicial
harassment and other reprisals for their reporting, a draft data protection law threatened to
further curtail freedom of expression. Media workers in Pakistan also came under increased
pressure as journalists and others were arrested on spurious charges. A new administration in
the Philippines brought no immediate respite for the media; at least two journalists were killed
in the latter part of the year while judicial harassment of others continued and websites
belonging to independent media groups remained blocked.
In China, online censorship and surveillance grew ever more pervasive within the country.
The government also sought to prevent the discussion of its human rights record
internationally, including by trying to stop the OHCHR from publishing a report documenting
potential crimes under international law and other serious human rights violations against
Uyghurs and other Muslim ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang.
The Indian government likewise tried to prevent the human rights situation there from being
discussed abroad by imposing international travel bans on human rights defenders. It also
took the extraordinary and unlawful step of banning a list of ordinary words from being used in
parliamentary debates in a clear attempt to restrict criticism from opposition parties.
In Myanmar, the military authorities intensified both online and offline surveillance and
restricted the right to information, reportedly using CCTV cameras with facial recognition
capabilities in major cities and imposing periodic nationwide internet and telecommunications
shutdowns. In North Korea, all criticism of the government remained forbidden.
In Indonesia, freedom of expression was dealt a further blow with the adoption in December
of a new penal code that recriminalized insulting the president and other officials and state
institutions. The Maldives parliament passed a law that could force journalists to reveal their
sources. Encouragingly, the Maldives government was considering amending the law, but
faced strong criticism.
Authorities in Viet Nam continued to use the existing criminal code to arbitrarily arrest and
prosecute critics. A new decree, “Decree 53”, requiring tech companies to store user data and
potentially share it with the authorities, potentially provided a new tool to silence dissent.
In both Malaysia and Nepal, comedians were among those who faced prison sentences in
relation to their performances.
Governments must respect media freedoms, halt all investigations or prosecutions related
to the exercise of the right to freedom of expression without discrimination and repeal legal
provisions that criminalize legitimate expression or which can be used to restrict it.

FREEDOM OF PEACEFUL ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION
Even as governments sought to repress dissent, people across the region claimed their right to
protest against injustice and discrimination, often risking arbitrary arrest and detention, as well
as injury and even death when authorities repeatedly resorted to unnecessary and excessive
force.
In Sri Lanka, police used live ammunition, tear gas and water cannon against largely peaceful
crowds protesting against the economic crisis, causing deaths and injuries. Police in
Bangladesh used live and rubber bullets, sound grenades and tear gas to disperse protests by
students and workers.

38

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In Pakistan, authorities forcibly broke up peaceful protests by activists and family members of
victims of enforced disappearances. Protesting victims of loan sharks in Nepal were met with
police baton charges and arbitrarily detained. In India, a 15-year-old boy and another protester
were shot and killed by police during demonstrations in Jharkhand state. Police in Indonesia
also responded with unnecessary and sometimes lethal force to protests including in Papua
and West Papua.
New restrictions were introduced further limiting the right to protest in several countries. In
Karnataka state in India, an order was upheld which restricted protests to a designated area in
the state capital. A new penal code in Indonesia banned unauthorized demonstrations, while
in Australia, several states adopted new laws imposing fines and prison sentences for
participation in unauthorized protests.
Freedom of association was also further curtailed in a number of countries. In Afghanistan,
the space for independent human rights monitoring and reporting had all but disappeared. In
India, money laundering laws and other pretexts were used to harass NGOs. New restrictions
were imposed on the legitimate work of NGOs in Myanmar with non-compliance punishable by
imprisonment.
In Cambodia, the main opposition party, the Cambodia National Rescue Party, remained
banned and prosecution of its members and that of its successor, the Candlelight Party,
continued. Public accusations of links to communist groups, known as “red-tagging”,
continued to be used in the Philippines against organizations and individuals as a way of
suppressing dissent by marking them out for arbitrary detention and unlawful killing. In
Mongolia, human rights defenders faced accusations of spying and other familiar patterns of
intimidation. Civil society space in Chinese Autonomous Region of Hong Kong contracted even
further in 2022 as legitimate NGO activities were criminalized, creating an environment of fear
and self-censorship.
Governments must respect and facilitate the exercise of the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and association. The work of human rights defenders must be respected and
protected and a safe and enabling environment for their work ensured.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In China, despite the authorities’ assertions to the contrary, many thousands of men and
women were still believed to be arbitrarily detained in Xinjiang. Tibetan activists in China were
also sentenced to lengthy prison sentences after unfair trials for activities deemed to have
“incited separatism” or “endangered national security”.
Elsewhere across the region, human rights defenders, political and environmental activists
and others were arbitrarily arrested and detained for asserting their right to protest or otherwise
challenging government policies and actions.
In Thailand, more than 1,000 people including several hundred children were facing criminal
charges for their participation in protests. Protesters in Sri Lanka were arrested, arbitrarily
detained and charged with terror-related and other offences. In Myanmar, mass arbitrary
arrests and detentions of opponents of the military regime continued and more than 1,000
people were convicted in grossly unfair trials.
In Viet Nam, long prison sentences were imposed on human rights and land rights activists,
and in India, human rights defenders were detained without trial.
Governments must end all arbitrary arrests and detention of government critics and others
and immediately release anyone detained solely for the peaceful exercise of their rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association or other human rights.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

39

IMPUNITY AND THE RIGHT TO JUSTICE
Impunity prevailed as national authorities in many countries failed to fulfil victims’ rights to
justice, truth and reparation, and international bodies too often reneged on their
responsibilities to protect them.
Despite the report by OHCHR that added to an already strong body of evidence of Chinese
atrocities in Xinjiang the UN Human Rights Council voted against even holding a debate on the
situation. It similarly betrayed the countless victims of the “war on drugs” in the Philippines by
failing to renew OHCHR’s monitoring mandate, despite a disturbing increase in police killings
during anti-drug operations during the year. By contrast, in the face of a lack of progress on
establishing accountability for crimes under international law committed during and after the
armed conflict in Sri Lanka, the council adopted a resolution to extend OHCHR’s mandate to
gather evidence for future accountability processes.
Impunity became further entrenched in Afghanistan, where the Taliban’s version of a justice
system lacked any credibility. In Nepal, there was no progress towards realizing the right to
justice for the tens of thousands of victims of grave human rights violations committed during
the 1996-2006 internal armed conflict there.
Where prosecutions of alleged perpetrators took place, trials were too often marred by
irregularities. For example, there were serious questions about the credibility of a trial in
Indonesia in which a former military commander was acquitted of the unlawful killing of four
Papuan high-school students in 2014.
Governments must address impunity by undertaking thorough, independent, impartial,
effective and transparent investigations into crimes under international law and other
serious human rights abuses and by bringing suspected perpetrators to justice in fair trials.
Full cooperation should be extended to international investigations and justice processes.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
The Myanmar military was responsible for war crimes as it intensified indiscriminate and
targeted ground and air attacks against civilians and civilian objects, and looted and burned
villages, killing hundreds and forcibly displacing thousands of people. Its use of cluster
munitions and land mines, both banned under international law, was also documented.
War crimes were also committed in Afghanistan, where the Taliban continued its campaign of
reprisal killings against members of the former administration and security forces and
arbitrarily arrested, extrajudicially executed and tortured individuals allegedly associated with
the National Resistance Front and other armed opposition groups.
Armed groups were also responsible for grave violations in Afghanistan, where Islamic State –
Khorasan Province (IS-KP) continued its targeted attacks on minority ethnic and religious
groups, including by bombing religious and educational facilities used by Hazara and Sikh
communities. In Myanmar, some groups used banned anti-personnel landmines or improvised
explosive devices. Armed groups in India’s Jammu and Kashmir region reportedly killed at
least 19 civilians including members of the Hindu minority community.
All parties to armed conflicts must abide by international humanitarian law, in particular
by ending direct attacks against civilians or civilian infrastructure and indiscriminate
attacks.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Following an Amnesty International report documenting the role of businesses in importing
and distributing aviation fuel that could be used by Myanmar in military air strikes against

40

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

civilians, implicated companies including Puma Energy and other foreign businesses
announced that they were exiting or suspending business operations in Myanmar.
Underscoring the need for corporate actors to take seriously their responsibility to protect and
promote human rights and to be held to account when they do not, Amnesty International also
found that Meta’s (formerly Facebook) algorithms and business practices had substantially
contributed to grave human rights violations suffered by Rohingya in Myanmar 2017.
Corporate actors should put in place due diligence measures to ensure that their
operations and those of their partners do not cause or contribute to human rights abuses.
They should also put mitigation measures in place against any potential abuses.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Freedom of religion and belief remained under threat in several countries. In India, where
Muslims were routinely arrested and prosecuted for exercising their religious freedoms, the
Karnataka state government, following the example of other states, passed a law criminalizing
marriages where the forced conversion of one spouse, often the Hindu woman, was alleged by
a relative or other person. Girls were also banned from wearing the hijab in public schools in
Karnataka.
Allegations of violations of blasphemy laws continued to result in death sentences and
lynchings in Pakistan where forced conversions to Islam of Hindu, Christian and Sikh women
and girls also persisted.
In China, religious leaders and Falun Gong practitioners were among those subjected to
arbitrary detention and imprisonment, while the continued persecution of Uyghurs, Kazakhs
and those from other predominantly Muslim ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang threatened to
erase both their religious and cultural identities.
Governments must take effective measures to implement legal and policy reforms to fully
protect, promote and guarantee freedom of religion or belief without discrimination.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
New legislation aimed at strengthening protections for women and girls, including legislation
combating sexual and gender-based violence, was adopted in several countries including
China, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. In India the Supreme Court passed two
progressive judgments upholding the right to dignity of sex workers, by directing the police to
stop harassing them and interpreting an existing law to expand abortion access to all women,
notwithstanding their marital status.
Nevertheless, the reality for many women and girls in the region remained one of systemic
discrimination and violence. In Afghanistan, women and girls were effectively erased from
public life and spaces as new edicts further restricted their rights and freedoms which, in
addition to banning them from working with NGOs, forbade them from travelling without a
male chaperone, attending secondary school and university or going to public parks, among
other restrictions.
In Nepal, women continued to be denied equal citizenship rights and, although the statute of
limitations for rape was extended, the excessively short period in which complaints must be
filed remained a significant barrier to effective remedy for survivors.
Legal obstacles to women’s participation in elections in Fiji remained in place during the
December parliamentary elections because a legal challenge to a discriminatory law requiring
women to change their name on their birth certificate if they wished to vote under their
married name was unresolved. Women’s representation in public life remained low, including
in Papua New Guinea – where only two of the 118 parliamentarians elected in 2022 were

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

41

women – and Japan, where women accounted for just 10.6% of prefectural assembly
members.
Violence against women also remained prevalent. There were calls on the Maldives
authorities by UN experts to address rising gender-based violence there. In Bangladesh,
hundreds of incidents of rape or murder of women by their husbands or other family members
were recorded by an NGO, although many cases are thought to go unreported and impunity
for such crimes remained widespread. Despite being criminalized, violent attacks on women
and girls accused of sorcery continued in Papua New Guinea.
In Pakistan, several high-profile murders of women by their partners or family members were
reported, yet the National Assembly failed to adopt legislation on domestic violence, pending
since 2021.
Governments across the region must accelerate efforts to protect and end discrimination
against women and girls and take concrete steps to prevent and prosecute gender-based
and sexual violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Some steps were taken towards legal recognition of LGBTI rights in countries including Japan,
Singapore and Taiwan. In Singapore, consensual sexual relations between men were
decriminalized. However, the Singapore government also amended the constitution to
effectively block same-sex marriage and, overall, LGBTI people in the region remained among
the most at-risk groups, with particular concerns in South Asia.
In Sri Lanka, despite a landmark decision by the CEDAW Committee that provisions in Sri
Lanka’s Penal Code criminalizing consensual same-sex conduct violate the right to nondiscrimination, the government failed to act. In Afghanistan, LGBTI people were forced to live
in hiding to protect themselves against physical and sexual assault, arbitrary
detention and other violations by the Taliban. Chinese authorities also continued their antiLGBTI campaign, severely restricting both offline and online LGBTI activism and censoring
LGBTI content. In Pakistan, violent attacks, hate speech and threats against transgender
people persisted and murder rates of transgender people were the highest in the region.
Governments should repeal laws and policies that discriminate against LGBTI people,
including by decriminalizing consensual same-sex relations and removing legal obstacles to
same-sex marriage, and put in place measures to protect LGBTI people’s rights and enable
them to live in safety and dignity.

ETHNIC AND CASTE-BASED DISCRIMINATION AND
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In both India and Pakistan, caste-based discrimination continued largely unabated. In India,
Dalits and Adivasis were subjected to violence and discrimination from members of dominant
castes with impunity. A draft bill was tabled in Bangladesh that would outlaw discrimination
including based on caste, religion and other identities, but mobs continued to conduct violent
attacks against Hindu minorities.
Indigenous peoples as well as ethnic and religious minority groups also continued to face
widespread discrimination in Cambodia, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, the
Philippines, Sri Lanka and Thailand. In Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
were disproportionally represented in the penal system. In Sri Lanka, Muslim and Tamil
minorities were arbitrarily arrested and detained in disproportionate numbers under the
draconian Prevention of Terrorism Act. Online advocacy of hatred towards and disinformation

42

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

about ethnic Korean people continued in Japan and they were scapegoated for the
assassination of former prime minister Shinzo Abe.
In Nepal, Indigenous peoples, evicted from their ancestral lands during the establishment of
national parks and conservation areas, remained landless and at risk of eviction from informal
settlements. Malaysian authorities forcibly relocated members of an Indigenous community in
Kelantan state to make way for the construction of a dam, while illegal logging in Cambodia
continued to threaten the livelihoods and culture of Indigenous peoples there.
Governments must provide effective and accessible access to justice to victims of ethnic,
religious and caste-based discrimination and hate crimes, and work with affected
communities to develop comprehensive programmes to eliminate discrimination in the
criminal justice system and advocacy of hatred in online and offline domains.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other forms of ill-treatment of detainees remained commonplace in many
countries and custodial deaths including as a result of torture were reported in at least ten
countries.
After a decade-long struggle, a law to criminalize torture was finally adopted in Pakistan, but
reports of torture and other ill-treatment of detainees persisted, as did incidents of torture in
detention in Mongolia despite the establishment of a national mechanism for the prevention of
torture there. In Nepal, torture in pretrial detention including to obtain “confessions” also
continued to be reported, and there were still no convictions under the 2017 law criminalizing
torture.
Fifty-four alleged deaths in custody were recorded in the first nine months of 2022 in
Bangladesh. There were reports of sexual violence in detention in Myanmar, where hundreds
of people died in custody during the year. Torture and other forms of ill-treatment were also
reported elsewhere, including China, North Korea and Viet Nam.
In the Indonesian province of Aceh, scores of men and women were subjected to flogging.
State-authorized public floggings also resumed in Afghanistan following the Taliban’s return to
power.
States must prohibit and criminalize torture and other acts of ill-treatment, and take
effective measures to protect people and prevent these forms of abuse. Where they occur,
states must investigate allegations, hold those responsible to account and provide victims
with a remedy.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Devastating floods, soaring temperatures, deadly typhoons and coastal erosion highlighted the
vulnerability of the region to climate change. Yet preparedness and adaptation remained
largely inadequate and the poorest and most marginalized suffered the greatest
consequences. In Pakistan, heatwaves, droughts and then devastating floods left nearly
750,000 people without access to adequate housing, education or healthcare. In India,
farmers, street vendors, daily wage earners and other outdoor workers were particularly
affected by record-breaking heat and air pollution. In Bangladesh, climate change,
compounded by discrimination, prevented Dalits and other marginalized groups from coastal
south-western regions from accessing water supplies and sanitation.
Despite the warning signs, emissions targets set by many states in the region, including the
biggest emitters, remained insufficient to keep the increase in average global temperatures
below 1.5˚C, and policies were often inconsistent with meeting even these targets. Particularly
worrying was the continued financing by Japan of global oil, gas and coal projects and its

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

43

plans for the construction of new coal-fired electricity plants; China’s increased coal production
despite government pledges to transition to renewables; and the incompatibility of South
Korea’s electricity generation plans with the need to phase out coal by 2030.
Governments across the region must urgently review climate change targets and policies
to ensure that they are consistent with keeping global temperatures down. Investment in
disaster preparedness and adaptation must be increased and protection of marginalized
and other groups particularly at risk from climate change prioritized. Wealthier countries in
the region must also urgently scale up climate finance to lower-income countries and
commit to providing additional dedicated funding for loss and damage.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and asylum seekers remained highly marginalized and at risk of refoulement.
The plight of Rohingya refugees from Myanmar remained unresolved. In Bangladesh, there
was some improvement in access to education for Rohingya children, but an estimated
100,000 remained out of school. In Malaysia, Rohingya and other refugees from Myanmar
remained detained indefinitely and several died during an attempted escape. Allegations of illtreatment and poor conditions in immigration detention centres were also reported to have
caused the deaths of many Indonesian nationals in Malaysia.
The practice of detaining refugees and asylum seekers solely for immigration purposes
continued in Australia, Japan and the Chinese special administrative region of Hong Kong. In
South Korea, there were reports of ill-treatment of foreign nationals in detention centres. In
New Zealand an independent review found the immigration detention framework was “a recipe
for arbitrary detention” and recommended an end to holding asylum seekers in correctional
facilities.
Afghans fleeing persecution at home faced pushbacks from neighbouring countries, while
the Malaysian authorities deported thousands of people to Myanmar despite the grave human
rights situation there.
Governments must cease detaining asylum seekers on the basis of their immigration
status and allow them to seek international protection, ensuring that they are not forcibly
returned to a country where they would face persecution.

DEATH PENALTY
The Papua New Guinea government abolished the death penalty. Executions resumed in
Afghanistan, Myanmar and Singapore. In Singapore, lawyers representing people on death row
faced intimidation and harassment.
Governments that still retain the death penalty must take urgent steps to fully abolish it.

44

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGIONAL
OVERVIEW
2022 will be remembered in Europe and Central Asia as the year Russia led a full-scale
military invasion of Ukraine, committing war crimes and potential crimes against humanity,
and sparking the biggest movement of refugees in Europe since World War II. Russia’s use
of unlawful siege tactics, attacks on energy infrastructure and civilian property left
thousands of civilians killed, injured and suffering severe privation.
Almost 7 million people were displaced within Ukraine, 5 million fled to Europe and 2.8
million left for Russia and Belarus. The welcome shown to those arriving in the EU was
striking, but discriminatory at times, as it did not include some categories of people fleeing
Ukraine such as Black people, non-nationals with temporary residency permits, and some
Roma people, who faced particular obstacles accessing protection. Generous reception of
most people from Ukraine stood in sharp contrast to the often violent rejection and abuse
of refugees and migrants at Europe’s external borders. This double standard revealed the
racism inherent in EU external border policy and practice. Many European countries also
introduced severe travel restrictions against Russian citizens, many of whom sought to flee
mobilization.
The socio-economic impact of the war reverberated worldwide, with many in the Global
South hit hard by disruption of grain and fertilizer exports. European countries saw huge
spikes in energy prices. By the end of the year, many European countries had cost of living
crises and record inflation, disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable. Moldova saw
inflation rise above 30%, and Türkiye, above 64%. Moves to tackle the climate crisis were
blunted by efforts to avoid dependence on Russia’s oil and gas.
The war fostered the reconfiguration of politics in the broader region. Belarus largely
aligned its foreign and military policy with Moscow and shared responsibility for Russia’s
act of aggression. There and in Russia, the war meant more repression, increasing
hardship, and more international isolation, symbolized by Russia’s expulsion from the
Council of Europe and suspension from the UN Human Rights Council. The NagornoKarabakh conflict flared up anew as Russia’s peacemaker role waned.
The war and Russia’s policy also destabilized the Western Balkans, as Serbia’s conflict
with Kosovo threatened to escalate. An indirect consequence was a shift in EU enlargement
policy, with the EU granting “conditional” candidate status to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
despite its failure to meet accession criteria. The EU also gave the nod to Ukraine and
Moldova to begin accession negotiations, but not to Georgia, where reforms stalled or
regressed.
With regard to international and regional human rights mechanisms, Russia’s veto powers
often paralysed the OSCE and also the UN Security Council and relegated these
organizations to the role of helpless observers of the conflict. The ICC however acted with
unprecedented swiftness, announcing an investigation into the situation in Ukraine on 2
March.
Overall, Russia’s war in Ukraine exacerbated the negative human rights trends of previous
years by fuelling insecurity and inequality; this in turn gave a fillip to authoritarian forces
and provided a pretext for further clampdowns on basic freedoms. These same forces were
emboldened to articulate and often implement racist, xenophobic, misogynistic and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

45

homophobic agendas. Vicious crackdowns on protesters in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan were
emblematic of authorities’ continuing use of excessive force.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine triggered an extensive human rights, humanitarian and
displacement crisis.
Investigators documented thousands of possible war crimes and potential crimes against
humanity committed by Russian forces, including extrajudicial executions and other unlawful
killings, torture and other ill-treatment, forced population transfers, the use of banned
weapons, sexual violence and the targeting of schools and hospitals. Russia’s use of siege
tactics against civilians, indiscriminate attacks and the targeting of Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure during winter seemed aimed at maximizing civilian suffering. Prisoners of war
held by both sides in the conflict were subjected to ill-treatment and possible extrajudicial
execution.
No progress was made in investigating violations of international humanitarian law during the
2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict or in bringing suspected perpetrators to justice. People
continued to be killed by mines planted by Armenian forces in territories ceded to Azerbaijan,
and tensions flared at the year’s end when Azerbaijani protesters blocked the road connecting
Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia, disrupting the provision of essential goods and services.
Georgia’s breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region saw no progress
on impunity for past abuses.
All allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity should be subject to impartial
and independent investigations, including through the principle of universal jurisdiction.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The region received record numbers of people on the move. People fleeing Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine constituted the biggest single case of displacement on the continent since World
War II. The largest numbers of such people were recorded in Poland (1.53 million), Germany
(1.02 million) and the Czech Republic (468,000). The EU activated the Temporary Protection
Directive for the first time, providing people fleeing the conflict in Ukraine with quick access to
accommodation, the labour market, and education. The reception shown to people seeking
protection from the war in Ukraine set a new benchmark in Europe and showed that EU
member states have the capacity to give dignified protection to millions if there is the political
will to do so. For example, a state emergency law was passed in the Netherlands for
municipalities to ensure that 60,000 Ukrainians had access to accommodation and other
services. In Switzerland, refugees from Ukraine received rapid support, although projects
aimed at improving conditions in asylum centres were postponed.
EU countries also marked the largest number since 2016 of asylum requests from people
from other countries around the world seeking safety and a rise in people using the Western
Balkan, Central and East Mediterranean routes to arrive. Throughout the year Europe’s borders
remained a place of racialized exclusion, danger and abuse for many people also seeking
protection coming from other parts of the world, including Afghanistan, Syria and sub-Saharan
Africa. At both land and sea borders, states subjected refugees and migrants to forcible, often
violent, summary returns without examination of their individual circumstances. Many refugees
and migrants endured the consequences of racist border policies at the hands of the officials
enforcing them. Spanish authorities continued to deny responsibility for serious human rights
violations during operations by their border police in Melilla in 2021 which resulted in the

46

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

death of 37 people from sub-Saharan Africa, injuries to scores of others and the summary
return of at least 470 people to Morocco.
State actors patrolling sea borders prevented refugees and migrants arriving by boat from
disembarking. Border officials and police arbitrarily detained, often for long periods, others
who managed to reach EU territory and summarily returned, often violently, thousands of
people from Bulgaria and Greece to Türkiye; Türkiye to Iran and Syria; Cyprus to Lebanon;
Spain to Morocco; France to Italy; Croatia to Bosnia and Herzegovina; Hungary to Serbia; and
Latvia, Lithuania and Poland to Belarus.
Countries reacted differently to the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan in 2021. Denmark began
to review cases of rejected Afghan asylum seekers, but Belgium resumed refusals of
international protection for Afghans. While Germany resettled significant numbers of at-risk
Afghans, a new programme launched to approve admission of 1,000 people per month
prompted concerns over fairness and transparency of the process.
In the east of the region, Tajikistan detained and deported Afghan refugees. Russia’s war in
Ukraine prompted the large-scale migration of Russians to Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and
Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan proposed legislative amendments which could force many to return
to Russia. Belarus continued to violently force refugees and migrants to cross its borders
towards EU countries, subjecting them to torture and other ill-treatment.
Governments must ensure that everyone has their right to international protection
respected, protected and upheld without discrimination or being returned to persecution or
other human rights violations.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The rights of women saw both progress and setbacks. In Poland, a harmful constitutional court
ruling from 2021 continued to limit access to abortion, while NGOs supported 44,000 people
to access abortion services (mostly abroad) at great risk due to the appalling criminalization of
the provision of help. Hungary adopted new rules requiring people seeking an abortion to show
a clinician’s report confirming that they had listened to the “fetal heartbeat”. Political forces in
Slovakia introduced legislation to limit access to abortion.
Several countries began removing restrictions on accessing abortion. The Netherlands
abolished the mandatory waiting period of five days for an abortion, while Germany repealed a
provision criminalizing doctors for “advertising abortion”. In Spain, parliament passed a bill to
remove the requirement of parental consent for 16- and 17-year-olds seeking an abortion,
mandatory counselling and reflection periods. Malta began to discuss the possibility of
termination if the woman’s life and health are at risk.
Violence against women and domestic violence persisted at high levels across the region.
This was the case in Kyrgyzstan, where gender-based violence remained systemic and underreported, and in Georgia, where concerns mounted about growing levels of femicide. Several
countries moved towards reforming rape laws and enshrining the principle of consent. New
laws entered into force in Belgium, Finland and Spain, while legislators in the Netherlands
continued to discuss such amendments.
Ukraine and the UK ratified the landmark Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention). Although
the EU had not made progress towards ratifying the Istanbul Convention, the European
Commission proposed a new directive to combat violence against women and domestic
violence.
UN Women reported that more than a third of female-headed households in war-affected
areas in Ukraine struggled to secure sufficient food, and Russian strikes on healthcare
facilities contributed to greatly reduced maternal health services. In April in Turkmenistan,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

47

demonstrating a new move to impose “traditional” values, police began preventing women
from sitting in the front passenger seat of a car under new rules lacking legal clarity.
Governments must urgently combat all forms of gender-based violence that
disproportionately affect women and girls and address its root causes.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Following earlier revelations about Pegasus spyware, 2022 saw revelations that Spain had
targeted journalists and opposition politicians. During the year, there were also independently
confirmed cases of journalists and politicians targeted with spyware in Poland and Greece.
A number of governments continued dangerous expansions of law enforcement and
intelligence service powers. In Serbia, the government sought to introduce legislation
facilitating biometric surveillance and data processing. In Switzerland and Ireland, NGOs
raised concerns about draft legislation expanding the powers of intelligence services in the
former and introducing facial recognition technology in law enforcement in the latter. In
Georgia, legislative amendments gave law enforcement authorities increased scope to conduct
covert surveillance. Turkmenistani activists were targeted abroad, for example in Istanbul
where Turkmenistani consulate staff attacked peaceful activists trying to deliver a human rights
petition.

EROSION OF JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE AND THE RIGHT
TO A FAIR TRIAL
In June the Council of Europe’s Venice Commission noted that in Georgia the speed and scope
of 2021 amendments to the law on common courts may create a “chilling effect on judges’
freedom of expression and internal judicial independence” with a perceived aim to “control
and silence” them. In Belarus legislation expanded the use of investigations and trials in
absentia and the justice system continued to persecute government critics. The governments
in Hungary and Poland continued to target judges and prosecutors with abusive disciplinary
proceedings and suspensions and to disregard international criticism in this area. In Türkiye,
the government’s grip on the judiciary has eviscerated judicial independence over a number of
years, resulting in human rights defenders, activists and political opponents facing baseless
investigations, prosecutions and convictions.
Governments must stop the slide to surveillance societies, respect the right to a fair trial,
and end the erosion of judicial independence.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Russia’s war in Ukraine was accompanied by systematic torture and other ill-treatment.
Prisoners of war were subjected to ill-treatment and possible extrajudicial execution. The
Russian “filtration” process subjected some civilians in Ukraine to electroshocks, execution
threats, the denial of food and water, and the separation of children from their parents.
Elsewhere in the east of the region, ill treatment was commonly deployed in detention centres.
In Kazakhstan electric shocks and burning with steam irons were reported and according to
official figures six individuals died from “unlawful interrogation methods”. Torture and other illtreatment was rampant in Tajikistan to intimidate and extract confessions. In Belarus, those
convicted under politically motivated charges were held in inhuman conditions in solitary
confinement. Kazakhstan fully abolished the death penalty in law, while Belarus executed at
least one person.

48

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Border guards and police at the EU’s external borders continued to subject refugees and
migrants to ill-treatment, frequently amounting to torture, and in Italy court cases relating to
torture in prisons continued.
Governments must act urgently to end torture and other ill-treatment, bringing
perpetrators to justice.

STATE OVERREACH AND FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Governments used various “crises” to arrogate new powers. The authorities in Hungary used
the pretext of the war in Ukraine to give themselves new powers to declare a state of
emergency. Latvia, Lithuania and Poland continued their states of emergency at the border
with Belarus, unjustifiably restricting access of journalists, NGOs and humanitarian actors.
Türkiye continued to detain and prosecute dozens of journalists, activists and opposition
politicians on spurious terrorism-related charges. Parliament passed a new disinformation law
enhancing government powers over social media.
In the Western Balkans, authorities pressured, harassed and threatened journalists,
especially those reporting on organized crime, corruption and war crimes. Monitors recorded
physical attacks against journalists in Kosovo, Montenegro and Serbia. Strategic Litigation
against Public Participation (SLAPPs), abusive lawsuits that targeted journalists and
environmental activists, were increasingly common. The use of SLAPPs was concerning in
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria and Greece, but frighteningly common in Croatia,
Serbia and Slovenia. The European Commission proposed an anti-SLAPP directive, which was
under negotiation.
In the east, freedom of expression remained under severe assault. Government restrictions
left Russians with few independent sources of information. In March, new legislation
penalizing “discreditation” of and spreading “deliberately false information” about the Russian
Armed Forces effectively barred critical mention of the war in Ukraine. Thousands of
administrative and criminal prosecutions ensued. People criticizing the war were arrested,
heavily fined or sentenced to detention or prison. Many high-profile critics of the war were
declared “foreign agents”. Dozens of independent media were closed, thousands of websites
were blocked, and Meta was declared an “extremist organization”. Belarus also prosecuted
hundreds who expressed support for Ukraine or criticized the government, arrested 40 more
independent journalists and brought new charges against those already imprisoned. Hundreds
were prosecuted for association with “extremist” content.
The Tajikistani authorities aggressively targeted independent media and human rights
defenders in response to new protests in the Gorno-Badakshan Autonomous Oblast (GBAO),
and shut down the internet completely there in the first months of the year. Turkmenistan
reportedly blocked 1.2 billion IP addresses to prevent access to information from abroad, and
Azerbaijan adopted a new media law to create a single official register of journalists and
mandated media to distribute “objective” information only.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In the western part of the region, several countries imposed arbitrary or disproportionate bans
on peaceful protests. In Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities banned
protests commemorating the 30th anniversary of wartime persecution. Türkiye repeatedly
placed bans on Prides and demonstrations commemorating victims of enforced
disappearances. More often, the authorities resorted to other measures, such as preventive
detention (Sweden), excessive use of force against protesters (Serbia), severe fines (Slovenia),
arbitrary arrests (Greece) and unfair dismissals of protest participants (Hungary).

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

49

Many governments continued efforts to prevent or punish acts of civil disobedience,
especially by environmental protesters. Governments cracked down using various means,
including unlawful dispersals in Finland and charging protesters with severe crimes such as
sabotage in Sweden. The UK passed legislation granting police new powers to implement
restrictions on the grounds of noise and nuisance. Setting a precedent, the Federal
Administrative Court in Germany ruled that protest camps are protected by constitutional
guarantees of freedom of assembly.
To the east, peaceful protesters met with excessive force from the authorities in several
countries, leading to death, torture and injury. January saw a sudden explosion of mass protest
in Kazakhstan calling for reform. The response was over 10,000 arrested, use of live
ammunition and rubber bullets, labelling protesters “terrorists”, ill-treatment and detention in
inhuman conditions, and the death of at least 219 protesters and 19 law enforcement officers.
At the year’s end most incidents had not been investigated.
Tajikistan saw a brutal crackdown on protest in the GBAO. An “anti-terrorist operation” saw
tens of Pamiri protesters killed and over 200 people, including activists, poets and journalists,
arbitrarily arrested.
In Karakalpakstan, Uzbekistan, protests erupted in July in response to proposed
constitutional amendments around the status of the territory. Security forces were deployed,
leading to at least 21 deaths, more than 250 injured, hundreds arbitrarily detained and scores
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
Belarus saw police brutally disperse peaceful protests against Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, and the sentencing of many protesters to detention or fines after closed trials.
Authorities in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, restricted locations where public assemblies could be held.
In Russia, the authorities viciously persecuted not just protest participants but also those who
monitored protests.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In the west of the region, Türkiye and France stood out as countries restricting freedom of
association by seeking to dissolve associations. The former applied counter-terrorist provisions
in an overly broad manner, targeting a platform against femicide, a community group, and one
of the main opposition parties (the HDP). The latter abused the provisions of a new law on
“republican values”, targeting an anti-fascist group, two pro-Palestinian groups, and an
environmental rights collective.
Uzbekistan’s government cemented control of civil society when it issued a decree requiring
NGOs to obtain “national partners” – chosen by the government – to implement foreign grants.
Kyrgyzstan introduced new requirements for NGOs to report on foreign funds, and Belarus
cited “extremism” and “terrorism” charges to shut down over two hundred organizations.
The space for all to exercise the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly must be protected from state overreach under various pretexts.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Türkiye continued its assault on human rights defenders. At year’s end, Öztürk Türkdoğan
faced three different spurious prosecutions for “membership of a terrorist organization,”
“insulting a public official,” and “denigrating the Turkish nation”. Similarly, human rights
lawyer Eren Keskin and Şebnem Korur Fincancı, a prominent forensic specialist, both faced
baseless terrorism-related charges. Turkish authorities refused to implement a binding
decision from the European Court of Human Rights in the case of human rights defender

50

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Osman Kavala despite infringement proceedings. The Court of Cassation overturned charges
against former Amnesty Türkiye chair Taner Kılıç.
Greece, Italy and Türkiye all persecuted human rights defenders working on migrants’ and
refugees’ rights. Women’s rights defenders faced persecution in several countries. In Andorra,
Vanessa Mendoza Cortés faced a huge defamation fine after criticizing the harmful impact of
the country’s ban on abortion. In Poland, Justyna Wydrzynska faced trial for supporting a
pregnant woman’s efforts to seek an abortion.
In the east, defenders were subjected to arbitrary detention, violence and intimidation. In
Belarus, the human rights organization Viasna was a singular target, with Nobel laureate Ales
Bialiatski and colleagues imprisoned and facing trumped-up charges; Marfa Rabkova and
Andrey Chapyuk were sentenced in a closed trial to 15 and six years’ imprisonment
respectively. Nasta Loika was falsely charged with “petty hooliganism” and denied medicines,
warm clothes and drinking water in administrative detention, and then pressed with false
criminal charges. In Russia, human rights defenders were under unceasing pressure under
the “foreign agents” and “undesirable organizations” legislation, forcing many to leave the
country. In April, the Ministry of Justice withdrew the registration of over a dozen foreign
foundations and NGOs including Amnesty International, forcing the closure of their offices in
Russia. In occupied Crimea, Crimean Tatar rights activists and lawyers continued to face
severe reprisals.
Governments should protect human rights defenders and recognize their crucial role,
rather than stigmatizing and criminalizing their activities.

DISCRIMINATION
A number of countries saw record reports of antisemitism. In both Germany and the UK,
monitors recorded a serious increase in antisemitic hate crimes. In Slovakia, the suspect in the
murder of two LGBTI people was found to have written virulently antisemitic propaganda. The
Latvian parliament passed a restitution law granting compensation to the Jewish community
for properties seized during the Nazi and Soviet occupations.
Several countries continued to reinforce or pass new measures targeting Muslim women.
Andorra passed a law banning the wearing of conspicuous religious symbols which prevents
Muslim women from wearing the headscarf. In France, local authorities banned a protest by
women footballers against an attempt to codify a discriminatory ruling which prevents Muslim
women who wear headscarves from participating in competitive sports. The highest
administrative tribunal upheld a ban on wearing “burkinis” in Grenoble. In Switzerland,
following a 2021 referendum, parliament considered a draft law to ban face coverings. The
discussion of these measures was rife with negative stereotypes and mired in anti-Muslim
rhetoric.
Monitors in both Belgium and Switzerland found strong evidence of structural racism against
people of African descent. In the UK, police stop-and-search practices continued to
disproportionately affect Black people. An investigation found that over a two-year period 650
children had been strip searched, with 58% of them Black. In Denmark, a housing company
evicted numerous people to avoid categorization as a “ghetto” under laws which prohibit the
concentration of people of “non-Western background”. In Germany, the National
Discrimination and Racism Monitor found that racism was part of everyday life in the country.
Roma faced derogatory speech and systemic discrimination in housing, education, policing
and other realms of life. Roma continued to be subjected to segregation in education for
example in Albania, Croatia, Kosovo, North Macedonia and Slovakia. Racist policing,
statelessness and the lack of personal documentation continued to hinder efforts at Roma
empowerment. The continuing vicious crackdown on human rights in Belarus also targeted

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

51

national minorities, including Poles and Lithuanians, as well as proponents of Belarusian
language and culture. The government barred two schools from teaching in Polish in the west
of the country where many Poles live, closed a Lithuanian school in Hrodna region and shut
down Belarusian book shops.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination and violence against LGBTI people in some countries was accompanied by
judicial or legislative progress in others. One of the most serious violent incidents took place in
Slovakia when two people died and one was injured in a shooting outside a gay bar. Attacks
and/or threats against LGBTI leaders took place in Montenegro, North Macedonia and Poland.
Judiciaries in some countries issued decisions that upheld the rights of LGBTI people. Courts
in Croatia confirmed that same-sex couples should be able to adopt children under the same
conditions as others. The Constitutional Court in Slovenia declared bans on gay marriage and
adoption as unconstitutional. Following a Supreme Court decision in Latvia, administrative
courts started recognizing same-sex couples. In Switzerland, new regulations to legalize civil
marriage and adoption for same-sex couples entered into force. The Spanish parliament
passed a landmark bill that recognizes trans people’s right to gender self-determination. The
governments in Finland and Germany proposed progressive legislation on legal gender
recognition.
In contrast, the government in Hungary organized a referendum based on a 2021 anti-LGBTI
law. In Poland, numerous local governments still declared themselves to be “LGBT-free zones”
and activists faced SLAPP suits and arbitrary detention.
In the east, some progress was seen. President Volodymyr Zelensky promised legislation on
civil partnerships in Ukraine. Moldova held its largest-ever Pride march notwithstanding
threats from the mayor in the capital, Chisinau, that he would ban it. Elsewhere, however,
LGBTI rights continued to be severely repressed. Russia extended the prohibition of
“propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations, paedophilia and gender reassignment” from
minors to all age groups. Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan continued to criminalize consensual
sexual relations between men, and a discriminatory draft law was submitted in Uzbekistan
allowing police to conduct mandatory testing for men who have sex with men.
Governments must redouble their efforts to prevent discrimination including against Jews,
Muslims, Black people, Roma and LGBTI people.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
Countries with close economic ties to Russia were profoundly impacted by the war in Ukraine.
In Russia itself, overall poverty levels increased. Within Ukraine, the World Bank reported that
poverty levels increased tenfold as nearly half a million children were plunged into poverty.
By the end of the year, most countries in the region had cost of living crises and record
inflation. Seventeen EU member states had inflation greater than 10%. As usual, across the
region the poorest and most vulnerable, including persons with disabilities, pensioners and
children, were disproportionately affected and suffered inadequate social protection.
Governments must take immediate action to address ongoing socio-economic hardships,
by assigning adequate resources including through comprehensive social protection to
ensure that everybody can enjoy their economic, social and cultural rights.

52

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The climate crisis was brought home to many by unprecedented summer heatwaves, with
temperatures exceeding 40˚C in places. Some 25,000 excess deaths were recorded due to the
heat, which also resulted in dried up rivers, a glacier collapse in Italy, severe drought affecting
most of Portugal and fires destroying vast territories in Spain. The urgency of taking climate
action was counteracted by the effects of Russia’s war in Ukraine. In Ukraine military activities
polluted the air, water and soil with toxic substances and Russia’s conduct of hostilities raised
the risk of a nuclear accident around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. The need to
reduce dependence on Russian oil and gas led to a scramble to ensure alternative sources of
fossil fuels, decisions to extend the life of coal and nuclear plants, and temporary reductions in
fuel taxes. Turkmenistan continued to be one of the highest methane gas emitters globally and
women in rural areas there were disproportionately impacted by climate change.
After some equivocation before COP 27, the EU supported the creation of a Loss and
Damage fund, raising some hopes for climate solidarity. However, European countries failed to
align 2030 emission reduction targets to achieve the global target of limiting temperature
increase to 1.5˚C.
Governments must increase their emission reduction targets in a way that reflects their
responsibility for the climate crisis. They should implement adequate and human rightsconsistent policies, including phasing out the use and production of fossil fuel through a
just transition. They should also urgently scale up climate finance to lower-income
countries and commit to providing additional dedicated funding for loss and damage.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

53

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
REGIONAL OVERVIEW
Governments failed to adequately respond to the devastating impact of worsening economic
conditions, exacerbated by global events such as the war in Ukraine and local factors such
as conflict and climate-related disasters, on the human rights of millions of people to food,
water, housing and healthcare.
Armed conflicts continued to devastate the lives of millions of people across the Middle
East and North Africa. Civilians faced indiscriminate attacks, destruction of vital
infrastructure, forced displacement and abusive rule by unaccountable militias, armed
groups or security forces. Lebanon and Jordan continued to host millions of Syrian
refugees, but both countries adopted coercive policies to pressure refugees to return.
Authorities failed to secure safe return of millions of internally displaced people to their
places of origin.
Governments continued to use draconian measures to repress the rights to freedom of
expression, association and peaceful assembly. Authorities censored or silenced online and
offline media. They subjected human rights defenders, journalists, protesters, women’s
rights campaigners, political activists and other critics or dissidents to arbitrary detention,
unfounded criminal prosecutions, unfair trials, imprisonment, travel bans, threats and other
forms of harassment. Security forces used unlawful, sometimes lethal, force and mass
arrests to crush protests.
Other human rights violations included discrimination against ethnic and religious
minorities, enforced disappearances, torture and other ill-treatment, and the use of the
death penalty and other cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments.
Three events in particular highlighted human rights issues in the region. In September,
the death in custody of Mahsa (Zhina) Amini following her arrest by Iran’s so-called
“morality police” for violating the country’s abusive veiling laws sparked unprecedented
protests calling for an end to the Islamic Republic and the establishment of a system
respecting human rights and equality. In November, Egypt hosted COP27, which exposed
its abysmal human rights record and the plight of the tens of thousands of people
languishing in Egyptian jails for political reasons. It also highlighted the failure of
governments worldwide to take the necessary action to avert the climate crisis and tackle
environmental degradation. Later in November, Qatar staged the football World Cup,
drawing attention to the plight of Qatar’s migrant workforce, some working in conditions
that amounted to forced labour. Many migrant workers across the region experienced
similar conditions. The World Cup also highlighted discrimination against LGBTI people in
Qatar.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
Prolonged armed conflicts, military occupation and insecurity continued to devastate the lives
of millions of civilians in Iraq, Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, Libya, Syria, and
Yemen. Parties to the conflicts, both state and non-state actors, committed war crimes and
other serious violations of international humanitarian law, including indiscriminate and targeted
attacks, leading to civilian casualties and destruction of infrastructure.

54

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The armed conflict in Syria continued into its 11th year, although levels of violence
decreased. Syrian and Russian government forces conducted unlawful ground and aerial
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including water stations and camps for internally
displaced people, killing and injuring scores of civilians.
The devastating conflict in Yemen continued despite a ceasefire agreement. All parties to the
conflict carried out unlawful attacks that killed civilians, obstructed access to humanitarian aid
and destroyed civilian infrastructure.
In Libya, a national ceasefire in place since October 2020 generally held. Militias and armed
groups, however, continued to engage in localized clashes over territory and resources, during
which they carried out indiscriminate attacks and destroyed civilian infrastructure.
The conflict between Israeli military forces and Palestinian armed groups flared up again. On
5 August, Israel launched a three-day military offensive targeting the Palestinian Islamic Jihad
in the Gaza Strip, which has been under a 15-year-long illegal Israeli blockade and
discriminatory rule. Around 1,700 Palestinian homes were damaged or destroyed, and
hundreds of civilians were displaced during the offensive. Seventeen Palestinian civilians were
killed in Israeli attacks and at least seven were killed apparently by rockets launched by
Palestinian armed groups that misfired.
All parties to armed conflicts must abide by international humanitarian law, in particular
ending direct attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure and indiscriminate attacks.
Foreign governments must stop transfers of weapons where there is an overriding risk that
they will be used to commit or facilitate serious violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.

RIGHTS OF REFUGEES, MIGRANTS AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
The rights of refugees, migrants and internally displaced people continued to be undermined
by ongoing and historical conflicts. Host nations, such as Lebanon and Jordan, violated the
rights of refugees and international donor governments did not adequately fund humanitarian
response programmes. Authorities continued to arrest and arbitrarily detain refugees and
migrants and subject them to refoulement and mass expulsions.
Lebanon continued to host an estimated 1.5 million Syrians, but the failure of the government
to mitigate the impacts of the economic crisis in the country left most refugees living in
extreme poverty and unable to access their human rights such as food, housing, education
and health. The Lebanese authorities also scaled up so-called voluntary returns for Syrians,
despite well-documented persecution in Syria and a coercive environment in Lebanon that
undermined the ability of Syrian refugees to provide free and informed consent to return.
Neighbouring Jordan continued to host around 2 million Palestinian refugees and more than
750,000 refugees from other countries in the Middle East and North Africa, most of whom had
limited access to essential services due to severe underfunding. Israel welcomed tens of
thousands of Ukrainian refugees and allowed thousands of Jewish Ukrainians to settle in the
country, but continued to deny millions of Palestinians their right of return. It also denied
asylum to tens of thousands of people fleeing from African countries, particularly from Eritrea
and Sudan.
In Libya, state officials, militias and armed groups subjected refugees and migrants to
widespread violations including unlawful killings, indefinite arbitrary detention, torture, rape
and other ill-treatment, and forced labour. EU-backed Libyan coastguards shot at or
deliberately damaged boats carrying refugees and migrants crossing the Mediterranean.
Thousands of people intercepted at sea and disembarked in Libya were forcibly disappeared;

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

55

thousands of others were expelled from the country’s southern borders without the opportunity
to seek asylum.
At the border between northern Morocco and the Spanish enclave of Melilla, security forces
on both sides used excessive force, killing 37 people from sub-Saharan Africa and injuring
many more. In Algeria, authorities arrested or summarily deported dozens of refugees and
asylum seekers. In Iran, security forces fired at Afghan nationals crossing the Iran/Afghanistan
border, and arbitrarily detained and tortured others before expelling them unlawfully. Saudi
Arabia forcibly returned tens of thousands of Ethiopian migrants after arbitrarily detaining them
in inhumane conditions because they did not have valid residency documents and subjecting
them to torture and other ill-treatment. In Iraq, Libya and Syria, internally displaced people
were unable to return to their homes due to insecurity, risks of arbitrary arrest and harassment
by security forces, and lack of essential services and job opportunities.
Governments must end the arbitrary detention of refugees and migrants on the basis of
their migration status, and protect them from refoulement and mass expulsions. They must
also take concrete steps to ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified return of internally
displaced people to their areas of origin.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities across the Middle East and North Africa region continued to arbitrarily arrest,
detain, prosecute and harass people for expressing critical views, participating in peaceful
protests, and engaging in human rights work or political activism.
Authorities used terrorism legislation or vaguely worded charges related to “national security”
to silence dissent and impose long prison sentences. In Algeria, environmental activist Mohad
Gasmi was jailed for three years for email exchanges relating to the exploitation of shale gas in
the country. In Jordan, three journalists were arrested and charged with “spreading fake news”
for their coverage of leaked documents that exposed the financial activities of companies,
politicians and the king. In Morocco, human rights defender Saida Alami was sentenced to two
years in jail for her social media posts denouncing the repression of journalists and activists, a
sentence that was subsequently increased to three years on appeal.
In some states, authorities increased censorship or ramped up threats against free speech.
The Huthi de facto authorities in Yemen shut down at least six radio stations in the capital and
continued to imprison at least eight journalists, four of them on death row. Syria’s government
passed a new cybercrime law imposing long prison sentences for criticizing the authorities or
constitution online. A new decree in Tunisia mandated prison terms of up to 10 years for wilful
misuse of telecommunications networks to produce, send or spread “fake news” or other false
or defamatory content, and allowed authorities to dissolve entities found to have violated it. A
new law in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) criminalized “anyone who mocks, insults, or
damages the reputation, prestige or standing of the state” or “its founding leaders”.
Authorities cracked down on protests in Iran, Libya and Syria, including through the use of
unlawful lethal force and mass arrests. The authorities in Iran responded to the unprecedented
uprising against the Islamic Republic with live ammunition, metal pellets and beatings, killing
hundreds of people, including dozens of children, and injuring thousands more. The
authorities shut down or disrupted internet and mobile phone networks and blocked social
media platforms. Thousands were arbitrarily arrested and subjected to unfair trials and
prosecutions and two were executed. Palestinian authorities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
at times used excessive force to disperse peaceful gatherings.
Impunity for unlawful killings and other serious human rights violations prevailed domestically
across the region, but at the international level some positive steps were taken. For example, in
November, the UN Human Rights Council established a fact-finding mission to investigate

56

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

human rights violations related to the Iran protests that erupted in September. Furthermore,
European countries investigated and prosecuted individuals suspected of committing crimes
under international law in Syria and Iran through their national courts under the principle of
universal jurisdiction.
In several countries, authorities adopted other measures to crush dissent. In Algeria, they
used bogus anti-terrorism charges to silence members of opposition political parties and
movements. They also suspended at least one political party and threatened to suspend at
least two others. Israeli authorities raided and ordered the closure of seven Palestinian civil
society organizations and disqualified a Palestinian political party from standing in Israel’s
parliamentary elections. In December, human rights lawyer Salah Hammouri was deported to
France following nine months in administrative detention without charge or trial and the
revocation of his East Jerusalem residency status.
Between April and the end of the year, the Egyptian authorities released 895 people held for
political reasons, but 2,562 suspected critics were arrested and interrogated by prosecutors
during the same period including hundreds in connection to calls for protests during COP27 in
November. Thousands of human rights defenders, journalists, protesters and other actual or
perceived critics and dissidents remained in arbitrary detention for exercising their human
rights.
Governments must respect the rights to freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly, including ensuring that journalists, human rights defenders and activists can
enjoy these rights without harassment, violence and prosecution, and releasing those
detained for exercising these rights.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN AND GIRLS
In 2022, women and girls continued to face discrimination in law and in practice across the
Middle East and North Africa, including in relation to the rights to inheritance, divorce, political
representation and employment opportunities. Gender-based violence remained prevalent and
was committed with impunity. Authorities in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Yemen
subjected women human rights defenders and activists to prosecution, interrogation and/or
other forms of harassment for speaking out against sexual violence and gender-based
discrimination.
Women and girls were at the forefront of nationwide protests that erupted in Iran in
September, challenging decades of gender-based discrimination and violence and defying
discriminatory and abusive compulsory veiling laws.
So-called “honour killings” of women and other femicides continued. In central Iraq and
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, despite an increase in reports of such killings and other forms of
gender-based violence including against trans women, the government failed to criminalize
domestic violence. In Algeria, 37 femicides were recorded.
Legal protections from discrimination were further weakened in several countries in the
region. In March, Saudi Arabia passed its first “personal status law”, codifying many of the
problematic practices inherent in the male guardianship system and entrenching genderbased discrimination in most aspects of family life. An amendment to Tunisia’s electoral law
removed provisions that improved women’s representation in parliament. The Huthi de facto
authorities in Yemen banned women from travelling in governorates under their control without
a male guardian or their written permission.
There were signs of progress in some countries, although women continued to face
discrimination and violence. Morocco ratified the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, but domestic

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

57

law still entrenched gender inequality. A constitutional amendment in Jordan declared men
and women equal before the law and banned discrimination between them, but no steps were
taken to amend the country’s laws. In Kuwait, the government introduced measures to
increase women’s representation in public employment and leadership, but domestic law
continued to discriminate against women. Omani authorities set up a domestic violence
hotline, but failed to establish shelters or pass laws defining domestic violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE
Across the region, LGBTI people faced arrest and prosecution, and at times were subjected to
torture such as forced anal examinations, on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender
identity. Some criminal courts handed down harsh sentences for those convicted of
consensual same-sex relations.
In some countries, there were signs of regression. In Lebanon, following demands by
religious groups to “reject the spread of homosexuality”, the interior ministry banned peaceful
gatherings by LGBTI people, but a court suspended the decision. In UAE, where the law
criminalizes consensual same-sex relations, the government ordered schoolteachers not to
discuss “gender identity, homosexuality or any other behaviour deemed unacceptable to UAE
society”. In Yemen, authorities targeted people with non-conforming sexual orientation or
gender identity with arbitrary arrest, rape and other torture.

ETHNIC AND RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Across the region, members of national, ethnic and religious communities and minorities
continued to face entrenched discrimination in law and practice, including in relation to their
rights to worship, enjoy equal access to employment and healthcare, and live free of
persecution and other serious human rights abuses.
Israel maintained an extreme form of discrimination – a system of apartheid – through
oppression and domination over Palestinians through territorial fragmentation, segregation and
control, dispossession of land and property, and denial of economic and social rights. Israel
committed a wide range of human rights violations against Palestinians to entrench this
system, including forcible transfers, administrative detention, torture, unlawful killings, denial
of basic rights and freedoms, and persecution, which constituted the crime against humanity
of apartheid. In a move to further entrench the system of apartheid, the authorities in March
re-enacted a law that imposes sweeping restrictions on Palestinian family reunification to
maintain a Jewish demographic majority, and in July the Supreme Court upheld a law
authorizing the interior minister to strip citizens of their citizenship if convicted of acts that
amount to “breach of allegiance to the state”.
In Iran, ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs, Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen, faced systematic discrimination, restricting their access to education, employment,
adequate housing and political office. In Kuwait, the Bidun (native but stateless Kuwaitis)
faced increased discrimination by law.
Members of religious minorities also faced deep-rooted discrimination in law and practice,
including in their right to worship. In Algeria, authorities used a decree that restricts religions
other than Sunni Islam to persecute members of the Ahmadi Religion of Peace and Light and
to close at least three Protestant churches. Egypt’s authorities continued to prosecute and
imprison Christians and other religious minorities, as well as atheists and people espousing
religious beliefs not sanctioned by the state, for “defamation of religion” and other bogus
charges. In Iran, Baha’is, Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews, Yaresan and Sunni Muslims
faced discrimination in law and practice, particularly in terms of accessing education, jobs,
political office and places of worship.

58

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Governments must take urgent action to end gender-based discrimination and violence
against women, girls and LGBTI people and bring to justice those responsible for such
crimes. They must also decriminalize consensual same-sex relations. Governments must
end discrimination on the basis national origin, ethnicity or religion, and implement legal
and policy reforms to grant equal rights for all without discrimination and to protect,
promote and guarantee freedom of religion and belief.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
Economic crises in some countries had a devastating impact on the cost of living, food and
fuel security, and the right to water, housing, health and an adequate standard of living. People
from marginalized groups, including women, LGBTI people, ethnic and religious minorities,
refugees and migrants, and low-paid workers, were hit particularly hard.
In Lebanon, the authorities failed to address the country’s acute economic crisis, classified by
the World Bank as one of the worst of its kind in modern history, resulting in a drastic
deterioration in the guarantee of economic and social rights. Almost half of Lebanese
households were food insecure; the state provided less than two hours of electricity per day;
medication became unaffordable or unavailable; and social protection programmes remained
woefully inadequate. Egypt spiralled into a financial and economic crisis that undermined
millions of people’s economic and social rights. Tunisia’s economic crisis also worsened, with
unemployment reaching 15% and shortages of staple foods. In Syria, an estimated 55% of the
population was food insecure. In Yemen, currency depreciation, high inflation and soaring
global food prices meant people’s access to food was highly restricted.
Across the region, governments failed to protect low-paid workers from labour abuses and
repressed workers’ right to join independent trade unions and to strike without fear of serious
repercussions. In Egypt, Iran and Jordan, workers who staged protests or strikes, or sought to
form independent trade unions, were penalized through unfair dismissal, arrests and
prosecution. In the Gulf states, low-paid migrant workers, who make up the majority of the
workforce, remained vulnerable to extreme exploitation, employment discrimination, highly
inadequate housing, a wide range of physical and mental abuses, underpayment or nonpayment of wages, limited access to healthcare, and summary dismissal and return to their
country. In Qatar, the government continued to reform the country’s kafala (sponsorship)
system for migrant workers, but the process failed to end widespread labour abuses including
wage theft. The authorities still failed to investigate adequately the unexpected deaths of
migrant workers, including those working in extreme heat and for long periods without breaks
or rest days. Many migrant workers faced discrimination on the basis of their race, nationality
and language, resulting in different rates of pay, worse working conditions, and tougher jobs.
Meanwhile, domestic workers, most of them women, continued to face harsh working
conditions and serious physical and mental abuse and sexual assault. The government also
maintained its ban on migrant workers forming or joining trade unions, a right afforded to
Qataris.
Governments must take urgent action to establish social protection measures that
effectively protect everyone, including marginalized groups, against the adverse impacts of
crises and call for coordinated international efforts to guarantee the rights to health, food
and an adequate standard of living. Governments must also protect the right of workers to
organize independent trade unions and to protest, and they must extend labour law
protections to migrant workers, including domestic workers.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

59

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
States across the region failed to take the necessary action to tackle climate change and
environmental degradation, including those party to the 2015 Paris Agreement, a legally
binding international treaty on climate change. 2022 saw widespread evidence of the
devastating impact of the climate crisis on human rights. In Algeria, wildfires destroyed large
areas of forest and killed more than 40 people. Iran suffered continuing loss of lakes, rivers,
wetlands and forests, high levels of air and water pollution, and land subsidence. In Iraq,
intense droughts, heat waves and sandstorms displaced more than 10,000 families.
The region’s major oil and gas-producing nations failed to support the call to phase out all
fossil fuels in the final agreement at COP27 or to take the required action at home to combat
climate change. Saudi Arabia, one of the world’s largest producers of oil, did not update its
NDC to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Kuwait, Bahrain and UAE, the world’s second, third
and fourth highest carbon-dioxide-emitting countries per capita, respectively, and Qatar also
failed to update their NDCs. The UAE even raised its levels of oil production during the year,
contrary to its obligations under the Paris Agreement. Other states failed to update or revise
their 2030 emissions targets to keep the rise of global temperatures below 1.5°C, or made
their modest pledges contingent upon international financial support. Negotiations at COP27
were overshadowed by Egypt’s human rights crisis including a wave of mass arrests in
connection to calls to protest during the conference. The event took place in a repressive
environment with participants subjected to interrogations, surveillance and other forms of
harassment.
Governments must take urgent action to curb their carbon emissions and stop funding
fossil fuel projects. They must also review and respect their NDCs and meet all their
obligations under the Paris Agreement.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued in official and unofficial places of detention with
virtual impunity in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, Lebanon,
Libya, Saudi Arabia, the State of Palestine, Syria and Yemen. Abuses were inflicted to extract
confessions and punish detainees. Torture methods included beatings, electric shocks, mock
executions, suspension in contorted positions, sexual violence, denial of healthcare and
prolonged solitary confinement. In almost all cases, authorities failed to carry out adequate
investigations into allegations of torture and suspicious deaths in custody.
Militias and armed groups in Libya systematically tortured and otherwise ill-treated detainees,
sometimes to death, using electric shocks, flogging, sexual violence and other methods. In
Saudi Arabia, authorities tortured and ill-treated migrant workers and denied them adequate
healthcare, resulting in several deaths in custody. In Egypt, torture remained rampant in
prisons, police stations and facilities run by the National Security Agency. In Israel, security
forces continued to torture and otherwise ill-treat Palestinian detainees, and such abuses
remained rife in detention and interrogation centres run by Palestinian authorities in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip. In Lebanon, a military investigative judge indicted five members of a
security agency on charges of torture in the case of a Syrian refugee who died in custody, but
the case was being heard in the inherently unfair military courts.
Iran, Libya and Saudi Arabia maintained laws that provide for corporal punishment, including
amputation, flogging, blinding, stoning and crucifixion. In Iran, between May and September,
the authorities amputated the fingers of five men convicted of theft.
Prisoners across the region were often held in inhumane conditions, suffering from
overcrowding, poor ventilation and hygiene, lack of sufficient food and water, and denial of

60

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

access to timely and appropriate healthcare, family visits, or fresh air and outdoor exercise. In
Bahrain, Ahmed Jaber Ahmed was denied medical care for 11 months, which left him unable
to walk or dress himself. Eventually a hospital diagnosed tuberculosis that had spread to his
spine. In UAE, human rights defender Ahmed Mansoor was held in solitary confinement
throughout 2022 without a mattress, pillow, personal hygiene items, books and his glasses.
Governments must ensure independent, impartial and effective investigations into
allegations of torture, extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances and other crimes
under international law and serious human rights violations, and put in place measures to
prevent these crimes, and ensure reparation for victims.

DEATH PENALTY
Most countries in the region retained the death penalty and courts handed down death
sentences after unfair trials, including for offences not involving intentional killing, for acts
protected under international law such as consensual same-sex relations and apostasy, and for
bogus or vague charges brought against dissidents.
Executions were carried out in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and the State of Palestine
under the de facto Hamas authorities for the first time in five years. In Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Libya
and Saudi Arabia, death sentences were passed after grossly unfair trials, including by
emergency, military and special courts. In Iran, where the death penalty was widely used as a
tool of political repression, executions increased in 2022 and public executions resumed. Iran
was the only country in the region to execute people convicted of offences that occurred when
they were children. In Saudi Arabia, the largest single mass execution in decades took place
on 12 March when 81 men were put to death, and Saudi Arabia resumed executions for drugrelated offences after an unofficial two-year moratorium. In Egypt and Iraq, fewer executions
were carried out in 2022 compared with previous years.
Governments must immediately establish an official moratorium on executions with a view
to abolishing the death penalty.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

61

AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL
REPORT 2022/23
A-Z COUNTRY ENTRIES

AFGHANISTAN
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Head of state and government: Mohammad Hassan
Akhund
Restrictions on women’s rights, freedom of
the media and freedom of expression
increased exponentially. Institutions
designed to support human rights were
severely limited or shut down completely.
Peaceful protesters faced arbitrary arrests,
torture and enforced disappearance. The
Taliban conducted extrajudicial executions,
arbitrary arrests, torture and unlawful
detention of perceived opponents with
impunity, creating an atmosphere of fear.
Extreme poverty increased, exacerbated by
drought and other natural disasters. Public
executions and floggings were used as
punishment for crimes such as murder,
theft, “illegitimate” relationships or
violating social norms. Women’s rights
continued to be attacked, and women’s
participation in public life was severely
limited. Afghanistan was the only country in
the world where girls were banned from
attending secondary school. Almost all
institutions set up to address gender-based
violence under the former government were
shut down by the Taliban.

BACKGROUND
Already a poor country, Afghanistan plunged
deeper into poverty due to its international
isolation and the economic upheaval brought
on by the Taliban takeover in 2021.
According to the UN Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 97% of
Afghans were living in poverty, up from 47%
in 2020. The lack of social protections led
families to resort to measures including child
marriage and the selling of organs. The level
of humanitarian assistance did not meet the
population’s needs. The economy continued
to be seriously hampered by the freezing of
Afghan foreign reserves and the cutting of
development assistance, steps taken by the
international community following the Taliban

64

takeover. The aid received by Afghanistan in
2022 was mostly humanitarian assistance,
aimed at preventing starvation, but not
contributing to other social needs. As a
result, access to healthcare, employment and
education continued to suffer. The exodus of
doctors, engineers, lawyers, teachers and
government officials left those sectors
severely under-resourced.
The increasing humanitarian crisis was
made worse by drought, flash flooding,
earthquakes and other natural disasters,
some exacerbated by climate change.
The Taliban Supreme Leader ordered the
Taliban judges to impose sharia law – Islamic
law – in November, and thereafter public
executions and floggings began.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Under the Taliban, extrajudicial executions of
people associated with the former
government, members of armed groups such
as the National Resistance Front (NRF),
Islamic State of Khorasan Province (IS-KP)
and those allegedly not following the Taliban’s
rules appeared to be widespread and
systematic. This included Afghans associated
with the former government or former
security forces. The UN Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) recorded at least
237 extrajudicial executions between the
Taliban takeover on 15 August 2021 and 15
June 2022. In December, the UN reported at
least another 69 extrajudicial killings primarily
of NRF members, 48 of of which had
occurred between 12 and 14 September in
Panjshir province.
In one incident in Ghor province on 26
June, the Taliban attacked the home of a
man associated with the former government,
killing six Shia Hazaras: four men, a woman
and a girl. Three of the men killed were
members of the former anti-Taliban groups
known as the People’s Uprising. Following
the extrajudicial killings the Taliban claimed
that they were rebels, despite the fact that all
those killed were civilians. In September,
fresh videos and pictures of extrajudicial
killings by the Taliban of people associated
with the NRF in Panjshir province appeared

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

on social media. The attacks clearly
constituted a war crime. The Taliban Ministry
of Defence announced an investigation into
the incident, but no findings were made
public. Media reported that civilians in the
area were evicted and their homes taken over
to be used as police and military installations.
The Taliban authorities also tortured to death
civilians in Panjshir province, according to
media reports. On 6 September the UN
Special Rapporteur on the situation in
Afghanistan reported on executions of
captured fighters in Balkhab district of Sar-IPul Province.
Impunity prevailed for such crimes under
the Taliban. There were no proper or
transparent investigations into extrajudicial
executions or other gross human rights
violations. Taliban officials continued to deny
that such violations had occurred and
rejected the findings of NGOs including
Amnesty International.

DEATH PENALTY, TORTURE, AND CRUEL,
INHUMAN OR DEGRADING PUNISHMENT
The Taliban began publicly executing and
flogging people for crimes such as murder,
theft, “illegitimate” relationships or violations
of social norms. Between 18 November and
16 December, more than 100 people were
publicly flogged in stadiums in several
provinces, according to UN human rights
experts.
In December, the Taliban authorities carried
out their first public execution in Farah
province in the presence of senior Taliban
officials including the deputy prime minister,
ministers and the chief justice.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The space for free media shrank drastically
as the Taliban created an increasingly
intimidating environment, forcing many
media outlets to close. Journalists faced
growing restrictions including arbitrary arrest,
unlawful detentions and torture in response
to reporting that criticized the Taliban, leading
many to self-censor. Journalists were beaten
and faced other forms of torture while

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

detained. Many journalists fled the country.
Women television reporters were forced to
almost completely cover their faces.
The Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission (AIHRC), the national
human rights institution, remained closed,
and the space for civil society organizations
to document and report on human rights
shrank significantly. Independent human
rights groups were unable to work freely. The
Taliban arrested and unlawfully detained
those who criticized the Taliban on social
media, particularly Facebook.
The Taliban dismantled any space for
peaceful assembly, demonstration or
gathering. Taliban police used excessive and
unnecessary force against demonstrators,
and peaceful protesters were arbitrary
arrested, detained, tortured and forcibly
disappeared. Detained protesters faced
physical and psychological torture. Family
members prevented female relatives from
protesting out of fear of repercussions,
further shrinking the space for freedom of
assembly.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Taliban shut down the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs (MoWA) and replaced it with
the Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and
Prevention of Vice, which issued restrictive
and abusive decrees on women’s and girls’
rights. Women who protested against these
restrictions were met with unlawful detention
and violence.
Girls remained barred from attending
secondary school, and from December, from
tertiary education. Previously, women
attending universities were required to learn
in gender-segregated classrooms wearing
head-to-toe coverings, among other
restrictions. They faced difficulties registering
for classes and the national university
entrance exam and, in some instances, were
denied entrance to university buildings,
making higher education almost inaccessible.
Women were also barred from studying
certain subjects. By the end of the year,
women and girls were only permitted to
attend primary schools.

65

Women and girls were increasingly
prevented from freely accessing other public
spaces through various measures. The
Taliban imposed a dress code, required
women to have a chaperone (mahram) to
accompany them in public, and banned
women and girls from public parks. In
August, the media reported that 60 women
university students were denied the right to
leave Afghanistan because they did not have
a mahram. These rules were arbitrarily and
randomly enforced and many women chose
not to travel alone as a result.
The Taliban announced that male relatives
would be responsible for any violations of the
restrictions by women and girls in their
families. This led to family members
restricting the rights of female relatives out of
fear of reprisals by the Taliban authorities.
The Taliban cracked down on women who
protested against these restrictions publicly
or on social media, including through
beatings, arrests, unlawful detention and
arrests of family members. Some of the
women arrested, including those fleeing
abuses, were charged with a vague and
ambiguous “crime” of “moral corruption”.
However, following the Taliban takeover the
applicability of previously existing laws
remained mostly unclear as the Taliban
publicly enforced their narrow and restrictive
understanding of the sharia laws in the
country. While protests continued throughout
the year, they were increasingly met with
resistance from Taliban police who blocked
the way of protesters and arrested journalists
attempting to cover the protests.
The dismantling of former government
structures, including the MoWA and
the AIHRC, and the conversion of the judicial
system into the religious-based
sharia system, reduced the protections
previously available to women and girls. This
led to an increase in reports of domestic
violence and forced marriages. There was no
reliable mechanism to which women victims
of domestic violence could turn. Courts and
prosecution units that were previously
responsible for investigating and adjudicating
cases of gender-based violence remained

66

shut. The Taliban authorities and communitylevel dispute resolution mechanisms both
punished women for reporting domestic
violence.
The Taliban additionally barred women and
girls from working with NGOs in December.
This and other Taliban restrictions on
women’s rights to work outside the home
hugely affected women’s livelihoods – in
particular households where they are the sole
breadwinners – at a time of increasing
national food insecurity.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Between August 2021 and June 2022,
UNAMA recorded 2,106 civilian casualties.
Many were people killed by the IS-KP, which
continued to carry out systematic and
targeted attacks on minority ethnic and
religious groups, including by bombing
religious and educational centres and
attacking public transportation taken by these
groups. Such instances included an attack
on a Sikh temple in the capital, Kabul, on 18
June and the bombing of an education
centre in a primarily Hazara neighbourhood
on 30 September. The latter killed at least 52
teenagers, mostly girls. The Taliban
authorities failed to investigate these attacks
or take adequate steps to protect minorities.
Instead, in some instances, the Taliban
removed existing security measures set up
under the former government to protect these
minority groups. This included removing
guards protecting sites likely to be targeted,
exposing them to further risk of attack.
In areas of ongoing armed resistance
against the Taliban – particularly in the
provinces of Panjshir, Baghlan, Badakhshan
and Sari Pul – civilians continued to face
death, arbitrary arrest, torture and restricted
movement enforced by local Taliban
authorities. Locals also reported that the
Taliban carried out forced evictions in these
areas, particularly in Panjshir.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government takeover by the Taliban
continued to be deeply damaging to the
country’s healthcare system. The Taliban

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

policy on women healthcare workers
remained ambiguous and inconsistent.
Because of requirements that women travel
with a mahram, as well as fears of Taliban
reprisals against women and the large
numbers of educated women who fled the
country, the healthcare sector faced a serious
depletion in human resources. This was
particularly challenging in rural areas where
health resources were already limited under
the previous government. The freezing of
most international aid, which had been
largely responsible for supporting healthcare
before 2021, left hospitals and health clinics
with limited resources or staff, contributing to
a widespread inability to access healthcare.

REFUGEES AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE
Large numbers of Afghans continued to flee
the country due to a well-founded fear of
persecution by the Taliban. Despite the
dangers they were subject to in Afghanistan,
other countries continued to deport Afghan
refugees and asylum seekers. Some fleeing
Afghans were shot dead, denied the right to
apply for asylum, faced pushbacks on the
border, or met with other violations and
exploitation by the authorities of the countries
in which they sought refuge.
At the beginning of the year, 3.8 million
people were internally displaced in
Afghanistan, living in precarious
circumstances with limited ability to access
their human rights. The Norwegian Refugee
Council reported that the Taliban forcibly
evicted some of these internally displaced
people from urban areas and forced them to
return to their villages of origin, where they
faced extreme poverty and an inability to
sustain themselves.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people in Afghanistan continued to
face grave human rights violations
perpetrated by the Taliban, including threats,
targeted attacks, sexual assaults, arbitrary
detentions and other violations. Many LGBTI
people remained fearful that past
discriminatory practices by the Taliban would

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

resurface. These historically included
punishing those believed to be engaging in
same-sex relations with death. Many LGBTI
people remained in hiding, fearing a risk to
their lives.

IMPUNITY
The Taliban governance structure lacked
justice, truth or reparation for crimes under
international law or human rights violations.
Courts and prosecutors did not investigate
extrajudicial executions or prosecute those
committing other human rights violations.
The independence of the judicial system was
severely damaged by the Taliban replacing
judges and courts with their own systems of
justice.
In October, the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber
authorized the ICC Prosecutor to resume its
investigation into the situation in Afghanistan.
In its decision, the Court stressed that such
an investigation should be with regard “to all
alleged crimes and actors”, including
“members of armed forces or security and
intelligence services of non-States parties”, in
contrast to the Prosecutor’s prior decision to
focus his attention on crimes committed only
by the Taliban and IS-KP.

ALBANIA
Republic of Albania
Head of state: Bajram Begaj (replaced Ilir Meta in July)
Head of government: Edi Rama
The government failed to protect citizens’
personal data from a cyberattack on the
country’s servers. Intimidation against
journalists continued. A specialized forensic
psychiatric facility was lacking to
accommodate and treat patients. Roma and
Egyptian people were subjected to
discrimination and segregation in
education. Violence persisted against
women and LGBTI people. There were fears
that the restructuring of the courts would
make justice less accessible.

67

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In July and September, an external
cyberattack on Albania’s main state systems
and servers revealed important classified and
unclassified information and personal data
relating to Albanian citizens. There were
concerns that the government had failed to
provide adequate protection against these
incidents.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
JOURNALISTS
In September the Prosecutor’s Office banned
all media outlets from publishing information
from files that had been hacked from
Albanian servers and computer systems and
then leaked online, and threatened to launch
criminal investigations against offenders and
block news websites.
Due to the government’s failure to protect
citizens’ data, in April a journalist’s personal
data was downloaded by a public notary
without his consent, after he had published
information about the vetting process of a
former prosecutor who was formerly married
to the notary.
In July, the prime minister banned a
journalist for three months from participating
in his press conferences, saying that he
should be sent for “re-education” and
accusing him of unethical behaviour.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
In April, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture published a report on a
recent visit to Albania to examine the
situation of forensic psychiatric patients in
the country, currently accommodated
unlawfully in the prison system. The
Committee stressed the urgent need for a
permanent solution for the accommodation
and treatment of such patients by creating a
specialized forensic psychiatric facility, as
required by mental health legislation.
In October, a 32-year-old man died in a
police station in Tirana after he was arbitrarily
detained. Although he was suffering from a
health condition requiring immediate
treatment, the police refused to send him to

68

hospital immediately. The police also
unlawfully failed to register the victim in the
official registers.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI people remained subject to
discrimination and harassment. In May, a
transgender man was physically attacked by
a group in the street because of their gender
identity.
ROMA AND EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
Roma and Egyptian people were subjected to
discrimination and segregation in education
from an early age. In May, the European
Court of Human Rights ruled that the rights
of six Roma and Egyptian families had been
violated when their children had suffered
indirect discrimination and segregation in
the Naim Frashëri primary school, in Korçë.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Violence against women remained
widespread, with protection orders not being
effectively implemented. Dozens of women
were killed by their partners or family
members. A report confirmed that women
candidates and members of parliament
encountered different forms of abuse within
political parties, including offensive language
or insults, speech interruption, threats, and
sexual harassment.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
In July, the government approved judicial
reforms reducing the number of courts in the
country. There were concerns that this would
make access to justice more expensive and
more difficult.

ALGERIA
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria
Head of state: Abdelmadjid Tebboune
Head of government: Aïmene Benabderrahmane
Authorities continued to arrest and
prosecute people who expressed dissent
online or attended protests. They also

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

continued to use anti-terrorism laws to
prosecute peaceful activists and journalists,
and to close or threaten to close
associations. Prison officers subjected
prisoners to torture and other ill-treatment
with impunity. Authorities closed three
churches and refused licences for more,
and restricted the right to movement of
some activists and journalists. Three
lawyers were prosecuted in relation to their
defence of political activists or for
protesting against a suspicious death in
custody. Thirty-seven femicides were
reported; no changes were made to the law
to protect women. Courts handed down
death sentences; there were no executions.

BACKGROUND
On 4 July, the 60th anniversary of Algerian
independence, President Tebboune
pardoned 1,076 prisoners and issued
clemency measures for 70 people indicted
but not sentenced for participating in the
mass, peaceful protest movement known as
Hirak in 2019-2022.
In July, the Moroccan king called for
restoration of diplomatic ties with Algeria.
Algeria had cut ties in August 2021 over what
it called “hostile acts” in relation to the longstanding dispute over the Western Sahara
(see Morocco/Western Sahara entry).
In September, the government postponed
the planned visit of the Special Rapporteur
on the Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and of
Association for the eighth time since 2011.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The widespread crackdown on freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly escalated,
with authorities crushing any form of dissent.
At the end of the year, at least 280 activists,
human rights defenders and protesters
remained in prison on charges relating to the
peaceful exercise of their rights to freedom of
expression and assembly.
In March, a court in the capital Algiers
sentenced five young Hirak activists,
including Mohamed Tadjadit and Malik Riahi,
to two years in prison for publishing a video

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

in which a 15-year-old boy said that police
had sexually assaulted him.1 After the release
of Mohamed Tadjadit in August, the Sidi
M'hamed court in Algiers re-ordered his
provisional detention in October for the fourth
time in three years, but released him a week
later.
In April, a criminal court in Adrar city in
south-west Algeria sentenced environmental
activist Mohad Gasmi to three years in prison
for “sharing confidential information without
the intent of treason” relating to email
exchanges about the exploitation of shale gas
in Algeria. He was already serving a prison
sentence for “glorification of terrorism” for a
Facebook post in which he attributed the
radicalization of a prominent Algerian militant
to the authorities’ failure to deliver justice and
dignity to the people.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Authorities suspended at least one political
party and threatened to dissolve at least two
associations. They also used bogus antiterrorism charges against members of
opposition political parties and movements
deemed oppositional. A new law on
associations was being drafted.
On 20 January, on the orders of the Ministry
of Interior, the State Council suspended the
Socialist Workers’ Party (PST), forcing it to
cease all activities and close its premises.
The PST appealed, but received no response
and remained suspended. Also in January,
the Ministry of Interior asked the State
Council to suspend two other political parties:
the Union for Change and Progress; and the
Rally for Culture and Democracy.
In April, Abdelrahman Zitout, younger
brother of a member of Rachad, an
opposition movement the authorities label as
“terrorist”, was imprisoned on multiple
charges. No evidence of terrorism was
brought against him in court. He staged
several hunger strikes to protest against his
imprisonment.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued with
impunity.

69

Anti-corruption activist, former military
officer and whistle-blower Mohamed
Benhlima was transferred to Blida military
prison south-west of Algiers in April, held in
solitary confinement, subjected to torture and
other ill-treatment, and not allowed to receive
food, clothes and books from the outside.

21,870 people were deported to Niger in
2022.
In November, authorities forcibly transferred
over 60 Syrian and Palestinian men, women
and children across the Niger border and left
them in the desert.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF

At least five activists and journalists were
prevented from leaving the country without a
judicial order, in breach of their right to
freedom of movement.
In February, Lazhar Zouaimia, an AlgerianCanadian national and member of Amnesty
International in Canada, was charged with
“terrorism” for his alleged connection with
the Movement for the Self-determination of
Kabylie (MAK) and Rachad. Authorities twice
stopped him from leaving Algeria, before
allowing him to travel to Canada in May.2 In
September, a tribunal in the city of
Constantine convicted Lazhar Zouaimia in his
absence and sentenced him to five years in
prison and a fine.
In August, staff and authorities at Oran
airport questioned activist Kaddour Chouicha
and journalist Jamila Loukil and prevented
them from travelling to Switzerland for a UN
conference.

Authorities continued to use Decree Law
06-3, which restricts religions other than
Sunni Islam, to prosecute members of the
Ahmadi Religion of Peace and Light and to
close at least three Protestant churches,
bringing to 29 the number of churches
closed since 2018. Authorities had issued no
licences for non-Muslim worship since 2006.
Authorities refused to issue building
licences to the Protestant Church of Algeria,
which has 47 churches across the country.
In January, the government rejected the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention’s view
that the sentencing to five years in prison of
Hamid Soudad, a Christian, for “offending
Islam” under Article 144bis2 of the Penal
Code is incompatible with the ICCPR. The
government said that the Article protects
public order.
In June, the first instance court in Bejaia in
east Algiers charged 18 members of the
Ahmadi Religion of Peace and Light with
“participation in an unauthorized group” and
“denigrating Islam” under Article 46 of the
Law on Associations and Article 144bis2 of
the Penal Code, respectively. The judge
ordered that three be detained and the others
released pending further investigation. In
November, all charges against the group
were dropped. On 16 November, the Ministry
of Religious Affairs issued a fatwa against the
group, declaring them “heretics” and saying
they should be “condemned and punished
according to the law”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, over 140 refugees and asylum
seekers were arrested or deported between
January and mid-September, and at least

70

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Authorities arbitrarily arrested defence
lawyers, thus undermining the right to fair
trial. In June, the first instance court of
Tebessa in north-east Algeria sentenced
lawyer Abderraouf Arslane to three years in
prison, two of them suspended, after he had
spent over a year in pretrial detention. He
was arrested in May 2021 for defending three
Hirak activists, and charged with “spreading
fake news” and “terrorist”-related offences.
In May, lawyers Abdelkader Chohra and
Yassine Khlifi were arrested for protesting
against the suspicious death in custody of an
activist, and charged with “spreading fake
news” and “incitement to unarmed
gathering”. Both were sentenced on 15
August to six months in prison, suspended,
and released the same day.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code and Family Code continued
to unlawfully discriminate against women in
matters of inheritance, marriage, divorce,
child custody and guardianship. The Penal
Code’s “forgiveness clause” allows rapists to
escape sentencing if they obtain a pardon
from the victim and does not explicitly
recognize marital rape as a crime.
The activist group Féminicides Algérie
recorded 37 reported femicides in 2022.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Penal Code continued to criminalize
consensual same-sex sexual relations,
punishable by two months to two years in
prison and a fine.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
The Labour Code continued to restrict the
right to form trade unions.
Authorities denied registration to the
independent General Autonomous
Confederation for Algerian Workers, as they
had done since 2013.
On 30 April, police in Bejaia city summoned
Nacer Kassa, regional coordinator of the
National Autonomous Union of Public
Administration Personnel, to request he
cancel a protest demanding improved
workers’ rights. The union did not hold its
protest but denounced the ban. In October,
Bejaia local authorities refused, without
explanation, to allow the union to hold its
general assembly.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts continued to hand down death
sentences, including for political reasons.
The last execution was in 1993.
In October, Mohamed Abderrahmane
Semmar, editor of the news outlet Algérie
Part, was sentenced to death for “high
treason” for leaking information about
Algerian oil deals.
In November, the Criminal Tribunal of First
Instance in Dar El Beida in Algiers sentenced
scores of people, including one woman, to
death for the murder of activist Djamel Ben
Smail, who was lynched by a crowd in August

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

2021 in the Kabylie region in north-east
Algeria. The judge convicted five of the
defendants in their absence of several
charges, including for their alleged links to
MAK, which the authorities label as
“terrorist”.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Algeria did not update its 2030 emissions
target to align with the 1.5°C imperative, and
domestic legislation remained insufficient to
protect and promote the right to a clean,
healthy environment.
In August, wildfires destroyed around
10,000 hectares of forest, killing 43 people.
1. “Algeria: End prosecution of activists who exposed torture of a child
in police custody”, 22 March
2. “Algeria: Lift arbitrary travel bans on diaspora activists”, 6 May

ANDORRA
Principality of Andorra
Heads of state: Joan Enric Vives i Sicília and
Emmanuel Macron
Head of government: Xavier Espot Zamora
Andorra maintained a total ban on abortion.
A woman human rights defender who raised
concerns about women’s rights, including
access to abortion, was awaiting trial
accused of defamation. Legislation was
passed that discriminated against women
and girls choosing to wear headscarves at
school.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A total ban on abortion remained in place.
Consequently, those in need of an abortion
had to travel to other countries to seek the
healthcare they needed, inflicting additional
stress and reinforcing the stigma surrounding
abortion.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In October, a judge issued an indictment
against Vanessa Mendoza Cortés, president
of the organization Stop Violence, accusing
her of “crimes against the prestige of the

71

institutions”, which carries a potential fine of
up to EUR 30,000. The public prosecutor
brought criminal charges against her in 2020
following a complaint by the Andorran
government after her intervention at the
CEDAW Committee and statements she made
to the press about abortion rights and calling
for an improvement to women’s rights. In
June 2021, the prosecutor dropped two of
the charges, but kept the charge liable to a
fine. Her trial was pending at the end of the
year.
In February, a report by the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe urged the
authorities to guarantee the right to freedom
of expression to all those speaking out about
sexual and reproductive rights, including
access to abortion.

DISCRIMINATION
In April, parliament passed legislation
banning the wearing of conspicuous religious
symbols in educational institutions. The law
prevents Muslim women and girls who
choose to wear a headscarf from exercising
their rights to non-discrimination, equality,
education, freedom of religion, expression,
bodily autonomy and access to public life.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Defamation laws that include the
criminalization of legitimate criticism of the
authorities remained in force, in breach of
international human rights law.

ANGOLA
Republic of Angola
Head of state and government: João Lourenço
Angola’s human rights record remained
appalling. The pre- and post-election
periods were mired in human rights
violations including crackdowns on the right
to peaceful assembly and protest, and the
detention and torture of activists. In the
south, extreme weather conditions,
symptomatic of climate change, continued
to impact the rights to food and water; and

72

the associated humanitarian crisis remained
unmitigated. Illegal occupation of
communal grazing land in this region
aggravated the dire conditions under which
pastoralist communities lived.

BACKGROUND
General elections took place on 24 August
amid general discontent about the high cost
of living and increasing government
unpopularity. The young were among the
most dissatisfied, incensed by growing
unemployment and the government’s failure
to create the 500,000 jobs it promised during
the 2017 electoral campaign. Crackdowns on
peaceful assembly and protest by youth
increased in the lead-up to the election.
Unprecedented apathy among the electorate,
with only 46% voting, contributed to the
People’s Movement for the Liberation of
Angola (MPLA) winning the election with
51% of the vote, the lowest margin ever
recorded. It lost Luanda, the capital and the
largest electoral district, for the first time to
the National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola. As allegations of
electoral irregularities cast a shadow over the
legitimacy of the MPLA’s victory, President
Lourenço was sworn in with a show of military
might in the streets and skies of Luanda.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
While there were no human rights violations
reported at polling stations on election day,
numerous crackdowns by security forces on
the right to peaceful assembly, protest and
freedom of expression in the pre- and postelectoral period were recorded. Security
agents enjoyed impunity for these crimes.
The police continued to detain António
Tuma, the assistant technical secretary for
information of the Cabinda Independentist
Movement (MIC), accused of “criminal
association and rebellion”. He and another
MIC activist, Alexandre Dunge, had been
arrested in their homes at dawn on 6 October
2021 and remained in detention at Cabinda
Civil Penitentiary until 1 July when the
Cabinda District Court absolved and released

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

them. Hours later, António Tuma was rearrested along with six other MIC – activists
Sebestão Macaia Bungo, Joaquim do
Nascimento Sita, Jorge Gomes, Teofilo
Gomes, Marcos Futi Poba Polo and José
Isamo– who had gathered to celebrate the
release of their colleagues. However, the
Criminal Investigation Service (SIC) claimed
that they had intended to go on a march to
create public instability.
In March, the SIC detained 10 civic activists
for planning a seminar on regional
sustainable development at Agostinho Neto
Primary School in Malanje province. SIC
officers subjected the activists to torture in
detention.
In April, police arrested and detained 22
youth activists, including three women, in
Luanda. They were accused of taking part in
an “unauthorized manifestation in disregard
of the presuppositions of the law on the right
to assembly and demonstration”. The
activists intended to protest against Indra, the
company contracted to manage the electoral
process, and call for the release of political
prisoners. After summary trials, 20 of them
were acquitted, while two were ordered to
pay fines as an equivalent to a 40-day prison
sentence.
The authorities tightened their grip on the
right to freedom of association by preventing
civil society meetings from taking place
ahead of the general election. On 21 May, the
police prevented two civil society
organizations – Omunga and the Association
for the Development of Culture and Human
Rights – from holding a conference on peace
building.1
Mass arrests were carried out following the
election. On 26 August dozens of young
people, including children, took to the streets
in Lobito city, Benguela province, to
peacefully protest the provisional election
results. The national police dispersed them
with tear gas and gunfire and arrested eight
activists and 11 bystanders. The following
day, a group of young people were dispersed
by police when they attempted a peaceful
demonstration against the provisional results.
Twenty members of the group were arrested,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

including activists Avisto Mbota, Albino
Elavoko, António Gomes, Maria Do Carmo
Correia and Mário Hulunda Raúl who were
gathered inside a residence where the police
surprised them with gunshots, arrests and
beatings. By 29 August, a total of 40 young
people had been presented to Lobito District
Court on charges of public disobedience. The
arresting officers failed to appear in court and
the case was dismissed due to lack of
evidence.
On 15 September, as President Lourenço
was being sworn in, police detained civic
activist Osvaldo Caholo for seven hours
before releasing him without charge. Three
days before, he had given an interview to
Deutsche Welle where he said that in the
next five years, the MPLA would turn Angola
into a terrorist state against its own people. In
the same month, 12 civic activists were
detained at the SIC premises in Luanda,
accused of posting videos on social media to
“sow insecurity, hatred and panic”. They
were released without charge after four days
on 28 September.
Also in Luanda, on 20 September,
unidentified men wearing facial disguises
invaded the home of Claudio Emmanuel, a
radio show host, and held his family hostage
after one of his guests criticized the
intelligence services on air. The men tortured
Claudio Emmanuel’s wife, tying her up,
beating her and using a hot knife to inflict
more than 30 cuts to her limbs. They also
threatened to kill her baby if she screamed.
Although the case was reported to the police
who later visited Claudio Emmanuel’s home,
no one was held accountable.
On 29 September, civic activists and their
families received death threats for organizing
protests against the election results. For
example, Hermenegildo Victor, coordinator of
the Civic Movement Mudei, and Basílio da
Fonseca, leader of the civic organization,
Malanjina Resistance, received death threats
on their mobile phones from unknown
sources.

73

RIGHT TO FOOD AND WATER

FORCED EVICTIONS

Extreme weather conditions symptomatic of
climate change continued to affect lives in
the south, including in the provinces of
Cunene, Huíla, Kwando Kubango and
Namibe, where drought reached
unprecedented levels in recent years,
causing food and water shortages, and
malnutrition resulting in the death of people
and cattle.2
The Integrated Phase Classification (IPC)
which describes the severity of food
shortages said food insecurity in the Cunene,
Huíla and Namibe provinces was among the
worst in the world, affecting about 1.58
million people, of whom 43% were classified
by the IPC as being in crisis phase 3 and
15% in emergency phase 4. Around 400,000
children were projected to be acutely
malnourished in 2022, according to UNICEF
and OCHA. Some adults and children
resorted to eating grass to survive. There was
a massive loss of livestock caused by fodder
shortages as a consequence of the drought
which aggravated food insecurity levels
among pastoralists. Meanwhile, the war in
Ukraine led to a 45% increase in wheat
prices in Africa, according to the African
Development Bank, which further aggravated
food shortages.
REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS
The drought, widespread cattle losses and
crop failure continued to drive people to
neighbouring Namibia as the only viable
option in the desperate search for food and
water. Thousands of people trekked to
Namibia on foot, without food and water,
some of them sick and malnourished; many
of them died on the journey. In Namibia, they
sheltered under cardboard and plastic bags
or slept outside on the ground, without cover.
Whereas there was little government relief
for those who remained in Angola, the
Namibian government and the Red Cross
made visible efforts to provide relief for the
refugees. Hunger forced many of those who
had been repatriated to Angola to return to
Namibia.

The expropriation of communal grazing land
for commercial ranching in southern Angola
continued, despite calls by local and
international human rights organizations to
end the practice. The land transfers from
pastoralist communities to commercial
ranchers exacerbated food and water
shortages by limiting the communities’
access to arable land and preventing them
from transferring their livestock to alternative
grazing land in accordance with the seasons.
Land transfers were often made without the
free, prior and informed consent of the
pastoralists, who include Indigenous and
tribal peoples. The authorities and the
ranchers violated pastoralists’ procedural and
political rights, including their rights to just
compensation, community consultations,
environmental impact assessment and
resettlement. For instance, on 12 October,
the police attempted to evict the Mucubai
community from their land in Ndamba on the
outskirts of Moçâmedes, Namibe Province, to
facilitate a land transfer to a commercial
rancher. The police burned 16 houses and
personal belongings including blankets,
clothes and water containers. A five-year-old
boy disappeared following the raid and the
residents feared he may have been burned
alive in one of the houses.3

74

1. “Angola: Authorities repress civil society organizations ahead of
election”, 24 May
2. Angola: Make the Vote Meaningful for Human Rights Observance:
Human Rights Manifesto for Angola Ahead of the 2022 General
Election, 16 August
3. “Angola: Authorities must account for missing five-year-old following
violent raid in Ndamba”, 20 October

ARGENTINA
Republic of Argentina
Head of state and government: Alberto Fernández
Impunity for gender-based violence
persisted with many femicides and attacks
against LGBTI people going unpunished.
Abortion remained difficult to access in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

many parts of the country, despite its recent
decriminalization. Investigations into
several key cases of disappearances and
deaths in police custody did not progress.
Officials did not take measures to improve
the integration of refugees and asylum
seekers.

BACKGROUND
The country remained mired in an economic
and social crisis. In the first half of 2022,
36.5% of the population was living in poverty.
In September, vice-president Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner was the target of an
assassination attempt.
In September, the UN Independent Expert
on the Effects of Foreign Debt visited
Argentina and expressed the need to ensure
that its international debt obligations do not
compromise human rights.
In November, the Special Rapporteur on
Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary
Executions found that Argentina did not
effectively investigate and prevent unlawful
deaths. He concluded that “victims often
belong to the most disadvantaged and
vulnerable sections of the population... while
those responsible enjoy impunity”.

WOMEN´S AND LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN, GIRLS AND LGBTI PEOPLE
According to figures collected by NGOs,
during 2022, 233 gender-based killings were
recorded, 91% of them in domestic settings.
Despite the public attention given to the
fight against gender-based violence,
prosecution rates for sexual violence
remained low and only 15.5% of reported
cases resulted in convictions, according to
the National Prosecutor’s Office.
In October, after more than four years of
collaboration between the Argentine,
Brazilian and Nicaraguan justice systems,
actor Juan Darthés testified in the trial in
Brazil in which he is charged with the rape of
Thelma Fardin. A final ruling in the case was
deferred to 2023.
Women and LGBTI journalists faced
increased violence and attacks. At least two
journalists who defend women’s human

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

rights filed complaints with the courts for
online harassment and violence. At the end
of the year their cases remained pending.
The fate and whereabouts of Tehuel de la
Torre, a 21-year-old transgender man missing
since March 2021, remained unknown. No
independent, effective, impartial, transfeminist investigation into the case was
carried out.
SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Significant obstacles persisted in accessing
abortion services despite the approval of a
law in 2020 decriminalizing and legalizing
abortion within the first 14 weeks of
pregnancy. Authorities did not carry out any
campaigns to disseminate information about
the law.
Miranda Ruiz, a doctor from Tartagal, Salta
Province, was finally acquitted after having
been criminalized for assisting in a legal
abortion.
Ana, a 30-year-old woman who had had a
miscarriage, was finally released after having
been accused of aggravated homicide and
spending eight months in prison in Corrientes
Province.
According to the latest available official data
released in 2022, at least three children aged
under 15 gave birth daily in 2020. Despite a
decrease in the number of pregnancies
among children and adolescents aged
between 10 and 19 between 2016 and 2020,
more than 50,000 people in this age group
gave birth during 2020.
COMPREHENSIVE SEX EDUCATION
By the end of the year litigation remained
pending against a resolution passed by
Chaco Province’s Ministry of Education in
May allowing a teacher training conference to
contain content dismissing abortion rights
and children’s rights, and pathologizing
sexual diversity.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
At the end of the year, a ruling against the 13
police officers accused in the case of
Valentino Blas Correas, a 17-year-old boy
from Córdoba Province who was shot and
killed by police in August 2021, remained
pending.

75

On 5 June, Daiana Soledad Abregú was
found dead in a police cell in the town of
Laprida, Buenos Aires Province. Although
initial examinations suggested that she took
her own life, a second autopsy dismissed the
hypothesis of suicide. The five police officials
charged with aggravated homicide remained
at liberty.
A bill on a Comprehensive Approach to
Institutional Violence by Police Officials in the
Security and Penitentiary Services remained
pending before the Lower House at the end
of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Jujuy provincial government introduced
a bill to amend the provincial constitution and
limit social protest, prohibiting roadblocks
and the “usurpation of public space”. The
discussion of the reform was deferred to
2023.

IMPUNITY
Trials before ordinary civilian courts
continued for crimes against humanity
committed under the 1976-1983 military
regime. Between 2006 and December 2022,
286 rulings were handed down, bringing the
total number of convictions to 1,088 and
acquittals to 166.
The investigation into the disappearance
and death of Facundo Astudillo Castro in
2020 made no significant progress. He was
last seen at a police checkpoint in Buenos
Aires Province.
By the end of the year, the investigation into
the disappearance and death of Santiago
Maldonado had made no progress. His body
was found in 2017 in a river on Mapuche
territory in Chubut Province, 78 days after a
violent raid by the Argentine National
Gendarmerie.
Concerns remained over the lack of
institutional public policies on effective
searches for missing persons, and
investigations into alleged enforced
disappearances were not carried out.

76

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Indigenous peoples continued to face serious
difficulties in accessing collective land rights.
The National Institute for Indigenous Affairs
only completed 43% of the survey of
Indigenous territories mandated by the
Emergency Law 26.160. Evictions of
Indigenous people from their territories
continued despite a prohibition mandated by
the same law.
Formosa Province authorities denied the
pre-colonial existence of the Nivaclé people
and thus refused to issue birth certificates
and identity cards to its people, especially the
elderly. According to civil society
organizations, about 30% of them remained
without identity documents, violating their
right to identity and putting them at risk of
statelessness.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In May, national authorities established a
community sponsorship programme for
people fleeing social unrest and natural
disasters in Central America, the Caribbean
and Mexico. However, people in need of
international protection for other reasons and
from other countries were not included.
Authorities suspended the relocation of new
people in need of international
protection under the community sponsorship
programme for Syrians (the “Syria
Programme”). Government authorities failed
to pass regulations pursuant to the refugee
law to allow asylum seekers and refugees
greater access to basic rights such as
education, work and healthcare.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Congress failed to enact the Wetlands Law
Bill, which had been pending approval for
more than a decade, despite intense
heatwaves, droughts and fires in large areas
of the country, which threatened both land
and livelihoods.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ARMENIA
Republic of Armenia
Head of state: Vahagn Khachaturyan (replaced Alen
Simonyan in March, who replaced Armen Sarkissian in
February)
Head of government: Nikol Pashinyan
No progress was reported in investigating
war crimes and other crimes under
international law during the 2020 ArmeniaAzerbaijan armed conflict and its
immediate aftermath. Law enforcement
officers used excessive force during antigovernment protests. Freedom of expression
was restricted as hundreds faced criminal
prosecution for allegedly insulting officials.
Amendments to the Mining Code made it
easier to bypass public opposition and
environmental concerns. Laws to combat
discrimination on the grounds of sexual
orientation and gender identity remained
inadequate.

BACKGROUND
The security situation along the ArmeniaAzerbaijan border remained tense with
frequent skirmishes. Azerbaijani shelling
inside Armenia proper, with strikes in the
Syunik, Gegharkunik and Vayots Dzor
provinces, resulted in over 200 deaths
including two civilians. In October, Azerbaijan
and Armenia agreed on the short-term
deployment of an EU monitoring mission
along their border.
The large-scale migration of Russians to
Armenia prompted by the war aided
economic performance but also contributed
to an increase in rental prices and the cost of
living generally.
In March, the European Committee of Social
Rights expressed concern over insufficient
measures taken by Armenia to improve
occupational safety and health, the lack of a
clearly defined policy on occupational health
and safety and the failure to guarantee social
security to all workers and their dependents.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
No substantive progress was made in
investigating war crimes and other violations
of international humanitarian law during the
2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict and in its
immediate aftermath, or in bringing
suspected perpetrators to justice.
People continued to be killed and injured by
mines planted by Armenian forces in
territories where they had ceded control to
Azerbaijan. Azerbaijani authorities reported in
October that 266 people had been injured by
mines since the 2020 conflict, maintaining
that the maps of minefields provided earlier
by Armenia were not reliable.
According to an ICRC report issued in
August, over 300 Armenians remained
missing or unaccounted for since the 2020
fighting.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Freedom of peaceful assembly was curtailed
by the violent and disproportionate response
of law enforcement authorities to protests.
A series of anti-government protests took
place from April to June demanding the
resignation of prime minister Nikol Pashinyan
over negotiations on the Armenia-Azerbaijan
conflict. The protests often took the form of
large-scale demonstrations with protesters
blocking streets and setting up tents. The
response of the authorities on occasions was
disproportionate, dispersing and arresting
hundreds and injuring dozens.
In one of the most violent clashes, which
took place on 3 June, police fired stun
grenades and used excessive force to prevent
thousands of demonstrators from
approaching the Armenian parliament
building. Fifty people, including 34 police
officers, were said to require medical
attention and dozens were arrested for taking
part in “mass violence”.
Media rights watchdogs reported that at
least 11 journalists were injured while
covering protests from April to June; some
were also obstructed from covering the
demonstrations. By the end of the year no
police officers had been charged with using

77

excessive force in connection with the antigovernment demonstrations.
On 25 August, police dispersed a peaceful
protest in the capital, Yerevan, against the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, arresting 22
people. Detained protesters were held
without access to a lawyer, or an interpreter
for those who did not speak Armenian, for
several hours and released without charge
later that day.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression continued
to be unduly restricted. Criminal prosecutions
over the legitimate expression of criticism of
the authorities had a chilling effect on free
speech.
The trial of Yazidi human rights defender
Sashik Sultanyan continued on fabricated
charges of “inciting ethnic hatred” for voicing
criticism of the authorities’ treatment of
national minorities.
Following the passing in 2021 of legislative
amendments criminalizing insulting public
figures, more than 200 criminal cases were
initiated on charges of grave insults against
officials.
On 4 July, new amendments proposed by
the Prosecutor General giving the
government powers to block online content it
considers harmful, without prior judicial
oversight, prompted concerns regarding everincreasing government censorship of free
speech on the internet.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
On 18 June, parliament amended the Mining
Code which makes it easier to bypass public
opposition and environmental concerns,
allowing mining projects to proceed despite
protests. Local environmental activists raised
concerns that the new law served the
government’s intention to restart the Amulsar
gold mine project in southern Armenia,
halted due to environmental and other
concerns and civil society protests.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination on grounds of sexual

78

orientation and gender identity as laws to
combat discrimination remained inadequate.
The authorities failed to address the
recommendations made in 2021 by the
Council of Europe’s Committee on Equality
and Non-Discrimination, which included
adopting effective legislation and “policies to
strengthen action against discrimination
based on sexual orientation, gender identity,
gender expression and sexual
characteristics”.
On 17 May, the European Court of Human
Rights found that the authorities had failed to
protect an LGBTI bar owner from
homophobic violence, including arson and
physical and verbal attacks in 2012, and to
carry out an effective investigation.

AUSTRALIA
Australia
Head of state: Charles III (replaced Elizabeth II in
September), represented by David Hurley
Head of government: Anthony Albanese (replaced Scott
Morrison in May)
New laws restricted the right to peaceful
protest in several states and territories.
Discrimination against First Nations peoples
continued. The rights of child detainees
were violated. Australia accepted an offer
by New Zealand to resettle refugees, but
indefinite detention of asylum seekers
continued. New carbon reduction targets
were enshrined in legislation, but fell short
of required levels.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
New South Wales, Tasmania and Victoria
adopted new laws carrying large fines and
prison sentences for participating in
unauthorized protests.
In August, police in New South Wales
arrested 34 peaceful protesters and a legal
observer at a demonstration in Sydney
against government inaction on climate
change. Twenty-one people were charged
under the Roads and Crimes Legislation
Amendment Act 2022 and faced a two-year

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

prison sentence or a fine of up to AUD
22,000 (approximately USD 14,170) if
convicted.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
remained over represented in the adult
prison population, despite targets to reduce
the number of incarcerated First Nations
people.
During the year, 21 Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people died in custody.
The government proposed a constitutional
amendment in September to establish the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice, a
body mandated to make representations
directly to government on issues affecting
First Nations peoples.
In September the UN Human Rights
Committee found that Australia’s failure to
adequately protect Indigenous Torres Strait
Islanders against impacts from climate
change violated their rights to enjoy their
culture and be free from arbitrary
interference with their private life, family and
home.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Australia continued to detain children as
young as 10. First Nations children, who
represented 6% of the population aged 10 to
17, constituted 50% of those in youth
detention.
In July, 17 boys held in Western Australia’s
Banksia Hill Youth Detention Centre were
transferred to the maximum-security adult
Casuarina Prison. Incidents of self-harm
among the transferred children were
reported.1 Increased rates of self-harm
among children detained in Don Dale Youth
Detention Centre in the Northern Territory
were also reported.
In August, allegations of sexual and physical
abuse against children held at Ashley Youth
Detention Centre in Tasmania emerged
during an official investigation, prompting
calls for the immediate closure of the facility.2

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In March the government accepted New
Zealand’s offer to resettle 150 refugees
annually for the next three years. However,
the practice of indefinite detention of
refugees and asylum seekers offshore in
Nauru and Papua New Guinea, and in
Australia, continued.
In July an Iranian-Kurdish refugee, Mostafa
“Moz” Azimitabar, challenged the legality of
his 15-month-long detention in hotels,
dubbed by the government as “alternative
places of detention”. A decision on the case
was pending at the end of the year.3

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The Climate Change Act, adopted on 9
September, legislated for a 43% emissions
reduction below 2005 levels by 2030. While
this represented progress, it fell short of the
figure needed to keep the rise in average
global temperatures below 1.5˚C.
The government committed to increase
financial support for countries in the region to
mitigate the effects of climate change to AUD
2 billion (approximately USD 1.3 billion) for
the period 2020-2025, but did not rejoin a
global climate fund it had left in 2018.
1. “Moving kids with complex needs to maximum security prison
shameful”, 6 July
2. “Australia: Amnesty International calls for the closure of Ashley Youth
Detention Centre in light of the latest evidence of sexual abuse”, 19
August
3. “Australia: Refugee Moz Azimitabar is taking the Australian
government to court over its detention regime”, 13 July

AUSTRIA
Republic of Austria
Head of state: Alexander Van der Bellen
Head of government: Karl Nehammer
Social assistance benefits in some states
remained inadequate. The right to adequate
housing was insufficiently recognized and
implemented. Women and girls were not
adequately protected from gender-based
violence. Journalists were prevented from

79

observing protests. Media freedom came
under increased pressure. Regulations for
unaccompanied children seeking
international protection did not adequately
protect them. Racial profiling persisted.
Police accountability for excessive use of
force remained inadequate. Austria failed to
reach its climate targets.

concern that there were insufficient places in
women’s shelters.
In September, women’s rights organizations
criticized persistent barriers to accessing
affordable and safe abortion services.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Although the government introduced some
measures to prevent Covid-19 related
evictions and support people at risk of
homelessness, the authorities failed to
develop and implement a national housing
strategy or ensure federal provision of
homeless assistance services. Further, a lack
of information, high levels of bureaucracy,
language barriers and statutory requirements
intentionally excluding Austrian as well as
non-Austrian citizens who did not fulfil the
eligibility criteria left many people without
access to relevant services and assistance.1

Media freedom continued to be under
pressure.
At several protests in the capital, Vienna,
police prevented journalists from observing
and reporting protests or failed to adequately
protect them from attacks by protesters.
When evicting people from a protest camp in
April, police set up a separate press zone for
journalists at such a distance from the camp
that it was impossible to observe events
adequately.
The use of strategic lawsuits against public
participation (SLAPPs) increased, both
against publishers of media outlets and
against journalists.
In March, Julian H., who played a key role
in the making of the so-called “Ibiza video”
alleging high-level corruption, was sentenced
to 41 months’ imprisonment. Concerns were
raised about his right to a fair trial.
A law on freedom of information, proposed
in February 2021 and aimed at increasing
transparency and trust in politics and
institutions, remained stalled.
The EU Commission began infringement
proceedings against Austria for its continued
failure to transpose the EU Whistle-blower
Directive into national law.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

Gender and intersectionality were not
sufficiently considered in the provision of
services. Most homeless assistance services,
for example, were not gender-specific but
based on the needs and experiences of men.
Proposed reforms to the care system failed to
fulfil the rights to fair remuneration and social
security of migrant women, who constituted
the vast majority of workers providing care for
older people in their homes.
By the end of the year, 28 women had been
killed due to gender-based violence, amid

In February, the Styrian Regional
Administrative Court ruled that an asylum
seeker from Morocco had been unlawfully
returned by the police to Slovenia, noting that
such unlawful actions were a recurrent
practice.
By the end of the year, 90,000 Ukrainian
refugees received temporary protection in
Austria under the provisions of the EU
Temporary Protection Directive.
In September, the Ministry of Internal Affairs
revealed that within a period of seven months
5,140 unaccompanied children seeking

RIGHT TO SOCIAL SECURITY
In June, parliament amended the Basic Act
on Social Assistance, providing a
hardship clause for non-Austrians and
ensuring those living in shelters for women
and homeless people receive the full amount
of social assistance. By the end of the year,
four federal states had partially implemented
the amendments, but the law continued to
deprive people of adequate access to social
benefits.

RIGHT TO ADEQUATE HOUSING

80

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

asylum had disappeared. Many NGOs and
politicians demanded the immediate
assignment of a legal guardian to all
unaccompanied minors on their arrival,
rather than only when admitted to the asylum
procedure, which could take several months.

DISCRIMINATION
Law enforcement continued to use facial
recognition technology without a clear legal
basis, despite its potentially discriminatory
impact on gender and ethnic and racial
minorities, as well as on rights to privacy,
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly.
Racial profiling by police persisted and
there was still no effective accountability
mechanism.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Failures to investigate allegations of excessive
use of force by the police, such as at the
2021 May Day demonstration, persisted.2 An
independent investigatory body, announced
by the government in 2020, had not been
established by the end of the year. Police
were still not required to wear identification
badges, further impeding accountability.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
Austria failed to reach its climate targets,
including the sustainable reduction of carbon
emissions, and there was no active climate
action law in place.
1. Austria: “If housing was a human right, I wouldn’t live like this” –
Barriers to Accessing Homeless Assistance Services in Austria, 7
April
2. “Amnesty criticizes climate of impunity for police violence in
Austria”, 26 January (German only)

AZERBAIJAN
Republic of Azerbaijan
Head of state: Ilham Aliyev
Head of government: Ali Asadov
Violations of international humanitarian law
continued to be reported and there was no

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

notable progress investigating alleged war
crimes committed during the 2020
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Freedom of
expression, assembly and association
remained severely restricted as authorities
carried out arbitrary arrests and politically
motivated prosecutions of civil society
activists, crushed peaceful protests and
hindered the work of independent
organizations and media outlets. Women
and girls continued to face discrimination.

BACKGROUND
Azerbaijan’s role in the supply and transit of
energy supplies grew. It pursued an
increasingly assertive economic and military
policy, particularly after Russia’s influence in
the region fell following its full-scale invasion
of Ukraine and the subsequent Western
sanctions.
Security along the Armenia-Azerbaijan
border remained fragile. During a flare-up
between 12-14 September, Azerbaijani
shelling inside Armenia proper, in the Syunik,
Gegharkunik and Vayots Dzor provinces,
killed at least two civilians. In October,
Azerbaijan and Armenia agreed on the shortterm deployment of an EU monitoring
mission along their border.
The Lachin corridor, the only road
connecting Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia,
was blocked since 12 December and
remained closed at the end of the year.
Dozens of Azerbaijani protesters had blocked
the road, demanding an end to alleged
unlawful mining in the area and that
Azerbaijan retake control of the corridor.
Russian peacekeeping forces subsequently
barricaded the road to prevent an escalation
of tensions. Access to essential goods and
services for ethnic Armenian residents of
Nagorno-Karabakh was disrupted and
hundreds of people were stranded.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
On 2 October, the Prosecutor General’s Office
opened an investigation into a video which
had first appeared online shortly beforehand
showing a group of men in Azerbaijani

81

military uniforms rounding up and shooting at
least six Armenian soldiers. The investigation
was continuing at the end of the year, with no
progress reported in identifying those
responsible. Likewise, no substantive
progress was made in investigating war
crimes and other violations of international
humanitarian law during the 2020 ArmeniaAzerbaijan conflict and in its immediate
aftermath, or in identifying and bringing to
justice suspected perpetrators.
According to an ICRC report issued in
August, over 300 Armenians missing on
Azerbaijan’s territory remained unaccounted
for.
People continued to be killed and injured by
mines which Azerbaijan claimed Armenian
forces continued to lay in its internationally
recognized territory, retaken in 2020.
Azerbaijani authorities also maintained that
the mine maps provided earlier by Armenia
were not reliable. In October, the Azerbaijani
authorities reported that 45 people had been
killed and 221 injured by mines since the
2020 conflict.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Media remained severely restricted, with
websites publishing dissenting views blocked
and critical social media users arbitrarily
penalized and prosecuted. Having effectively
muzzled most of the independent media in
the country, authorities targeted critical
outlets reporting on Azerbaijan from abroad.
On 8 February, the president enacted a new
media law requiring the owners of media
outlets serving Azerbaijani audiences to
reside permanently in the country, making
them vulnerable to censorship and
persecution. The new law further increased
state control over Azerbaijani media by,
among other things, requiring all journalists
to obtain official registration and report
information “objectively”, while failing to
provide a clear explanation for this
requirement in the law.
Authorities continued to subject civil society
activists and independent media to arbitrary
arrest and other forms of harassment. In
September Azerbaijani human rights

82

organizations reported that 99 people were
imprisoned on politically motivated charges.
Female journalists appeared to be targeted
in particular. On 15 February, police
detained, beat and insulted two journalists,
Fatima Movlamli and Sevinj Sadigova, while
they were covering protests by mothers of
deceased Azerbaijani servicemen. Ayten
Mammedova sustained minor injuries when
she was assaulted in a lift on 8 May by an
unknown assailant with a knife. His threats
made it clear that the attack was connected
to her work as a journalist.
On 23 April, former prisoner of conscience
and prominent activist Bakhtiyar Hajiyev
reported that he had been kidnapped and
beaten by masked men who warned him
against criticizing the interior minister. On 9
December, following a private dispute, a
Baku court ordered his pretrial detention for
50 days over politically motivated charges of
hooliganism and contempt of court. Activists
and individuals with dissenting views over the
Azerbaijan-Armenia conflict were targeted by
an online smear campaign reportedly
orchestrated through government-linked
social media accounts.
On 20 September, Ahmad Mammadli,
activist and head of the NGO Democracy
1918 Movement, was jailed for 30 days for
criticizing President Aliyev following clashes
between Armenia and Azerbaijan. In
November, two other activists of the NGO
were also given 30 days’ detention for
purportedly disobeying police.
On 11 September, Avaz Zeynali, chief editor
of the independent news outlet Xural, and
lawyer Elchin Sadigov, known for
representing opposition figures, were arrested
on politically motivated charges of accepting
and facilitating bribery, respectively. On 20
September Elchin Sadigov was transferred by
the court to house arrest, while Avaz Zeynali
remained in pretrial detention at the end of
the year.
At least six activists critical of the
government were arrested on what appeared
to be fabricated drug-related charges, in
separate cases, after their asylum

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

applications were rejected by Germany and
they were deported to Azerbaijan.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
The right to freedom of association remained
curtailed while excessive restrictions, both in
law and practice, continued to hinder the
work of human rights defenders and NGOs.
Authorities continued to arbitrarily restrict
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
Police broke up peaceful anti-government
rallies in the capital, Baku, on at least three
occasions between May and November.
Peaceful protesters were rounded up, beaten
and arbitrarily detained; most were released
shortly afterwards without formal charges
being brought.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 4 July, the CEDAW Committee expressed
concern about internally displaced women
and girls who faced limited access to
education, employment, healthcare and
housing. It recommended that Azerbaijan
abolish restrictions in the country’s Labour
Code, which prohibits women from working
in 204 professions.

BAHRAIN
Kingdom of Bahrain
Head of state: Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
Head of government: Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa
Prisoners were tortured and subjected to
cruel and inhuman treatment, including
medical neglect, delays in medical
treatment as reprisal and denial of contact
with family members. Authorities continued
to restrict freedoms of expression and
assembly and to hold prisoners for
exercising these rights. The government did
not adequately protect migrant workers from
exploitation or take adequate steps to
address the climate crisis. The government
tightened access to healthcare for stateless
children.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
At least six prisoners were tortured and
otherwise ill-treated during the year.
In February, Ahmed Jaafar Mohamed told
the Office of Public Prosecution’s Special
Investigation Unit (SIU), the agency that
investigates government abuses, that Jaw
prison guards had beaten him when he was
forcibly deported from Serbia to Bahrain on
24 January. The SIU told the UN that it was
investigating the allegation, but did not report
any results.
In March, authorities moved Ahmed Jaber
Ahmed to an external hospital only after 11
months of illness had left him unable to walk
or dress himself. The hospital diagnosed
tuberculosis that had spread to his spinal
column, requiring that he be put in a halo
brace. Denial of medical care can be
considered cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.
In May, AbdAli Khayer, a Jaw inmate
imprisoned on terrorism charges in a mass
trial, said in a voice-recorded call from the
prison that when he told a guard he needed
treatment at the prison clinic for painful gout
that was making it difficult for him to stand,
the guard responded by beating him with his
fists.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The authorities violated prisoners’ right to
health by failing to provide them with
adequate medical care compared to that
available in the community.
Prison officials deliberately denied access to
medical care to prisoners who spoke out as a
punitive measure. In retaliation for his
chanting pro-Palestinian slogans, authorities
refused to take prisoner of conscience
AbdulHadi al-Khawaja from Jaw prison to a
medical appointment for possible glaucoma
for nine months, putting him at risk of
blindness.1
When tuberculosis, an infectious disease,
affected several inmates at Jaw prison, the
administration did not institute preventive
measures including contact tracking and
testing. Authorities returned Hasan Abdulla
Bati from hospital to his cell with eight other

83

inmates two days after he was diagnosed with
tuberculosis.2
From June until the end of the year, the
Ministry of Interior refused to schedule a
dental appointment for 74-year-old Hasan
Mushaima, even though he was suffering
serious dental pain and had lost a tooth. He
had been imprisoned since 2011 for
participating in mass protests.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Prison staff continued to punitively restrict
phone and video calls with family members
for prisoners who talked back to guards, even
though prison regulations provide for four
calls per week. Family visits with prisoners
remained banned since the start of the
Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, leaving families
without information when scheduled phone
calls were cut without explanation. From 11
to 21 August, the administration at Dry Dock
juvenile prison did not permit Ali Isa
AbdulIthnashr to call his family after he
argued with a guard.
In September, without explanation, Jaw
prison denied 14 prisoners access to phone
calls after moving them from their regular
cells.
Authorities maintained their confiscation of
the writings of AbdulJalil al-Singace,
imprisoned since 2011 for exercising his right
to freedom of expression that year. In
response, he remained on a solid-food
hunger strike for over a year, significantly
weakening his health.
In November, authorities opened two new
prosecutions against AbdulHadi al-Khawaja
for insulting a prison guard and chanting
political slogans.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to hold prisoners for
exercising their rights to freedom
of expression and assembly.
In February, Amnesty International
confirmed use of the Pegasus spyware
against three Bahraini citizens who had
criticized the government.3

84

During the final two weeks of November,
authorities arrested and released six
members of the family of prisoner of
conscience Hasan Mushaima for peacefully
protesting on his behalf. One was held for
interrogation for two days.
Ten leaders imprisoned since 2011 for
exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and assembly during mass
protests that year continued to be held, as
did prisoner of conscience Sheikh Ali
Salman, an opposition leader serving a life
sentence.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The government continued to leave migrant
workers unprotected from exploitation
through the kafala (sponsorship) system.
The Ministry of Labour and Social
Development failed to take the steps
necessary to process the unpaid wages of at
least 18 employees of dissolved construction
company GP Zachariades. The employees
had returned to their home countries without
pay based on the Ministry’s assurance that it
would work with the liquidators of GP
Zachariades, which had benefited from
Bahraini government contracts, to ensure
they received their dues.
In August, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights noted that migrant
workers continued to face employment
discrimination and limited access to
adequate housing, education and healthcare.
Bahrain does not have a legislated minimum
wage in the private sector, where most
migrants work, unlike the public sector.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The government tightened access to public
healthcare for families whose children are
stateless due to Bahrain’s genderdiscriminatory nationality law.
Under the Nationality Law, Bahraini women
do not pass their nationality to their children.
In April, government health clinics began
requiring families of these stateless children
to apply each time they sought free public
health treatment.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In August, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights expressed concern
about Bahraini laws that criminalize abortion
in all cases, including when pregnancy is a
result of rape, and discriminate against
women in inheritance and the right to pass
on their nationality.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Bahrain did not update its NDC to carbon
reduction in 2022. The annual regional report
by the UN-sponsored Sustainable
Development Solutions Network found that
Bahrain’s action to reduce climate change, in
line with UN Sustainable Development Goal
13, was stagnant. Bahrain has the thirdhighest rate of carbon dioxide emissions per
capita in the world, according to World Bank
data.
1. “Bahrain: Human rights defender at risk of blindness due to denial of
medical care”, 1 April
2. “Bahrain: Prison officials’ inadequate response to tuberculosis cases
in Jaw prison puts prisoners’ health at serious risk”, 9 June
3. “Bahrain: Devices of three activists hacked with Pegasus spyware”,
18 February

BANGLADESH
People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Head of state: Mohammad Abdul Hamid
Head of government: Sheikh Hasina
Severe crackdowns on freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly
continued to be reported, including police
use of excessive or unnecessary force to
suppress protests. Rights of workers and
ethnic and religious minorities were under
threat. Ensuring the human rights of
Rohingya refugees inside the world’s largest
refugee camp continued to pose a major
challenge for Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND
In August, Michelle Bachelet conducted the
first official visit to Bangladesh by a UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights. She
subsequently raised several human rights

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

concerns, including the “narrowing civic
space, increased surveillance, intimidation
and reprisals often leading to selfcensorship”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Free expression remained restricted. Reports
estimated that in the first nine months of the
year at least 179 journalists were harassed or
faced reprisals. Most commonly this entailed
being assaulted in the course of their work or
cases being filed against them in relation to
published stories.
The draconian Digital Security Act (DSA)
was used repeatedly to stifle dissent and
criticism of the government. According to a
report by human rights group Ain o Salish
Kendra (ASK), 2,249 cases were filed under
the DSA over the course of the year before
the Cyber Tribunals in Dhaka, Rajshahi and
Chittagong divisions alone. Article 19
documented media reports of 114 DSA cases
between January and November and found
that the vast majority (78 cases) were filed in
connection with posts on social media. It also
found that 46 out of the 114 cases were filed
by individuals associated with the ruling
party.
A former Awami League MP and her
daughter filed separate cases against Fazle
Elahi, editor of a local newspaper in the
Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT), under
provisions in the DSA relating to defamation
and publishing offensive, false or threatening
information, leading to his arrest in June.
Fazle Elahi had published an article that
detailed alleged irregularities and misuse
relating to a government property leased by
the MP and her daughter.
In August, the vice-president of the Awami
League’s Rangpur district unit filed a case
under the DSA against online news website
Netra News. The case related to an exposé
published by Netra News, which used
satellite imagery to verify the existence of
secret prisons operated by the Directorate
General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI), the
state’s principal military intelligence agency,
to detain victims of enforced disappearances
“for spreading propaganda”. The case was

85

also filed against a survivor of the secret
prison system who had shared their
testimony with Netra News.
The authorities also tried to limit the right to
freedom of expression of NGOs. The NGO
Affairs Bureau (a body under the Prime
Minister’s Office) rejected the registration
renewal application of human rights
organization Odhikar over allegations that
they had published “misleading information”
about extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances and murders. The Bureau
argued that this information “tarnished the
image” of Bangladesh globally.
Individuals also faced threats to their rights
to freedom of expression. In March, a teacher
in Munshiganj district was arrested for
“hurting religious sentiments” by discussing
the difference between science and religion
in class, after a complaint was made by the
school’s office assistant. After his release 19
days later, the teacher told media that he felt
he was “framed” because of internal conflicts
in the school.
The draft Data Protection Act introduced
new restrictions on freedom of expression
and threatened people’s right to privacy.
Broadly worded exemptions granted under
the law would give the authorities legitimacy
to access the personal data of individuals and
institutions without judicial oversight.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The police cracked down on several protests
during the year. In Sylhet in January, police
clashed with hundreds of students from a
public university demanding the resignation
of the vice-chancellor, who had earlier
ordered police action against a student-led
blockade of the premises. The police
reportedly used batons, sound grenades and
rubber bullets against students, leading to
several injuries, and filed a case against 200
students.
In February, police fired bullets and tear gas
shells to disperse garment workers protesting
against a factory closure. In March, police
used tear gas and water cannons against
demonstrators from leftist organizations,
during protests against rising prices of

86

essential services and basic commodities. In
June, police suppressed protests by workers
from several garment factories in the capital,
Dhaka, who were calling for an increase in
the 2018-set national monthly minimum
wage of BDT 8,000 (USD 80), due to rising
inflation. In July, the police arrested 108
young men from a community centre in
Chuadanga for playing “harmful and
addictive” games as part of an online gaming
competition.
In December, police clashed with activists
and supporters of the Bangladesh Nationalist
Party (BNP), the largest opposition party,
outside the BNP’s headquarters in Dhaka.
The party had just announced its plan to
arrange a political rally demanding the
resignation of the ruling party so a neutral
caretaker government can oversee the
upcoming elections in 2023. A man died
from a bullet wound and at least 60 others
were injured after the police opened fire on
thousands of protesters. In the first half of
December, the police conducted mass
arrests of 23,968 individuals nationwide,
including at least several hundred opposition
party leaders and activists.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Allegations of custodial torture and other illtreatment remained common. Civil society
organizations Odhikar and ASK estimated
that there were 54 alleged deaths in custody
in the first nine months of the year. ASK
reported that 34 of those who reportedly died
in custody were being detained while on trial.
The death in custody of a delivery man
accused of theft was widely reported. The
police said that he had hanged himself;
however, his wife, Zannat Akhter, alleged that
he was beaten to death after the family were
unable to pay money demanded from them
by police following his arrest. Zannat Akhter
told media: “[the] police demanded BDT
500,000 [approximately USD 4,870] from us
after arresting my husband. They killed him
as we could not pay the money. Allah will
judge the people who orphaned my boy.”

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
High rates of extrajudicial executions and
enforced disappearances in the past decade
continued to garner national and international
concern, including from UN human rights
mechanisms such as the Committee against
Torture. During her visit to Bangladesh, the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
called on the government to ratify the
Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance.
According to estimates from Odhikar, in the
first nine months of the year at least 25
people were killed in extrajudicial executions
and 16 people became victims of enforced
disappearance. Although this represented a
significant reduction compared to the
previous year, these grave human rights
violations persisted at concerning levels
despite sanctions imposed by the USA
against the Bangladeshi police in December
2021. An investigative report by Netra News
exposed details and satellite imagery of
“Aynaghar”, a secret facility operated by
the DGFI to detain victims of enforced
disappearance in central Dhaka. Former
detainees described cruel, inhuman and
degrading prison conditions in the facility,
including windowless cells with large fans
that were switched on almost continuously to
drown out all other sounds.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Based primarily on a compilation of reports
from nine newspapers, ASK estimated that
there were records of at least 936 women
and girls being raped, while 292 women were
murdered by their husbands or other family
members. Although these figures were lower
than those recorded by ASK in 2021, a
culture of impunity persisted for genderbased violence and the lack of official data on
violence against women and girls made it
difficult to assess the true extent of its
prevalence.
A female student at the University of
Chittagong was reportedly sexually assaulted
and stripped naked on campus by five men
reportedly affiliated with the ruling party’s

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

student wing, the Bangladesh Chhatra
League (BCL), who also threatened to release
a video recording of the incident if she
complained. Nevertheless, the woman filed a
complaint with the police and the university.
Following an investigation, five young men
were arrested; at least two of them were
found to be active members of the BCL and
enrolled as students in the University of
Chittagong. They were expelled from the
university after dozens of fellow students
formed human chains to protest against the
authorities’ inaction.
Following sustained pressure from women’s
rights groups, parliament passed an
amendment bill for the Evidence Act 1872,
repealing Section 155(4) which allowed
defence lawyers to subject rape complainants
to questions about their perceived morality
and character. However, the Rape Law
Reform Coalition criticized the bill for crucial
omissions and ambiguities, which could
continue to allow victim-shaming in court
even in the absence of Section 155(4).

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Despite institutional reforms and other
changes enacted after the deadly collapse of
the Rana Plaza building in 2013,
occupational safety of workers remained a
distant prospect. The Safety and Rights
Society estimated that at least 333 workers
were killed in 241 workplace accidents in the
first six months of 2022, compared to 306
deaths in the same period in 2021.
In June, a fire at the BM Container Depot
killed at least 49 workers and injured 250
others. Along with an array of other noncompliance issues, the Department of
Explosives found that the depot did not have
a licence to store hydrogen peroxide, the
presence of which may have caused the
explosion. Some of the surviving workers told
the Prothom Alo newspaper that an exit gate
was locked, preventing workers escaping.
The same issue had contributed to the
deaths of workers in the Hashem Foods
Factory fire less than a year before, and the
Tazreen Fashions fire in 2012. In parliament,
an opposition party MP condemned the

87

government’s lack of action against the depot
owners, who were affiliated with the Awami
League’s Chattogram South district unit.
The frequency of industrial accidents
underscored the continuing failure of the
government to monitor and ensure
employers’ compliance with safeguards
under labour and building safety laws relating
to the occupational safety of workers.
In August, more than 150,000 tea workers
employed by 168 tea estates across
Bangladesh launched an indefinite strike to
demand an increase in their daily minimum
wage from BDT 120 (USD 1.2) to BDT 300
(USD 3). After a series of unsuccessful
negotiations, prime minister Sheikh Hasina
directed tea estate owners to raise the
minimum wage to BDT 170 (USD 1.7).

DISCRIMINATION
Minority groups reported facing different
forms of discrimination, particularly along
ethnic and religious lines. In April, the law
minister placed before parliament the longanticipated Anti-Discrimination Bill, which
would outlaw discrimination on various
grounds, including gender, religion, ethnicity,
place of birth, caste and occupation. It would
also introduce a complaints mechanism for
victims of discrimination to seek remedies.
In March, reports emerged regarding the
death of Indigenous rights activist Nabayan
Chakma Milon in military custody. In May, the
Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) Commission
issued a press release in which it expressed
deep concern over the deployment of new
units of the Armed Police Battalion to replace
vacant army camps in the CHT; this, it
argued, was a violation of the CHT Peace
Accord.
In July, a mob in Narail district vandalized a
Hindu temple, and ransacked and set fire to
the homes of several Hindu families as well
as a grocery shop owned by a Hindu man,
alleging that a Facebook post by the son of
the shop owner “hurt religious sentiments”.
This assault followed a similar pattern of mob
attacks against Hindu communities in recent
years, involving calculated looting and then
violent destruction ostensibly in response to a

88

social media post, which would often turn out
to be fake. Affected residents described
having their possessions stolen by groups of
people who also demanded money and then
burned down their homes or threatened to
start fires.
Marginalized groups from coastal southwestern Bangladesh reported their access to
water being severely impeded by not only
climate change-induced damage to water
and sanitation infrastructure but also
systemic discrimination. For Dalits, this
discrimination was driven by notions of
impurity and untouchability.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Access to education for Rohingya refugees
from Myanmar improved during the year
despite some early setbacks. Between
December 2021 and April 2022, the
government reportedly shut down and
dismantled about 30 community-led schools.
Rohingya refugees alleged that some
schoolteachers were detained by the Armed
Police Battalion and released only after
signing a paper confirming that they would
stop teaching. In May, the situation improved
when UNICEF reported enrolling 10,000
Rohingya children in the Myanmar
Curriculum Pilot, which sought to provide
Rohingya children with education based on
the national curriculum of their home
country. This had been a key demand from
humanitarian actors since the start of the
refugee crisis. However, UNICEF estimated
that, of the more than 400,000 school-aged
Rohingya children in Bangladesh’s refugee
camps, 100,000 were not yet attending
learning centres.
On 19 June, the day before World Refugee
Day, tens of thousands of Rohingya refugees
held a demonstration named “Bari
Cholo” (Let Us Go Home) spanning 23
camps in Ukhia and Teknaf. Despite
concerns from the international community
and human rights groups, the Bangladeshi
government persisted in its plans to relocate
at least 100,000 Rohingya refugees to the
remote and flood-prone Bhasan Char island.
In October, 963 Rohingya refugees were

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

relocated to Bhasan Char, bringing the total
number to 30,079 according to official
figures. Refugees attempting to flee the
remote island were reportedly detained by
police, raising doubts as to the voluntary
nature of the relocation.

BELARUS
Republic of Belarus
Head of state: Alyaksandr Lukashenka
Head of government: Raman Halouchanka
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and assembly remained severely
curtailed. At least one man was executed.
Torture and other ill-treatment were
widespread and impunity prevailed. The
justice system was abused to suppress
dissent and trials were routinely unfair.
National and religious minorities faced
discrimination. Refugees and migrants were
subjected to violence and refoulement.

BACKGROUND
Belarus remained largely isolated
internationally owing to the continuing refusal
by the EU and USA to recognize Alyaksandr
Lukashenka as president. It chiefly aligned its
foreign and defence policy with that of
Russia, including by contributing to Russia’s
war against Ukraine.
GDP plunged and inflation rose after trade
with Ukraine halted and new sanctions were
imposed by Western governments on
Belarusian companies.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained severely
restricted. Thousands were prosecuted,
including for expressing support for Ukraine,
reporting on the movements of Russian
troops and military equipment, or criticizing
the government. Forty independent
journalists were arbitrarily arrested and new
charges were brought against others already
imprisoned. At the end of the year, 32
journalists remained imprisoned for their
work.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Hundreds of individuals were prosecuted in
closed trials for “insulting” officials,
“discrediting” state institutions and symbols,
or “inciting societal animosity and enmity”. In
July, student Danuta Peradnya was
imprisoned for six-and-a-half years for
reposting a message criticizing the war in
Ukraine and the role of Alyaksandr
Lukashenka in it.1
The authorities continued to arbitrarily label
organizations, online resources, printed and
other material as “extremist”. Thousands of
individuals were prosecuted for association
with such content, for example “liking” a
social media post or wearing a t-shirt with an
“extremist” logo. The official list contained
over 2,200 people considered “extremists”,
most of them imprisoned under politically
motivated charges.
Journalist Yury Hantsarevich was sentenced
in July to 30 months’ imprisonment for
“facilitating an extremist activity” after he
sent photos of Russian military equipment to
independent media outlets.
In November, the Ministry of the Interior
banned the use of the traditional salute “Long
Live Belarus”, adding it to the list of “Nazi
symbols and paraphernalia”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The authorities continued the crackdown on
independent civil society organizations that
began after the disputed 2020 presidential
election, targeting NGOs, media outlets,
professional organizations and ethnic and
religious communities.
The authorities used arbitrary charges of
“extremism” and “terrorism” to shut down
organizations. Over 250 civil society
organizations as well as major independent
media outlets were shut down, many
following their designation as “extremist
organizations”.
In April, the authorities raided the homes
and offices of leaders of independent trade
unions, arresting 16 people on undisclosed
grounds. In July, the Supreme Court
liquidated the Belarusian Congress of
Democratic Trade Unions, effectively banning
all independent trade unions.

89

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

Following Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine on 24 February, police brutally
dispersed peaceful protests across Belarus,
arresting at least 700 protesters on 27
February alone. Following closed trials, many
were sentenced to detention for up to 30
days on trumped-up charges of “organizing,
preparing or participating in activities grossly
violating public order” and others were fined.
The authorities continued to prosecute
peaceful participants of the 2020 protests,
arresting 280 individuals in the first six
months of 2022.
In May, legislative amendments were
enacted allowing troops from the Ministry of
the Interior to use combat weapons and
special military equipment to disperse public
protests and other activities said to be
disturbing public order.

The authorities prevented human rights
defenders from carrying out their work and
subjected them to arbitrary detention,
violence and intimidation. People targeted
included members of the prominent human
rights organization Viasna, several of whom
were in pretrial detention or received prison
terms. In September, imprisoned leaders Ales
Bialiatski, Valyantsin Stefanovich and
Uladzimir Labkovich faced new trumped-up
public disorder charges. On 7 October Ales
Bialiatski was co-awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize.
Marfa Rabkova and Andrey Chapyuk, in
detention since 2020, were sentenced in a
closed trial to 15 and six years’ imprisonment
respectively.4
Nasta Loika served at least six 15-day terms
of administrative detention on trumped-up
charges of “petty hooliganism”, during which
she was denied medicines and basic
necessities, including warm clothes and
drinking water. In December she was
charged with the criminal offence of
“organizing activities grossly violating public
order” and transferred to pretrial detention.

DEATH PENALTY
At least one man was executed .
In May, legislation was amended extending
the application of the death penalty to
“attempted crimes” in terrorism-related
cases, in violation of the country’s obligations
as a state party to the ICCPR.2 In December
parliament approved in its first reading a law
introducing the death penalty for treason
committed by public officials or military
personnel.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread. Perpetrators continued to enjoy
impunity.
Individuals convicted under politically
motivated charges often faced harsher
treatment and worse conditions of detention.
They were frequently held in inhuman
conditions in solitary confinement or denied
the right to make phone calls, see family
members, receive food parcels or exercise
outside. Prominent political activist Syarhei
Tsikhanouski, serving an 18-year sentence on
trumped-up charges, was repeatedly
subjected to such arbitrary restrictions and
spent over two months in a punishment
isolation cell.3

90

UNFAIR TRIALS
The justice system continued to be widely
abused by the authorities to crack down on
all dissent and imprison government critics,
as well as to intimidate and silence the
lawyers defending them. At least seven
lawyers were issued with arbitrary charges
and at least five of them arrested. At least 17
more were arbitrarily stripped of their legal
licence after working on politically motivated
cases.
Hearings in politically motivated cases were
usually closed and fraught with irregularities.
In July, legislation was enacted widening the
use of investigations and trials in absence of
defendants, and used later in the year.

DISCRIMINATION
The authorities escalated attacks on some
ethnic minorities, including Poles and
Lithuanians, in apparent retaliation against
Poland and Lithuania for hosting exiled

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

opposition activists and criticizing the
Belarusian government.
Military cemeteries of Polish soldiers were
repeatedly vandalized, with no one held to
account. The government arbitrarily barred
two schools in western Belarus (home to a
sizable Polish minority) from teaching in
Polish and closed a Lithuanian-language
school in Hrodna region. Authorities targeted
schools and publishing houses teaching or
publishing in Belarusian, despite its status as
an official language, regarding it as a
language of the political opposition.
Belarusian bookshops were closed, and
Belarusian-speaking activists, academics and
literary and cultural figures and tour guides
faced arbitrary arrest.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
The authorities targeted local Christian
leaders and activists who spoke out against
police violence during the 2020 protests and
Belarus’s role in Russia’s war in Ukraine. In
March, the police searched the homes of
several Catholic priests, arbitrarily detaining
one, Aliaksandr Baran, for 10 days and fining
another, Vasil Yahorau, for displaying
solidarity with Ukraine.
Following a suspicious fire on 26
September, the authorities terminated the
agreement for a local Catholic parish to use
the landmark St Simon and Alena Church in
the capital, Minsk. During the 2020
demonstrations, the church had defiantly
offered shelter to protesters facing police
violence.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The quality and availability of healthcare
remained severely compromised, including
by the continued exodus of medical workers
dismissed on political grounds, as well as
shortages of certain drugs and medical
equipment as a result of international
sanctions. Medical professionals sacked for
supporting peaceful protests in 2020 were
arbitrarily refused re-employment. The
authorities suspended the licences of at least
seven large private medical clinics in what
appeared to be a coordinated campaign

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

targeting independent provision of health
services.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to force refugees
and migrants, including those from Syria,
Iraq and Afghanistan, to cross the border into
Poland, Lithuania and Latvia. Many were
pushed back into Belarus, where they faced
torture and other ill-treatment by border
guards and other officials, obstacles to
claiming asylum, or refoulement. In March,
the authorities reportedly evicted refugees
and migrants from a makeshift camp in the
village of Bruzgi, leaving nearly 700 people
without shelter or support, including many
young children and people with severe
illnesses and disabilities.5
1. “Belarus: Free student jailed for 6.5 years for reposting criticism of
Ukraine war and Lukashenka”, 6 July
2. “Belarus: New death penalty law is the ultimate attack on human
rights”, 19 May
3. “Belarus: Jailed activist subjected to ill-treatment: Sergey
Tihanovski”, 5 October
4. “Belarus: Harsh sentences for Rabkova and co-defendants illustrate
crushing of civil society”, 6 September
5. Poland: Cruelty Not Compassion, at Europe’s Other Borders, 11 April

BELGIUM
Kingdom of Belgium
Head of state: Philippe
Head of government: Alexander De Croo
An improved criminal law introduced a
consent-centred approach to rape and other
sexual violence. Asylum seekers were left
destitute and Afghan asylum seekers were
denied international protection. A stateowned weapons manufacturer continued
irresponsible arms transfers. A bilateral
treaty with Iran raised concerns about
impunity. Structural discrimination against
non-nationals and racial and ethnic
minorities was documented. Prisoners were
detained in inhumane conditions and the
state was ordered to remedy its violations of
the principle of non-refoulement.

91

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE

IMPUNITY

In June, new criminal provisions about rape
and other sexual violence that centre around
the concept of consent, entered into force.
The law also decriminalizes sex work.
Two new care centres for survivors of sexual
violence were opened, bringing the total
number of operational facilities to seven, with
at least three more planned.

In July, Belgium ratified a treaty with Iran that
allows for the transfer of sentenced nationals.
International and Iranian civil society called
on Belgium to ensure this treaty does not
entrench impunity and ensures
accountability for serious human rights
violations and unlawful acts committed by the
Iranian authorities extraterritorially.2 In
December, the Constitutional Court of
Belgium partially suspended implementation
of the treaty and was due to rule on its
annulment in early 2023.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Scores of asylum seekers continued to be left
homeless and destitute by the denial of
access to housing, due to insufficient shelter
capacity.
In March, the Commissioner General for
Refugees and Stateless Persons resumed
refusals of international protection for Afghan
asylum seekers, claiming that there was “no
longer a real risk of becoming a victim of
random violence” in Afghanistan and that
subsidiary protection on humanitarian
grounds was not warranted. In October, the
Commissioner reported that only 52.2% of
Afghan asylum seekers receive international
protection.
Despite being at risk of refoulement, illtreatment amounting to torture in detention
and unlawful killings, Afghan refugees in Iran
faced unreasonable administrative obstacles
accessing protection in Belgium. Several
months after refugees seeking to travel to
Belgium had submitted applications for
humanitarian visas, the Belgian authorities
announced that applications would only be
considered if re-submitted in Pakistan.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In December, Amnesty International and
other civil society organizations commenced
litigation against FN Herstal, an arms
manufacturer fully owned by the Walloon
region, challenging the company’s continued
arms sales to states that are likely to use the
weapons to commit serious human rights
violations and violations of international
humanitarian law.1

92

DISCRIMINATION
Studies by the Interfederal Centre for Equal
Opportunities (Unia) published in March and
June found structural discrimination against
people of African descent in housing and
persistent structural and direct discrimination
against non-nationals in the labour market.
In March, the NGO Ligue des Droits
Humains reported that a foreign national or a
person with dual nationality was more likely
to experience acts of violence during arrest,
police custody or as a witness than a Belgian
national.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Overcrowding in dilapidated prisons
continued, with insufficient access to
essential services, including healthcare and
sanitary facilities for people deprived of their
liberty.
In June, the Council of Europe’s Committee
of Ministers expressed its “deep concern” at
the structural overcrowding and worsening
situation in Belgian prisons and urged the
authorities to rapidly adopt solutions to
improve the conditions of detention.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In September, the Brussels Court of Appeals
ordered the government to pay EUR 100,000
compensation to Nizar Trabelsi and request
his transfer back to Belgium from the USA
where his prison conditions violated the
absolute prohibition of torture and inhumane
and degrading treatment. Nizar Trabelsi was
extradited, in violation of the principle of non-

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

refoulement and interim measures ordered
by the European Court of Human Rights, to
the USA after completing a 10-year sentence
in a Belgian prison on terrorism-related
charges.
1. “Belgium: Walloon arms trade: a new lawsuit will target FN Herstal”,
21 June (French only)
2. “Belgium must ensure new treaty with Iran does not entrench
impunity”, 5 July

BENIN
Republic of Benin
Head of state and government: Patrice Talon
Freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly were still restricted by repressive
laws regulating online communications and
the right to strike. Cases of arbitrary arrests,
and torture and other ill-treatment were
documented. Alleged unlawful killings
committed by the defence and security
forces during the 2021 presidential election
had still not been investigated. People with
albinism continued to face discrimination
and violence.

BACKGROUND
Several attacks and violent incidents
attributed to members of Islamist armed
groups in the two northern regions resulted in
the killing of at least 12 soldiers. To ease
political tensions following the 2019
parliamentary elections, 17 people detained
since February 2020 for “undermining state
security” were released on 14 June. On 27
July, 30 political opponents arrested during
the April 2021 presidential elections were
released and placed under judicial
supervision. The two opposition leaders Joël
Aïvo and Reckiatou Madougou remained in
detention, having been condemned to 10
and 20 years’ imprisonment respectively in
December 2021 for “money laundering and
endangering the security of the state” and
“financing terrorism”. In November, the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
considered the detention of Reckiatou

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Madougou to be arbitrary and called for her
immediate release.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Freedom of expression continued to be
threatened by the 2018 Digital Code, which
criminalizes with imprisonment the
publishing of false information online. In
December, journalist Virgile Ahouansè was
provisionally released under judicial
supervision after 48 hours in police custody.
He was accused of publishing “false
information” after he made allegations about
extrajudicial executions by members of the
defence and security forces. After a strike by
air traffic controllers in September, the
National Assembly voted on 11 October to
ban the right to strike for workers at the port
and airport of Cotonou, and in the
hydrocarbon sector. A 2018 law already limits
the right to strike to 10 days per year and
bans strikes in certain sectors, including
health.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Activist Jean Kpoton was released on 18
January after a year in prison. He had been
sentenced in February 2021 under the Digital
Code, after a publication on social media
networks relating to alleged expenses by the
president during a tour of the country.
On 29 January, violent clashes erupted after
members of the Azaël Ahouignan sect from
Kogandji village in Savalou opposed the
arrest of some if its members suspected of
violence and destruction of goods and
property. According to the authorities, two
policemen and six members of the sect were
killed. Dozens were arrested. According to
local media, some people arrested and
released a few days later reported having
suffered ill-treatment during their detention.
In the context of attacks by armed groups in
northern Benin, a 70-year-old man was
arrested by the police on 19 March in
Tanguiéta in the Atakora region bordering
Burkina Faso. Accused of killing a
policeman, he was taken to Cotonou on a
day-long 587km journey, during which he

93

was beaten by police with their rifle butts. He
was released without charge after one week
in detention.1
Two journalists were arrested in March in
Tanguiéta while investigating African Parks,
the organization that manages the Pendjari
National Park. Suspected of espionage, they
were detained for four days without any legal
grounds.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
As of December, no investigation had been
opened into the killings of at least five
demonstrators by the security forces in the
run-up to the 2021 presidential election.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 4 February, a transgender woman was
taken to Pahou police station after being
assaulted in Ouidah by neighbours and
motorbike taxi-drivers, who accused her of
being a thief. Police officers allegedly beat
her with sticks and machetes, and stripped
and photographed her. She spent three days
in detention, naked and deprived of food.
She was released on 6 February without
charge.2 On 29 June she filed a complaint
against the policemen of Pahou police
station. In the absence of any further
investigation she appealed to the
Constitutional Court, which held a hearing in
December.
According to LGBTI rights organization the
Hirondelle Club, a “mob movement” around
the organization’s headquarters on the
International Day against Homophobia,
Biphobia and Transphobia on 17 May
prevented members from visiting the
headquarters for several weeks for fear of
intimidation or attack. Representatives of the
organization also received death threats via
social media and on their phones, but did not
complain to the authorities because they
assumed that no action would be taken.

DISCRIMINATION
In August, the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination
expressed concerns about the physical

94

attacks, stigmatization and discrimination
perpetrated against people with albinism
based on beliefs relating to witchcraft and
skin colour. The Committee urged Benin to
take effective measures to protect people
with albinism and ensure they have equal
access to education, health and employment.
1. “Benin – Togo: Fight against armed groups must not justify human
rights violations”, 27 July
2. “Benin: Police accused of violently attacking transgender woman”, 7
March

BOLIVIA
Plurinational State of Bolivia
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto Arce
Catacora
The government signed a reparations
agreement with victims of the former
military regime. The judiciary continued to
lack full independence. Threats and attacks
against human rights defenders continued.
Law enforcement officials violently
repressed, and in some cases arbitrarily
detained, coca leaf producers who were
protesting. Deforestation and mercury
contamination particularly affected
Indigenous peoples.

IMPUNITY
After camping for more than 10 years in front
of the Ministry of Justice, victims of the
1964-1982 military regime signed a
reparation agreement with the government
that will bring economic reparation for more
than 1,700 people. However, thousands of
victims were still awaiting government
recognition and reparation.
The victims of human rights violations and
crimes under international law reported in the
course of the 2019 political crisis, during
which at least 37 people died and hundreds
more were wounded, were still awaiting
justice, truth and reparation at the end of the
year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
The UN Special Rapporteur on the
Independence of Judges and Lawyers visited
the country in February and concluded that
authorities continue to interfere with the
independence of the judiciary and access to
justice remains difficult.
Authorities and officials of the former
interim government were still facing charges
including “terrorism”, “sedition” and
“conspiracy”. After more than 21 months,
former interim president Jeanine Áñez and
other former state authorities were still in pretrial detention. This also indicated structural
problems in the administration of justice,
resulting in an extremely high proportion of
people awaiting trial being deprived of their
liberty.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Authorities failed to protect environmental
human rights defenders, who, according to
local organizations, were the targets of at
least 200 attacks and threats during the year.
Some attacks included kidnappings and the
burning of community camps, where many
environmental defenders were staying.
Human rights defenders, including Waldo
and Franco Albarracín, continued to report
threats against them and their families, as
well as persistent stigmatization and
harassment by the authorities. Waldo
Albarracín also faced criminal proceedings
that lacked due process guarantees.1

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Law enforcement officials violently repressed,
and in some cases arbitrarily detained, coca
leaf producers protesting against US-funded
efforts to eradicate local production. Security
forces used excessive force against some of
the detainees.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Despite Bolivia’s commitment to maintain its
forest cover and combat illegal deforestation,
over a million hectares of land were burned,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

mostly to expand agricultural activities,
during the year.
The contamination associated with the
unregulated disposal of mercury waste in
rivers, mostly due to small-scale gold mining,
was linked to illness, especially in Indigenous
fishing communities living in poverty. The
government announced it would implement a
plan to reduce the use of mercury, but did
not disclose the plan’s content.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women survivors of gender-based violence
seeking justice lacked effective protection
from reprisals. Women and adolescents
lacked free or affordable modern
contraceptives, especially in rural areas.
1. “Bolivia: Misuse of the justice system to persecute human rights
defender must stop”, 7 April (Spanish only)

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Head of state: Rotating presidency – Denis Bećirović,
Željko Komšić and Željka Cvijanović
Head of government: Borjana Krišto, replaced Zoran
Tegeltija in December
Threats against journalists and human
rights defenders persisted. Reception
conditions for refugees and migrants
improved but many were still sleeping
rough. The Council of Ministers adopted
action plans on Roma inclusion and LGBTI
people’s rights. Access to justice and
reparations for civilian victims of war
remained limited.

BACKGROUND
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) remained in a
state of political crisis. Political parties in
Republika Srpska (RS) threatened to
dismantle state-level institutions. Government
in the Federation of BiH ended its full term in
its caretaker capacity. In October, the High
Representative imposed amendments to the

95

Federation of BiH Constitution and the BiH
Elections Law aimed at “improving the
functionality” of the Federation of BiH
institutions. Critics warned that the changes
would deepen ethnic divisions. In December,
the European Union granted BiH formal
candidate status for the EU.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Media outlets and journalists reporting
corruption and war crimes continued to face
political pressure, harassment and threats.
Politicians engaged in smear campaigns
against journalists, inciting further threats
against them, both online and in person. In
November, Federation Police Director Zoran
Čegar was suspended after he threatened a
journalist, saying he would “rip her throat
out”.
In September, the Constitutional Court ruled
that RS public broadcaster RTRS had
slandered Vladimir Kovačević, a journalist
who was attacked and seriously injured
covering mass protests in Banja Luka in
2018, potentially because of the smear
campaign.
BiH was downgraded from 58th to 67th
place in the World Press Freedom Index.
Politicians and businesses used defamation
lawsuits to intimidate journalists and human
rights defenders. In April, a Belgian-based
company sued and sought excessive
damages against two local environmental
activists who had raised concerns about the
impact of the company’s hydropower plants
on the Kasindolska River.1
Laws on peaceful assembly varied regionally
and were generally not consistent with
international standards. In May, the RS police
banned a peaceful march to mark the 30th
anniversary of the wartime persecution of
Bosniaks and Croats in Prijedor. The Council
of Europe’s Human Rights Commissioner
said the police decision violated people’s right
to peaceful assembly.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The authorities registered close to 27,000
arrivals during the year, an increase from

96

16,000 in 2021. Around 1,300 people,
mostly from Afghanistan, remained in BiH at
the end of the year.
Reception conditions generally improved,
but key institutions responsible for migration
remained under-resourced and struggled to
manage reception centres without assistance
from the International Organization for
Migration. The authorities failed to share
responsibility for hosting asylum seekers
across the country, leaving most people
stranded in Una-Sana Canton.
The unexpected increase in arrivals from
August onwards and the high turnover in the
reception centres further affected the delivery
of adequate long-term support to residents.
While most refugees and migrants were
accommodated in reception centres, several
hundred people, including families with
children, were sleeping rough near the
border, mostly in Una-Sana Canton. They
lacked access to essential services, including
water, food, sanitation, heating and medical
care. Activists said the authorities prevented
them from delivering humanitarian assistance
to people outside of reception centres.
The discriminatory measures imposed by
Cantonal authorities in 2020 remained in
place, including illegal prohibition of
migrants’ and refugees’ freedom of
movement, gathering in public places and
using public transport.
The asylum system remained largely
ineffective with applications taking an
average of over 400 days to process.
Recognition rates remained extremely low,
with not a single refugee status granted by
the end of the year.
In contrast, the applications of Ukrainians
who sought protection in BiH were processed
quickly. Ukrainians were granted subsidiary
protection, rather than refugee status, limiting
their access to essential rights, including
family reunification and travel documents.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA
In April, the country’s Council of Ministers
adopted an action plan for the social
inclusion of Roma to address the existing

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

gaps in Roma people’s access to housing,
employment, education and healthcare.
The authorities failed to implement multiple
rulings of the European Court of Human
Rights and the BiH Constitutional Court,
which found the power-sharing arrangements
set out in the Constitution to be
discriminatory, preventing people who did not
belong to one of the so-called constituent
peoples (Bosniak, Croat or Serb) from
running for legislative and executive office.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In July, the Council of Ministers adopted the
first action plan on the rights of LGBTI
people, aimed at enhancing protection
against discrimination.
A Sarajevo municipal court confirmed that a
former deputy in the Sarajevo Cantonal
Assembly was guilty of discriminating against
LGBTI people, the first court ruling in BiH
regarding discrimination on grounds of sexual
orientation.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Nearly 500 cases of crimes under
international law committed during the
1992-1995 armed conflict, involving over
4,000 suspects, remained pending before
courts. Lack of capacity, systemic
deficiencies in the prosecutor’s offices and
inconsistent regional cooperation continued
to cause major delays, diminishing many
victims’ hopes that they would see justice,
truth and reparation in their lifetime.
Authorities failed to put in place a
comprehensive countrywide reparations
programme for civilian victims of war. Access
to social support, including a disability
allowance, depended on victims’ residence
and varied significantly across the country.
Authorities failed to implement a 2019 UN
Committee against Torture decision, which
urged BiH to ensure immediate and
comprehensive redress to all survivors of
wartime sexual violence.
In RS, victims of wartime rape who lost their
claims for compensation in civil courts due to
the application of statutes of limitation had to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

pay excessive court fees and some faced
seizure of property. The UN Human Rights
Commissioner called for the practice to end
urgently.
Over 7,500 people remained missing as a
result of the armed conflict.
1. “Bosnia and Herzegovina: Young environmental activists face
baseless defamation charges from Belgian-owned hydropower
company in Bosnia”, 20 October

BOTSWANA
Republic of Botswana
Head of state and government: Mokgweetsi Masisi
A presidential commission recommended
constitutional amendments to improve the
protection of certain rights, while
undermining others. Migrants and asylum
seekers including children were subjected
to arbitrary detention. Murders attributed to
gender-based violence constituted a large
proportion of all murders between January
and March. There was a documented rise in
the number of people going missing.
Indigenous peoples’ rights were violated.
Botswana continued to use the death
penalty.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
In July, following a visit to Botswana, the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention said it
found several instances where the country’s
laws and practices fell short of international
standards. This included the use of
automatic arbitrary detention of
undocumented migrants as well as asylum
seekers and their children, who had no
access to education while detained.

DISCRIMINATION
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Murder rates continued to rise and a large
proportion of cases were a consequence of
gender-based violence. In July the Botswana
Police Force said they received 349 reports
of murders between January and March; 164

97

victims were women and 133 cases were
attributed to gender-based violence.
ATTACKS ON CHILDREN
In June, NGOs raised concerns about the
rising number of disappearances in the
country. A prominent case involved a sixyear-old boy who disappeared in March in
Lobatse. His remains were found in July with
some body parts missing. The child was
allegedly sold by his stepfather for BWP
200,000 (approximately USD 15,000) for
ritual purposes. The case ignited national
outrage at the increase in disappearances.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In December, the Presidential Commission of
Inquiry into the Review of the Constitution of
Botswana produced its report following
extensive countrywide consultations. It made
some positive recommendations for the
constitutional protection of rights to health,
land, education and work among others, and
to protect intersex people from
discrimination. A few other recommendations
raised human rights concerns (see Death
penalty below).
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Restrictions on Indigenous peoples’ rights
continued. A judge’s refusal to allow the body
of an older man of the San (also known as
Basarwa), a nomadic hunter-gatherer people,
to be buried on his ancestral land in the
Central Kalahari Game Reserve, was upheld
by the Court of Appeal in December.
Following a protracted legal battle between
the government and his family members, the
court made an order directing the family to
bury the deceased within seven days.

DEATH PENALTY
Botswana continued to sentence people to
death although no executions were carried
out in 2022. In July it was reviewed by the
UN Committee against Torture, which
recommended that the authorities adopt a
moratorium on the death penalty with a view
to abolishing it. The constitutional review
process (see above, Economic, social and
cultural rights) concluded that Batswana

98

largely supported the death penalty and even
wanted to extend its use; it recommended
that further crimes, including drug-related
offences and the rape of children under 12,
carry the death penalty.

BRAZIL
Federative Republic of Brazil
Head of state and government: Jair Messias Bolsonaro
Racism continued to drive state violence.
Mass killings by public security officials
were frequent, disproportionately affecting
Black people in marginalized
neighbourhoods. Cis and transgender
women, especially Black women, were
targets of various forms of violence. In an
election year, the dissemination of fake
news and statements by President
Bolsonaro incited politically motivated
violence, threatened state institutions and
undermined the functioning of judicial
institutions. Many journalists and human
rights defenders were threatened and killed.
The social, political and economic situation
continued to deteriorate, leading to
violations of the rights to food, health,
housing, work and social assistance, among
others. Investigations into human rights
violations documented by the Parliamentary
Commission of Inquiry into the
government’s handling of the Covid-19
pandemic were shelved. The historic failure
of the state to confront structural racism
continued to result in Indigenous peoples
and Afro-descendants being
disproportionately impacted by failings in
institutional measures and actions.

BACKGROUND
Throughout the year, President Bolsonaro
consistently attacked the high courts and the
rule of law. The election period was marked
by polarization and political violence. The
presidential elections were won by Luíz Inácio
Lula da Silva, who was due to take office in
January 2023. He announced the creation of
a Ministry of Native Peoples and committed

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

to zero deforestation. Supporters of outgoing
President Bolsonaro organized protests and
demanded military intervention, claiming
unproven electoral fraud. In November, the
Liberal Party, of which Jair Bolsonaro is a
member, filed a claim requesting more than
250,000 voting machines be reviewed for
fraud; the Superior Electoral Court dismissed
the claim and ordered a penalty of BRL 22.9
million (approximately USD 4.3 million) for
petitioners acting in bad faith. The number of
people receiving Brazil Aid, a cash transfer
programme introduced in 2021 to replace
the Family Allowance social assistance
programme, reached record levels during the
election period, as did other benefits
approved through an amendment to the
Constitution based on the declaration of
a state of emergency; there were
concerns that this assistance may have been
used for political ends. The number of
firearms registered among the civilian
population increased and was estimated to
be greater than the number of weapons in
the possession of the navy, army and air
force combined.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The economic crisis deepened structural and
persistent social inequalities in the country.
Rising inflation and the impoverishment of
the population disproportionately impacted
groups that have historically faced
discrimination, such as Black people,
Indigenous peoples and other traditional
communities, women, LGBTI people and
residents of favelas and marginalized
neighbourhoods. According to UNICEF, 2
million people between the ages of 11 and 19
who had not finished basic education left
school between January and August.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the end of the year, more than 693,000
people had died from Covid-19 since the
beginning of the pandemic. Despite the
problems associated with implementation of
the vaccination programme, 80% of
Brazilians had been fully vaccinated by
December.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In September, the Pan-American Health
Organization reaffirmed that Brazil was at a
high risk of the re-emergence of polio, which
had been eradicated in Brazil in the 1990s.
Congress approved the draft Budget
Guidelines Law for 2023, which allocated the
lowest level of funding in a decade to the
Ministry of Health. Budget cuts impacted the
public health system, known as the Unified
Health System, and threatened to affect
access to adequate care, including medicine
supplies and sufficient health workers, as
well as HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment
and vaccination programmes.
During the year, the Attorney General
requested that the Supreme Court dismiss
seven of the 10 investigations opened against
President Bolsonaro following the report of a
Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry (CPI)
into the government’s management of the
Covid-19 pandemic. The CPI’s final report
recommended that President Bolsonaro be
indicted for nine crimes, including
“charlatanism”, “malfeasance” and crimes
against humanity. By the end of the year, the
Supreme Federal Court had granted the
closure of at least three of the investigations
requested by the Attorney General.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
According to the National Confederation of
Municipalities (CNM), 5.8 million new homes
were needed for families living in inadequate
housing and some further 24.8 million
housing units required improvements.
In March, the Federal Court of Justice (STF)
extended Law No. 14.216/2021, which
suspended urban evictions during the
pandemic. Judge Luis Roberto Barroso
justified the decision by stating that: “in the
context of the Covid-19 pandemic, the right
to housing is directly related to health
protection and there is a need to avoid as
much as possible an increase in the number
of people living on the street”. In October, the
STF approved a transitional programme for
the reinstatement of evictions that had been
suspended during the pandemic.
The number of people living on the streets
increased in 2022. A survey published in
June by the Federal University of Minas

99

Gerais estimated that more than 180,000
people in the country had nowhere to live,
68% of whom were Black (approximately 119
million of the Brazilian population is black)
and 84% of whom were receiving social
assistance via Brazil Aid.
RIGHT TO WORK
Although the level of unemployment was the
lowest since 2015, poverty increased. In
2021, the latest year for which figures were
available, 62.9 million people had a per
capita household monthly income of BRL
497 (approximately USD 90, representing
41% of the minimum wage) or less,
according to the Getúlio Vargas Social
Foundation. This represented 29.6% of the
country’s total population, according to the
Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics.
RIGHT TO FOOD
More than half of the population did not have
adequate and secure access to food. The
number of people experiencing severe food
insecurity (hunger) reached 33.1 million,
15% of the population. The situation was
particularly acute among small-scale farmers;
21.8% of households in this sector
experienced hunger. Households headed by
women and Black people were the most
affected by food insecurity. 70% of the total
population experiencing severe food
insecurity were Black.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Incidents of politically motivated intimidation
and violence targeting activists, human rights
defenders, journalists and voters exercising
their right to freedom of expression, thought
and belief increased exponentially during the
election period. According to a survey by the
polling institute DataFolha, seven in 10
people reported feeling afraid to express
themselves politically in the country.
There were at least 59 instances of
politically motivated violence in October
between the first and second rounds of the
presidential election. A number involved
threats with firearms, including
Congresswoman Carla Zambelli pointing a

100

gun at a political opponent. There were
physical attacks on journalists, such as an
attack by a congressman on journalist Vera
Magalhães after a political debate.
Reporter Aline Porcina faced intimidation
during Independence Day celebrations and
cameraman Rogério de Paula was assaulted.
Harassment of religious leaders not aligned
with the president’s anti-human rights
discourse and harassment of electoral
workers also intensified, leading to at least six
killings. Political violence also affected
children; a 12-year-old girl was shot dead
during a celebration of Luís Inácio Lula da
Silva’s victory in the city of Belo Horizonte.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The logic and implementation of the “war on
drugs”, which have governed public security
policies in Brazil for decades, continued to
feed the cycle of violence and killings by
police in the country.
Heavily armed police operations resulted in
hours of intense shootings in favelas and
marginalized neighbourhoods. The state’s
excessive use of force also manifested itself
in raids on people’s homes, destruction of
belongings, psychological torture, restrictions
on people’s freedom of movement and the
suspension of basic services such as schools
and health centres.
Three police operations, in which the
Federal Highway Police participated, resulted
in the deaths of 37 people. In March, a police
operation in the Complexo do Chapadão
neighbourhood of the city of Rio de Janeiro
left six people dead. In May, 23 people were
killed as a result of another police operation
in the city’s Vila Cruzeiro neighbourhood.
Such police operations did not follow the
guidelines established by the Supreme Court
and were carried out despite a plan to reduce
killings by police presented by the Governor
of Rio de Janeiro in March.
In May, Genivaldo de Jesus dos Santos, a
Black man with a mental disability, was
extrajudicially executed in the custody of the
Federal Highway Police after being restrained
in a car using an unidentified gas in
Umbaúba, Sergipe state. Three policemen

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

involved in the incident were indicted for
abuse of authority and first degree murder
with aggravating factors.
The Federal Prosecutor’s Office requested
the suspension of the 2021 Ministry of
Justice and Public Safety Ordinance, which
allows the Federal Highway Police to
participate in operations in locations other
than federal highways. In June, a Rio de
Janeiro Federal Court partially suspended the
ordinance, but a Federal Appeals Chamber
overturned that decision two days later.
In 2022, the NGO Brazilian Forum on
Public Safety reported that in 2021, 99% of
victims of police killings were male, 84%
were Black and 52% were aged under 25.
The continuing high death toll during police
operations was evidence of the state’s failure
to effectively fulfil its obligations regarding
external supervision of police conduct. The
fact that Black people made up a
disproportionate percentage of victims was
further proof that systemic and institutional
racism continued to drive the criminalization
of and excessive use of force against Black
people. The persistence and scale of killings
by police also underscored the impunity
enjoyed by those directly responsible and the
lack of accountability of those in the chain of
command who facilitated or tolerated
excessive use of force.

IMPUNITY
The authorities did not adequately investigate
cases of excessive use of force or ensure that
those directly responsible or in the chain of
command were brought to justice.
In June, the task force formed to investigate
the circumstances that led to the May 2021
Jacarezinho massacre, in which 28 people
died, completed its work. Four civilian police
officers were accused of the murder of three
people, and two suspected drug dealers were
accused of involvement in the death of a
civilian police officer. The cases of the other
24 killings were closed, reportedly due to lack
of evidence, without determining
responsibility.
Those suspected of criminal responsibility
for the enforced disappearance of Davi Fiuza,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

then aged 16, in October 2014 had still not
been brought to justice by the end of 2022.
The teenager was last seen being put into an
unmarked car during a police operation in
the city of Salvador, Bahia state. Of the 17
police officers indicted, only seven faced
charges, including kidnapping. A first hearing
in the case took place in October under the
inadequate military justice system. By the
end of the year none of the officers charged
had been convicted and all remained at
liberty.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
According to the Space Research Institute,
between January and October the
deforestation rate in the Brazilian Amazon
reached its highest level since 2015, with
9,277 km² of forest destroyed in what is
known as the “Legal Amazon” region, an
area covering nine states in the Brazilian
Amazon.
The disasters caused by the effects of
climate change, and by the state’s failure to
adopt adequate and sufficient measures to
mitigate them, continued to have
disproportionate impacts on marginalized
communities, those most affected by the lack
of public policies on housing, basic sanitation
and infrastructure.
According to a survey by the National
Confederation of Municipalities, the first five
months of the year alone saw the highest
number of deaths for a decade as a result of
extreme rainfall. In February and March, at
least 238 people died in Petrópolis
municipality, Rio de Janeiro state, following
mudslides and flooding. In June, 128 people
lost their lives in landslides and floods in
Recife, the capital of Pernambuco state. In
both cases, most of the people affected were
Black women living in favelas and
marginalized neighbourhoods who were at
home when the landslides and flooding
occurred.
In April, Brazil submitted its second update
to its original NDC. According to the Climate
Action Tracker, the latest update was weaker
than Brazil’s original NDC in terms of

101

absolute emissions reductions, falling short of
the Paris Agreement’s goal of submitting
increasingly ambitious NDCs with each
update.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
March marked the fourth anniversary of the
killings of Marielle Franco, a councilwoman
and human rights defender, and her driver,
Anderson Gomes. No one had been brought
to justice for the killings, despite continuing
efforts by the families to press for justice and
effective participation in the investigations.
The two men accused of the killings
remained in prison, but no date had been set
for their trial by the end of the year and those
behind the killings had yet to be identified.
In January, three environmental activists
belonging to the same family who protected
turtles in the Amazon were killed in Pará
state. By the end of the year, no one had
been brought to justice for the killings.
In June, British journalist Dom Phillips and
Brazilian Indigenous expert Bruno Pereira,
defenders of the rights of Indigenous
peoples, disappeared in a region near the
Vale do Javari Indigenous lands in Amazonas
state. Their bodies were found 11 days later.
Three men were arrested and at the end of
the year were awaiting trial on charges of
murder and concealing the bodies.
Investigations into the intellectual authors of
the killings were ongoing.
In November, human rights defender
Bishop Vicente de Paula Ferreira was
threatened by a group of unidentified
individuals, some reportedly armed. Bishop
Vicente is known for his support of social
causes and defence of democracy and the
environment.
In December, Raimundo de Oliveira, an
activist of land rights movement Movimento
Sem Terra, was shot dead inside his house in
the Bico de Papagaio region, Tocantins state.

RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND
QUILOMBOLAS

killings in land-related conflicts in rural areas
of the country. This represented a 150%
increase compared to the first six months of
2021. More than half of the conflicts
occurred in the “Legal Amazon” region and
impacted mainly Indigenous peoples and
Quilombolas.
In April, Quilombola leader Edvaldo Pereira
Rocha was shot dead in Maranhão state. A
suspect was arrested, and investigations into
the reasons for and individuals behind the
killing were continuing at the end of the year.
In May and June, respectively, two Guarani
Kaiowá men, 17-year-old Alex Lopes and
Vítor Fernandes, were killed in Mato Grosso
do Sul state. In September, 14-year-old
Gustavo da Conceição, a member of the
Pataxó people, was killed in Bahia state. No
one had been brought to justice for these
killings by the end of the year.
In addition to ongoing attacks on Indigenous
land in Rondônia state, the Hutukara
Yanomami Association reported that the
presence of illegal mining in the region was
affecting the health of Indigenous peoples.
The Association recorded the deaths of nine
children from diseases that could have been
treated with adequate access to healthcare.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The National Association of Transvestites and
Transsexuals (ANTRA) published data in
January 2022 showing that at least 140
transgender people were killed in 2021 and
for the 13th consecutive year Brazil was the
country with the highest number of killings of
transgender people in the world.
Transgender candidates were subjected to
intimidation and threats during the electoral
process. Nevertheless, for the first time in the
country’s history, two transgender women
were elected as federal deputies.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
According to the Forum on Public Safety, 699
women were victims of feminicide in 2022,
62% of whom were Black.

Between January and July, the Pastoral Land
Commission registered 759 violent incidents,
involving a total of 113,654 families, and 33

102

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Although abortion in cases of rape is
provided for in Brazilian law, those seeking
abortion services faced intimidation and
stigma from authorities.

BULGARIA
Republic of Bulgaria
Head of state: Rumen Radev
Head of government : Galab Donev (replaced Kiril
Petkov in August)
Media freedom further deteriorated as
journalists were subjected to threats,
intimidation and abusive litigation. Migrants
and asylum seekers faced pushbacks.
Domestic violence increased. Courts found
discrimination against Roma during riots in
2019. People with disabilities faced
persistent discrimination.

BACKGROUND
In June, the reformist coalition led by Kiril
Petkov lost a no-confidence vote, triggering
an early parliamentary election in October.
Galab Donev took on the role of caretaker
prime minister in August. The former prime
minister Boyko Borissov’s GERB party won
most seats but failed to win a clear majority,
likely leaving the country in a state of
protracted political crisis.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and independent media outlets
reporting on organized crime, corruption or
minority rights faced persistent threats and
harassment and were frequently victims of
abusive litigation by public officials and
business people. An Association of European
Journalists’ survey indicated that one in two
journalists in Bulgaria faced undue pressure
and one in 10 had been threatened with
court action. This had a chilling effect on
reporting and resulted in increased selfcensorship. Journalists and human rights
defenders living outside of the capital, Sofia,
were particularly vulnerable to intimidation.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Major media outlets continued to be
controlled by politicians and oligarchs, further
undermining editorial independence and
limiting access to information.
In November, the parliament adopted at first
reading amendments to harmonize the
Criminal Code with European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) rulings on freedom of
expression. The amendments would remove
the existing provision treating the defamation
of a public official as an aggravating
circumstance and reduce excessive and
disproportionate fines for defamation.
In November, the Revival party proposed
legislation which would publicly label
individuals and organizations who received
financial support from foreign sources as
“foreign agents”, fine them for failing to
disclose foreign donations and prohibit them
from carrying out political or educational
activities. Civil society organizations warned
that the law would undermine freedom of
expression and association.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
There was a sharp rise in the number of
refugees and migrants who arrived at the
border with Türkiye. Authorities recorded over
85,000 arrivals, more than double the 2021
number. Summary returns, sometimes
accompanied by violence, remained
widespread.
Rights organizations reported continuing
discriminatory practices in the asylum
system, with applications by nationals of
certain countries, including Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bangladesh, Morocco and Tunisia,
being automatically rejected.
Bulgaria received nearly 1 million
Ukrainians, mostly women and children, and
provided access to healthcare, social services
and education to 150,000 who registered for
temporary protection. Many refugees left after
September amid growing uncertainty about
the government’s extension of the hotel
accommodation scheme. UNHCR, the UN
refugee agency, urged the authorities to
provide a lasting solution for accommodation
of refugees.

103

On several occasions, the authorities
provisionally accommodated Ukrainian
refugees, including families with children, in
a temporary accommodation centre in
Elhovo, which was designed as a detention
facility for people entering irregularly. The
NGO the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee
highlighted inadequate and undignified
conditions at the Elhovo centre.
In August, an appeals court in Varna
overturned an earlier district court decision
that had approved the extradition to Russia of
Aleksei Alchin, a Russian national who had
criticized the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
The appeal court said that due to Aleksei
Alchin’s political beliefs, his rights would
likely be violated upon his return.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Cases of domestic violence, which spiked
during the Covid-19 pandemic, continued to
rise.
Amendments to the Law on Protection from
Domestic Violence and the Criminal Code,
aimed at further harmonizing domestic
legislation with international standards and
strengthening protection for victims, had not
been adopted by the end of the year.
The Council of Europe’s Human Rights
Commissioner asked the authorities to
urgently address the severe lack of support
services for victims of domestic violence in all
parts of the country.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, a court in Sofia ordered Boyan
Rassate, the Bulgarian National Union Party’s
candidate in the 2021 presidential election,
to pay a BGN 3,000 (EUR 1,500) fine for a
break-in at an LGBTI community centre – the
Rainbow Hub – in 2021, during which the
facility was vandalized and an activist
assaulted. He was a cleared of charges of
assault.
In June, the ECtHR called on Bulgaria to
pay compensation to the mother of a young
man killed in a homophobic attack in 2008.
In line with Court’s ruling, in December, the
Council of Ministers proposed amendments
to the Criminal Code, which would recognize

104

homophobia as an aggravating circumstance
in respect of certain crimes against the
person, including murder.
The authorities failed to take steps to
develop a national strategy and an action
plan to combat discrimination on the grounds
of sexual orientation or gender identity.

DISCRIMINATION
In October, the ECtHR ruled that the
authorities violated the right to private and
family life of the Roma residents of
Voivodinovo who were driven from their
homes during the violent anti-Roma protests
in 2019, and ordered the authorities to pay
compensation. In August, the national
Commission for Protection against
Discrimination said that the expulsion of
Roma from Voivodinovo was an act of
discrimination.
The European Commission against Racism
and Intolerance urged the authorities to do
more to tackle hate speech and prejudice
against Roma.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In a ruling in January, the ECtHR found that
Bulgaria’s laws on secret surveillance were in
breach of the European Convention on
Human Rights. The Court said that the laws
failed to provide sufficient safeguards against
arbitrary or abusive surveillance and that
there was insufficient oversight against
unnecessary and disproportionate access to
stored communications data.

RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
In two separate cases, the ECtHR ruled that
Bulgaria had violated the right to vote of two
people with a mental disability who were
under partial guardianship. It found that
Bulgaria’s de facto blanket ban on people
affected by a mental disability voting was
disproportionate and unjustifiable. The
Constitutional Court refused to provide an
interpretation of the national legislation
relating to the right of people with a mental
disability to vote, stating that the relevant
provisions in the Constitution were sufficiently
clear.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The authorities reiterated their commitment
to closing specialized institutions for adults
with disabilities. However, rights organizations
said that the government needed to improve
community-based services to provide a
dignified alternative to group accommodation
in institutions.
In June, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture urged Bulgaria to
urgently adopt measures to address poor
living conditions and physical neglect in
social care homes.

BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso
Head of state: Ibrahim Traoré (replaced Paul-Henri
Sandaogo Damiba in September, who replaced
Roch Marc Christian Kaboré in January)
Head of government: Apollinaire Kyélem de Tambèla
(replaced Albert Ouédraogo in October, who replaced
Lassina Zerbo in March)
Armed groups and government armed forces
committed violations of international
humanitarian law. The armed conflict
continued to affect the rights to food, water,
health and education. There were cases of
arbitrary detention and violations of the
right to freedom of expression. Two
historical judicial cases of high-profile
killings were finally completed, including
one related to the murder of President
Thomas Sankara in 1987.

BACKGROUND
Burkina Faso underwent two military coups.
The first, in January, was led by LieutenantColonel Paul-Henri Damiba. It toppled
President Roch Marc Kaboré and his
government and led to the dissolution of all
elective offices – parliamentary and local. The
army justified the coup on the basis of the
government’s poor handling of the armed
conflict, which continued to have major
impacts on civilians. The military authorities
placed Roch Marc Kaboré under house
arrest until 7 April on grounds of “security”.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The state of emergency was renewed in
April after a two-month suspension. The new
government established military zones in
northern and eastern Burkina Faso and
ordered civilians to evacuate these areas. A
two-year transition before presidential
elections was negotiated under mediation
from ECOWAS. In September, after military
setbacks in the armed conflict, LieutenantColonel Damiba was overthrown by military
officers led by Captain Ibrahim Traoré.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ARMED GROUPS
The Group for the Support of Islam and
Muslims (GSIM) blocked access and
commercial supply to several cities in
northern and eastern Burkina Faso. In
February, the GSIM cut access to the city of
Djibo in response to the government’s
prohibition of the movement of people and
goods from Djibo to areas under the GSIM’s
influence. In July, the main road access to
the town of Sebba, which hosted 30,000
internally displaced people from
neighbouring districts, was also cut off by
the GSIM. The blockades reduced food
security and access to medicines and
healthcare for civilians.
In March, armed assailants launched an
attack in Arbinda, a town in Soum province
under siege since 2019, targeting people
fetching water. Seven people were killed,
including three civilians.
In Djibo, the GSIM attacked and destroyed
civilian objects including water infrastructure
affecting more than 300,000 residents,
according to the Norwegian Refugee Council.
Traders and others who attempted to supply
food to the city were threatened with violence
by armed groups, leading the government to
deploy armed escorts to assist them to enter
Djibo. On 26 September a 207-vehicle
civilian supply convoy for Djibo, escorted by
the military, was attacked by armed
assailants at Gaskindé. Following the attack,
50 people remained unaccounted for.
According to the government, the bodies of
11 soldiers were found after the attack.

105

In June, members of the Islamic State in the
Sahel attacked the town of Seytenga, killing
at least 80 people, mostly civilians. The
assailants reportedly went from house to
house, killing men. Thousands of residents
were displaced; some 16,000 fled to the
regional capital, Dori, and 360 crossed into
Niger.
GOVERNMENT FORCES
In February, French forces supporting the
national army killed four civilians during an
aerial strike on the armed group Ansaroul
Islam. There was no investigation into the
incident to determine the lawfulness of the
attack.
In April, media reports indicated that
dozens of civilians were killed during military
strikes against armed groups in the villages of
Sokoundou, Wassakoré and Tin-Rhassan, in
Oudalan province, close to the border with
Mali. No investigation was set up into the
incident.
In August, state authorities acknowledged
their responsibility for the deaths of “several”
civilians during aerial strikes against armed
groups near Kompienga/Pognoa, close to the
border with Togo. Media reports indicated
that around 30 civilians, mostly women, were
killed during the strikes.
On 30 December, two neighbourhoods with
majority ethnic Fulani populations in the town
of Nouna, Kossi province, were attacked by
government auxiliary forces. At least 86
people were killed, according to local
sources. The Office of the Prosecutor of
Nouna announced an investigation into the
killings.

Nord, Sahel and Est regions where armed
groups were most active.

RIGHT TO FOOD

In April, a military tribunal in the capital,
Ouagadougou, found former president Blaise
Compaoré and his former head of security,
Hyacinthe Kafando, guilty of the murder of
President Thomas Sankara and 12 other
government officials in 1987. They were
sentenced to life imprisonment in their
absence, along with General Gilbert
Diendéré. Eight other defendants were also
found guilty and sentenced to between three
and 20 years’ imprisonment; a further three
accused were acquitted. In May the military

A combination of conflict-driven increases in
the price of consumer products and
variations in the climate severely affected
food security in Burkina Faso. According to
OCHA, 4.9 million people faced food
insecurity by September, including many
internally displaced people who had fled their
homes and lost their livelihoods due to the
conflict. Some 180,000 children were
chronically malnourished, according to
OCHA. This situation was most acute in the

106

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
UNICEF reported that 4,258 schools were
closed or non-functioning at the end of
September due to the conflict. State
authorities supported by UNICEF and other
organizations developed educational radio
programmes targeting children displaced by
the conflict or otherwise not in school.
UNICEF reported in September that some
292,861 children had accessed these radio
programmes.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In March the former president of the National
Assembly, Alassane Bala Sakandé, was
arrested, detained and interrogated by the
gendarmerie before being released the same
day without charge. On 24 March, prior to his
arrest and detention, he had issued a press
statement calling for an end to the illegal
detention of the deposed president, Roch
Marc Kaboré.
On 19 May, Luc Pagbelguem, a journalist
working for the television channel BF1, was
assaulted by a security detail of the
transitional prime minister, Albert Ouédraogo,
while reporting on an event. This prompted a
statement by professional media
organizations on 26 May which denounced
the assault against Luc Pagbelguem and
intimidation against several other journalists
in Burkina Faso.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

tribunal ordered Blaise Compaoré and nine of
the other convicted men to pay a total of XOF
800 million (EUR 1.2 million) in
compensation to the families of Thomas
Sankara and the 12 other victims.
General Gilbert Diendéré was also found
guilty in May of complicity in the unlawful
arrest and aggravated abduction of student
union leader Boukary Dabo in 1990 and
sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment and a
fine of XOF 1 million (EUR 1,450) by the
Ouagadougou High Court. These crimes had
led to the death of Boukary Dabo. Two other
accused in the same case were sentenced to
10 and 30 years’ imprisonment respectively
and ordered to pay damages.

BURUNDI
Republic of Burundi
Head of state: Evariste Ndayishimiye
Head of government: Gervais Ndirakobuca (replaced
Alain-Guillaume Bunyoni in September)
Officials failed to uphold the rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly
and association. Many independent human
rights organizations were not allowed to
operate and many civil society actors
remained in exile. Targeted attacks by
security forces and the Imbonerakure (the
ruling party’s youth wing) continued against
government critics and members of the
opposition, including arbitrary arrests and
detention and enforced disappearances.
Detainees’ rights were violated. The Truth
and Reconciliation Commission faced
accusations of bias. The government’s
failure to address fuel shortages and an illadvised decision to ban bicycles, tricycles
and motorbikes from Bujumbura’s city
centre adversely affected the cost of living,
impacting social and economic rights.
Some returning refugees were subjected to
harassment, intimidation and attacks.

BACKGROUND
In February, the EU lifted sanctions imposed
on Burundi under Article 96 of the Africa

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Caribbean and Pacific Partnership
Agreement in 2016. Relations with
neighbouring Rwanda continued to improve,
and in March the president received a visit
from the Rwandan minister of defence, who
bore a special message from his president in
a bid to normalize bilateral relations. In May,
the president of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (DRC) made an official visit amid
concerns about the Burundian army and
Imbonerakure conducting military operations
against Burundian armed groups inside the
DRC.
The Burundian authorities continued to
deny access to and fail to cooperate with
regional and international human rights
mechanisms, including the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
(ACHPR) and the UN Human Rights Council.
According to OCHA, 1.8 million of the
country’s 13 million population needed
humanitarian assistance in 2022.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Officials failed to uphold the rights to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly and
association.
In March, law enforcement authorities shut
down a press conference organized by the
civil society organizations Words and Actions
for the Awakening of Consciences and the
Evolution of Mentalities (PARCEM) and the
Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice
Observatory (OLUCOME). During the
conference, participants had denounced
Ministry of Interior measures banning
bicycles, tricycles and motorcycles from
Bujumbura city centre.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
proposed a genocide denier bill in March to
punish anyone who denied the 1972
genocide against the Hutu in Burundi. The
bill, if enacted, poses the risk of further
restrictions to the already shrinking civic
space and repression of the right to freedom
of expression.
In June, third anniversary celebrations for
the main opposition National Congress for
Freedom (CNL) party were banned in several

107

provinces. Security forces and members of
the Imbonerakure disrupted several CNL
meetings, including in Gitega province in
July, where a group of alleged Imbonerakure,
accompanied by the local authorities,
accused the party of holding a clandestine
and unauthorized meeting. CNL offices were
damaged, two were burnt down in Ruyigi
province and CNL attempts to form an
opposition parliamentary group were initially
met with opposition from the president of the
National Assembly.
In September, the ACHPR chairperson
wrote to President Ndayishimiye, requesting
provisional measures in the case against 12
human rights defenders and journalists
(Marguerite Barankitse, Dieudonné
Bashirashize, Arcade Havyarimana, Patrick
Mitabaro, Innocent Muhozi, Patrick
Nduwimana, Pacifique Nininahazwe, Armel
Niyongere, Gilbert Niyonkuru, Anne Niyuhire,
Vital Nshimirimana and Bob Rugurika), all
living in exile. They had been falsely accused
of participating in the May 2015 attempted
coup d’etat and sentenced by the Supreme
Court in their absence to life in prison in June
2020, in a decision only made public in
February 2021.

lawyers alleged that he was put under
pressure and forced to resign from his role at
Kira Hospital over unsubstantiated claims of
fraud, money laundering and forging
documents. One of his lawyers said that a
recent financial audit, commissioned by Kira
Hospital interim officials, found no
wrongdoing on Christophe Sahabo’s account.
On 27 September, his brother, Etienne
Sahabo, and his lawyer Sandra Ndayizeye,
daughter of the former president Domitien
Ndayizeye, were arrested and accused by the
prosecutor general of forging the minutes of
the Kira Hospital’s general assembly meeting
that reinstated Christophe Sahabo as the
director. Sandra Ndayizeye was released on 7
October after renouncing her representation
of Christophe Sahabo. Etienne Sahabo was
also released the same day.
In December, the Supreme Court quashed
lawyer Tony Germain Nkina’s five-year
prison sentence and ordered a retrial in
connection with his June 2021 conviction for
“collaborating with rebels who attacked
Burundi”. He was released a week later after
the Court of Appeal of Ngozi acquitted him.
Arrested in October 2020, he had been
falsely accused of endangering state security.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS

The authorities and the Imbonerakure
continued to target CNL members,
brutalizing, arresting and illegally detaining
them.
Christophe Sahabo, managing director of
the Kira Hospital in Bujumbura, was arrested
in April, alongside French national JeanDavid Pillot, chair of the hospital’s board of
directors. The latter was released after one
night in detention, but Christophe Sahabo
remained in detention for several days
without access to his family or lawyers of his
choosing. He was detained in a National
Intelligence Service (SNR) cell where he
spent more than 30 days before being
presented to a magistrate and transferred to
Mpimba prison. On 29 September, he was
transferred to the Ruyigi prison,
approximately 160km from Bujumbura where
his case was registered. His family and

The authorities continued to violate the rights
of detainees. Detention conditions fell short of
international human rights standards;
facilities were severely overcrowded and food,
water and healthcare were inadequate.
Prisoners and human rights defenders
denounced ration cuts imposed by the prison
authorities from July onwards. This situation
was aggravated by the continuing increase in
the prison population. According to human
rights defender Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, food
provided by the authorities was enough to
feed only 4,294 inmates, while the prison
population was estimated to be more than
12,000.
The authorities were yet to conduct an
effective investigation into a fire at Gitega
prison in December 2021 which killed at
least 38 people, according to official
accounts. The facility, designed to house 400

108

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

inmates, held more than 1,200. Throughout
the year, the prosecutor general presided
over the release of prisoners accused of
minor infractions as directed by President
Ndayishimiye in 2021 in an effort to reduce
overcrowding. According to officials, at least
60 inmates were released in the capital,
Gitega, as of June. In Mpimba prison in
Bujumbura, 111 prisoners, including five
women, were granted provisional release in
June. In November, the minister of justice
issued an internal notice to all departments
on prison overcrowding, calling on them to
implement the president’s directive to release
pretrial detainees accused of minor
infractions.
André Ndagijimana, a CNL member, died at
Ngozi Hospital in July while in police custody.
He had been denied access to appropriate
healthcare.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Although the number of enforced
disappearances decreased, critics of the
government and the ruling party remained at
great risk of such crimes.
Jean de Dieu Ndasabira, a CNL member,
went missing in June. Local organizations
that documented his case believed he was
picked up at his workplace in Bujumbura by
SNR officers . The authorities had not
provided information on any investigations
into his disappearance by the end of the year.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Burundian human rights organizations
continued to report the discovery of bodies in
rivers across the country; the security forces
and the Imbonerakure are believed to be
responsible for the killings. The authorities
failed to investigate these allegations.
In June, a local youth official of the CNL
party, Jean Claude Ntirampeba, was found
dead near the Rusizi river. There were clear
signs on his body that he had been
murdered.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
has long been accused of bias. Its
methodology and manner of exhuming
bodies continued to be contested by human
rights groups and was seen by many
Burundian and international actors as part of
the ruling party’s narrative to portray the Hutu
as the sole victims of the 1972 massacres,
without investigating other atrocities.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Since August 2021, the authorities failed to
secure fuel supplies, causing paralysis to
economic activity, a sharp rise in inflation,
rising food prices and scarcity of public
transport in major cities, which prevented
many healthcare professionals, students,
public servants and private sector workers
from reaching work. The public transport
crisis was compounded by the interior
ministry’s ban in March on bicycles, tricycles
and motorcycles in Bujumbura city centre
(see above, Freedom of expression,
association and assembly).
Local media reported abuses by the
Imbonerakure, local officials and security
forces who extorted motorists by demanding
money to avoid long queues for fuel.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, there were 258,272 Burundian
refugees in neighbouring countries and more
than 80,000 internally displaced people
inside Burundi. UNHCR facilitated the return
of 16,621 Burundian refugees mainly from
the DRC, Rwanda and Tanzania. Local media
and human rights organizations continued to
report cases of harassment and targeted
attacks against returnees by the
Imbonerakure and local officials.

109

CAMBODIA
Kingdom of Cambodia
Head of state: Norodom Sihamoni
Head of government: Hun Sen
Rampant illegal logging and unchecked
urban development violated the human
rights of Indigenous peoples and the urban
poor. Freedom of expression and association
remained severely restricted and unfair
trials of political opposition members and
supporters continued. Authorities arrested,
detained and assaulted striking workers.
Despite some steps to tackle human
trafficking it remained widespread. The
right to adequate housing was not protected
and human rights abuses were linked to
microfinance loans.

BACKGROUND
The government crackdown on independent
media, civil society organizations and political
opposition that began in 2017 continued
throughout 2022. Independent observers
raised concerns about irregularities in the
June local elections in which the ruling
Cambodian People’s Party (CPP) won 80% of
the seats. It was contested by the Candlelight
Party which is comprised of some former
members of the Cambodia National Rescue
Party (CNRP), which was banned by a court
order in 2017. Cambodia’s NDC remained
unchanged since 2020 at a 50% reduction of
historical emissions by 2030.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Large-scale illegal logging of protected forests
continued with severe consequences for
Indigenous peoples whose livelihoods and
culture depend on them.1 Indigenous
activists reported receiving death threats from
authorities and a rise in gun possession
amongst illegal loggers throughout the year.
In August, following a public outcry, the
government halted logging in Phnom Tamao
forest, but only after hundreds of hectares
had been cleared.

110

The destruction of lakes and wetlands,
especially around the capital Phnom Penh,
for private development also continued,
resulting in increased flood risks, and loss of
housing and livelihoods for surrounding
communities, where many people had
precarious incomes or were living in poverty.
The sale and gifting by the government of
Boeung Tamok, one of the last remaining
lakes in Phnom Penh, to private companies
and individuals for draining and development
continued. In July, Cambodia’s Supreme
Court upheld convictions and suspended
parts of prison sentences for “incitement to
commit a felony” against three environmental
activists from the campaign group, Mother
Nature Cambodia. The three, who were
arrested in 2020 for protesting against the
privatization of the lake, remained under
restrictive probation conditions. In
September, the authorities dismantled sheds
used by local fishermen to make way for the
Boeung Tamok development.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 16 August, members of the prime
minister’s bodyguard unit detained five
journalists along with four activists from a
social justice group, Khmer Thavrak, who
were documenting the destruction resulting
from the illegal logging in Phnom Tamao
forest. One of the journalists was reportedly
hit in the face while filming the arrest. All
nine were released without charge, but were
required to sign a document admitting that
they flew a drone without permission.
On 3 February, a supporter of the banned
CNRP, Veourn Veasna, was found guilty of
“incitement to commit felony” and sentenced
to two years’ imprisonment in relation to a
poem he had posted on Facebook that was
critical of Hun Sen.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Judicial harassment of members and
supporters of opposition political parties
continued in 2022. The trial on charges of
treason of the leader of the CNRP, Kem
Sokha, which began in 2020, was ongoing at
the end of 2022, with the verdict scheduled

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

for 3 March 2023. Mass trials of another 115
CNRP members and supporters took place
during the year in which 67 people were
convicted and sentenced to prison terms
ranging from five to 18 years. UN human
rights experts described the trials as “deeply
flawed” and called for all convictions to be
reviewed.
Five members of the Candlelight Party were
arbitrarily detained or imprisoned during the
year. On 7 September, the party’s vice
president, Son Chhay, was convicted of
defamation, fined KHR 17 million (about
USD 4,098) and ordered to pay the CPP
KHR 3 billion (approximately USD 727,132)
in compensation, after questioning the
fairness of the June elections.

On 11 August, police punched and kicked
protestors outside the NagaWorld Casino,
injuring at least 17 women, with one
hospitalized as a result. On 12 September,
police hit striking workers and union
members with walkie-talkies as they
attempted to submit a petition to the Ministry
of Labour calling for a resolution to the
dispute and to withdraw accusations that
Yang Sophorn, president of the Cambodian
Alliance of Trade Unions, was acting illegally
by backing the strike.
On 30 September, NagaWorld filed criminal
complaints against four LRSU members for
trespassing, aggravated intentional damage
and unlawful confinement.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS

On 9 September, the Ministry of Justice
announced the establishment of a taskforce
to coordinate investigations and prosecutions
of those responsible for human trafficking of
foreign workers to Cambodia. Raids by the
authorities in Phnom Penh and the town of
Sihanoukville resulted in the rescue of
hundreds of trafficked workers.
According to media and other reports, many
more trafficked people, including children,
were held in “slave compounds” and forced
to work in cyber and other scams. Rescued
victims reported being subjected to rape,
beatings and other physical violence by
guards. Some died while trying to escape.
Those arrested for involvement in human
trafficking were mainly low-level suspects.
On 30 August, the Preah Sihanouk
Provincial Court sentenced Chen Baorong,
head of an anti-trafficking NGO, the
Cambodia-China Charity Team, and two other
men, Chen Xiaohua and Tan Xiaomei, to two
years in prison each. Their prosecution
appeared to be in retaliation for negative
international publicity about the rescue of a
trafficking victim who alleged that those
detaining him had “harvested” his blood.
Their sentences were reduced on appeal to
10 months on 21 December.

Police arrested and physically assaulted
striking workers and union members who
were calling for higher wages and the
reinstatement of dismissed workers following
mass layoffs by the NagaWorld Casino in
Phnom Penh in late 2021.
In January, authorities arrested 28 members
of the Labor Rights Supported Union of
Khmer Employees of NagaWorld (LRSU).
The LRSU president, Chhim Sithar, and nine
others were charged with “incitement to
commit a felony”. All 10 of those charged
were later released on bail, but the case
remained pending at the end of the year. The
18 others were released without charge after
signing pledges that they would not
participate in further strike action. Chhim
Sithar was rearrested on 26 November for
breaching bail conditions that neither she nor
her lawyers were aware of.2
On 5 February, six LRSU members were
arrested as they left a Covid-19 testing site,
following a government order that all those
involved in the NagaWorld strike action
should be tested. Three were later charged
with “obstruction of Covid-19 measures”
under Covid-19 regulations introduced in
2021, which carry a prison sentence of up to
20 years. They were released on bail but still
faced charges at the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

HUMAN TRAFFICKING

111

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In April, the Compliance Adviser
Ombudsman of the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), an international body that
addresses complaints by people affected by
IFC-supported projects, agreed to review a
complaint filed by local NGOs on behalf of 19
individuals, including Indigenous people,
alleging human rights abuses, including
coerced land sales, forced migration and
child labour, arising from lack of due
diligence and inadequate supervision of loans
by six Cambodian microfinance corporations
and banks.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
Lack of land titles meant that thousands of
people remained at risk of eviction without
access to compensation under national law.
According to the land and housing rights
NGO, Sahmakum Teang Tnaut, 1,507
households had been forcibly evicted since
2020 because they were unable to
demonstrate ownership of the land on which
they lived.
1. Cambodia, ‘Our traditions are being destroyed’: Illegal logging,
repression, and Indigenous peoples’ rights violations in Cambodia’s
protected forests, 28 January
2. “Cambodia: Imprisoned union leader must be released: Chhim
Sithar”, 14 December

CAMEROON
Republic of Cameroon
Head of state: Paul Biya
Head of government: Joseph Dion Ngute
Freedoms of expression, association and
assembly were still restricted. Dozens of
opposition party supporters and anglophone
leaders remained arbitrarily detained. In the
Northwest and Southwest regions,
separatist groups committed serious crimes
and the army committed human rights
violations. In the Far North region, armed
groups continued to carry out deadly raids
on villages. Humanitarian access was
hampered.

112

BACKGROUND
Armed violence between the army and armed
separatist groups continued in the Northwest
and Southwest anglophone regions. The
armed conflict in the Far North region
continued to rage with the active presence of
the armed groups Boko Haram and Islamic
State in West Africa Province. In May,
inhabitants of Tourou in Mayo-Tsanaga
department held a demonstration at the subprefecture of Mokolo to denounce the
insecurity and demand more protection from
the authorities.
As of 30 November, 385,000 people were
internally displaced because of the armed
conflict in the Far North, and as of
December, more that 620,000 people were
internally displaced because of the armed
violence in the Southwest and Northwest,
and 87,000 were refugees in Nigeria.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Human rights defenders and activists from
several organizations were targeted with
death threats, harassment and intimidation
for exposing human rights violations and
abuses in the two anglophone regions.1 On
22 April, four UN Special Rapporteurs
focusing on human rights defenders,
extrajudicial executions, the right to freedom
of expression and the right to association
wrote to President Paul Biya raising concerns
over repeated death threats since 2015
against the president and the lawyer of the
NGO Organic Farming for Gorillas (OFFGO).
OFFGO had exposed abuses by businesses
in the Northwest region.
On 27, 28 and 30 June, peaceful protests
organized by visually impaired people were
violently dispersed by the police in the capital
Yaoundé, according to reports from the
Collectif des Aveugles et Malvoyants Indignés
du Cameroun and the media. Twenty-seven
demonstrators were locked up for several
hours in Yaoundé’s central police station
before being released. Others were beaten,
insulted, loaded onto vehicles and
abandoned in various places far from the
centre of Yaoundé.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

On 1 August, Mohamadou Bouba Sarki,
president of the Confédération des
associations des jeunes solidaires du
Cameroun, was arrested in Garoua city, North
region, by police officers and gendarmes and
detained for one night. He had tried to
organize a peaceful march to demand the
release of several detainees.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Mancho Bibixy Tse and Tsi Conrad, protest
leaders from the Northwest and Southwest
anglophone regions and arrested for taking
part in peaceful protests in 2016 and 2017,
were still arbitrarily detained after being
sentenced by a military court in Yaoundé to
15 years in prison, following their conviction
for “acts of terrorism, secession, spreading
false information, and contempt for public
bodies and officials”. In 2019 and 2021 the
UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention
called for the release of the two men.
As of December, at least 62 Cameroon
Renaissance Movement (MRC) members
and supporters remained in arbitrary
detention in Yaoundé and Douala after they
were sentenced by military courts for
attempted revolution, rebellion, aggravated
assembly or participation in the organization
of an undeclared public meeting, in relation
to their activism or their participation in
banned protests in September 2020.2 Among
them were Olivier Bibou Nissack, the
spokesperson for MRC leader Maurice
Kamto, and Alain Fogué Tedom, national
treasurer of the MRC, both sentenced to
seven years in prison, and Dorgelesse
Nguessan, sentenced to five years for having
participated in a protest.
Former director of the public broadcaster
Cameroon Radio and Television (CRTV),
Amadou Vamoulké, whose pretrial detention
for six years had been considered arbitrary by
the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention, was sentenced on 20 December
to 12 years in prison, after more than 130
adjournments.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
While a report by the Ministry of Public
Health recorded almost 15,000 notified cases
of cholera and 298 deaths in several regions,
the New Bell prison in Douala was affected
by two cholera epidemics. In the first
outbreak starting in February, at least six
inmates at the prison died of cholera. One of
them, Rodrigue Ndagueho Koufet, who died
on 7 April, had been arbitrarily detained
since September 2020 for having
participated in a peaceful protest. According
to non-governmental media, the second
outbreak from August onwards caused the
deaths of at least 10 prisoners. The prison
administration carried out disinfection and
reinforced existing hygiene measures. The
regional health delegation for the Littoral
region provided vaccines and supported the
care of patients evacuated to public
hospitals.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
The Ministry of Defence acknowledged on 7
June that the Cameroonian army killed nine
people on the evening of 1 June in the town
of Missong, Menchum department,
Northwest region, “in an inappropriate
reaction, inadequate to the circumstances
and clearly disproportionate to the refusal of
the hostile villagers to cooperate”.

RIGHT TO LIFE
NORTHWEST AND SOUTHWEST REGIONS
Separatist groups committed serious crimes
in the Northwest and Southwest regions,
targeting people, healthcare facilities and
schools, which did not receive adequate
protection from the authorities. On 8 and 11
February, these groups burned down Molyko
primary school in Buea and Queen of Rosary
Catholic college in Mamfe, both in Southwest
region.
On 26 February, a nurse from a medical
NGO was killed and two other medical staff
injured when their car was shot at by a
separatist group at a checkpoint on the
outskirts of Bamenda, Northwest region.
On 13 April, the government reported the
killing of the Northwest regional prison

113

delegate and three of his staff in an attack on
their vehicle on 12 April.
According to reports by OCHA, 13 students
and three teachers were abducted in four
separate incidents and released after
payment of a ransom. On 4 and 6 April, two
schools in Buea suffered arson attacks by
unknown armed men.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
FAR NORTH REGION
Armed groups continued to carry out deadly
raids on villages, killing and abducting
dozens of civilians. The Mada hospital in
Logone-et-Chari department was forced to
close for several months – preventing
thousands of people from accessing health
services – after an attack on 2 July that killed
two civilians.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
On 5 April, Doctors Without Borders (DWB)
announced the suspension of all medical
activities in the Southwest region after four of
their colleagues were arrested and detained
after being “investigated for complicity with
secessionism simply for carrying out their
medical duties”, according to DWB.
Humanitarian operations were suspended
from 15 to 21 May in the Northwest and
Southwest regions after armed separatist
groups called for lockdowns.
1. “Cameroon: End threats against activists who exposed violations and
abuses in Anglophone regions”, 7 July
2. “Cameroon: More than a hundred detainees from Anglophone regions
and opposition party languishing in jail for speaking out”, 24 January

CANADA
Canada
Head of state: Charles III (replaced Elizabeth II in
September), represented by Governor General Mary May
Simon
Head of government: Justin Trudeau
Marginalized groups faced intersecting
inequities, systemic discrimination and
barriers to the realization of their human

114

rights. The right to assembly was often
under threat, particularly for Indigenous
land defenders. Authorities failed to
mitigate the climate crisis.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In February, authorities invoked the
Emergencies Act to end the “Freedom
Convoy” blockade protest against Covid-19
vaccine mandates and restrictions in the
capital Ottawa. The Convoy was
characterized by incidents of racism,
violence, harassment, intimidation and hate
speech.1 On 25 April, the government
established a Public Order Emergency
Commission to examine the use of the Act.
On 3 November, the Ontario government
passed Bill 28 making it illegal for members
of the Canadian Union of Public Employees
(CUPE), including educational assistants,
school custodians, early childhood educators,
secretaries and other professionals to
exercise their constitutional right to proceed
with a planned strike. This was repealed on
14 November.2

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The Innu people of Pessamit condemned
climate change, forestry practices,
hydroelectric projects and colonial policies
threatening their traditional ways of life and
identity, including their cultural rights, which
should be included in any climate changes
plans.3
In April, Prime Minister Trudeau officially
acknowledged the role of the Catholic Church
and the government in creating, maintaining
and operating the residential school system,
which the House of Commons unanimously
recognized as genocide on 27 October.
On 1 June, 19 land defenders opposing
construction of pipelines on their lands were
charged with criminal contempt.4 On 22
June, Wet’suwet’en land defenders filed a
civil claim over surveillance, harassment and
intimidation against the minister of justice for
the province of British Columbia, three Royal
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) officers,
Forsythe Security and Coastal GasLink

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Pipeline Ltd. The case was ongoing at the
end of the year.
In September, a private company, Coastal
GasLink, began drilling on Wet’suwet’en
territory, despite opposition by Hereditary
Chiefs.5
On all issues, Indigenous Nations called for
Nation-to-Nation dialogue with provincial and
federal governments. However, authorities
failed to obtain the free, prior and informed
consent of Indigenous communities in
relation to resource extraction projects.

RIGHT TO WATER
Thirty-three long-term drinking water
advisories, issued when water is not known to
be safe, remained in effect at the end of the
year, affecting 29 First Nations communities.
In August, the territory of Nunavut declared a
state of emergency for the city of Iqaluit over
the shortage of water.
Following a class action lawsuit by several
First Nations, the 2013 Safe Drinking Water
for First Nations Act was repealed and the
authorities committed to introduce a new law
in consultation with First Nations.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In July, the Standing Senate Committee on
Human Rights acknowledged the
disproportionate impact of forced and
coerced sterilizations on Indigenous women,
Black and racialized women, and people with
disabilities. In November, research in Québec
confirmed that Indigenous women suffered
forced sterilizations and obstetric violence.
Gaps remained on disaggregated data
collection and accountability mechanisms for
implementation of the 2022 Progress Report
on the National Action Plan to End Violence
against Indigenous Women, Girls and Two
Spirit peoples. A new national action plan to
end gender-based violence was introduced in
November.
In October, a coalition of civil society
organizations representing transgender,
Indigenous and Black sex workers
challenged laws criminalizing sex work before
the Ontario Superior Court. A decision
remained pending.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In August, the government launched the first
“Federal 2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan”,
committing new funds prioritizing Black,
Indigenous and racialized civil society
organizations. Core recommendations for
health, employment and refugee support
were lacking, as were implementation details.

DISCRIMINATION
In April, the CERD Committee condemned
the criminalization of Secwepemc and
Wet’suwet’en land defenders by the federal
government, the province of British
Columbia, the RCMP’s Community-Industry
Response Group and private security firms.
In June, the Toronto Police Service reported
disproportionate use of force and strip
searches on racialized, particularly Black,
communities.
In October, the Québec Superior Court ruled
arbitrary traffic stops unconstitutional as they
are based on racial profiling. The Québec
government appealed this decision in
November, contradicting a commitment
made in 2020.
On 4 October, the federal government
sought to dismiss a class action lawsuit by
Black federal workers alleging systemic
discrimination in the public service. A
decision remained pending.
In November, the appeal of a Québec
Superior Court judge’s decision to uphold
most of Bill 21 banning the wearing of
religious symbols in certain public service
functions was heard by the Court of Appeal.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In May, the Québec Superior Court restored
access to subsidized childcare for refugee
claimant families, denied by the Québec
government since 2018. The Québec
government appealed this decision.
In June, the British Columbia government
announced it would end immigration
detention in its provincial jails, citing human
rights concerns. The provinces of Nova
Scotia, Alberta and Manitoba followed suit.
In August, the Ontario Superior Court
dismissed a motion to challenge Canada’s

115

denial of essential healthcare to migrants with
irregular status and refusal to compensate an
affected individual.
In October, the Supreme Court of Canada
heard a constitutional challenge of the Safe
Third Country Agreement, which prevents
most refugee claimants arriving at Canada’s
official land ports of entry from seeking
protection in Canada.
Disparities in refugee resettlement were
prevalent. Authorities committed to resettle
40,000 Afghans and increase sponsorship to
3,000 Afghan refugees. Authorization for
emergency travel and fee-exempt temporary
visitor visas were, however, open to an
unlimited number of Ukrainians.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Canada continued to have the highest rate of
greenhouse gas emission per capita of the
top 10 emitting countries and was among the
largest public finance providers for fossil
fuels.
A new NDC reduction of 40-45% below
2005 levels by 2030 and reaching net-zero
emissions by 2050 had been announced in
April 2021. This target fails to reflect
Canada’s level of responsibility and capacity
and will not keep the rise of global
temperatures below 1.5˚C.
Canada committed to doubling its climate
finance contribution to CAD 5.3 billion (USD
3.9 billion) over the next five years to support
international climate efforts in developing
countries. These commitments fall short of
Canada’s fair share of responsibility for the
climate crisis.
By 1 July, Export Development Canada had
financed CAD 3.4 billion (USD 2.5 billion) to
the oil and gas sector in Canada and abroad.

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Central African Republic
Head of state: Faustin Archange Touadéra
Head of government: Felix Moloua (replaced HenryMarie Dondra in February)
Human rights violations and abuses
continued in the context of the armed
conflict; dozens of civilians were killed
during attacks by all parties. Women and
girls were subjected to conflict-related
sexual violence. The Special Criminal Court
held its first trial and convicted three
people for crimes against humanity. At least
50% of the population faced food
insecurity; in some areas it reached 75%.
Several journalists faced intimidation,
harassment and threats. The death penalty
was abolished.

BACKGROUND

1. “Amnesty International Canada statement on ‘Freedom Convoy’
blockade”, 11 February

The security situation remained dire because
of the armed conflict between the armed
forces with their allies, and various armed
groups.
In March, the Republican Dialogue for
reconciliation, organized by the authorities,
was boycotted by the main opposition parties.
A constitutional reform project supported by
the government was viewed by some political
parties as a means to allow the president to
run for a third term. In September, the
constitutional court annulled the decree
establishing a government-appointed
committee to redraft the constitution. In the
same month, lawyers and magistrates held a
seven-day strike in support of independence
for the judiciary. In October, the constitutional
court’s president was removed from office.

2. “Amnesty International Canada welcomes repeal of ‘chilling’ Ontario
anti-strike bill”, 7 November

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS

3. Any Tidal Wave Could Drown Us – Stories from the Climate Crisis, 3
November
4. “Canada: Indigenous land defenders at risk”, 22 June
5. “Canada: Construction of pipeline on Indigenous territory endangers
land defenders”, 3 October

116

According to the UN Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), at least 100
civilians were killed between February and
March. In September at least 46 civilians

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

were killed including eight women and eight
children. They were killed by members of the
Union for Peace in the Central African
Republic and Return, Reclamation and
Rehabilitation (known as 3R), armed groups
that had signed the peace agreement in
2019, as well as by the security forces.
On 3 October, three MINUSCA
peacekeepers were killed, and one was
seriously injured by an improvised explosive
device (IED) in the Koui area. According to
OCHA, between January and October, 11
people were killed and 42 injured in 40 IEDrelated incidents.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 14 March, Maxime Jeoffroy Eli Mokom
Gawaka, a leader of the Anti-Balaka armed
group, was surrendered by the Chadian
authorities to the ICC.1 The opening of his
hearing to confirm the charges was
provisionally scheduled for 31 January 2023.
He is suspected of war crimes and crimes
against humanity carried out during 2013
and 2014 in the Central African Republic.
The ICC trial of Mahamat Said, alleged
commander of the Seleka armed group,
opened on 26 September under charges of
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The Court of Assizes in Bangui, the capital,
held its first criminal trials since 2020 in
April. Twenty-five cases were heard involving
alleged members of the armed group,
Coalition of Patriots for Change, who were
found guilty.
Also in April, the government announced
the opening of a judicial investigation into a
deadly attack against the Muslim community
in Boyo town which took place between 6
and 13 December 2021. In July, MINUSCA
published a report on the events in which at
least 20 civilians were killed, including a 12year-old girl and three boys, and at least 12
people were injured; 547 homes were burned
and food stocks looted. MINUSCA said the
attacks were carried out by the armed group,
Anti-Balaka, with the involvement of the
Central African Republic armed forces who
had trained the former in Bambari and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

transported them to the Boyo area the day
before the attack.
The first trial before the Special Criminal
Court (SCC), a UN-backed hybrid court
mandated to investigate and prosecute
crimes under international law committed
since 2003, opened in May.2 It concerned
three members of 3R accused of killings,
rapes and other inhumane acts committed in
the villages of Lemouna and Koundjili in May
2019. On 31 October, they were found guilty
of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The SCC also announced the arrest of three
people suspected of having committed
crimes in the context of the conflict. The
court said in its June report that it had issued
more than 60 arrest warrants, of which only
four had been executed.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
According to the Gender-Based Violence
Information Management System, between
January and September, 17,831 cases of
gender-based violence were registered, more
than all cases recorded in 2021. The
statistics related only to victims who agreed to
speak, which suggests the actual figures
might be far higher.
According to the UN Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in the Central African
Republic, MINUSCA documented 47 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence between
June and October in which it identified 70
victims, including 42 girls aged between two
and 17 years. It attributed responsibility for
the crimes to all parties to the conflict.

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the UN World Food Programme
(WFP), food insecurity worsened as a result
of the Covid-19 pandemic and the conflict in
Ukraine, which led to a rise in food prices. In
September, 50% of the population (around
2.2 million people) did not have enough to
eat. The situation was of particular concern in
the Bakouma, Koui, Ngaoundaye, Obo and
Zémio sub-prefectures where between 65%
and 75% of people were affected. The WFP
said that throughout the country 395,000

117

children under the age of five were
chronically malnourished.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists faced intimidation, harassment
and threats simply for exercising their right to
freedom of expression.
Ndeke Luka Radio officials said that on 26
September, the Ministry of Communication
informed them that the station might be
closed if the journalists continued to cover
the constitutional reform issue. In October,
the High Council of Communication (the
media regulator) denounced intimidation,
harassment and threats against journalists by
“political authorities”.

DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty was abolished under the
Law on the Abolition of the Death Penalty
which was passed by the National Assembly
on 27 May, and promulgated by the
president one month later. The last execution
in the country took place in 1981.
1. “Chad/Central African Republic: Maxime Jeoffroy Eli Mokom Gawaka
must face justice at the ICC”, 15 March
2. “Central African Republic: First-ever SCC trial ensures alleged war
criminals face justice”, 19 April

CHAD
Republic of Chad
Head of state: Mahamat Idriss Déby
Head of government: Saleh Kebzabo (replaced Albert
Pahimi Padacké in October)
The authorities used excessive force to
disperse peaceful protesters and violated
the right to freedom of assembly.
Government critics continued to be
arbitrarily detained. Dozens of people were
killed in attacks by armed groups or in
inter-communal violence. The Observatory
for the Promotion of Gender Equality and
Equity was created amid continued
violations of women’s and girls’ rights. More
than 2 million people faced food insecurity.

118

BACKGROUND
On 13 March, a year after the death of former
president Idriss Déby and the establishment
of the Transitional Military Council led by his
son, Mahamat Idriss Déby, a pre-dialogue
opened in Doha, Qatar, between the
government of Chad and several armed
groups with the aim of ensuring the
participation of the latter in a national
dialogue. In August, the national dialogue
was held in the Chadian capital, N’Djamena,
with participation from the government, civil
society and some of the armed groups. This
dialogue granted the extension of the
transitional period for two years and the
possibility for Mahamat Idriss Déby to run in
future elections.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In May, several events organized by the
opposition Wakit Tama platform to protest
against the military transition and the French
government’s foreign policy in Chad were
banned by the Ministry of Security on the
grounds of possible public disorder. The
movement also planned demonstrations for
the same purposes in August and September
during the inclusive national dialogue. These
were banned on the same grounds.
The law governing freedom of peaceful
assembly remained contrary to international
standards including the guidelines of the
African Commission on Human and Peoples’
Rights, which state that protests do not
require prior approval but, at most, prior
notification.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January a demonstration was held in the
town of Abéché to protest against the
planned appointment of a new canton chief
from the Bani Halba community in Abéché.
According to the NGO Chadian Convention
for the Defence of Human Rights, over a twoday period at least 13 protesters were killed
and 80 injured.1 On 25 January, a
government spokesperson denied the use of
firearms in a statement to the press. On 3
February, a government delegation visited
Abéché and acknowledged the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

disproportionate use of force. At least 212
people were also arrested, according to local
organizations. Some were reportedly illtreated before being released after five days
in detention without charge.
Security forces also used excessive force
targeting associations and the “Transformers”
political party, which challenged the
organization of the national dialogue in
N’Djamena. In early September, security
forces surrounded the headquarters of the
Transformers and fired tear gas. Human
rights defenders and the leader of the
Transformers reported that several
demonstrators were injured.
On 20 October, security forces used
excessive force during a demonstration
organized by several political parties and
associations to protest against the extension
of the transitional period. The government
announced that at least 50 people died and
300 were injured. A national commission of
inquiry was set up and a commission led by
the Economic Community of Central African
States began a separate investigation in
December.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In May, following dispersal of a demonstration
by the Wakit Tama platform, six of its leaders
were transferred to Moussoro prison, 300km
from N’Djamena.2 According to their lawyers,
their case should have fallen within the
jurisdiction of the Court of N’Djamena. The
Public Prosecutor announced that they were
being prosecuted for “gathering with a view
to disturbing public order, attacking property
and physical aggression”. Following a trial in
Moussoro, they were sentenced to a 12month suspended prison term each.
On 30 August a demonstration by the
“unemployed graduates” movement to
demand jobs in the civil service was also
dispersed by the police. According to the
movement’s leaders, several members were
injured during the dispersal. Several people
were arrested and released a few hours later.
In September at least 140 people who were
gathered in front of the office of the
Transformers party were arrested and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

released the same day. They were protesting
against the national dialogue and the security
forces’ surrounding of the building.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
Following the October demonstrations,
hundreds of people, including children, were
arrested and illegally transferred to Koro Toro,
500km from N’Djamena. In December, after
hearings held behind closed doors, which
were boycotted by the defendants’ lawyers,
262 defendants were sentenced to prison
terms ranging from two to three years; 80
defendants were given suspended sentences
ranging from one to two years, and 59
defendants were acquitted, according to the
public prosecutor.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
According to reports by the media and NGOs,
the armed group Islamic State’s West Africa
Province (ISWAP) continued to unlawfully kill
civilians in the Lake Chad area. In early
August, ISWAP fighters reportedly killed six
civilians in the village of Aborom. In
September ISWAP reportedly killed one
person and looted several homes in Baltram.
Alleged ISWAP fighters also killed five
civilians on a boat in Baga Sola in September.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Communal violence leading to killings
between individuals were recurrent during
the year. In February at least 10 people were
killed in inter-communal violence in the town
of Sandana. In May, violence in Danamadji
resulted in the deaths of six people. In
September, at least 17 people were killed in
Mangalmé. According to local NGOs, the
disputes originated from tensions between
herders and farmers over access to natural
resources, especially grazing land. On each
occasion the authorities announced
investigations and set up local dialogues to
resolve the conflicts.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In September, transitional president
Mahamat Idriss Déby wrote to the minister of

119

finance asking him to transfer CFA 10 billion
(USD 14.8 million) as the state’s contribution
to the fund to compensate the victims of
former president Hissène Habré’s regime.
Over 7,000 victims had been awarded CFA
82 billion (over USD 135 million) by the
Extraordinary African Chambers in 2017 in
the trial against Hissène Habré, and CFA 75
billion (nearly USD 124 million) by Chadian
courts in 2015 in the trial against former
agents of Hissène Habré’s regime, but they
had not received any compensation by the
end of the year.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
According to UNICEF, 67% of girls in Chad
were married before the age of 18 and 30%
before the age of 15, giving Chad one of the
highest rates of child marriage globally.
On 19 July, Chad created the Observatory
for the Promotion of Gender Equality and
Equity, with a mission to promote the
inclusion of measures for gender equality in
public policies.
In August, the Higher Council for Islamic
Affairs in Mangalmé, Guera region,
introduced a fine for people who refuse
marriage proposals. The Chadian League for
Women’s Rights denounced this measure as
promoting the forced marriage of girls.

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the Famine Early Warning
System, rising prices and fuel shortages
increased food insecurity. Conflicts between
farmers and herders also disrupted
agricultural production and seasonal herding.
According to OCHA, in July approximately
2.1 million people in Chad were food and
nutritionally insecure.
1. “Chad: One year after the establishment of the Transitional Military
Committee, freedom of peaceful assembly remains hampered”, 20
April (French only).
2. “Chad: Release detained opposition members and supporters” , 30
May (French only).

120

CHILE
Republic of Chile
Head of state and government: Gabriel Boric Font
(replaced Sebastián Piñera Echenique
in March)
Impunity persisted for human rights
violations committed during the mass
protests of 2019. Authorities created some
mechanisms to advance reparations for
victims. Human rights defenders continued
to be threatened and attacked. Proposed
reforms regarding rights to health and
sexual and reproductive rights remained
pending legislative proceedings at the end
of the year. Refugees and migrants
continued to face significant obstacles to
remaining in the country.

BACKGROUND
In September, citizens rejected by a large
majority a proposal for a new constitution that
would have strengthened protections for
economic, social, cultural and environmental
rights. Different political sectors committed to
initiate a new constituent process.
Northern and southern territories of the
country were under a prolonged state of
emergency for much of the year due to the
migration crisis and conflict between the
state and Mapuche people.
Chile ratified the Escazú Agreement in May.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE, AND RIGHT
TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
Some protests were registered, primarily in
the capital, Santiago. In some instances,
police responded with excessive use of force.
By the end of the year, the Public
Prosecutor’s Office had brought charges in
only 140 of the 10,938 complaints of human
rights violations by state officials relating to
the social upheavals in late 2019. The cases
resulted in 17 convictions and two acquittals.
A court convicted a former captain in the
Carabineros (National Police) of unlawful
coercion in connection with the injuries
sustained by Fabiola Campillai. She lost her

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

eyesight and senses of smell and taste after
police fired a tear gas canister in her face as
she was walking to a bus stop in November
2019.
A former police commander was charged in
connection with the case of Gustavo Gatica,
who was injured during the November 2019
protests and lost his eyesight; an investigation
in the case was ongoing.
A civilian court sentenced an army officer
convicted of the killing of Kevin Gómez in the
city of Coquimbo in October 2019 to five
years’ imprisonment.
The North Central Prosecutor’s Office
continued investigating high-ranking
members of the administration of former
president Sebastián Piñera for crimes against
humanity and torture and other ill-treatment
(“unlawful coercion” in the Chilean Criminal
Code). Among those under investigation were
members of the Carabineros high command
accused of responsibility for widespread
human rights violations and crimes under
international law during the 2019 social
crisis.
The government announced a Police
Reform Commission and a Consultative Unit
and a Comprehensive Agenda for Truth,
Justice and Reparation for victims of the
social crisis and established a Round-table
for Comprehensive Reparation to advance
the drafting of reparation policy and law.
The government announced a new
programme to provide reparation to the more
than 400 people who sustained eye trauma
during the protests, replacing the muchcriticized existing programme.
A court sentenced a Carabineros officer to
four years’ intensive probation for inflicting
eye trauma on a protester at a student march
in 2013.
Courts convicted 10 former military officers
in the “Quemados” case in which Rodrigo
Rojas de Negri and Carmen Gloria Quintana
were beaten and burned with fuel during a
protest in 1986; Rodrigo Rojas died of his
injuries.
The government launched a National
Search Plan for Disappeared Detainees to
determine the fate of more than 1,000 people

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

who were forcibly disappeared under the
regime of Augusto Pinochet (1973-1990).

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
People accused of alleged offences during
the 2019 mass protests remained in
detention. Many were acquitted due to lack
of evidence after long periods in preventive
detention; in some cases evidence was found
to have been fabricated. Protests demanding
their release continued during the year. An
amnesty law for those accused in relation to
the social protests in 2019 remained under
discussion in Congress. At the end of the
year, the government granted 13 pardons,
nearly all to people detained during the crisis.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES´ RIGHTS
A court convicted three Carabineros of
unlawful coercion and harassment for forcing
Mapuche children in Ercilla to strip during an
identity check in 2018.
A new trial was held into the death of Alex
Lemun, a Mapuche adolescent who was shot
by police in November 2002 in the commune
of Angol. The new trial followed an InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
decision in the case that Chile was
responsible for various human rights
violations. In November, a court sentenced a
colonel in the Carabineros to seven years in
prison in connection with the death.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The Ministry of Education announced a
Comprehensive Sexuality Education Bill but
failed to submit it to Congress.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Chile had one of the highest mortality rates
associated with Covid-19 in the Americas in
2022: 3,215 deaths per million inhabitants.
One of the new government’s electoral
promises was reform towards a universal
healthcare system.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Congress abolished the higher age of consent
for same-sex relationships. However,
congressional review of changes to the Anti-

121

Discrimination Law to address LGBTI rights
made little progress.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND
JOURNALISTS
Verónica Vilches, a defender of the right to
water in Petorca province, received new
death threats and the house of Lorena
Donaire, also a water defender from the same
province, was burned down in June.
Investigations into the incidents were
continuing at the end of the year.
During an International Workers’ Day
march, a female reporter from a community
television channel was shot by a civilian and
later died of her injuries.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
High levels of pollution affected the cities of
Quintero and Puchuncaví, Valparaíso Region,
resulting in critical public health risks several
times during the year. The authorities
announced the progressive closure of the
Ventanas smelter, the installation responsible
for some of the largest sulphur dioxide
emissions in the region.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to use unlawful preadmissibility practices to deny people access
to refugee status determination procedures.
Procedures were lengthy, lasting between two
and four years, and very few individuals were
recognized as refugees. Authorities restarted
the immediate expulsion of foreign nationals
without assessing whether they were in need
of international protection or the risks they
would face if expelled.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The National Committee for the Prevention of
Torture confirmed that human rights
violations had been committed at a
psychiatric hospital in the Valparaíso Region.
However, the Valparaíso Prosecutor’s Office
requested the definitive dismissal of the
investigation.

122

CHINA
People’s Republic of China
Head of state: Xi Jinping
Head of government: Li Keqiang
Severe Covid-19 restrictions in some cases
undermined the right to health and
adequate food. The government continued
to stifle criticism of its policies and actions
and discussion of topics considered
sensitive through increasingly pervasive
online censorship. Government critics,
human rights defenders, pro-democracy
activists and religious leaders and
practitioners were among those subjected to
arbitrary arrest and detention. Systematic
repression of ethnic minorities in Xinjiang
and Tibet continued. Authorities attempted
to prevent the publication of an OHCHR
report documenting potential crimes against
humanity and other international crimes in
Xinjiang. Women continued to endure
sexual violence and harassment and other
violations of their rights. The Hong Kong
government continued its crackdown
against the pro-democracy movement.
Journalists, broadcasters and book
publishers were among those prosecuted
and imprisoned under the National Security
Law and other repressive legislation, while
civil society organizations both in Hong
Kong and abroad faced criminal charges or
harassment for legitimate activities. Despite
some positive policy commitments,
including to increased use of renewables,
China’s CO2 reduction targets were rated as
“highly insufficient” and coal production
increased.

BACKGROUND
The government maintained its “zero-Covid
policy” for most of the year involving
widespread lockdowns and mandatory
quarantine. Localized protests against the
harsh restrictions intensified from midNovember. Demonstrations spread to at least
20 cities following an apartment block fire in
Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang Uyghur

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Autonomous Region (Xinjiang), on 24
November in which at least 10 people died.
The authorities denied that locked doors had
prevented residents from escaping but
announced the easing of Covid-19
restrictions following this incident.
In May, the then UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, conducted
a six-day mission to China that included two
days in Xinjiang. In June, 42 UN
independent human rights experts called on
the Chinese government to grant unhindered
access to UN special procedures and
mechanisms to assess allegations of serious
human rights violations in the country,
especially in Xinjiang, Tibet and Hong Kong.
In August, the government ratified ILO
Conventions 29 on forced labour and 105 on
the abolition of forced labour.
In October, President Xi Jinping’s third term
as General Secretary of the Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) was announced at
the Party’s 20th National Congress, raising
fears that the human rights situation would
continue to deteriorate following a decade of
escalating repression under his leadership.
China hosted the Winter Olympic Games in
February.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
There were reports of food shortages and
delayed or denied access to emergency
healthcare in areas under lockdown. An
unknown number of people died after being
refused hospital admission. Conditions in
quarantine facilities, where those who tested
positive for Covid-19 were detained, were
often poor and unhygienic. In some cases,
children were separated from their parents in
quarantine.
On 7 December, the central government
announced significant easing of restrictions
and on 26 December said that most
elements of the “zero-Covid policy” would be
substantially dismantled from 8 January
2023. Covid-19 infections and deaths
subsequently rose and there were reports
from multiple cities of hospitals under
extreme pressure and of acute shortages of
medications.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Online censorship grew more pervasive and
sophisticated as a tool to stifle criticism of the
government, intensifying around high-profile
events and anniversaries.
The authorities failed to deliver on
assurances made as hosts of the Winter
Olympic Games to guarantee media freedom
before and during the Games and ensure
opportunities for peaceful protest. Prior to the
Games, they warned athletes against “any
behaviour or speeches” that violated
“Chinese laws and regulations”. High-profile
dissidents were censored and had their
movements restricted. Journalists accredited
to the Games reported repeated government
interference in coverage of preparations for
the event and in interviews with athletes and
local people both in and outside Olympic
venues.
Authorities intensified their efforts to prevent
criticism of lockdown measures on social
media, including appeals for help by those
under lockdown and allegations of human
rights violations in quarantine facilities.
Authorities manipulated the Covid-19 health
status phone app that was required to enter
public buildings and shops and use public
transport or travel, to unduly restrict freedom
of movement and peaceful assembly. In
Henan province during demonstrations
against the freezing of deposits by local
banks in June, there were widespread reports
of the app suddenly communicating a redcode alert requiring users to quarantine for
14 days. Five local officials subsequently
received administrative sanctions for
manipulating the app.
In September, in the lead-up to the CCP
National Congress, the authority responsible
for regulating cyberspace in China launched
a three-month purge of internet “rumours
and fake news”, calling for tech companies to
redouble monitoring, tracing, bans and
suspensions against account holders. New
attempts to block censorship circumvention
tools such as Virtual Private Networks (VPN)
were also reported.

123

On 13 October, police arrested Peng Lifa
after he unfurled banners on a bridge in the
capital, Beijing, during the CCP National
Congress criticizing the government’s “zeroCovid” policy and calling President Xi a
dictator. Images of the protest went viral
internationally but all footage and keywords
were removed from Chinese social media
platforms. There were reports that authorities
had arrested some people for reposting
images of the protest.
Large numbers of people were detained for
participating in peaceful protests against
Covid-19 restrictions following the fatal
apartment fire in Urumqi in November. It was
unclear how many remained in detention at
the end of the year. Videos circulated online
showed police beating protesters during
arrests.
All discussion and commemoration of the
victims of the suppression of the 1989 prodemocracy protests remained banned. On
the eve of the 4 June anniversary of the
military crackdown on protesters in
Tiananmen Square, a well-known influencer’s
livestream was taken down, apparently
because it featured an ice cream sculpture
resembling a tank.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Authorities continued to imprison human
rights defenders, including citizen journalists
and human rights lawyers. Those detained
were held in harsh conditions and subjected
to torture and other ill-treatment.
On 1 March, human rights lawyer Yu
Wensheng was released after completing a
four-year prison sentence for “subverting
state power” apparently for criticizing the
president. Yu Wensheng said he was peppersprayed, forced to sit on a metal chair until
he partially lost consciousness and denied
adequate food during his pretrial detention.1
In January, citizen journalist Zhang Zhan,
who was sentenced to four years’
imprisonment in 2020 for “picking quarrels
and provoking trouble” after reporting on the
Covid-19 outbreak, ended her hunger strike
to stop the authorities from further forcefeeding. It was unclear if Zhang Zhan, whose

124

health had deteriorated during her hunger
strike, was permitted access to appropriate
medical care.2
In April, there were reports of serious
deterioration in the health of Huang Qi, the
imprisoned founder and director of the
Sichuan-based human rights website “64
Tianwang”. Huang Qi, who was serving a 12year prison sentence for his human rights
reporting, reportedly did not have access to
adequate medical care and was denied
access to a bank account where friends and
family had deposited money for him to
purchase medical and other supplies. He
had been refused all contact with his family
since 2020.3
Many lawyers remained in prison or under
strict surveillance. They included legal
scholar Xu Zhiyong and human rights lawyer
Ding Jiaxi, who were tried in secret in June
after being indicted for “subversion of state
power” in October 2021. The two men were
prominent members of the New Citizens’
Movement, a network of activists set up to
promote government transparency and
expose corruption. Neither had access to
lawyers in the months prior to their trials.4
In April, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention called on the Chinese authorities to
immediately release labour activist Wang
Jianbing. He was detained in Guangzhou in
September 2021, along with #MeToo activist
Sophia Huang Xueqin, and charged with
“inciting subversion of state power” in
connection with their participation in private
gatherings in Wang Jianbing’s house to
discuss shrinking civil society space.5 Both
were held in incommunicado detention and
subjected to ill-treatment following their
arrest.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Harassment and imprisonment of individuals
for practising their religion or beliefs
continued. Religious leaders and
practitioners, including those belonging to
house churches, Uyghur imams, Tibetan
Buddhist monks and Falun Gong members,
were among those subjected to arbitrary
arrest and detention during 2022.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ETHNIC AUTONOMOUS REGIONS
Systematic repression of ethnic minorities in
Xinjiang and Tibet continued under the guise
of “anti-separatism”, “anti-extremism” and
“counterterrorism”. Access to both regions
was highly restricted, making human rights
documentation and reporting virtually
impossible. Pervasive surveillance prevented
those living there from sharing information
about human rights violations.
XINJIANG
The government continued to implement farreaching policies that severely restricted the
freedoms of Uyghurs, Kazakhs and those
from other predominantly Muslim ethnic
minority groups in Xinjiang, which threatened
to erase their religious and cultural identities.
During their visit to the region in May, the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
and her team were not permitted to visit
detainees or their families and were
accompanied by state officials at all times.
Having failed to acknowledge the serious
human rights violations in the country during
the mission, in August OHCHR released a
long-awaited report reinforcing previous
findings by Amnesty International and others
that the extent of arbitrary and discriminatory
detention of Uyghurs and others in Xinjiang
may constitute international crimes, in
particular crimes against humanity. It also
documented allegations of torture or other illtreatment, incidents of sexual and genderbased violence, forced labour and enforced
disappearances, among other grave human
rights violations.
The Chinese government sought to
suppress the report, including by mobilizing
other governments to lobby against its
publication. Despite the findings, and calls by
dozens of UN independent experts for the
UN Human Rights Council to convene a
special session on China, on 6 October the
Council voted to reject a resolution to hold a
debate on Xinjiang at its next session.6
In November, the CERD Committee called
on the Chinese government to immediately
investigate all allegations of human rights
violations and release all individuals arbitrarily
deprived of their liberty in Xinjiang. Despite

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

government claims that internment camps
they called “training” or “education” centres
had been closed, many thousands of men
and women were still believed to be arbitrarily
detained in internment camps, prisons or
other facilities where political indoctrination,
physical and psychological torture and other
forms of ill-treatment were widely reported.
Chinese authorities continued to target
Uyghurs and other Xinjiang residents who
spent time overseas and continued to
pressure other governments to return
Uyghurs living abroad back to China.
In June, authorities informed the family of
25-year-old Uyghur student Zulyar Yasin that
he would be sentenced to up to five years’
imprisonment for “separatism”. Zulyar Yasin,
who had spent two years in Türkiye studying
finance at Istanbul University, was detained
in December 2021 and was scheduled to go
on trial on 28 June, although this was
postponed on two occasions due to Covid-19
lockdowns and eventually rescheduled for
early 2023.7
Four Uyghurs faced deportation from Saudi
Arabia to China where they were at risk of
serious human rights violations. Saudi
authorities detained Buheliqiemu Abula and
her 13-year-old daughter on 31 March.
Buheliqiemu Abula’s former husband
Nuermaimaiti Ruze and religious scholar
Aimidoula Waili had been detained without
charge since November 2020. Aimidoula
Waili was previously imprisoned in China
from 2013 to 2016, and told Amnesty
International he was repeatedly tortured while
in detention.8
Idris Hasan, a Uyghur computer designer
who was arrested in Morocco in July 2021,
remained in detention and at risk of forcible
return to China. This was despite Interpol’s
cancellation of the “red notice”, which
formed the basis for his arrest, and appeals
to the Moroccan authorities by the UN
Committee against Torture and other special
procedures not to extradite him.9
TIBET
Ethnic Tibetans continued to face
discrimination and restrictions on their rights
to freedom of religion and belief, expression,

125

association and peaceful assembly. Protests
against Chinese government repression
nevertheless continued.
In September, the Kardze Intermediate
People’s Court in Sichuan sentenced six
Tibetan writers and activists to prison terms of
between four and 14 years for “inciting
separatism” and “endangering state
security”. Gangkye Drupa Kyab, Seynam,
Gangbu Yudrum, Tsering Dolma and Samdup
were detained in March or April 2021. Pema
Rinchen was detained in late 2020 and held
incommunicado until his trial. All six had
been arbitrarily detained in the past in
connection with their writings or protests
against the Chinese authorities and several
suffered from health complications as a result
of beatings, poor detention conditions and
other ill-treatment experienced at the time.
Tibetan monk Rinchen Tsultrim continued
to be denied any contact with his family and
access to lawyers despite repeated requests
by his family to visit him since his detention
in August 2019. He was sentenced to fourand-a-half years’ imprisonment in November
2020 following an unfair trial.

DEATH PENALTY
China remained the world’s leading
executioner, although the government
continued to classify statistics for executions
and death sentences as “state secrets”. The
death penalty remained applicable for 46
offences, including non-lethal offences that
do not meet the threshold of the “most
serious crimes” under international law and
standards.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
On 30 October, the country’s top legislature
adopted the amended Law on the Protection
of Women’s Rights and Interests. Due to take
effect on 1 January 2023, the revised law
includes new provisions to strengthen
protection for women in the workplace
including requirements on employers to
eliminate gender discrimination in hiring
processes and to prevent sexual harassment
in the workplace.

126

Violence against women including sexual
violence and sexual harassment remained
widespread, and authorities censored public
discussion around it.
Authorities quickly censored discussions
about, and banned social media sites from
sharing footage of an incident in June that
was caught on CCTV of a group of men
physically assaulting several women in a
restaurant in Tangshan, Hebei province.
Twenty-eight people were sentenced to prison
terms for their role in the attack. Mao Huibin,
a journalist who posted the footage and an
article about the incident, was arrested in
July and faced up to five years in prison for
“picking quarrels and provoking trouble”.
In August, Haidian District People’s Court
dismissed an appeal by Zhou Xiaoxuan
against a court ruling rejecting her request for
an apology and damages against a wellknown state TV host, Zhu Jun, for groping
and forcibly kissing her when she was an
intern at the TV station in 2014. Zhou
Xiaoxuan’s public stance against sexual
harassment resulted in her being the target of
online bullying and state censorship.
In January, a video showing a woman in
poor mental and physical health chained in
an outhouse in Xuzhou in Jiangsu province
went viral, sparking public outrage in China.
At least four activists were arrested for
investigating and publicizing the case and for
supporting the woman who they suspected
was a victim of human trafficking, but which
local authorities initially denied. One, Wu Yi,
was known to have been tried in secret for
“picking quarrels and provoking trouble” but
details of her sentence and whereabouts
were unknown. According to media reports in
February, 17 local officials had been
punished or were being investigated in
relation to the case. In March, the Ministry of
Public Security announced a one-year
campaign to investigate trafficking of women
and children.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Both off- and online LGBTI activism was
severely restricted. Dozens of social media
accounts of LGBTI groups remained closed

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

due to pervasive censorship. The authorities
also censored TV programmes and films,
removing LGBTI-related content.
In July, Tsinghua University in Beijing issued
official warning letters to two students for
“distributing unauthorized promotional
materials” after they were tracked by
surveillance cameras leaving rainbow flags on
the campus. In November, the Beijing
Municipal Education Commission endorsed
the university’s action against the students.
Authorities censored online discussions of
the incident.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Under its NDC submitted in 2021, China
committed to reduce CO2 emission intensity
by over 65% before 2030 from 2005 levels,
to reach peak carbon emissions by 2030 and
achieve carbon neutrality “before 2060”. In
November, China’s targets, policies and
actions were given a rating of “highly
insufficient” by the Climate Action Tracker, a
consortium providing global scientific
analysis, because they were not consistent
with limiting warming to the 1.5°C
temperature limit.
In March, the government published a new
policy document on the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI), an infrastructure project
covering 72 countries. The document
reaffirmed that no new coal power plants
would be built under the BRI and that it
would “proceed with caution” on coal power
projects already underway.
New domestic renewable targets were
issued in 2022 which aimed to increase
electricity generation from renewable sources
by approximately 35% by 2025 from 2020
levels. However, domestic production of coal
increased despite commitments to control
coal consumption until 2025 and start to
gradually phase it down thereafter.

HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE
REGION
The Hong Kong authorities continued their
crackdown against pro-democracy activists,
journalists, human rights defenders and
others. The 2020 National Security Law

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

(NSL) and other repressive laws were widely
used to target people exercising their rights to
freedom of expression, peaceful assembly
and association. The UN Human Rights
Committee urged the Hong Kong government
to repeal the NSL and sedition provisions of
the Crime Ordinance, and in the meantime to
refrain from applying them.
In July, John Lee, former Hong Kong
security chief who oversaw the police
crackdown on the 2019 protests and the
implementation of the NSL, took over as
Chief Executive of Hong Kong, having been
selected by the central government in Beijing
as the sole candidate in the May elections.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND ASSEMBLY
At least 11 people were sentenced to terms
of imprisonment during the year under
colonial-era sedition laws for exercising their
right to peaceful expression.
In September, five speech therapists were
sentenced to 19 months’ imprisonment each
after being found guilty of sedition for
publishing children’s books depicting the
government’s crackdown on 2019 prodemocracy protests and other issues.10
In October, radio show host and public
affairs commentator Edmund Wan (known as
Giggs) was sentenced to 32 months in prison
for “sedition” and “money laundering” for
criticizing the government and raising funds
for school fees for young Hong Kong activists
who had fled to Taiwan after the 2019
protests. Giggs, who was detained for 19
months prior to his conviction, was released
on 18 November but was required to hand
over fundraising proceeds to the government.
Political activists, journalists, human rights
defenders and others charged under the NSL
were held for prolonged pretrial detention. As
of 31 October, at least 230 people had been
arrested under the NSL since its enactment
in 2020.
The space for peaceful protest remained
highly restricted and those who participated
in demonstrations or encouraged others to do
so risked prosecution. In January, Chow
Hang-tung was convicted of “inciting others
to take part in an unauthorized assembly”
and sentenced to 15 months’ imprisonment

127

after publishing a social media post in 2021
encouraging people to commemorate the
1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown. In
December, Chow Hang-tung won her appeal
against that conviction, but remained in
prison awaiting trial on similar charges under
the NSL for which she faced up to 10 years’
imprisonment.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Authorities continued to criminalize or
otherwise prevent legitimate civil society
activities. Repressive legislation, including the
NSL and Societies Ordinance, which gave
excessive powers to the police to refuse,
cancel the registration of or prohibit a society,
were used with chilling effects on civil society
organizations. More than 100 civil society
organizations had been forced to disband or
relocate since the enactment of the NSL in
July 2020.
Restrictions were imposed on smaller, more
informal groups. In June, police reportedly
delivered letters to at least five
representatives of small civil society groups,
including informal Facebook groups and
religious networks, warning them to register
or risk violating the Societies Ordinance.
Five former trustees of the 612
Humanitarian Relief Support Fund, set up to
assist participants in the 2019 protests with
legal fees and other costs but which closed in
2021, were arrested in May, as well as the
former secretary in November, for “colluding
with foreign forces” under the NSL. They
faced up to 10 years’ imprisonment. In
December, all six were found guilty of failing
to register the fund under the Societies
Ordinance and fined between HKD
2,500 and 4,000 each (approximately USD
321-513).
Attacks on groups operating outside Hong
Kong also expanded. In March, the National
Security Police sent a letter to the Chief
Executive of a UK-based organization, Hong
Kong Watch, accusing the group of
“jeopardizing national security” by “lobbying
foreign countries to impose sanctions” and
engaging in “other hostile activities”. The
group was accused of violating Article 29 of
the NSL which criminalizes “collusion with

128

foreign forces” and asserts extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Police also blocked Hong Kong
Watch’s website in Hong Kong.
Civil society organizations exercised selfcensorship in order to be able to operate and
raise funds. Local payment and
crowdfunding platforms suspended the
fundraising accounts of two groups. One of
the platforms told a group that it had taken
this action because of the “excessive risks
involved” in hosting the account. In a
separate case, three activists who had sued
the Hong Kong police for ill-treatment during
a land rights protest in 2014 reported that
their account on an international
crowdfunding platform had been removed
because it was considered too high risk for
the company.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Hong Kong government made no
progress towards drafting a genderrecognition law despite having established an
inter-departmental working group on gender
recognition in 2014 and carrying out a
consultation in 2017.
1. “China: Lawyer Yu Wensheng must be granted true freedom after
unjust imprisonment”, 28 February
2. “China: Covid-19 journalist still needs medical attention: Zhang
Zhan”, 3 March
3. “China: No access to family and proper medical care: Huang Qi”, 29
April
4. “China: Unfair trials of prominent activists an attack of freedom of
association”, 21 June
5. “China: Activists charged with subversion: Sophia Huang Xueqin and
Wang Jianbing”, 19 May
6. “China: Xinjiang vote failure betrays core mission of UN Human
Rights Council”, 6 October
7. “China: Uyghur student facing trial highlights government push to
jail Muslims”, 27 June
8. “Saudi Arabia: Uyghur teenage girl and mother detained:
Buheliqiemu Abula, Nuermaimaiti Ruze, Aimidoula Waili”, 6 April
9. “Morocco and Western Sahara: Ethnic Uyghur at risk of extradition to
China: Idris Hasan”, 2 March
10. “Hong Kong: Conviction of children’s book publishers an absurd
example of unrelenting repression”, 7 September

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

COLOMBIA
Republic of Colombia
Head of state and government: Gustavo Petro
(replaced Iván Duque Márquez in August)
Human rights defenders continued to face
attacks, threats and harassment because of
their work; defenders of the land, territory
and environment were particularly at risk.
Killings and threats targeting former
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia –
Army of the People (FARC-EP) combatants
persisted. Attacks on media workers and
outlets continued, threatening freedom of
expression. Excessive and unnecessary use
of force by state officials was reported.
Indigenous leaders and defenders were
attacked and killed and, in areas where
armed opposition groups continued to
operate, Indigenous and Afro-descendant
communities were forcibly displaced and
some faced humanitarian crises. A final
report by the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission acknowledged that violations of
reproductive rights had been committed
during the decades-long armed conflict
(1964-2016). Several former army
members, civilians and former FARC-EP
commanders were charged with crimes
against humanity and war crimes
committed during the conflict before the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP).
Abortion was decriminalized. Attacks on
LGBTI people continued. Gender-based
violence persisted and survivors faced
ongoing barriers to accessing justice, truth
and reparation. Venezuelan refugee women
faced violence and discrimination on
grounds of nationality and gender.

BACKGROUND
Parliamentary elections were held on 13
March. Some seats in parliament were
reserved for former FARC-EP combatants
and for victims of the armed conflict, as
stipulated in the 2016 Peace Agreement.
In June, the Colombian Truth Commission
released its final report, highlighting the need

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

to address historic inequalities,
discrimination, racism, gender-based
violence, violence against Indigenous peoples
and Afro-descendants and to guarantee the
rights to truth, justice and reparation of
victims of the armed conflict.
Gustavo Petro, former mayor of Bogotá and
former M-19 guerrilla fighter, won the
presidential election and began his four-year
term in August. He was accompanied by
Francia Márquez, environmental defender
and the country’s first Black woman vice
president.
In August, authorities recognized the
competence of the UN Committee on
Enforced Disappearances to receive and
examine individual complaints regarding
victims of enforced disappearance. In
September, Colombia also ratified the InterAmerican Convention on the Protection of
Human Rights of Older Persons. In October,
Congress approved the Escazú Agreement.
President Petro restored diplomatic relations
with Venezuela and in September some
border operations between the two countries
were re-established.
In October, President Petro reinstalled and
reinitiated meetings of the National
Commission for Security Guarantees,
established by the Peace Agreement to
create a public policy for dismantling armed
groups.
In October, the Colombian government and
the National Liberation Army (ELN)
recommenced peace talks and proposed a
“multilateral ceasefire”. The government also
explored negotiations with other armed actors
in the context of a “total peace“ policy.
Colombia is one of the South American
countries with the highest recurrence of
extreme weather events. Approximately 84%
of its population is exposed to multiple
environmental hazards. According to the
Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and
Environmental Studies of Colombia (IDEAM),
coastal and insular areas are most sensitive
to climate change, as well as high mountain
ecosystems.

129

RIGHTS TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, the Constitutional Court declared
an unconstitutional state of affairs due to the
constant and massive violations of
fundamental rights to life, physical integrity
and security of former FARC-EP combatants.
The Institute of Studies for Development and
Peace (INDEPAZ), a civil society organization,
reported 42 killings of former combatants
during the year. The UN Security Council
stressed its concern regarding the persistent
threats, attacks and killings targeting former
FARC-EP combatants who had signed the
Peace Agreement.
According to the Kroc Institute, compliance
with the 2016 Peace Agreement between
FARC-EP and the Colombian state remained
slow, particularly regarding the
implementation of ethnic and gender-based
approaches. The Institute reported that 37%
of the Agreement’s provisions had been
minimally implemented and 15% uninitiated.
From January to December, the Unit for the
Search for Persons Deemed as Missing
(UBPD) recovered 185 bodies of people
reported missing in the context of the armed
conflict, in regions such as Antioquia,
Santander and Sucre. In June, the UBPD
also reported it had handed the remains of
167 victims back to their families and loved
ones since its creation in 2017.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In May, the Foundation for Press Freedom
(FLIP) expressed alarm at the arbitrary
detention of journalists Luis Ángel and Luna
Mendoza, who were covering the high-profile
murder of Paraguayan prosecutor Marcelo
Pecci near the city of Cartagena.
In May, media outlets in Antioquia and
Córdoba departments received death threats
in the context of an armed strike declared by
the paramilitary group the Gaitanista SelfDefence Forces of Colombia (AGC – also
known as the Gulf Clan).
In July, the Colombian Council of State
declared the state responsible for
psychological torture, threats, persecution,
exile and illegal interception in the case of

130

journalist Claudia Julieta Duque and her
family between 2001 and 2010.
In August, journalists Leiner Montero and
Dilia Contreras were killed in Magdalena
department. According to FLIP, the killings
were related to their journalistic work.
In September, FLIP reported threats against
Telemundo journalists covering the Darien
Gap migration route.
As of September, FLIP had reported 595
violations of freedom of expression against
journalists, including two cases of sexual
violence. In the first five months of the year,
FLIP reported a 59% increase in threats
against media workers covering the electoral
process compared with 2018.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
In May, Indigenous leader Luis Tombé was
shot dead in the context of an environmental
protest in the town of Miranda, Cauca
department, when members of the Mobile
Anti-Riot Squad (ESMAD) opened fire on
protesters calling for the release of fellow
demonstrators held by police.
In June, civil society platform Campaña
Defender la Libertad criticized ESMAD’s
excessive use of force against protesters,
which resulted in one person sustaining eye
trauma at Distrital University in Bogotá.
Protesters were calling for more resources
and improved infrastructure for the university.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
According to Campaña Defender la Libertad,
arbitrary detentions by state security forces
increased between March and June, in the
context of the upcoming elections.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Killings and threats targeting Indigenous
leaders and defenders continued.
In January, the Totoroez Indigenous people
reported the killing of Albeiro Camayo, a
member of the Indigenous Guard, by FARCEP dissidents in Cauca department.
In February, the National Indigenous
Organization of Colombia (ONIC) reported the
killing of Julio César Bravo, a human rights

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

defender and leader of the Pastos people in
Nariño department.
ELN combatants in Chocó department killed
Luis Chamapuro, a member of the Wounan
people, in February.
Also in February, Dilson Arbey Borja, an
Indigenous leader, human rights defender
and member of the Indigenous Guard, was
killed in the city of Turbo, Antioquia
department.
The OHCHR condemned the killing of Miller
Correa in March, in the context of constant
threats against his community and its
leaders. Miller Correa was a human rights
defender and member of the Nasa people in
Cauca department.
In September, two Wayuu Indigenous
infants died of malnutrition in the northern
region of La Guajira, taking the death toll
among young children there to 39 since
January. On 6 September, the
Ombudsperson’s Office issued a public
warning asking the government to take action
to address the humanitarian situation in the
region.
In June, at least 100 Indigenous people
from Alto Andagueda reserve in Chocó were
forcibly displaced following clashes between
state security forces and illegal armed
groups.
Indigenous organizations in Chocó
highlighted the risk of displacement faced by
Emberá Indigenous families due to the
presence of illegal armed groups in Chocó in
the Jurubida Chori Alto Baudó reserve.
In September, Awá peoples highlighted the
continuing humanitarian crisis and violence
affecting them because of the presence of
illegal armed actors on Indigenous reserves
in Nariño and Putumayo departments.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In July, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
(JEP) announced the opening of Case 11,
relating to sexual violence, grave violations of
reproductive rights and violence motivated by
the sexual orientation and/or gender identity
of the victims in the context of the armed
conflict.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The Feminicides Observatory reported that
there were 557 feminicides in 2022.
Victims of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence, by state officials in the
context of the 2021 national strike faced
continuing obstacles in accessing justice and
reparation.1

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A ruling by the Constitutional Court in
February decriminalized abortion up to the
24th week of pregnancy. The historic
decision came in response to a lawsuit filed
by the Causa Justa movement.
The Truth Commission’s final report
recognized that grave violations of
reproductive rights, including forced
abortions, forced sterilizations and forced
contraception, had occurred in the context of
the armed conflict. The report recommended
that the state avoid restarting aerial
fumigation programmes to eradicate illicit
crops using the herbicide glyphosate as it has
negative effects on people’s reproductive
health.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
According to the NGO Caribe Afirmativo,
between January and July, 15 gay men were
killed and LGBTI people faced heightened
risks in the city of Medellín.
The JEP opened an investigation (Case 7)
into sexual crimes and discrimination against
forcibly recruited LGBTI children and
adolescents during the armed conflict.
The Constitutional Court recognized a nonbinary gender marker for ID registration,
establishing legal precedent for gender
diversity.
In March, lesbian rights defender Paola
Andrea Jaraba Martínez faced violence and
threats, allegedly related to her sexual
orientation and work in Córdoba department.
According to the NGO Trans Action and
Support Group (GAAT), between January and
August, 16 trans women were killed in
Colombia.

131

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to face
attacks, threats and harassment because of
their work. Defenders of the land, territory
and environment were particularly at risk.
In February, several human rights defenders
in the Magdalena Medio region were targeted
in a pamphlet circulated by an armed group
calling itself the United Self-defence Forces
of Colombia. The pamphlet referred to
human rights defenders as military targets
and gave them and their families 48 hours to
leave the area or face the consequences.
Targeted defenders included Carolina Agón
Ramón Abril. Ten days later, Yuvelis Natalia
Morales, a 21-year-old environmental
defender, was forced to flee Colombia after
her home was broken into.
In May, unidentified people shot at four
environmental defenders belonging to the
Federation of Santander Fishers for Tourism
and Environment (FEDESPAN), an
environmental organization which operates in
the city of Barrancabermeja, and assesses
possible environmental damage in the
Magdalena Medio region.
In July, Yuli Velásquez, president of
FEDEPESAN, was the victim of an armed
attack in which her bodyguard was injured.2
In August, the minister of the interior
installed the first Unified Command Point for
Life in Caldono municipality, Cauca
department. The aim of this space, and
similar spaces that followed in other regions,
was to listen to the demands and concerns of
communities and protect the lives of social
leaders, human rights defenders and others
at risk.
According to the NGO Programa Somos
Defensores, between January and September
there were 621 attacks targeting human
rights defenders.
INDEPAZ recorded the killings of 189 social
leaders and human rights defenders in 2022.

FORCED DISPLACEMENT
OCHA reported that from January to July,
there were 220 humanitarian emergencies
relating to confinement (meaning people
were forced to stay in their territories because

132

of the armed conflict and had limited access
to food, drinking water and basic services)
and forced displacement, affecting at least
249,106 people, mainly in the pacific region
and near the Venezuela-Colombia border.
In January, clashes broke out between
FARC-EP dissidents and the ELN in Arauca,
forcibly displacing 3,860 people.
In May, 7,989 people were prevented by
non-state armed groups from leaving their
homes or moving freely in the zones of Nóvita
and San José del Palmar in Chocó.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Between January and June, the ICRC
recorded 377 victims of explosive hazards,
including anti-personnel mines and explosive
remnants of war, in 16 departments. Cauca,
Antioquia, Arauca, Norte de Santander and
Meta were the most affected departments.
According to the human rights NGO
Attorneys Collective José Alvear Restrepo
(CAJAR), on 28 March, 11 people were
extrajudicially executed during a military
incursion in the Puerto Leguízamo
municipality, Putumayo department.
The National Ombudsperson issued an alert
over the presence of the paramilitary group
Border Command in Caquetá region and the
grave risk to the lives and physical integrity of
civil society leaders and former FARC-EP
combatants.
On 5 May, the AGC imposed a four-day
curfew across 10 departments in northern
Colombia, following the announcement of the
decision to extradite its commander “Otoniel”
to the USA. During this so-called armed
strike, at least 127 acts of violence were
reported in 73 municipalities, including four
killings, five death threats, 36 cases of
restriction of movement and one case of
torture and another of kidnapping.
In May, Afro-descendant communities
reported armed clashes in Istmina, Sipí,
Nóvita, Medio San Juan and Litoral del San
Juan in Chocó department, resulting in
collective forced displacements and the
confinement of several Black communities.
In June, unidentified armed actors killed

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Jesusita Moreno and Rómulo Angulo López,
members of Malaguita Afro-descendant
collective territory, in Bajo San Juan, Chocó
department.
As of 1 December, INDEPAZ reported that
91 massacres (that is, killings of three or
more people at the same time and place and
by the same alleged perpetrator) had resulted
in the deaths of 289 people.

IMPUNITY
On 18 February, the JEP announced the
opening of new cases on the responsibility of
FARC-EP combatants for sexual violence,
forced displacement and enforced
disappearances and other crimes committed
by state security forces and officials in
coordination with paramilitary groups; and
crimes against ethnic communities and
territories.
By the end of the year, the JEP had charged
79 former army members (including
officials), four civilians and one former
intelligence agent with crimes against
humanity and war crimes in relation to
extrajudicial killings and enforced
disappearances in Norte de Santander, the
Caribbean Coast, Casanare and Antioquia
departments. The JEP also charged eight
former high-ranking FARC-EP commanders
with crimes against humanity and war crimes
in the context of a policy of kidnapping and
hostage-taking, among other crimes.
In September, former FARC-EP combatants
accepted responsibility for homicides, forced
displacement, forced recruitment and other
crimes against civilians in Northern Cauca.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June, UNICEF declared that the number of
children crossing the Darién Gap between
Colombia and Panama had reached more
than 5,000 since the beginning of 2022,
twice the number recorded for the same
period in 2021.
Authorities stated that 2,477,000
Venezuelans were living in Colombia in July,
96% of whom had applied for Temporary
Protection Status.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Gender-based violence against Venezuelan
refugee women persisted and Colombian
authorities failed to guarantee Venezuelan
women’s rights to a life free from violence
and discrimination.3
1. Colombia: The Police Does Not Care for Me: Sexual Violence and Other
Gender-Based Violence in the 2021 National Strike, 1 December
2. “Colombia: Protect environmental defender at risk”, 15 July
3. Americas: Unprotected: Gender-based Violence against Venezuelan
Refugee Women in Colombia and Peru,12 July

CONGO
Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Denis Sassou Nguesso
Head of government: Anatole Collinet Makosso
Freedom of assembly was restricted, and
security forces beat up people in detention.
The country passed a law on gender-based
violence; however, discrimination against
women was still widespread. Obstacles
remained to the availability and
accessibility of healthcare, and there were
reports of environmental degradation.

BACKGROUND
In July, the ruling party won 111 of 151 seats
in the parliamentary elections more than one
year after President Denis Sassou Nguesso
was re-elected as head of state, serving his
fourth consecutive term in office after 36
years in power. The results were confirmed
by the Constitutional Court in August,
rejecting 30 annulment appeals filed by
several candidates. On 21 January, the
International Monetary Fund granted an
extended credit facility of USD 455 million to
the Congolese state, accompanied by the
requirement that the country carries out
reforms to improve the governance of public
funds. Several members of the family of the
president were still under investigation before
the French justice system over allegations of
corruption.

133

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Congolese activists tried to organize a
demonstration in the capital, Brazzaville, on 8
April to protest against the poor quality of
services provided by the national electricity
company. The announcement was made
online and an authorization was requested
from the prefecture beforehand. On 6 April
the prefect of the department banned the
demonstration on grounds of public order. In
defiance of this ban, on 8 April the organizer
went to the demonstration site, where he was
arrested by police and held for several hours
before being released. He reported that he
had been beaten while in detention.

ARBITRARY DETENTION, TORTURE AND
OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, a candidate in
the 2016 presidential election, was still in
detention, despite the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention considering his detention
as arbitrary. He was sentenced in 2018 to 20
years’ imprisonment for “undermining the
internal security of the state” and “illegal
possession of weapons and munitions of
war”.
According to the Centre of Development
Actions (CAD) and the Congolese Human
Rights Observatory, the Congolese police beat
up three people in Brazzaville in early
January, causing the death of one of them.
After the publication of the video of the
incident on social networks, four police
officers were sentenced to 10 years in
prison on 9 February for deliberate assault
and battery causing death and the state was
ordered to pay damages.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In March, Congo passed the “Mouébara law”
on combating violence against women,
including domestic violence. It included
provisions on prevention; protection of
victims; medical, psychological, social and
legal support to victims; and penalties for
perpetrators of up to 20 years in prison. The
law notably included specific provisions to
protect widows’ rights in inheritance.

134

The report Women, Business and the Law
2022 produced by the World Bank, which
assesses laws that can have an impact on
economic opportunities for women, indicated
that the legal framework in Congo is
detrimental to women’s economic rights. The
report highlighted many areas in need of
improvement, including gender inequality in
property and inheritance.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In early 2022, a measles epidemic took hold
in Congo. According to a statement by the
minister of health in April, the department of
Pointe-Noire was the epicentre of the
epidemic with 5,488 notified cases, including
112 deaths. A national vaccination plan
against measles and yellow fever was
launched on 15 August.
According to a statement by the minister of
health in March, maternal, neonatal and
infant death rates increased due to the
coronavirus pandemic and delays in measles
vaccination. In 2021, maternal mortality
deaths rose to 445 per 100,000 births, up
from 378 per 100,000 births in 2020.
According to the local NGO CAD, the health
situation in Congo remained fragile; the
organization highlighted the lack of beds in
several health centres and accessibility
problems in certain areas due to the
remoteness of some communities, lack of
transport and/or poor road conditions.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
According to a statement by the
Departmental Directorate of the Environment
in June, the Loubi lagoon in Pointe-Noire
department had been cleaned up in
accordance with Congolese standards. This
followed a complaint filed in 2016 by the
local association Youth for Life in Kouilou
against an oil company, denouncing two
crude oil spills into the Loubi lagoon in 2004
and 2011. In March 2019, the Pointe-Noire
court of justice ordered the company to
resume clean-up operations in the lagoon
and pay XAF 50 million (approximately USD
77,600) for “moral damage” to Youth for Life
in Kouilou and XAF 150 million

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

(approximately USD 232,800) for
environmental damage. The company
appealed against the decision.
The residents of the Vindoulou
neighbourhood in the Loango sub-prefecture
continued to complain to the authorities
about environmental damage caused by a
metal and battery recycling company
operating near homes and schools in their
area since 2012. They claimed that the
factory caused major air pollution and
discharged massive quantities of oil into the
streets. The Prefect of Kouilou had ordered
the closure of the factory in August 2020 for
a period of three months for non-compliance
with environmental legislation. The company
resumed its activities in November 2020
following an agreement by the Ministry of the
Environment, Sustainable Development and
the Congo Basin but without carrying out the
necessary improvements according to the
residents. Medical samples were taken
during the same period by the Departmental
Health Directorate, but the results were not
published.

CÔTE D’IVOIRE
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire
Head of state: Alassane Dramane Ouattara
Head of government: Patrick Achi
Modifications to two laws adopted by the
senate threatened to curtail the right to
freedom of expression. Political parties and
civil society organizations released a report
recommending a process to provide
reparation for victims of electoral violence.
Survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence continued to face obstacles in their
search for justice. There were several
incidents of badly constructed buildings
collapsing, causing deaths. The government
took measures to ensure the rights to health
and food. Activists and local people
continued to criticize deforestation, and the
authorities took measures to fight
environmental degradation.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
The year was marked by the rising cost of
living; an influx of refugees fleeing armed
conflict in Burkina Faso; and the continuing
“political dialogue” between the ruling party,
opposition parties and civil society
organizations. The objective of the political
dialogue was to agree on necessary
measures to achieve “political appeasement”
and “strengthen democratic culture” to end
decades of political crisis.
A diplomatic crisis erupted with Mali after
the latter arrested 49 Ivorian soldiers, labelled
as mercenaries, in July. In August, activist
Pulchérie Edith Gbalet was arrested after
returning from Mali and publishing a video
which criticized the Ivorian government for its
handling of the crisis.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In December, the senate adopted two bills
modifying the laws on the press and on
audiovisual communication in order to
combat the publication of false information;
and ensure that individuals active online,
specifically bloggers, activists and
influencers, are subject to regulations by the
relevant authorities. During the year, activists
had warned that, if enacted, the laws could
be used to repress the right to freedom of
expression online and target critics of the
authorities.
In April, student protesters in Bouaké were
injured when the police used tear gas to
disperse them. More than twenty students
were arrested and released the
following month. They had been calling for
better conditions to allow them to study.
In December, 46 academics were arrested
in Abidjan while marching to deliver a
memorandum to the prime minister
demanding employment in the civil service.
After being detained for a week, one was
acquitted while 45 were each given a fourmonth suspended sentence for disturbing the
peace.

135

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The March report of the fifth round of the
political dialogue recommended measures to
ensure peaceful elections and a mechanism
to provide reparations for victims of violence
during the 2020 elections. According to
official numbers, 85 people were killed and
hundreds injured during demonstrations and
clashes between the ruling party and
opposition supporters in 2020.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In March, the International Federation for
Human Rights published a report highlighting
the obstacles faced by survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence. They included
pressure to settle their cases out of court,
and lack of social service resources and legal
and judicial assistance.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
A lack of sufficient government oversight led
to people living in unsafe or inadequate
housing. Badly erected buildings, which
lacked authorization for construction,
collapsed, causing deaths. In Abidjan, there
were two such incidents in 30 days. In
February, a building under construction
collapsed on houses in Treichville, causing at
least five deaths and more than 20 injuries.
In March, a residential building collapsed in
Cocody, resulting in seven deaths and the
hospitalization of 13 people. On 9 March, the
government announced measures to address
this phenomenon, including by imposing
administrative sanctions against officials who
allow constructions to go ahead without prior
authorization; and establishing a joint control
brigade to oversee the implementation of the
regulations which, according to the
government, includes representatives of city
halls, district authorities and the Department
of Urban Sanitation and Drainage.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The Covid-19 vaccination campaign
continued, with vaccinations more than
doubling from December 2021 to March

136

2022. In March, vaccination was extended to
teenagers.
In September, a decree adopted by the
Council of Ministers made membership of the
universal healthcare coverage mandatory for
everyone. It is intended to cover 70% of
health costs and make healthcare more
affordable.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In March, the government announced a list
of measures to address the rising cost of
living, including increased monitoring to
ensure that prices of certain food products
were controlled. In August, the president
announced new measures to protect
purchasing power, including enhanced job
benefits for public officials.
In July, the National Council Against the
High Cost of Living, created to combat
inflation, sanctioned about 2,000 merchants
who had not respected price controls on
protected products.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The Coffee-Cocoa Council, in charge of
regularizing, stabilizing and developing the
industries of cocoa and coffee production,
announced the launch of a system starting in
April to trace cocoa production from the
plantation to the ports of export, in order to
combat child labour and deforestation.
In May, the state minister of agriculture and
rural development, and the minister of the
environment and sustainable development
signed a memorandum of understanding
(MOU) with Genesis, a French agency
specializing in environmental impact
assessments. Under the MOU, the agency
would evaluate the impact of soil restoration
projects financed by the governmental
Initiative d’Abidjan to fight deforestation and
foster restoration of forests. In the same
month, the prime minister announced that
the government had replanted 38 million
trees in less than three years.
In parallel, villagers from Bébou demanded
that the government help them fight illegal
cocoa plantations, which are destroying
forests, including the protected Bossématié

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Forest Reserve. In June, activists started a
petition calling on the government to
renounce a project which would destroy
hectares of land in a wildlife park, to make
way for a hotel in Bingerville.

CROATIA
Republic of Croatia
Head of state: Zoran Milanović
Head of government: Andrej Plenković
Pushbacks and collective expulsions
continued. Defamation lawsuits threatened
the work of journalists and the media.
Access to abortion remained severely
restricted. Same-sex couples were granted
the right to adopt children. Roma faced
widespread discrimination. Domestic
violence increased.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The number of people trying to enter through
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH)
increased in comparison with 2021, and aid
organizations documented continued
pushbacks and collective expulsions by the
Croatian authorities. Civil society groups
called for a proper investigation into systemic
violations on the country’s borders.
In February, the European Ombudsman
found that the European Commission failed
to ensure that fundamental human rights
were respected in EU-funded border
operations by Croatian authorities.1
Police officers caught on camera beating
asylum seekers in 2021 were found to be in
minor breach of duty and returned to work in
January.
In July, the EU-funded Croatian
Independent Border Monitoring Mechanism
found no major irregularities in border
operations, but said that border police
unlawfully returned potential asylum seekers
to BiH when they found them in the border
areas suspected of being mined. Civil society
and rights organizations repeated concerns
that the mechanism lacked independence, a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

strong mandate and adequate access to the
border area.
In April, the European Court of Human
Rights, rejecting Croatia’s appeal, made final
the 2021 ruling that Croatia violated the
European Convention on Human Rights
when it forcibly returned an Afghan family to
Serbia, resulting in six-year-old Madina
Hussiny’s death. The authorities proposed an
action plan to execute the judgment, but civil
society organizations questioned the quality
of the proposed measures.
In December, the Council of the EU decided
to admit Croatia into the Schengen area.
Human rights organizations criticized EU
institutions for having “turned a blind eye” to
overwhelming evidence of human rights
violations by the authorities.2
The authorities granted temporary
protection status to over 22,000 Ukrainians
fleeing the war and provided those in need
with accommodation and integration
assistance. In contrast, recognition rates of
asylum seekers from non-European countries
remained low, with only 16 people granted
international protection by October.
In May, the authorities arrested Aysoltan
Niyazova, an activist and member of the
band Pussy Riot, when she was in Croatia on
an anti-war tour and threatened to extradite
her to Turkmenistan. She was released
following condemnation by human rights
groups.3

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
Journalists and media reporting on organized
crime and corruption continued to face
threats, harassment and physical attacks.
Politicians and businesses frequently sued
journalists for defamation, which remained a
criminal offence. The Croatian Journalists’
Association documented over 1,000 active
Strategic Lawsuits against Public
Participation (SLAPPs) demanding over €10
million in damages, calling them a “judicial
terror”. In March, the Coalition against
SLAPPs in Europe named Croatia as one of
the countries in the EU where lawsuits to

137

silence journalists and activists are used the
most.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to sexual and reproductive services
continued to be limited due to the
widespread refusal of individual doctors and
some clinics to perform abortions on grounds
of conscience. In May, the case of a woman
denied an abortion by four different clinics
even though her fetus was diagnosed with an
aggressive brain tumour, sparked protests
and divided public opinion. The procedure
was finally carried out after the intervention of
the Ministry of Health. The Ombudsperson
for human rights said that doctors’ individual
right to conscience-based refusal could not
be an obstacle to access to adequate
healthcare.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In September, the government passed
measures to alleviate the effects of the rapid
rise in prices and the cost of living. The
measures included caps on the cost of
electricity, gas and essential food items, as
well as a temporary increase in social
assistance for economically vulnerable
people.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE
In a final ruling in May, the High
Administrative Court confirmed that same-sex
couples should be able to apply for child
adoption under the same conditions as
heterosexual couples.
ROMA
Despite some progress, Roma continued to
face widespread discrimination in all walks of
life. Roma children were considerably more
likely not to complete primary or secondary
education, and girls were particularly affected
by early marriage practices and were
frequently victims of trafficking. According to
the authorities, 50% of Roma girls gave birth
to their first child while under age. The UN
Committee on the Rights of the Child urged
the authorities to ensure better integration of

138

Roma children into mainstream education
and remove barriers that hinder their access
to education, healthcare and social services.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities reported a sharp increase in
domestic and gender-based violence in
comparison with 2021. Civil society
organizations warned that the penalties for
perpetrators remained inadequate.
The government announced a package of
measures, including stronger penalties for
perpetrators and enhanced protection for the
victims of domestic violence, such as a
standard protocol for risk assessments in all
cases and alternatives to the existing
temporary measures, which were seen as
ineffective. The Ombudsperson for gender
equality noted that law enforcement
continued to fail victims and called for
comprehensive reform, including effective
prevention, resocialization and education
programmes.
1. “EU: Ombudsman finds Commission failed to ensure rights at
Croatian border”, 24 February
2. “EU admits Croatia to Schengen without regard to abuses at the
border”, 8 December
3. “Croatia: Dissident and Pussy Riot member must not be extradited to
Turkmenistan”, 1 June

CUBA
Republic of Cuba
Head of state: Miguel Díaz-Canel
Head of government: Manuel Marrero Cruz
Food shortages and electricity outages were
frequent throughout the year. Hundreds of
people remained in prison following a
crackdown on protesters in July 2021. In
the wake of Hurricane Ian, authorities
deployed military cadets to repress
widespread protests over electricity outages
and interrupted the internet. Three
prisoners of conscience remained in prison,
representing only a tiny fraction of the total
number of people feared detained for the
peaceful exercise of their human rights.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
In September, following a referendum, Cuba
approved a new Family Code which legalizes
same-sex marriage and, among other things,
allows same-sex couples to adopt.
According to US official statistics, between
October 2021 and September 2022 more
than 224,000 Cubans made their way to the
USA, a significant increase compared with
the same period in 2020-2021, when just
over 39,000 Cubans arrived in the USA.
Many made dangerous journeys through the
Darien Gap, a jungle that connects Panama
and Colombia, while others risked travelling
by boat.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Throughout the year, food shortages forced
people to queue for hours for basic goods,
and parts of the island were frequently left
without electricity. The authorities placed the
blame for the economic situation almost
entirely on the US economic embargo,
ignoring their obligation to fulfil economic,
social and cultural rights.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
By the end of the year, hundreds of people
remained in detention following a crackdown
on protesters in July 2021,1 according to the
NGO Cubalex.
In March, Amnesty International called for
access to the country to monitor the trials of
those detained, but the authorities failed to
grant access to any international observers.
That same month, in an unusual move in a
context where defence lawyers are tightly
controlled by the state and access to court
documents is rare, Cuban authorities made
public at least six judgments relating to
approximately 129 people, including some
teenagers, who had been charged with more
severe offences for participating in the July
2021 protests. They were mainly accused of
throwing rocks or bottles at law enforcement
officials. Some were given 30-year prison
sentences.2
In September and October, in the wake of
Hurricane Ian, people protested across the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

island following widespread power outages.
According to reports received, the authorities
responded by deploying military cadets to
repress the protests and there were reports of
arbitrary detentions. The authorities also
appeared to have intentionally shut down
internet access, an increasingly common
tactic to limit communication in Cuba in
moments of political sensitivity. The internet
interruptions lasted at least two consecutive
nights, which made it hard for families to
communicate following the storm. Journalists
at 14 y medio, an independent online
newspaper, also had no internet, impacting
their ability to report.3
On 2 October, President Díaz-Canel
downplayed the widespread nature of the
protests and suggested that a minority of
“counter-revolutionaries” with connections
outside Cuba had carried out “acts of
vandalism such as blocking roads or throwing
rocks.” He said they would be dealt with
using the “force of the law”.
In December, a new Penal Code came into
force, which risked entrenching longstanding limitations on freedom of expression
and assembly and is a chilling prospect for
independent journalists, activists and anyone
critical of the authorities.4

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women human rights activists were central to
resisting repression of dissent. Mothers of
people, including young people, detained in
the context of the July 2021 protests were
vocal in advocating for their release.
Lawmakers failed to include femicide as a
crime in the new Penal Code, despite
proposals from women advocates.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
At the end of the year, prisoners of
conscience Luis Manuel Otero Alcántara,
Maykel Castillo Pérez and José Daniel Ferrer
García – all of whom were detained in the
context of the crackdown on dissent in July
2021 – remained in prison.
In June, the Popular Municipal Court of
Central Havana sentenced artist Luis Manuel
Otero Alcántara and musician Maykel Castillo

139

Pérez to five and nine years in prison,
respectively, for a range of charges
historically used to silence dissent including
“public disorder”, “contempt” and “insulting
national symbols”.5
Months previously, in January, the UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had
concluded that Castillo Pérez – one of the
writers of the song “Motherland and
Life” (“Patria y Vida”), which is critical of the
government and was adopted as a popular
protest anthem – had been arbitrarily
detained and called on the Cuban
government to release him immediately.
In July, the family of José Daniel Ferrer
García, leader of the unofficial political
opposition group the Patriotic Union of Cuba,
reported that he was being held
incommunicado, putting him at risk of torture
and other ill-treatment.6 In October, his family
reported that he was being held in solitary
confinement, segregated from other prisoners
and with very limited access to the outside
world.7
1. “Five things you should know a year on from Cuba’s 11 July protests”,
11 July
2. “Cuba: Amnesty International calls for access to country to monitor
trials of 11J protesters”, 24 March
3. “Cuba: Tactics of repression must not be repeated”, 5 October
4. “Cuba: New criminal code is a chilling prospect for 2023 and
beyond”, 2 December
5. “Cuba: Amnesty International condemns sentences of Luis Manuel
Otero Alcántara and Maykel ‘Osorbo’ Castillo”, 24 June
6. “Cuba: Political leader held incommunicado”, 12 July
7. “Cuba: Prisoner of conscience at risk”, 19 October

CYPRUS
Republic of Cyprus
Head of state and government: Nicos Anastasiades
Refugees and asylum seekers reported
being subjected to pushbacks to Lebanon.
Cyprus’s Supreme Court overturned the
2019 conviction of a British student for an
alleged false report of rape.

140

BACKGROUND
No progress was made towards the
resumption of full negotiations between
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders on
the Cyprus issue (the continuing dispute over
the administration of the island).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The NGO KISA reported instances of violence
and advocacy to hatred during two antimigrant demonstrations held in January
against Syrian refugees living in a residential
complex in the village of Chlorakas, and a
subsequent failure of the police to intervene.
KISA also reported threats and racial slurs
against KISA member Doros Polykarpou
during the second demonstration. The
outcome of an investigation into the incidents
by the independent police complaints
authority was not known at year’s end.
In June, the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child (CRC) expressed concerns in
relation to refugee, asylum-seeking and
migrant children, including substandard
living conditions in reception facilities and
insufficient access to education and to
healthcare. The CRC also expressed
concerns about pushbacks and forced
returns.
In August, human rights organizations
denounced two new pushbacks to Lebanon,
including that of 52 shipwreck survivors in
July. Survivors reported that Cypriot
authorities kept them in inhumane conditions
and ill-treated them prior to returning them.
In a case pending before the European Court
of Human rights, two Syrian nationals
reported several violations by the Cypriot
authorities, including their summary return to
Lebanon, with a risk of chain refoulement to
Syria.
As of September, there were over 27,000
asylum applications pending at first instance
compared to 16,994 at the end of 2021.

IMPUNITY
In September, a report submitted to Cyprus’s
Attorney General found that the 2005 death
of army conscript Athanasios Nikolaou was
murder and identified serious flaws in the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

police investigation. In October, a new police
investigation was ordered into the case.
Athanasios Nikolaou’s family expressed
concerns that they were not given sufficient
access to the report’s findings
or concerns about the progress of the new
investigation. In 2020, Cyprus was found in
breach of the European Convention on
Human Rights for failing to effectively
investigate the case.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In January, Cyprus’s Supreme Court
overturned the 2019 conviction of a British
student for an alleged false report of rape and
found serious shortcomings in the
investigation of the initial rape complaint by
the prosecuting authorities. After the Attorney
General rejected a request to reopen the
investigation, a complaint was filed with the
European Court of Human Rights.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Between 2006 and December 2022, the
remains of 1,028 missing individuals – 736
Greek Cypriots and 292 Turkish Cypriots –
were identified by the Committee on Missing
Persons in Cyprus in its mission to establish
the fate and whereabouts of people who were
subjected to enforced disappearance during
the inter-communal fighting of 1963-1964
and the events of 1974.

CZECH REPUBLIC
Czech Republic
Head of state: Miloš Zeman
Head of government: Petr Fiala
The Czech Republic hosted the third
highest number of registered Ukrainian
refugees in the EU and the highest number
per capita. Hundreds of Roma refugees
from Ukraine were subjected to
discriminatory treatment. There were
concerns over discriminatory remarks by the
Public Defender of Rights. Thousands of
Roma women unlawfully sterilized in the
past had still not been fully compensated.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Sterilization was still a requirement for legal
recognition of gender change. Concerns
remained over a deal to end a long-running
dispute over expansion of the Turów
coalmine near the Czech/Polish border.

BACKGROUND
There was no progress towards ratifying the
Council of Europe Convention on Preventing
and Combating Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
As of 31 October, the Czech Republic had
granted temporary protection to 453,725
refugees from Ukraine. The country
continued to register new arrivals, but the
number fell considerably from March
onwards. Of the refugees entering the Czech
Republic 47% were women and 33%
children. The country had the world’s highest
number of displaced Ukrainians per capita.
However, thousands of people who received
temporary protection status subsequently
returned to Ukraine. The Czech Republic, in
line with the decision of the EU, extended
temporary protection for Ukrainian refugees
until March 2023, but reduced financial aid.
Ukrainian Roma faced both systemic and
individual racism on arrival in the Czech
Republic. Ukrainian Roma were forced to
wait much longer than other applicants
before being assigned temporary protection.
Hundreds were stranded for several days at
train stations after their arrival in Prague and
Brno in April and May as they were not
recognized as refugees. They were denied
help from the authorities for several weeks.

DISCRIMINATION
The Public Defender of Rights, Stanislav
Křeček, continued to make discriminatory
remarks against Roma. He blamed the
problems of socially excluded
neighbourhoods and informal settlements on
their inhabitants, claiming they had not tried
to change their situation. He said that his
duty was not to defend human rights but to
protect citizens from unfair decisions by the
Czech authorities. In August, in an

141

unprecedented move, he removed all
portfolio responsibilities from his deputy, who
subsequently resigned.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Roma women who had previously been
forced or coerced into sterilization were still
awaiting reparations following the August
2021 passing of a law, based on the
recommendations of the previous UPR, that
women sterilized between 1 July 1966 and
31 March 2012 without their consent were
entitled to a one-off compensation of CZK
300,000 (around EUR 12,000). Only 30 of
260 applicants received compensation.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Attacks on LGBTI people were rarely
recognized as hate crimes. Legislation did not
recognize hate crimes against LGBTI people.
The stipulation under Czech law that
anyone seeking legal recognition for gender
change must first undergo sterilization
remained unchanged.
Although civil partnerships were an option
for same-sex couples, they were still not
allowed to marry. A bill to recognize equal
marriage, which failed a vote in parliament in
2018, was reintroduced in the new
parliament in 2022 but had not yet been
debated by the end of the year.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Corporal punishment for children remained
legal, contrary to calls by the UN and the
Council of Europe to ban it, and the
government did little to combat its use or to
promote alternatives and non-violent
parenting practices.
In September, the European Court of
Human Rights published the details of a
settlement between the Czech government
and a Roma man who filed a school
segregation application, having been enrolled
in a special school as a child due to his
ethnicity rather than his abilities. The
government agreed to pay him EUR 4,000
compensation.

142

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
The Czech Republic continued to supply
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
with arms, which were likely being used to
commit or facilitate serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian
law in Yemen.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The Czech and Polish governments agreed in
February to end a long-running dispute over
expansion of the Turów open-pit coal mine on
the Polish side of the border, which had
reached the EU Court of Justice in 2021. The
court ordered Poland to halt mining because
it contributed to an increase in CO2 pollution,
and polluted water in villages in the Czech
Republic located close to the Polish border.
The government deal was heavily criticized
by environmental groups for lack of
transparency, and local people were still
fearful about lack of access to clean water.

DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE
CONGO
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Head of state: Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo
Head of government: Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde
Kyenge
The Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) continued to experience serious
human rights violations, including mass
killings in the context of armed conflict and
inter-communal violence, a crackdown on
dissent and ill-treatment of detainees.
People from regions affected by armed
conflict, including eastern DRC, were
particularly affected amid mass
displacement and a deepening
humanitarian crisis. The authorities
continued to show a lack of political will to
hold the perpetrators of human rights

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

violations to account. The right to education
was violated.

BACKGROUND
Armed conflicts continued in several parts of
the DRC’s territory, including in the provinces
of Nord-Kivu, Sud-Kivu, Ituri, Tanganyika,
Kasaï-Oriental, Kasaï Central, Kasaï and MaiNdombe. The resurgence of the rebel group,
March 23 Movement (M23), in Nord-Kivu
province aggravated the security and
humanitarian crisis in eastern DRC, while
reigniting military and political tensions
between the DRC and Rwanda. Tensions
between the two countries sparked a new
wave of anti-Rwanda and anti-UN protests.
There were new spikes of inter-communal
violence in the central and western regions.
Inter-communal violence between the Teke
and Yaka tribal groups erupted in August in
Kwamouth territory in the western province of
Mai-Ndombe, amid unresolved land and
customary power disputes. As of September,
the violence had resulted in at least 150
deaths, hundreds of people injured, and
more than 11,000 forcibly displaced.
Hundreds of homes were burned down and
property was looted, while violence spread to
the neighbouring provinces of Kwilu and
Kwango.
Uncertainty about the government’s ability
or willingness to implement constitutional
provisions for the 2023 general elections
continued to fuel political tensions, while the
government’s crackdown on dissenting voices
intensified. Corruption and squandering of
public resources persisted and remained
largely unpunished, hindering the realization
of President Tshisekedi’s pledges to improve
people’s economic and social conditions,
including his commitment to ensure universal
access to basic education and healthcare.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Attacks on civilians in eastern DRC
intensified. Military interventions by UN
forces and East African Community armies
such as Uganda and Burundi did not lead to
a decrease in attacks against civilians by
armed groups.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Armed groups unlawfully killed more than
1,800 civilians and injured thousands in the
eastern provinces of Ituri, Nord-Kivu and
Sud-Kivu, according to the UN.
In Ituri, the Cooperative for the Development
of the Congo (CODECO), an armed group
composed mainly of members of the Lendu
ethnic group, intensified indiscriminate
attacks on the Aluur and Hema ethnic
groups. In one of their deadliest attacks, on 8
May, they killed at least 52 unarmed people
including children and older people in the
gold mining village of Kablangete, according
to the Kivu Security Tracker. They also raped
at least six women.
A preliminary UN investigation into attacks
on 29-30 November found that M23 rebels
killed at least 131 civilians and raped at least
22 women in the Kishishe and Bambo
villages, Nord-Kivu province, in retaliation for
clashes between M23 and rival armed
groups.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
An additional 600,000 people were forced to
flee their homes in 2022 according to
UNHCR, the UN refugee agency, bringing
the number of internally displaced people
nationwide to nearly 6 million, more than in
any other African country, and up from 5.5
million in 2021.
Armed groups continued their targeted
attacks against internally displaced people in
eastern DRC, killing hundreds of people and
injuring many others, while further displacing
tens of thousands. In Nord-Kivu alone,
fighting between the Congolese army and the
M23 rebels forced more than 200,000
people to flee their homes.
Data collected by the UN showed that at
least 250 internally displaced people were
killed during the year as a result of deliberate
attacks against their camps in the east, with
180 killed in Ituri alone. On 1 February,
CODECO fighters attacked the Plaine Savo
camp in Ituri, killing at least 62 civilians and
injuring dozens of others, according to the
UN. The camp was home to more than
24,000 people who fled violence in Djugu

143

territory in 2019. In June, armed men
attacked the Rujagati camp in Nord-Kivu,
killing seven civilians. In Sud-Kivu province,
at least 10 members of the Banyamulenge
community were killed between May and
October during attacks against their internally
displaced people camps around the towns of
Minembwe and Fizi. On several occasions,
the Congolese security forces and the UN
Organization Stabilization Mission in the DRC
– whose primary mandate is the protection of
civilians – failed to prevent or stop these
attacks, including when they had been
warned through existing community alert
mechanisms.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In western DRC, in response to the intercommunal violence, members of the
Congolese army and police, deployed as
reinforcements from the capital, Kinshasa,
were accused by local human rights groups
of committing serious human rights
violations, including summary executions,
rape, arbitrary arrests and looting of property.
In December, the Bandundu military garrison
tribunal sentenced three Congolese army
officers to death and prison terms of between
one and nine years for several crimes,
including killing three civilians in the towns of
Fadiaka and Bagata in November. A further
28 soldiers were awaiting trial at the end of
the year, in connection with similar crimes in
the region.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
More than 64% of the DRC’s population lived
on less than USD 2.15 a day, according to
the World Bank, while 27 million people,
including 3.4 million children, faced food
insecurity according to the World Food
Programme.
In addition to physical constraints such as
the poor condition of roads, relentless attacks
by armed groups and military operations
made humanitarian access increasingly
difficult. This was particularly the case in the
eastern provinces, which host the majority of
internally displaced people. In Nord-Kivu,
particularly in the city of Beni, the increased

144

use of explosive devices posed a threat to
humanitarian workers and other civilians.
Suspected combatants of the Allied
Democratic Forces (a Ugandan rebel group
considered a terrorist entity by the
Congolese and Ugandan governments)
carried out multiple attacks on the BeniKasindi road, an important trade route
between the DRC and Uganda, limiting
humanitarian access. In Rutshuru territory,
areas controlled by the M23 rebel group were
almost completely cut off from humanitarian
access, including essential healthcare
services, from May onwards. Widespread
checkpoints manned by armed groups, and
other deliberate movement restrictions
imposed by both government forces and
armed groups in Ituri, Sud-Kivu and NordKivu, prevented communities from accessing
vital assistance such as food, water and
healthcare.
ATTACKS AGAINST AID WORKERS
Attacks against local and international aid
workers continued, especially in the eastern
provinces, resulting in at least four people
being killed, several wounded, and 10
abducted during the first half of the year
alone. On 7 January, the NGO, Concern
Worldwide, said three of its employees were
abducted by armed men wearing masks, who
attacked their convoy in the town of
Kahumba in Masisi territory. They were
released a week later. In May, another two
humanitarian workers were abducted in the
same area and freed after eight days,
according to OCHA.
In some areas, recurrent attacks forced
several humanitarian organizations to
suspend their activities or even leave entire
districts permanently. In March, for example,
seven humanitarian organizations suspended
their activities in the Kamango health zone,
leaving more than 300,000 people without
humanitarian assistance in northern NordKivu, according to OCHA.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATIONS
No substantial progress was made towards
systematically and appropriately addressing

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

widespread impunity for crimes under
international law and other serious human
rights violations committed in the DRC since
the 1990s. Nevertheless, additional steps
towards a “transitional justice” agenda were
made, although the government continued to
emphasize reconciliation and reparations as
opposed to accountability. In March, it
launched public consultations on transitional
justice across the country, with the stated aim
of collecting people’s opinions on appropriate
justice mechanisms. In October, with the UN
Joint Human Rights Office’s support, the
government set up a commission composed
of Congolese experts, with the mission of
developing a “national transitional justice
strategy.” In December, a bill setting out
“basic principles for protection and
reparation for victims of conflict-related
sexual violence and victims of crimes against
the peace and security of mankind”, was
enacted. The bill was prepared by a
commission established under the First
Lady’s leadership.
In February, the International Court of
Justice delivered its long-awaited judgment,
determining reparations due to the DRC from
Uganda as a result of the latter’s breach of
international humanitarian law during its
armed activities on DRC territory between
1998 and 2003. The court ordered Uganda
to pay the DRC USD 325 million in five
annual instalments of USD 65 million,
starting on 1 September 2022. The amount
awarded included USD 225 million for
damage to people, USD 40 million for
damage to property and USD 60 million for
damage relating to natural resources. In
September, the government confirmed
receipt of the first instalment in line with the
court’s order. It did not make public how the
reparations to people would be allocated.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities intensified their crackdown on the
rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly. They continued to
use the Covid-19 pandemic and the
extended “state of siege” (a form of martial

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

law) in Ituri and Nord-Kivu as pretexts to ban
or suppress public meetings and
demonstrations by individuals and groups
considered to be critical of the government.
Military authorities, appointed under the
“state of siege”, continued to arbitrarily arrest
and detain critics, and to ban and suppress
demonstrations, with impunity.
Demonstrations considered favourable to the
authorities were allowed to go ahead while
those deemed critical were banned or
violently suppressed.1 Civil society and
opposition activists were arbitrarily arrested
and detained, often without trial, for
criticizing the “state of siege” or the
government, or otherwise exercising their
human rights. In April, a military court in
Beni city, sentenced 12 activists from the civil
society movement, Lutte pour le
Changement, to 24 months in prison for
“inciting the public to disobey the laws”. The
activists had been arrested in November
2021 for staging a peaceful sit-in at the city
hall to protest against the extension of the
“state of siege” without a proper assessment
of its impact on the security situation. They
were eventually released in August after the
Court of Appeal of Nord-Kivu quashed the
military court’s decision.
Across the DRC, the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly remained the exception
rather than the rule. Administrative
authorities in Kinshasa, as well as the cities of
Lubumbashi, Matadi, Kisangani, Kolwezi,
Kananga, Tshikapa, Mbujimayi, Bukavu,
Kalemie, Kindu, Lisala and Gbadolite,
unlawfully and systematically banned all
demonstrations deemed critical of President
Tshisekedi or his government.
In July, UN soldiers and Congolese police
officers in the eastern cities of Goma,
Butembo, Beni and Uvira responded
disproportionately to violent demonstrations
against the prolonged UN presence in the
DRC and its failure to ensure civilian
protection. At least 36 people were killed,
including 29 demonstrators and bystanders
and seven UN personnel, according to the
government. The outcomes of investigations
into these incidents promised by the

145

Congolese and UN authorities remained
unknown and nobody was held accountable.
On 21 September, a peaceful demonstration
organized by the National Union of Doctors in
Kinshasa was unlawfully banned by the city’s
governor and subsequently suppressed by
the police with brutality, resulting in several
demonstrators being arrested and others
injured. Although the minister for human
rights denounced this particular incident, no
concrete steps were taken to rescind the
governor’s arbitrary ban, to hold both the
governor and the Kinshasa police
commander to account, or to provide the
victims with access to justice and effective
remedies.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
As a result of severely limited holding
capacity and dilapidation of prisons, as well
as the widespread use of arbitrary arrests and
prolonged pretrial detention, the state of
prisons nationwide continued to deteriorate at
an alarming rate; thousands of detainees
were held in inhumane conditions.
Most prisons remained overcrowded, with
some, like Goma prison, holding up to
1,000% above their intended capacity. The
abusive use of pretrial detention – around
75% of inmates were pretrial detainees – and
the challenges faced by prosecutors and
courts in dealing with the backlog of cases,
made the situation worse.
Overcrowding, security and safety
deficiencies, and lack of access to basic
goods and services such as clean water,
electricity and medicine resulted in
thousands of inmates experiencing
starvation, and physical and mental ill health,
among other consequences. According to the
UN, at least 120 inmates nationwide died of
starvation or from ill-treatment.
Mass prison escapes were frequent, with
four such cases recorded in 2022. In August,
more than 800 inmates escaped from
Butembo prison in Nord-Kivu, following an
attack on the prison by suspected
combatants of the Allied Democratic Forces.

146

RIGHT TO EDUCATION
The government’s free education scheme
continued for the third year. The government
said the scheme allowed thousands of
children from low-income families to access
primary education. Nevertheless, an
increasing number of parents, teachers’
unions and students denounced serious
shortcomings in the scheme’s
implementation. They highlighted the
inequality of resources which favoured urban
over rural schools, inadequate school
infrastructure and furniture, overcrowded
classrooms, and insufficient and irregular
salary payments to teachers, among other
challenges. According to UNESCO, more
than 2 million school-aged children remained
out of school, despite some progress
recorded in recent years, and the quality of
education remained poor.
In areas affected by armed conflict and
inter-communal violence, frequent attacks on
schools continued, and many schools were
used as internally displaced
people’s shelters. UNICEF said that more
than 420 schools and 180,000 children were
affected by the attacks on, or occupation of,
schools due to the conflict in eastern and
western DRC.
1. Democratic Republic of the Congo: Justice and Freedoms Under Siege
in North-Kivu and Ituri, 10 May

DENMARK
Kingdom of Denmark
Head of state: Margrethe II
Head of government: Mette Frederiksen
Legislation on rape, including in cases
where perpetrators falsely represent
themselves as someone else, was amended.
Special legislation was passed to grant
people displaced from Ukraine temporary
protection. The authorities revoked
residence permits of several Syrian and
Afghan refugees and placed them in return
centres. The Supreme Court absolved the
Ministry of Defence of responsibility for the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

torture of Iraqi civilians during a joint
operation in Iraq in 2004.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
There was broad political agreement on
revision of Article 221 of the Penal Code,
scheduled to enter into force on 1 January
2023, so that non-consensual sex by
perpetrators falsely representing themselves
as someone else will no longer be penalized
more leniently than rape.

DISCRIMINATION
In January 2020, a housing company evicted
96 families from the Nøjsomhed area in
Elsinore under the much criticized Law
“L38”, which uses “non-Western
background” as one criteria to designate
areas as “ghettos”. In September 2022,
seven of the families evicted were granted the
right to appeal to the Supreme Court. In
November, 12 people similarly evicted had
their case against the Ministry of the Interior
and Housing referred to the EU Court of
Justice to determine whether the categories
of “non-Western” and their “descendants”
fall under the EU law’s definition of ethnicity.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, the Refugee Appeals Board
started reassessing cases of rejected Afghan
asylum seekers; cases had been on hold
since December 2021 in view of the Taliban’s
seizure of power in Afghanistan. By 30
November, the Return Agency listed eight
Afghan refugees as having had their
residence permits revoked. Also, by the same
date, 16 Syrian refugees were listed as
having had their residency permits revoked,
with reference to changes in the situation in
their country of origin. Both groups were
ordered to move to return centres. In
December, the Refugee Appeals Board
announced a more lenient assessment of
evidence in asylum cases involving Afghan
girls and women.
Special legislation was passed in March,
offering two-year residence permits and basic
rights for people displaced from Ukraine. The

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

legislation did not offer the same benefits to
non-Ukrainian nationals fleeing Ukraine. The
two-year residence permit was granted to
33,048 people out of the 37,162 who
applied.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In March, parliament passed legislation
concerning indiscriminate
telecommunications data retention, which
violated both EU and international law. In
April, the EU Court of Justice clarified that EU
law prohibits the indiscriminate retention of
data for the purposes of combating crime.
The Ministry of Justice temporarily modified
its data retention practices to conform with
EU law.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In May, the Supreme Court overturned a
previous decision by the Eastern High Court
and ruled that Iraqi war prisoners tortured
during operation Green Desert in 2004 were
not entitled to compensation from the Danish
Ministry of Defence.

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
Dominican Republic
Head of state and government: Luis Rodolfo Abinader
Corona
Lawmakers again failed to table a revised
Criminal Code that would decriminalize
abortion and provide protections for LGBTI
people. President Abinader committed to
police reform. Reports of discrimination
against Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian
descent continued as construction of a wall
along the Haitian border commenced.

BACKGROUND
A report by NGO Participación Ciudadana
and Transparency International found that
the public viewed criminality, unemployment
and corruption as priority social problems.

147

In September, at the UN General Assembly,
Dominican authorities called on the
international community for more support to
address the deepening human rights and
humanitarian crises in Haiti. That same
month, Hurricane Fiona hit the Dominican
Republic, displacing hundreds of people and
resulting in power cuts.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Congress again failed to table a revised
Criminal Code that decriminalizes abortion
and provides protections against torture,
violence and discrimination on the grounds of
sexual orientation and gender identity.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In May, the beating and subsequent death of
a man in police custody reignited calls for
police reform to address consistent
complaints of excessive use of force by law
enforcement. Police later recommended the
dismissal of five officers in relation to the
death, according to media reports.
In August, President Abinader stated that
his government would do “whatever it takes”
to reform the police and committed to
specialized and ongoing capacity building of
tens of thousands of police. This
announcement followed over a decade of
evidence collected on routine torture and
other ill-treatment by police of young men,
sex workers and others in marginalized
communities.

DISCRIMINATION
In February, construction began of a wall
along the Haitian border, which Dominican
authorities argued will reduce organized
crime and irregular immigration. Human
rights organizations indicated it will only
exacerbate xenophobia and historically
entrenched discrimination. It also stands to
limit safe routes for Haitians seeking
international protection in the Dominican
Republic.
In May, some 20 civil society organizations
protested against what they described as the
authorities’ racist treatment of Haitian

148

migrants and asylum seekers and
Dominicans of Haitian descent, especially
during detentions and deportations.
In December, a number of civil society
organizations condemned the collective
expulsions of people, including children,
adolescents and pregnant women, to Haiti by
the Dominican Republic, amid ongoing
complaints of racial profiling and
discrimination against Dominicans of Haitian
origin and Dominicans who are presumed to
be Haitian because of their skin colour.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
In September, on the ninth anniversary of a
2013 ruling by the Constitutional Court,
which retroactively and arbitrarily deprived
thousands of Dominicans of Haitian descent
of their nationality, human rights
organizations called on the Dominican
authorities to address the continuing problem
of stateless people.
Despite a 2014 law that aimed to provide
documents for people made stateless by the
2013 ruling, tens of thousands remained
without documents, limiting their access to
education and healthcare.

ECUADOR
Republic of Ecuador
Head of state and government: Guillermo Alberto
Santiago Lasso Mendoza
Organizations reported dozens of human
rights violations during mass protests in
June across the country. Security forces
killed a protester in Puyo. At least 146
prisoners were killed amid a crisis in the
prison system. Authorities failed to provide
truth, justice and reparations to Indigenous
communities affected by oil spills. Abortion
in cases of rape was decriminalized.

BACKGROUND
President Lasso, whose approval rating
dropped below 20% during the year,
announced states of emergency seven times

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

during the year, giving a variety of reasons for
doing so, including security risks from
organized criminal groups, but also alleged
violence in the context of national strikes.
Mass protests continued to erupt across the
country during the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Ecuadorian organizations reported that the
response of the authorities to protests by
Indigenous peoples over socio-environmental
issues that began in June resulted in a wide
range of human rights violations. These
included arbitrary detentions, excessive use
of force, criminalization and attacks on
journalists and human rights defenders. At
least six people died in the context of the
protests.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In January, the Constitutional Court ruled in
favour of the A’i Cofán Indigenous community
of Sinangoe, confirming that the state had
violated the community’s rights to prior
consultation, to nature, to water, to a healthy
environment, to culture and to territory by
granting 20 mining concessions without their
consent and processing 32 others that
affected their territory. The Court also
recognized the A’i Cofán’s right to organize
their own guard to protect their land and
ordered comprehensive reparation measures
for the community.1 By the end of the year,
the authorities had not complied with the
ruling.
On 28 January, an oil pipe owned by OCP
Ecuador, a private company, broke, spilling
approximately 1 million litres of oil into the
Coca River basin in the Amazon and affecting
Indigenous peoples and their environment.
By the end of the year, Indigenous peoples
affected by this and a prior spill in April 2020
in the Amazon had still not received truth,
justice and reparations.2
On 14 June, security forces arrested
Leonidas Iza, President of the Confederation
of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador
(CONAIE), in Cotopaxi province. He was
detained incommunicado and charged with

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

“paralysing a public service” before being
released that night. Human rights
organizations considered his detention
arbitrary and that the criminal proceedings
against him could constitute the
criminalization of protest. The UN Special
Rapporteur on the independence of judges
and lawyers stated that his right to defence
may also have been affected.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 21 June, security forces repressing a
demonstration in Puyo, the capital of Pastaza
province, fired a tear gas grenade directly
and at close range at B.G., a Kichwa
Indigenous man. He later died of his
injuries.3
In June, the UN Committee on the Rights of
the Child expressed concern at the use of
violence against children by security forces
during protests. It criticized the authorization
to use potentially lethal ammunition, such as
pellets, in addition to the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of tear gas.
By the end of the year, the Prosecutor’s
Office had failed to charge or prosecute law
enforcement officials for human rights
violations committed during protests in
October 2019 and June 2022.
In November, the Constitutional Court ruled
that President Lasso’s proposed
Constitutional reform to allow the armed
forces to engage in joint operations with the
National Police to combat organized crime,
on a permanent and complementary basis,
should be referred to the National Assembly
for approval.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In February, President Lasso issued Decree
355 granting pardons to 3,000 prisoners to
reduce overcrowding, promising that 1,400
more guards would be hired and that USD
125 million would be invested in the prison
system by 2025.
On 9 May, 44 prisoners were killed and 10
others injured at the Santo Domingo de los
Tsáchilas prison, amid a protracted crisis. At
least 146 people were killed in Ecuador’s
prisons in 2022, according to the Permanent

149

Committee for the Defence of Human
Rights.4

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In April, the president signed into law a bill
decriminalizing abortion in cases of rape. The
law includes restrictive conditions, including
allowing abortion only up to the 12th week of
pregnancy. In July, the Constitutional Court
modified the law to no longer require the
permission of legal guardians or third parties
for girls and adolescents who are victims of
rape and want to access abortion.
Authorities failed to guarantee access to
justice and protection services for refugee
women survivors of gender-based violence, in
particular those from Venezuela.
In September, the body was found of lawyer
María Belén Bernal. A victim of feminicide,
she disappeared after visiting the Police
College in the capital, Quito, earlier that
month.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
By the end of the year, authorities still had
not designed and implemented a national
policy for the protection of human rights
defenders at risk.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government had not announced a new
NDC since 2019.
1. “Ecuador: Constitutional Court ruling to protect Indigenous peoples
from mining projects affecting their human rights”, 10 February
2. Ecuador: Amazon at Risk: Submission to the 41st Session of the UPR
Working Group, 5 April
3. “Ecuador: Evidence confirms that security forces killed Indigenous
protester in Puyo”, 24 June (Spanish only)
4. “Ecuador: In light of new prison massacre, authorities must address
structural causes”, 10 May

EGYPT
Arab Republic of Egypt
Head of state: Abdel Fattah al-Sisi
Head of government: Moustafa Madbouly
Authorities severely repressed the rights to
freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly. In the lead-up to the
UN Climate Change Conference (COP27) in
November, authorities released 895
prisoners held for political reasons but
arrested nearly triple that number, including
hundreds linked to calls for protests during
COP27. Thousands of actual or perceived
government critics or opponents remained
arbitrarily detained and/or unjustly
prosecuted. No adequate investigations
were carried out into at least 50 suspicious
deaths in custody involving reports of denial
of adequate healthcare or torture. Death
sentences were handed down after grossly
unfair trials and executions were carried
out. Sexual and gender-based violence
remained prevalent, amid the authorities’
failure to adequately prevent and punish it.
Authorities repressed workers’ right to
strike, and failed to protect them from
unfair dismissal by companies. Residents of
informal settlements were forcibly evicted
and detained for protesting against home
demolitions. Authorities prosecuted
Christians demanding their right to worship
and others espousing religious beliefs not
sanctioned by the state. Refugees and
migrants were arbitrarily detained for
irregularly entering or staying in Egypt, and
dozens were forcibly returned to their home
country.

BACKGROUND
In October, Egypt reached a deal with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) on a USD
3 billion loan after it agreed to float the
Egyptian pound, amid a deepening financial
and economic crisis that had devastating
effects on people’s economic rights. Nearly a
third of June’s national budget was allocated
to debt repayment, and the budget failed to

150

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

meet the minimum constitutionally mandated
allocation of 3% and 6% of GDP to health
and education, respectively.
In April, the president announced a
“national dialogue” with the opposition.
Egypt’s human rights record came under
increased international scrutiny during
COP27, which took place in Sharm El-Sheikh
city in November.
Sporadic attacks by armed groups in North
Sinai continued, albeit at a reduced rate
compared to previous years. Tribal militias
played an increasing role in military
operations, successfully uprooting the
Province of Sinai armed group, an affiliate of
the armed group Islamic State, from several
villages around Rafah and Sheikh Zuwayed.
State media reported dozens of deaths and
injuries by explosive devices planted by the
armed group. In October, emergency
measures granting the defence minister
exceptional powers to impose curfews, close
schools and evacuate residents in “some
areas of the Sinai Peninsula” were extended
by six months.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to crush all forms of
peaceful dissent and stifle civic space.
Security forces arbitrarily arrested at least
11 journalists for their work or critical views.
At least 26 journalists remained arbitrarily
detained following convictions or pending
investigations into accusations of “spreading
false news”, “misusing social media” and/or
“terrorism”.
At least 600 news, human rights and other
websites remained blocked, according to
rights groups.
Authorities arbitrarily detained at least eight
human rights defenders, and subjected those
at liberty to surveillance, unlawful
summoning and coercive questioning.
Fifteen human rights defenders and NGO
staff were still subjected to investigation,
travel bans and asset freezes in relation to
the decade-long criminal investigation into
the legitimate work of civil society
organizations known as Case 173. In April,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

the government required all NGOs to register
under the draconian 2019 NGO law by April
2023 or face closure.
Political opponents were also targeted
through arbitrary detention, unfair
prosecution and other harassment. In May,
an emergency court sentenced former
presidential candidate and founder of Masr
al-Qawia party Abdelmoniem Aboulfotoh, and
its deputy head Mohamed al-Kassas, to 15
years and 10 years in prison, respectively, for
disseminating “false news”,“membership of a
terrorist group” and other bogus charges.
Authorities added 620 people, including
detained journalists and opposition
politicians, to their “list of terrorists” without
due process, effectively banning them from
engaging in civic or political work or travelling
abroad for five years.
In the lead-up to COP27, security forces
arrested hundreds of people in connection
with protests planned during the conference.
Among them was Abdelsalam Abdelghany,
arrested in September at his home in the
capital, Cairo, after he supported calls for
protests during COP27 on social media. He
remained detained pending investigations on
charges of “spreading false news” and
“joining a terrorist group”.
During COP27, security forces subjected
participants to interrogations, surveillance
and other forms of harassment, and denied
entry to Egypt during COP27 to Italian
national Giorgio Caracciolo of the anti-torture
group DIGNITY.
On 6 November, British-Egyptian activist
Alaa Abdel Fattah, who had been on hunger
strike in protest at his arbitrary detention and
denial of consular visits since April, also
stopped drinking water. On 11 November, he
was fed intravenously after he lost
consciousness. He remained arbitrarily
detained and in poor health at the end of the
year.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
After the president announced the
reactivation of the Presidential Pardons
Committee (PPC) in April, authorities ordered

151

the release of 895 people held for political
reasons and dozens of others for failure to
pay debts.1 Security forces refused to release
at least 33 of them, unlawfully summoned
others for questioning and threatened to rearrest them for speaking out. Activist Sherif
al-Rouby was released in May and rearrested in September after he publicly
complained about hardships facing former
prisoners. Security forces arbitrarily banned
from travelling human rights lawyer Mahinour
el-Masry, researcher Ahmed Samir Santawy
and others released in 2022.
From the reactivation of the PPC in April to
the end of the year, 2,562 suspected critics
or opponents of the government were
arrested and interrogated by the Supreme
State Security Prosecution, while thousands
remained detained arbitrarily for exercising
their human rights. Lawyer Youssef Mansour
remained arbitrarily detained since his arrest
in March for criticizing abuses against a
client.
Prosecutors and judges routinely renewed
the pretrial detention of thousands of people
held on unfounded terrorism or securityrelated charges. A new online system for
detention-renewal hearings in Badr 3 prison
violated detainees’ right to adequate defence
and to challenge the legality of their
detention.
Defendants’ rights to a fair trial were
routinely flouted, with security forces
preventing private meetings with lawyers.
Convictions and trials of government
opponents and human rights defenders by
inherently unfair emergency courts continued
despite the lifting of the state of emergency in
October 2021.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES,
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Prosecutors routinely failed to order
investigations into complaints of enforced
disappearances, torture and other illtreatment.
Security forces subjected hundreds of
detainees to enforced disappearance, some
for months. National Security Agency (NSA)
officers arrested Abdel Rahman al-Saeed on

152

23 March at his home after he posted a video
on social media criticizing the rising cost of
living. He remained forcibly disappeared until
19 April.
Torture remained rampant in prisons, police
stations and NSA-run facilities. After videos
depicting police abuse at Al-Salam First
police station in Cairo were leaked in January,
authorities convicted and sentenced 21 men,
a woman and a boy to between five years and
life in prison and added them to the “list of
terrorists”. Authorities did not open impartial
and effective investigations into the police
abuse.
In the second half of the year, authorities
moved hundreds of prisoners held for
political reasons from the Tora prison
complex south of Cairo to the new Wadi alNatrun prison complex north of Cairo and
Badr prison complex, north-east of Cairo.
There and elsewhere conditions were cruel
and inhuman, with prisoners reporting
overcrowding, poor ventilation, lack of
hygiene, and inadequate food, drinking
water, fresh air and exercise. Authorities
denied prisoners access to adequate
healthcare and imposed undue restrictions or
barred contact with the outside world, in
some cases deliberately to punish dissent.
Authorities imposed on all detainees in Badr
3 prison a blanket ban on family and lawyer
visits and written correspondence.

DEATH PENALTY
The courts, including terrorism-circuits of
criminal courts and emergency courts,
handed down death sentences after unfair
mass trials.
In June, a terrorism-circuit of the Cairo
Criminal Court sentenced 10 men to death
for “terrorism” and murder after a grossly
unfair trial. Many had been forcibly
disappeared and tortured, denied access to
their lawyers, and held in cruel and inhuman
conditions amounting to torture.2
While the rate of executions dropped from
previous years, the execution of individuals
convicted after grossly unfair trials continued.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS AND
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Four videos, which appeared online between
July and August, depicted the apparent
extrajudicial execution of three unarmed men
in custody by the military and affiliated tribal
militias in North Sinai. In one video, a visibly
injured young man, possibly under the age of
18, can be seen being questioned before
being shot dead by an individual in military
fatigues and boots.
Prosecutors failed to carry out independent
and effective investigations into the causes
and circumstances of at least 50 deaths in
custody following reports about denial of
adequate healthcare or about torture.
The Public Prosecution closed
investigations into the suspicious death in
custody of the economist Ayman Hadhoud on
18 April, ignoring evidence that the
authorities forcibly disappeared him on 5
February and then subjected him to torture
and other ill-treatment, and denied him
access to timely and adequate healthcare.3
In July, an Italian court halted the
prosecution of Egyptian security officers for
the torture and murder of Italian student
Giulio Regeni in 2016 amid the refusal of
Egyptian authorities to cooperate and
disclose the suspects’ locations.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Authorities failed to adequately prevent and
redress widespread sexual and gender-based
violence by state and non-state actors.
Between June and October, four young
women were killed by men whose advances
they rejected. Police did not act on
complaints of harassment lodged by Nayera
Ashraf against another student at the
University of Mansoura two months before he
stabbed her to death.
Authorities prosecuted activists speaking
out against sexual violence. In January, the
Court of Cassation upheld the conviction
against activist Amal Fathy for criticizing the
authorities’ failure to protect women from
sexual harassment, and sentenced her to one
year’s imprisonment.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In August, an economic court convicted
journalist Rasha Azab of “insult” and
“defamation” and fined her EGP 10,000
(USD 522) for expressing solidarity online
with survivors of sexual violence who
published anonymous testimonies accusing
film director Islam Azazi of sexual assaults.4
Authorities prosecuted women social media
influencers for their conduct on social media.
At least seven women remained imprisoned
on morality-related or other bogus charges.
Authorities continued to target individuals
based on their real or perceived sexual
orientation or gender identity. In April,
security forces arrested four men and two
transgender women at a mall in Cairo and
briefly detained them solely on the grounds of
their gender identity and their actual or
perceived sexual orientation. They reported
being verbally and physically abused. One of
the transgender women said she was sexually
harassed and forced to strip naked and
remove her hijab.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Authorities arrested workers and trade
unionists for staging peaceful strikes and
protests or seeking justice, and failed to
protect private sector workers from unfair
dismissal and other reprisals for seeking
better working conditions.
In February, security forces used police
dogs and tear gas to disperse a peaceful sitin by thousands of workers at the Universal
Group for Home Appliances, a private
company, and briefly detained three workers.
The Ministry of Manpower failed to address
the unfair dismissals of at least 65 workers in
May for their involvement in the strike.
Trade unionist Shady Mohamed was
detained in October pending investigations
on the charge of “joining a terrorist group”.
Prior to his arrest, he had filed a lawsuit
against his former employer challenging his
unfair dismissal.
In February, the upper house of parliament
approved a draft labour law that facilitates
unfair dismissals without adequate
compensation.

153

Authorities failed to act against private
companies that did not comply with the
minimum monthly wage after it came into
force in July.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The authorities continued to carry out forced
evictions in informal settlements and
arbitrarily arrested dozens of people for
protesting against demolition of their homes.
In August, security forces used unlawful
force against residents of Warraq Island
protesting against plans to evict them and
transform the island into a commercial
centre. Security forces used tear gas, beat
protesters with batons, and briefly detained
dozens. Subsequently, security forces
harassed residents at checkpoints and
suspended hospital and other services, in
what residents saw as attempts to drive them
out.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In June, Egypt issued an updated NDC, with
targets to cut emissions by 33%, 65% and
7% in the electricity, oil and gas, and
transport sectors, respectively, from
business-as-usual projections by 2030.
Experts pointed to concerns over the lack of
transparency in the NDC, failure to include
an overall emissions target and clear
baselines, and the conditioning of modest
targets on international financial support.
Experts deemed the pledges to be highly
insufficient to keep the rise of global
temperatures below 1.5°C.
Also in June, Egypt authorized Rosatom, the
Russian state-owned nuclear energy
corporation, to build a nuclear plant in Dabaa
town, Matrouh governorate. Egypt’s National
Climate Change Strategy cited nuclear energy
as an alternative source to fossil fuels despite
its harmful environmental impact and its high
financial cost relative to natural gas plants,
wind farms or photovoltaic solar plants of the
same capacity, according to analysis by the
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR),
a human rights NGO.

154

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued to discriminate against
Christians in law and practice, and
prosecuted Christians demanding their right
to worship.
The right to build or repair churches
remained restricted by a 2016 law requiring
approval from security agencies and other
state bodies. According to the EIPR, only
45% of applicants had been granted
preliminary approval to build or repair
churches since the enactment of the law.
In January, security forces arbitrarily
arrested nine residents of Ezbet Farag Allah
village in el-Minya governorate and detained
them for three months pending investigation
over accusations of “participating in a
gathering” and “committing a terrorist act”
for peacefully protesting against the
authorities’ refusal to rebuild the only church
in their village.5 The nine were released
without trial.
Members of religious minorities, atheists
and others not espousing state-sanctioned
religious beliefs were prosecuted and
imprisoned on “defamation of religion” and
other bogus charges. On 10 February, the
Court of Cassation upheld the three-year
prison sentence against blogger Anas Hassan
who was arrested in 2019 for running the
“Egyptian Atheists” Facebook page.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities continued to arbitrarily arrest and
detain refugees and migrants for irregularly
entering or staying in Egypt.
In March, authorities forcibly returned 31
Eritrean nationals to Eritrea, including women
and children, following prolonged arbitrary
detention in harsh conditions without allowing
them to challenge their detention or access
asylum procedures.6
1. “Egypt: Exclude security agencies from reviewing releases of jailed
critics”, 31 May
2. “Egypt: Quash death sentences in torture-tainted grossly unfair mass
trial”, 28 June
3. “Egypt: Investigate the suspicious death in custody of economist
Ayman Hadhoud following his enforced disappearance”, 14 April

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

4. “Egypt: End prosecution of rights defender for speaking out against
sexual violence”, 12 March
5. “Egypt: Release nine Coptic Christians detained for attempting to
rebuild church”, 30 March
6. “Egypt: Eritreans at imminent risk of deportation”, 25 March

EL SALVADOR
Republic of El Salvador
Head of state and government: Nayib Armando Bukele
Ortez
Authorities declared a state of emergency
resulting in massive human rights
violations, weakening of the rule of law, as
well as a continuous and serious
deterioration in access to public
information. Attacks against human rights
defenders and journalists remained
entrenched. Authorities failed to pass a law
guaranteeing the rights of victims of crimes
under international law committed during
the armed conflict (1980-1992). The
absolute prohibition of abortion remained in
force.

BACKGROUND
In March, following a proposal by President
Bukele, the Legislative Assembly decreed
and then extended a state of emergency for
nine months, which remained in effect at the
end of the year, and amended numerous
laws, in response to a spike in homicides
allegedly committed by gangs.
In September, the president announced his
intention to seek re-election, despite
criticisms from experts and organizations that
the constitution prohibits consecutive reelection.

ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Most of the more than 60,000 arrests made
during the state of emergency were allegedly
arbitrary because they did not comply with
legal requirements, namely that an arrest
warrant must be issued or the person caught
red-handed committing a crime. Some of the
arrests were based solely on individuals

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

having tattoos or a prior criminal record or
the fact that they were living in an area
controlled by a gang.1
Thousands of people were indiscriminately
prosecuted, most of whom were denied
contact with their legal representatives,
access to the case file, information on the
reasons for their detention or the right to be
heard at the indictment hearing. According to
local organizations and lawyers, hearings,
which were rushed, sometimes dealt with
hundreds of defendants at a time.
At the end of the year, President Bukele
announced the imposition of a military siege
on some areas and cities as a
complementary measure to the state of
emergency. In December alone, the military
and police encircled three of the most
populous and poorest cities, arresting
hundreds of people on suspicion of being
gang members. The Legislative Assembly
approved criminal and procedural
amendments contrary to international law.
These included holding hearings and issuing
sentences without the accused being present
and withholding the identity of the judges, as
well as abolishing maximum periods of
pretrial detention.
According to local organizations, as of
August, 89% of the habeas corpus writs filed
in defence of people detained during the
state of emergency had not been resolved.
Both the minister of security and the
chairman of the ruling party announced their
intention to extend the state of emergency
throughout 2023.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
During the state of emergency, El Salvador
had the highest rate of people deprived of
liberty of any country in the world, with 1,927
people imprisoned per 100,000 inhabitants.
By the end of the year, there were more than
94,000 people detained in the country,
despite the fact that the holding capacity of
the country’s prisons, as of February 2021,
was 30,864, according to official data
obtained by local organizations.

155

Extreme overcrowding resulted in violations
of the right to life and physical integrity and
caused serious sanitation problems and
shortages of food and basic hygiene supplies,
seriously affecting the health of detainees.
Cases were documented where prisoners
were ill-treated by prison guards, as well as
cases of torture by gang members, including
beatings, lynchings and constant threats,
which prison officials did not attempt to
prevent.
At least 90 men were reported to have died
in state custody as of November. Civil society
organizations reported that numerous death
certificates documented signs of torture. In a
large number of cases, organizations
reported that the authorities did not officially
inform the families of the deaths. There was
no publicly available evidence that these
events were being diligently investigated.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
At the beginning of 2022, the organizations
Access Now, CitizenLab and Amnesty
International confirmed that the mobile
phones of several journalists and members of
civil society organizations had been infected
with Pegasus spyware. At the end of the year,
there was no information that this was being
diligently investigated.
In February, the Legislative Assembly
approved amendments to the criminal law
allowing the use of “digital undercover
agents”, which would permit police to
implement “necessary” digital undercover
operations. The Association of Journalists of
El Salvador (APES) warned that vagueness
and inconsistencies in the law risked leading
to the legalization of abusive surveillance.
In April, the Penal Code was modified to
provide for prison sentences of between 10
and 15 years for those who generate
“anxiety” or “panic” by reporting on gangs, in
an attempt to silence the press. APES
registered 125 attacks against journalists and
reported that 11 had fled the country during
2022 in a context of threats on social media
and public accusations by government
figures.

156

National organizations highlighted the
deterioration of access to public information
and transparency.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
During the state of emergency, the president
adopted a confrontational public discourse
that stigmatized and attacked human rights
defenders, international organizations and
the independent media.
In the first half of 2022, 61 attacks were
recorded against human rights defenders,
according to the human rights organization
Mesa por el Derecho a Defender Derechos.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A total ban on abortion remained in force. At
least two women remained imprisoned and
six faced legal proceedings on charges
relating to obstetric emergencies. In July, a
young woman was sentenced to 50 years in
prison for an obstetric emergency, the first
time the maximum prison term had been
applied.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The authorities continued to fail to adopt
adequate legislation to fully guarantee the
rights of victims of crimes under international
law committed during the armed conflict
(1980-1992).
There was little progress in investigating and
bringing to justice those suspected of
criminal responsibility for the crimes
committed during the armed conflict.
1. “El Salvador: President Bukele engulfs the country in a human rights
crisis after three years in government”, 2 June

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
Republic of Equatorial Guinea
Head of state and government: Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo
The authorities conducted arbitrary arrests
and detentions, torture and other illtreatment and enforced disappearances,
including in the context of the presidential
election and the so-called “Cleaning
Operation” against criminal gangs. Impunity
for sexual violence continued. Pregnant
girls remained banned from attending
school. Undocumented migrants were
deported amid a lack of due process. LGBTI
people continued to face multiple forms of
discrimination. The death penalty was
abolished in the Penal Code but remained
in the Code of Military Justice.

BACKGROUND
Staff of the International Monetary Fund
visited Equatorial Guinea in May and warned
of the urgent need to mitigate the impact of
rising food and fuel prices on people living in
poverty.
In September the ruling party nominated
President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
in power for 43 years, to be its candidate for
the November presidential elections. He was
re-elected with 94.9% of the vote.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In May, in response to an alleged increase in
crime, Vice-President Nguema Obiang
Mangue launched a national so-called
“Cleaning Operation” to counter gang crime.
During a single week in May, more than 400
young males were arrested by security forces.
Three months after the start of the operation,
thousands more had reportedly been
arrested across the country. Judges granted
parole to some of those arrested due to a lack
of evidence. In many cases, individuals were
ill-treated by the security forces during their
arrest and detention; at least four died in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

prison. The whereabouts of many others
remained unknown, and their families often
had little or no news.1
Former minister of justice Ruben Maye
Nsue Mangue was arrested on 7 August after
criticizing the president on social networks.
Civil society organizations had no news of his
whereabouts for many days. He remained in
detention at Mongomo prison at the end of
the year.
On 29 September, police arrested the leader
of the opposition party Citizens for Innovation,
Gabriel Nse Obiang Obono, and more than
150 of his supporters who were gathered at
the party’s headquarters in Malabo.
According to the authorities, four activists
died from tear gas inhalation during the
arrests, while Citizens for Innovation issued a
list of nine fatalities. A police officer also
reportedly died. On 6 October, 119 of the
supporters were released without charge.
Citizens for Innovation had been dissolved by
the authorities in 2018. Gabriel Nse Obiang
Obono had previously refused to respond to a
judicial summons. A few days before the
arrests, he threatened that there might be
demonstrations if he was not allowed to run
in the presidential elections. He was still
detained at the end of the year.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
On 28 July, a 16-year-old girl was raped by
an alleged member of the army forces
deployed on Annobón Island. A complaint
was filed but no information was available on
any follow-up. Some inhabitants of the island
reported to the authorities that other cases of
sexual violence by members of the defence
and security forces had been committed
previously with impunity. There were no
investigations into these allegations and some
of the accused were simply transferred
elsewhere in the country.
Pregnant girls continued to be banned from
attending school following an order issued by
the Ministry of Education in 2016. However,
in its 2022 intermediate UPR report, the
government mentioned the adoption of
measures to reintegrate pregnant girls into
the education system after they give birth.

157

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

DEATH PENALTY

Between January and March, dozens of
irregular migrants were deported to their
home countries without due process and
without access to a lawyer prior to
deportation orders being carried out.
According to local organizations, more than
500 people – mainly nationals of Cameroon,
Nigeria, Senegal, Côte d’Ivoire, Central
African Republic, Chad and Mali – had been
arrested during a government campaign
against irregular migrants accompanied by
immigration raids that took place between 30
October 2021 and early December 2021 in
major cities. Other people detained in the
context of this campaign were released
weeks after their arrest but did not receive
any explanation for their detention and were
never charged. Others, including Abdoulay
Ndom and Mouamed Kalouare from Mali,
Toba Mammed from Guinea, and Lamin
Sisoko from Côte d’Ivoire, were detained for
almost six months before being released in
May 2022. Along with the vast majority of
detained individuals, they did not receive any
legal assistance, nor were they given access
to appropriate legal procedures and due
process relating to their detention.2
Following criticism from migrants’ countries
of origin, the government extended the period
for undocumented migrants to regularize
their status until the end of August. It then
resumed its campaign against irregular
migrants.

On 19 September the president promulgated
the new penal code which abolished the
death penalty. However, death penalty
provisions remained in the Code of Military
Justice.

LGBTI PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face multiple
forms of discrimination in aspects of their
lives including work, education and leisure.
In its intermediate UPR report, the authorities
reported that draft legislation regulating sex
work and the rights of LGBTI people was still
being prepared. The draft legislation
reportedly included prevention of
“exhibitionism” and homosexual
“propaganda” and a provision to safeguard
the “moral integrity of the social majority”,
implicitly perpetuating discrimination, stigma
and violence against LGBTI people.

158

1. “Equatorial Guinea: ‘Cleaning Operation’ tramples on human rights,
not crime”, 18 August
2. “Equatorial Guinea: Illegally detained irregular migrants must be
released”, 29 April

ERITREA
State of Eritrea
Head of state and government: Isaias Afwerki
The authorities continued to subject
journalists, political dissidents, leaders and
members of religious congregations to
arbitrary detention, in some cases
amounting to enforced disappearance.
Conscripts to mandatory national service
were forced to serve for indefinite periods.
Allegations of sexual violence by military
commanders against conscripts in the Sawa
training camp persisted. Eritrea did not
provide information about its Covid-19
vaccination programme.

BACKGROUND
Despite being a member of the UN Human
Rights Council, Eritrea persistently failed to
engage with international human rights
mechanisms. It did not respond to requests
for country visits from the UN Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Eritrea, a mandate established in 2012, or
legislate for the protection of human rights in
line with the human rights treaties it had
ratified.
Eritrean forces deployed in northern
Ethiopia, mainly in Western Tigray Zone,
since 2020, were complicit in the ethnic
cleansing campaign against Tigrayan
residents, carrying out extrajudicial
executions, arbitrary detentions, rapes and
other forms of sexual violence, and forced
displacement (see Ethiopia entry).

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The authorities continued to subject
journalists, political dissidents, leaders and
members of religious congregations to
arbitrary detention amounting to enforced
disappearance. The fate and whereabouts of
11 members of the G-15 remained unknown
since their arrest by security forces in
September 2001. The G-15 are a group of 15
veteran politicians who oppose President
Afwerki. The 11 members were arrested after
writing an open letter to the president
demanding that he implement the draft
constitution and hold open elections. The
whereabouts and fate of a Swedish journalist,
Dawit Isaak, and another 16 individuals who
were assumed to have worked with the G-15
also remained unknown.
Ciham Ali and Berhane Abrehe disappeared
after being arrested in 2012 and 2018,
respectively. Ciham Ali, an Eritrean/US
national, was arrested when she was 15 at
the Sudan border in 2012 as she tried to flee
Eritrea after her father Ali Abdu, then a
minister of information, had defected and
gone into exile. Berhane Abrehe, a former
minister of finance, was arrested in
September 2018, a few days after publishing
a book called My Country Eritrea which
criticized the government. Shortly before the
book’s publication, he had challenged the
president to a televised debate.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Thousands of people were arbitrarily
detained. Abune Antonios, the Patriarch of
the Eritrean Orthodox Church, died in
February aged 94. He had been held under
unlawful house arrest since 2006, after the
authorities removed him from his position in
the church for openly criticizing government
policies. He was never charged with or
convicted of a recognizable criminal offence.
A day after his funeral on 10 February, the
authorities arrested 11 people who had
attended his funeral; they were released
without charge after four days.
In October, security forces arrested three
high-ranking Catholic clergymen. On 11
October, two priests – Abba Mihretab

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Stefanos, from Saint Michael’s Church parish
in Segeneity, a southern town, and Abba
Abreham, from the western town of Teseney
– were arrested. On 15 October, Bishop
Abune Fikremariam Hagos, also from
Segeneity, was arrested at Asmara
International Airport after arriving from
Europe. According to multiple sources, they
were detained without charge in Adi-Abieto
prison. Bishop Fikremariam and Abba
Mihretab were released from detention on 28
December.

FORCED LABOUR
The government continued to conscript highschool students to the mandatory national
military service programme. Conscripts
served indefinite periods of service beyond
the legal limit of 18 months.
Government forces conducted multiple
raids known in Tigrinya as giffa in which they
rounded up youths from the streets for
military service. Government officials
allegedly forced parents to bring children who
had evaded conscription to register for
national service. In July, they transported
thousands of high-school students, many of
them under 18, to attend their final year at
Warsai-Yikealo school in Sawa Military
Training Centre. After sitting their schoolleaving exams, students continued to be
forced into military training at the Sawa
training centre. Students accused of minor
infractions at Warsai-Yikealo school and
conscripts at the training centre were
commonly subjected to physical
punishments amounting to torture and other
ill-treatment. Allegations of sexual violence by
military commanders at the centre were also
common. The authorities did not allow for
conscientious objection to military service.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Eritrea remained the only country in Africa,
and one of the few countries in the world, not
to report on its administration of the Covid-19
vaccine. It did not access vaccines through
COVAX, a global risk-sharing mechanism for
pooled procurement and equitable
distribution of Covid-19 vaccines.

159

ESTONIA
Republic of Estonia
Head of state: Alar Karis
Head of government: Kaja Kallas
The lack of comprehensive antidiscrimination legislation persisted. The
definition of rape was still not based on
consent. Parliament adopted amendments
to the State Borders Act which violate the
European Convention on Human Rights and
the UN Refugee Convention. Same-sex
couples faced discrimination under the
Names Act.

DISCRIMINATION
In May, the CERD Committee raised
concerns about Estonia’s continued lack of
comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation.
The committee recommended adopting a
national plan to end statelessness and
address the persistently high number of
people with undetermined citizenship. It also
recommended that Estonia end its “punitive
approach” to the promotion of the official
language, in particular regarding access to
employment.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In its first evaluation report based on a visit in
February, the Group of Experts monitoring
the implementation of the Council of Europe
Convention on preventing and combating
violence against women and domestic
violence (GREVIO) welcomed the efforts
taken towards implementing the Convention
but noted that measures did not yet address
all forms of violence against women in a
holistic and comprehensive manner, as well
as the lack of a consent-based definition of
rape in the criminal code.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, the government fast-tracked
amendments to the State Borders Act to
allow border guards to summarily and forcibly
return migrants and asylum seekers without
an individual decision and to refuse

160

applications for international protection if the
claim is not made at a designated border
crossing. Both UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, and the Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights had raised
concerns previously and urged the Estonian
parliament to refrain from such provisions,
which violate the European Convention on
Human Rights and the UN Refugee
Convention. They reminded the parliament
that protection against forced returns is a
non-derogable right and thus should not be
denied because a country faces an
emergency situation or because people arrive
in an irregular manner.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Despite several Supreme Court rulings that
the fundamental right to the family also
extends to same-sex couples who live in a
registered partnership, it was still not possible
to have a common surname under the
Names Act without being married, effectively
preventing same-sex couples from sharing a
surname.

ESWATINI
Kingdom of Eswatini
Head of state: Mswati III
Head of government: Cleopas Dlamini
Fundamental freedoms were suppressed.
Political activists were arrested, subjected
to torture and other ill-treatment and their
homes were raided by security forces.
Peaceful protests were violently dispersed,
and the government denied human rights
concerns raised by UN Special Rapporteurs.
Hundreds remained at risk of forced
eviction. LGBTI people faced
discrimination, harassment and exclusion.
Women’s rights organizations continued to
raise concerns about gender-based violence.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Security forces continued to intimidate and
harass dissenters. On 31 January, Colani
Maseko, president of the Swaziland National

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Union of Students, was abducted by plainclothes Criminal Investigation Department
officers under the guise of “questioning”. He
was released on bail on 4 February after
being charged with sedition and damage to
property.1 In May, he was again abducted
outside the University of Eswatini by soldiers
who beat him and then took him to Matsapha
police station from where he was later taken
to hospital. Another student union leader,
Sakhile Nxumalo, was abducted by police
officers on 1 February, assaulted, including
by being electrocuted, and released the same
day without charge.
Police targeted Tibusiso Mdluli and
Nontsetselelo Nkambule of the People’s
United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO) for
wearing their party regalia during a protest in
Mbabane city on 23 March. They were put in
a police vehicle, stripped, insulted and
brutally beaten by over 40 police officers,
mostly men, and dumped in Mvutshini
township.
In August, the king publicly praised the
police and encouraged officers to take an
“eye for an eye”.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to use the 1938
Sedition and Subversive Activities Act and the
2008 Suppression of Terrorism Act (STA) to
silence critics.
In June, Zweli Martin Dlamini, editor of
Swaziland News, one of the country’s few
independent online newspapers, was
declared a terrorist under the STA.
In July, three UN Special Rapporteurs and
other UN representatives raised concerns
about the “severe restrictions of fundamental
freedoms” in relation to the repression of
mass protests, among other violations. The
government denied responsibility for the
violations.
On 1 September, the government banned
South African national Sicelo Mngomezulu
from entering the country following his
remarks about the Annual Reed Dance (a
cultural event). However, the ban may have
arisen from his being a member of MPs

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Mduduzi Bacede Mabuza and Mthandeni
Dube’s legal team. The MPs were detained in
2021 on trumped-up charges under the STA,
and for contravening Covid-19 regulations.
They were brutally assaulted by correctional
services officers in the early hours of 22
September and denied medical care for over
24 hours until their lawyer filed an application
at the court.
On 20 September, the home of PUDEMO’s
president, Mlungisi Makhaya, was bombed,
reportedly by state agents. He and his family
were out and no one was injured.

FORCED EVICTIONS
In April, a landowner enforced an eviction
order against more than eight homesteads in
KaMbhoke village in the Shiselweni region.
The homes of over 30 people were destroyed,
while violent protests by youths in the
community prevented some demolitions. No
alternative housing was provided.
In July, a landowner notified the Gege
community in Mbondzela farm, of his court
application to have them evicted from the
land which they farm. Meanwhile, the
residents were told to stop farming the land,
putting them at risk of food insecurity. The
move affected about 45 homesteads.
The Farm Dwellers Control Amendment Bill,
which aims to regulate relations between
farm dwellers and farm owners, remained
pending at the senate.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination, harassment and exclusion. In
April, the High Court upheld the Registrar of
Companies’ refusal to register the Eswatini
Sexual and Gender Minorities advocacy
group as an organization. In September, a
mob harassed a gay couple in Mbabane,
mocking them for “pretending to be women”.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Gender-based violence was widespread. On
11 February, a woman was killed in
Nhlangano by her former partner who
stabbed her approximately 40 times. The
perpetrator later died in hospital after being

161

attacked by a mob. Women’s rights
organizations intensified calls for the
declaration of a national emergency, signing
up to the Eswatini Gender Based Violence
Charter to end such crimes. Described as a
“people’s initiative”, the charter was
championed by the American Bar
Association in partnership with civil society
groups and the government.
1. “Eswatini: Student activist arbitrarily detained, facing malicious
charges must be released immediately”, 1 February

ETHIOPIA
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Head of state: Sahle-Work Zewde
Head of government: Abiy Ahmed Ali
The federal government continued to
impose restrictions on humanitarian aid to
Tigray and halted all deliveries in August
until November. Thousands of Tigrayan
detainees were held arbitrarily in dire
conditions, often in unofficial places of
detention without access to lawyers.
Opposition leaders were held in violation of
court orders for their release. Government
security forces and armed groups were
responsible for the unlawful killings of
civilians, which in some cases may have
amounted to war crimes. Promises to
investigate these crimes remained
unfulfilled. Multiple incidents of conflictrelated rape and other sexual violence were
committed by Tigrayan forces in the Afar
region. The right to freedom of expression
was significantly eroded.

BACKGROUND
The conflict in Tigray spread to other regions
of the country, primarily Amhara and Afar.
Armed conflict and violence in the Somali,
Southern, Gambela, Oromia, Amhara and
Benishangul-Gumuz regions killed thousands
of civilians and displaced communities.
Conflict and climate change-related drought
in Afar, Amhara, Oromia, Somali and other

162

regions left millions in need of humanitarian
assistance.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Since the start of the conflict in November
2020, the government had imposed
restrictions on humanitarian aid to Tigray. In
March 2022, it declared a humanitarian
truce that allowed the number of aid convoys
to the region to increase significantly but
delivery was stopped completely in August
until November, following the resumption of
fighting. The government’s closure of banking
and communications services in Tigray
compounded the humanitarian crisis. In
November, however, the cessation of
hostilities (Pretoria) agreement was signed
and deliveries, phone communication and
passenger flights to Tigray partially resumed.
According to the UN International
Commission of Human Rights Experts on
Ethiopia, the government used starvation as a
method of warfare.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The government’s mass detentions, targeting
ethnic Tigrayans in many parts of the country
including Western Tigray, Afar, Addis Ababa
and Amhara, could have amounted to war
crimes. Thousands of detainees were held in
official and unofficial places of detention
without judicial oversight of their detention
and without access to lawyers. Detention
conditions in Western Tigray were particularly
dire because the authorities did not provide
food and water for the detainees. Local
communities provided some food and water,
but it was insufficient.
In January, security forces forcibly
transferred thousands of Tigrayan residents
from Afar to a detention camp near Semera
city, where they remained for months. The
forced transfer of civilians, when not justified
for their protection, and their subsequent
arbitrary detention may amount to a war
crime. Tens of thousands of the Tigrayan
residents of Addis Ababa and other cities,
who had been detained since the state of
emergency was declared in November 2021,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

were released without charge after it was
lifted in February.
The government continued to unlawfully
detain Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) senior
leaders Michael Boran, Kenesa Ayana, Geda
Aoljira, Dawit Abdeta, Lemi Benya, Geda
Gebisa and Abdi Regassa. They had been in
detention since 2020, despite multiple court
orders for their release. Following an order by
the Federal Supreme Court in May, the police
released Colonel Gemechu Ayana, another
senior OLF official, who had been detained
for nearly two years on terrorism charges.
Dawud Ibsa, the OLF chair, was released
from house arrest in March after the National
Election Board of Ethiopia demanded his
release. He had been under house arrest
since May 2021.
In March and April, police arrested at least
30 members and leaders of the Balderas for
True Democracy, an opposition political party,
while they were celebrating public holidays in
Addis Ababa. They were released without
charge days later. In June, Sintayehu Chekol,
a senior leader of Balderas, was arrested in
Bahir Dar. The court ordered his release on
bail, but the police moved him to Addis
Ababa, where he was kept in detention and
repeatedly moved to different police stations
until his release in November.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Security forces and armed groups carried out
multiple unlawful killings, targeting civilians in
the Oromia, Benishangul-Gumuz, Amhara,
Tigray and Gambela regions, many of which
may have amounted to war crimes. In March,
the Ethiopian Government Communications
Service promised to conduct investigations
and prosecute those responsible for the
killings, but by the end of the year there was
no public information on the progress of
those investigations or prosecutions.
In March, a video was circulated on social
media showing security forces burning three
people alive. In June, a video of a mass
killing in Oromo Special Zone in Amhara
region was widely circulated. It showed
Amhara militias shooting and killing dozens

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

of people after forcing them from the back of
a truck.
Also in June, at least 400 Amhara civilians,
mainly women and children, were summarily
killed during a five-hour attack in the Tole
locality of West Wellega Zone, allegedly by
Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) forces. Security
forces near the area and local authorities
failed to intervene to stop the attack. In July,
similar attacks on Amhara residents in Qelem
Wellega Zone, allegedly by OLA forces who
targeted hundreds of ethnic Amhara
residents, were also reported.
In August and September, Amhara Fano
militias and OLA forces killed hundreds of
ethnic Amhara and Oromo civilians in an
attack in the Horo Guduru Wellega Zone of
Oromia. On 30 and 31 August, Amhara Fano
forces attacked Agamsa, a town in Horo
Guduru, killing at least 60 Oromo civilians. In
September, hundreds of Oromo and Amhara
civilians of three districts in Horo Guduru
were killed, allegedly in retaliatory attacks,
again by Amhara Fano militias and OLA
forces.
In January, in Abala, a town in Afar region
which borders Tigray, hundreds of civilians
were killed by Tigrayan forces and Afar police
and militias. During the fight for control of
Abala, Afar forces killed Tigrayan civilians in
the town and the Tigrayan forces shelled it
with artillery, indiscriminately killing dozens
more, which amounted to war crimes.
Multiple air strikes in Tigray killed hundreds
of civilians. According to the UN, air strikes in
January, allegedly carried out by government
forces, killed more than 100 civilians in
Dedebit. Following the resumption of
hostilities between the federal army and the
Tigrayan forces in August, air strikes on
Mekelle and Adi Daero in August and
September killed hundreds of civilians,
including children. One air strike on a
kindergarten in Mekelle on 26 August killed
at least nine civilians, including children.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Multiple incidents of conflict-related rape and
other sexual violence were carried out by
Tigrayan forces in Afar region. Four survivors

163

reported that they were raped and abused by
members of the Tigrayan forces. One survivor
said she was raped with her teenage
daughter, who became pregnant as a result.
Survivors faced health and psycho-social
complications as a result of their ordeals,
including abandonment by their husbands
and social stigma. Many survivors felt unable
to report their experiences due to the
potential risks to their livelihoods and
families.

In September, Alemu Sime, a senior
government official, called a meeting of civil
society organizations and gave 35 of them an
official warning for publicly calling for a
ceasefire and peace talks to end the conflicts
ahead of the Ethiopian New Year. Days
before, security forces had prohibited a
media conference organized by civil society
organizations and individuals to publicize
their joint call for peace.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

FIJI

The right to freedom of expression was
significantly eroded, with authorities arresting
at least 29 journalists and media workers in
Tigray, Addis Ababa, Amhara and Oromia.
The Tigrayan authorities charged five
journalists with “collaboration with the
enemy”; elsewhere, detained journalists and
media workers were rarely formally charged.
When detained journalists were granted bail,
the police delayed their release by appealing
against bail decisions.
In May, the police arrested Temesgen
Dessalegn, editor of Feteh magazine, and
subsequently charged him with disclosing
military secrets and spreading false rumours.
He was released on bail of ETB 30,000
(about USD 560) in November. Journalists
including Gobeze Sisay, Meskerem Abera
and Yayesew Shimelis were arrested by
security forces in May; Yayesew Shimelis was
re-arrested on 28 June, a week after his
release. They were held for days without
access to family or lawyers, before being
released. In May, the authorities also expelled
Tom Gardner, a journalist working for The
Economist newspaper based in Addis Ababa,
after he experienced online harassment by
government supporters for his reporting on
Ethiopia. Meskerem Abera remained in
detention after being re-arrested in
December by the federal police on allegations
including incitement to violence and
defamation of the national defence forces.
On 30 December, police arrested musician
Tewodros Assefa and held him for a day for
lyrics that criticized corruption by local
authorities in Addis Ababa.

164

Republic of Fiji
Head of state: Wiliame Maivalili Katonivere
Head of government: Sitiveni Ligamamada Rabuka
(replaced Frank Bainimarama in December)
Repressive laws and defamation suits were
used to silence government critics. A new
electoral law discriminated against married
women. Members of the security forces
were held accountable for past incidents of
ill-treatment, but police use of unnecessary
or excessive force against suspects
continued to be reported.

BACKGROUND
Fiji’s elections, held on 14 December,
resulted in the first change of government
since the 2006 coup, with former Prime
Minister Rabuka gaining support of the
majority of seats in parliament. In one of his
first acts as head of government, he officially
reversed the politically motivated travel bans
against the Vice Chancellor and President of
the University of the South Pacific (Pal
Ahluwalia) and a Fijian academic (Padma
Lal).
Heads of governments at the Fiji-hosted
Pacific Islands Leaders Forum Meeting in
July agreed to seek an Advisory Opinion from
the International Court of Justice on the
obligations of states under international law to
protect the rights of present and future
generations against the adverse impacts of
climate change.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained restricted
under the Public Order Act (as amended in
2012) and the Media Industry Development
Act (2010), while defamation suits and other
politically motivated proceedings were used
against political opponents and other
government critics.
In November, lawyer Richard Naidu was
convicted of contempt of court for
highlighting on social media a spelling
mistake in a court judgment. He planned to
appeal against the conviction, which Amnesty
International and other legal and nongovernmental organizations have called on
the authorities to drop.1
In August, lawyer and politician Aman
Ravindra Singh was sentenced in his
absence to 10 months in prison for contempt
of court in relation to non-payment of a fine
in a defamation case filed against him in
2018 by the then-Prime Minister and
Attorney General for posting messages on
Facebook that were critical of them.
Concerns were raised about restrictions on
media coverage of a visit to Fiji in February
by China’s foreign minister.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND
DISCRIMINATION
A study published in May by the University of
the South Pacific found 80% of women
journalists in Fiji experienced sexual
harassment in the workplace.
The High Court did not rule on a legal
challenge to a new electoral law which
discriminated against women prior to the
closure of voter registration for the December
parliamentary elections. There were concerns
that the law, which required women who
wished to vote under their married name to
apply for their name to be changed on their
birth certificate, created obstacles to women’s
participation in the political process.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, a police officer was suspended from
duty after video footage emerged of him
violently assaulting a bus driver during an
arrest in the town of Labasa.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In August, two military and three police
officers were sentenced to four years’
imprisonment each for sexually assaulting an
escaped prisoner, Iowane Benedito, in 2012.
In the case of two of the officers, who were
already serving prison sentences for the rape
in 2014 of Vilikesa Soko (who died as a result
of his injuries) and another man, Senijeli
Boila, the new sentence was given as
concurrent, meaning that their expected time
in prison remained unchanged.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In April, the Suva High Court fined a property
development company linked in media
reports to China FJD 1 million (approximately
USD 433,000) for destroying mangroves and
a coral reef during a tourism development
project on Malolo Island.
1. “Fiji: contempt proceedings over highlighting spelling mistake inject
climate of fear”, 9 August

FINLAND
Republic of Finland
Head of state: Sauli Niinistö
Head of government: Sanna Marin
Protests blocking streets were regularly
dispersed. Climate action was insufficient.
A new law on sexual violence was enacted
and reform of the law on legal gender
recognition was presented to parliament.
Legislation allowing the hindrance of the
right to seek asylum was adopted. A bill
protecting the rights of the Sámi people was
introduced.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Police regularly dispersed demonstrations
blocking streets and disrupting traffic, failing
to recognize that these acts of civil
disobedience should not be dispersed purely
because they caused disruption. There was a
lack of training and guidance about policing
protests. In August, Stockholm police
detained and deported six Finnish climate
activists on their way to join a peaceful

165

climate action, allegedly based on vague
information from the Finnish police.1

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In July, Finland amended the Climate Change
Act, setting a target to achieve carbon
neutrality by 2035. Concerns were raised
about the adequacy of planned measures
and resources for their implementation.2

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In June, new legislation amended the
definition of rape to align with human rights
standards, based on lack of consent
assessed in the surrounding circumstances.
In certain cases, when there is abuse of a
position of authority, the crime continues to
be defined as sexual abuse not rape.
New sexual assault support centres were
established, bringing the total to 21.3

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In September, the government introduced a
bill to make legal gender recognition available
to adults upon written application. While the
new law would abolish the requirements of
forced infertility and psychiatric diagnosis, it
would introduce a mandatory period of
reflection for applicants and would not
include a gender recognition system for
minors.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, amendments to the Border Guard Act
enabled the reception of asylum applications
to be centralized at a separately designated
crossing point, meaning that the eastern
border with Russia could be closed to asylum
seekers. The amendments included the
possibility of building barriers in the border
zone and the government started building a
fence along parts of the eastern border. This
could impede asylum seekers’ access to
territory to apply for international protection
and result in forced returns in violation of the
principle of non-refoulement. In June, the
government presented a bill introducing
border procedures that included holding
asylum seekers in supervised facilities at the
border, from which they would not be allowed

166

to leave. This would severely limit their
freedom of movement, amounting to de facto
detention.
During the year, over 45,000 temporary
protection permits were granted to people
fleeing conflict in Ukraine. Protection was
granted to all Ukrainians irrespective of their
time of arrival.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In November, the government introduced a
bill to reform the Act on the Sámi Parliament
to enhance the protection of the rights of
Sámi people.
1. “Open letter to the Stockholm Police by Amnesty International Finnish
and Swedish sections”, 31 August (Finnish and Swedish only)
2. Finland: Time to Address Remaining Gaps in Human Rights
Protection: Amnesty International Submission for the 41st Session of
the UPR Working Group, 7-18 November 2022, 31 March
3. Finland: Submission to the UN Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women: 83rd session, 10﻿-28 October 2022,
27 September

FRANCE
French Republic
Head of state: Emmanuel Macron
Head of government: Élisabeth Borne (replaced Jean
Castex in May)
Racial and religious discrimination
persisted, especially targeting Muslim
individuals and associations. Excessive use
of force by police continued without
accountability. The law on “republican
values” restricted freedom of association.
The European Court of Human Rights found
that France violated the rights of Chechen
refugees and destitute asylum seekers.
France failed to comply with air quality
standards. A former Liberian rebel
commander was sentenced for wartime
atrocities in Liberia. A criminal complaint
was filed against three French arms
companies for possible complicity in war
crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Yemen. Severe overcrowding

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

in prisons resulted in inhumane and
degrading detention conditions.

DISCRIMINATION
MUSLIM WOMEN’S RIGHTS
A collective of women footballers, Les
Hijabeuses, was unlawfully prevented from
holding a protest during a parliamentary
debate on a proposal to ban the wearing of
religious clothing in competitive sport. Tabled
as an amendment to the Democratizing
Sports bill, the proposal would have
reinforced an existing discriminatory ban
preventing Muslim women from participating
in competitive football if they chose to wear a
headscarf. An administrative tribunal
overruled the protest ban, albeit after the
protest itself had been abandoned. Although
the amendment was not adopted,
parliamentary debates on the subject were
marred by discriminatory rhetoric.1
At year’s end, France’s highest
administrative court, the Council of State
(Conseil d’État), was yet to rule on a
complaint brought by Les Hijabeuses in
November 2021 against the French Football
Federation’s discriminatory policy prohibiting
women who wear headscarves from
participating in competitive football matches.
In June, the Council of State upheld a lower
court ruling banning the use of full-body
swimwear – so-called “burkinis” – in public
swimming pools in Grenoble. The court
concluded that Grenoble’s proposed
authorization of use of the “burkini” would
“undermine equal treatment” for other users
of public services. It cited the 2021 law on
“republican values”, which critics had feared
would lead to human rights violations and,
particularly, discrimination against Muslim
individuals and associations.
ANTISEMITISM
In June, a mural was painted in Avignon
using overtly antisemitic imagery, symbolism
and tropes to depict a political adviser
controlling President Macron. Calls for its
removal were refused by local authorities on
the ground of freedom of expression. It was
eventually defaced by members of the public.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
In December, the CERD Committee urged
France to redouble its efforts to effectively
prevent and combat racist hate speech due
to “persistent and widespread racist and
discriminatory discourse… by political
leaders against certain ethnic minorities, in
particular Roma, Travellers, Africans, people
of African descent, people of Arab origin and
non-citizens”. The committee was also
concerned about law enforcement’s
persistent use of racial profiling.
A class action lawsuit filed in 2021 by a
coalition of organizations with the Council of
State, arguing that the government had failed
to take measures to prevent racial profiling
and that systemic racial discrimination by
police was ongoing, was pending at the end
of the year.

IMPUNITY
The public prosecutor decided to close the
case of a young man who lost his hand
during a police operation at a party near
Redon when kinetic impact projectiles as well
as stun and tear gas grenades were used
inappropriately and in a dangerous manner,
at night with low visibility. The prosecutor
claimed the use of force was necessary and
proportionate, in direct contradiction to the
findings of a 2021 report by Amnesty
International.
There was no progress towards securing
justice, truth and reparation for the death of
Algerian national Zineb Redouane, who died
after she was struck in the face by a tear gas
canister fired by police during a protest
outside her apartment in December 2018.
Despite media reports in 2021 that the
inspectorate for the National Police had
recommended an administrative sanction
against the police officer who fired the
canister, the director of the national police
refused to apply any sanction and the case
appeared to be stalled with the investigating
judge.

167

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
EXPRESSION
Civil society organizations faced restrictions,
including through the 2021 law on
“republican values”, and its subsequent
Implementing Decree in force since 1
January. Ahead of its introduction, NGOs had
warned that the law allowed for
disproportionate restrictions of the rights to
freedom of association and expression.
Several organizations were also threatened
with administrative dissolution based on other
laws.
In May, the Council of State suspended the
dissolution of an anti-fascist organization and
two pro-Palestinian organizations, holding
that they did not incite “discrimination,
hatred or violence, or behaviour likely to
provoke acts of terrorism”.
The dissolution of independent media outlet
Nantes Révoltée was announced by the
minister of the interior in January but no
proceedings were initiated. In September, the
prefect of the Vienne department urged
public authorities in the Poitiers area to
withdraw their funding to a festival organized
by Alternatiba, a grassroots movement
fighting against climate change and social
inequalities, because the programme
included civil disobedience workshops, which
would allegedly breach the “contract of
republican commitment”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) ruled in two decisions, R v.
France and W v. France, that the government
violated the prohibition of torture and
inhuman or degrading treatment (Article 3)
by inadequately assessing the human rights
risks in its deportations to Russia of
Chechens whose refugee status in France
had been revoked. In December, the ECtHR
ruled in M.K. and Others v. France, that the
government had violated the right of access
to a court (Article 6) for destitute asylum
seekers, by failing to enforce orders to
provide emergency accommodation issued
by the urgent applications judge of the
Administrative Court.

168

Border police continued to summarily return
people to Italy, including unaccompanied
minors, without due process or examination
of their individual circumstances. Law
enforcement carried out racial profiling
against people boarding or inside trains or
crossing the border by foot or car. People
crossing the border at night were detained
outside of any legal framework before being
handed over to the Italian police in the
morning. Dozens of people died while
attempting increasingly dangerous crossings.
Thousands of people continued to attempt
to cross the English Channel in small boats
due to a lack of safe and legal pathways to
the UK.2
According UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
118,994 refugees had arrived in France from
Ukraine up to the end of October.

CRUEL, INHUMAN OR DEGRADING
TREATMENT
On 24 February, the UN Committee on the
Rights of the Child condemned France’s
failure to repatriate French children enduring
life-threatening conditions in Syrian detention
camps for Islamic State (ISIS) suspects and
their families, violating their rights to life and
freedom from inhuman and degrading
treatment.
In July, France repatriated 35 children,
seven of whom were unaccompanied minors,
and 16 mothers who were detained in camps
in north-east Syria. In September, the ECtHR
condemned France in its H.F. and Others v.
France decision for refusing to repatriate two
women citizens held in the camps whose
partners were suspected ISIS fighters.
France continued to operate a case-by-case
approach to repatriation while dozens of
other nationals, including children, women
and men, remained held in dangerous,
overcrowded conditions.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In September, the Council of State reaffirmed
the right to live in a healthy environment as a
fundamental right.
In October, the Council of State fined the
government EUR 20 million for two six-month

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

periods from July 2021 to July 2022 in which
it failed to meet its legal commitment to
comply with European standards on air
quality. The fines were made payable to
environmental campaign groups. By the end
of the year, the state had failed to take
adequate air quality improvement measures
to ensure that pollution targets were met “in
the shortest time possible”.
Also in October, the cities of Paris, New York
and Poitiers as well as Amnesty International
France, joined an ongoing lawsuit brought by
a civil society coalition against TotalEnergies
in 2017. The grounds for the lawsuit were the
company’s failure to meet the objectives of
the Paris Agreement and to exercise
meaningful due diligence with regard to the
climate crisis – as required by the French
Duty of Vigilance law.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In November, the Paris Criminal Court
delivered a historic judgment convicting a
former Liberian rebel commander, Kunti
Kamara, for war crimes committed in Liberia
between 1989 and 1996, including
complicity in crimes against humanity and as
a direct perpetrator of torture and “barbaric
acts”.
Concerns remained regarding the
interpretation of universal jurisdiction in
French law. The interpretation, one of the
most restrictive in the world, continued to
render the exercise of universal jurisdiction
effectively void for most crimes under
international law.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In June, a coalition of NGOs filed a criminal
complaint to the Paris judicial court against
French arms companies Dassault Aviation,
Thales Group and MBDA France, citing their
possible complicity in war crimes and crimes
against humanity as a result of transfers of
arms to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates for use in Yemen. The government,
and parliament, made no progress towards
reaching an agreement to establish a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

parliamentary oversight mechanism on arms
transfers.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
In June, the French section of the
International Prison Observatory and
Amnesty International called for a national
action plan to urgently address overcrowding
and inhumane conditions in French prisons,
as highlighted by an ECtHR judgment in
2020.
1. France: Prefecture of Police Tries to Suppress Women Footballers’
Protest against Lawmakers’ Latest Attempt to Undermine Muslim
Women in Sport, 10 February
2. France: Rights under pressure: Amnesty International Submission to
the 43rd Session of the UPR Working Group, 1 May 2023, 26 October

GAMBIA
Republic of the Gambia
Head of state and government: Adama Barrow
The government agreed to implement most
of the recommendations of the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission, including the prosecution of
former president Yahya Jammeh for human
right violations during his presidency.
Freedom of expression for critics of the
government was under threat. The police
used excessive force on protesters. Women
continued to be under-represented in
politics as well as in the media. Prisons
remained overcrowded and people were
kept in pretrial detention for long periods of
time. At least five people were sentenced to
death.

BACKGROUND
Adama Barrow started his second term as
president in January. Legislative elections
were held in April.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, three former Junglers (members
of a paramilitary death squad under Yahya
Jammeh’s presidency), including the former

169

state guard commander, were arrested upon
arriving in the country from Equatorial
Guinea. As no charges were pressed against
them, the High Court ordered their release a
month later. In March, the Truth,
Reconciliation and Reparations Commission
(TRRC), whose aim is to create an impartial
record of human rights violations and abuses
committed during the 22-year rule of former
president Yahya Jammeh, recommended an
amnesty for former Armed Forces Provisional
Ruling Council vice-chairman Sanna Sabally,
who admitted responsibility for the
extrajudicial killings of soldiers. Victims-led
organizations condemned the procedure by
which the amnesties were recommended –
without their input – and asked the
government to ignore the TRRC’s
recommendation for Sanna Sabally’s
amnesty.
In May, the government published a white
paper and accepted 263 out of the TRRC’s
265 recommendations, including suspension
of current officials who were accused of
human rights violations in the TRRC report,
and the prosecution of former president
Yahya Jammeh. The government rejected the
TRRC’s recommendation for an amnesty for
Sanna Sabally. In June, the attorney general
and minister of justice disclosed that the
government did not have enough budget to
start implementing the TRRC’s
recommendations in 2022.
In November, the minister of justice stated
that the government had started discussions
with ECOWAS to set up a hybrid court in
order to prosecute crimes committed under
Yahya Jammeh’s rule.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
During his annual meeting with the Banjul
Muslim Elders in May, the president verbally
attacked activist Madi Jobarteh after he had
called for the removal of a minister due to
alleged mismanagement of public lands. The
president called him a “troublemaker” and
accused him of wanting to burn the country.
He also criticized the media for giving him a
platform and warned that it would not be
tolerated.

170

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 10 March, clashes between supporters of
the opposition United Democratic Party
(UDP) and the Police Intervention Unit
occurred in Brikama after the electoral body
rejected the nomination of a UDP candidate
for the Busumbala constituency. Shortly after
the clashes a video of police officers kicking
and beating an unarmed UDP supporter with
batons started circulating online. The video
was verified by Amnesty International. Both
the Gambia Centre for Victims of Human
Rights Violations and the National Human
Rights Commission (NHRC) condemned the
excessive use of force by the police, and the
NHRC urged the Inspector General of Police
to ensure the implementation of the African
Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights
Guidelines for the Policing of Assemblies by
Law Enforcement Officials in Africa.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In March, the EU Election Observer Mission
noted in its report that women’s participation
in politics was very low: women comprised
only five out of 58 members in the National
Assembly and only four out of 23 ministers. A
month before, a bill aimed at reserving seats
at the National Assembly for women and
people with disabilities was debated in the
national assembly, but failed to pass.
In March, the president of the Gambia
Press Union (GPU) expressed concerns over
pervasive sexual harassment and
discrimination against women in the media,
with most influential positions on editorial
boards and newsrooms held by men. He
called for media houses to adopt the GPU
policy on sexual harassment and appoint
more women to influential positions.
In October, the NHRC chairman asked the
CEDAW Committee to recommend that
Gambia criminalize marital rape. The Sexual
Offences Act does not specify marital rape as
an offence.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Several media houses reported that the
TRRC report characterized the State Central

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Prison (Mile II) living conditions as degrading
and unfit for humans. During a briefing at the
UN Peacebuilding Commission in October,
the minister of justice stated that prisons in
the country were “grossly overcrowded”, with
25 inmates kept in cells intended for five in
Mile II.
In September, after a fact-finding mission in
the detention facility, the National Assembly
Human Rights Committee stated that they
would lobby the Chief Justice to look into the
case of an inmate whose trial lasted 10 years.
The minister of justice announced an
investigation into the case and stated that his
office was currently compiling a list of all
those in pretrial detention, with the aim of
reducing the time they would have to spend
awaiting trial.

DEATH PENALTY
In July, the former director of the National
Intelligence Agency under the presidency of
Yahya Jammeh and four others were
sentenced to death by the High Court in
Banjul for the murder of the UDP’s youth
leader.

GEORGIA
Georgia
Head of state: Salome Zurabishvili
Head of government: Irakli Garibashvili
Freedom of expression was further
restricted. Selective justice and politically
motivated prosecution of government
opponents persisted. New laws increased
the government’s surveillance powers and
further eroded independence of the
judiciary and official watchdogs. Women
and girls continued to suffer discrimination
and high levels of violence. Failure to
effectively investigate torture and other illtreatment remained a concern in
government-controlled and breakaway
territories.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
Georgia continued to experience a protracted
political crisis. Amidst such concerns, in
June the European Commission deferred
granting Georgia EU candidate member
status, making it conditional on addressing
12 priority areas including democratic
governance, judicial reform and respect for
human rights.
The soaring remittances from Russia and
the influx of more than 100,000 people from
Russia following its full-scale invasion of
Ukraine aided economic growth but
apparently contributed to an increased cost
of living and economic inequality. Dire labour
market opportunities for youth drove high
levels of emigration.
In March the European Committee of Social
Rights expressed concern over Georgia’s
insufficient measures to overcome
environmental pollution and ensure access to
safe drinking water, as well as the failure to
guarantee social security to all workers and
their dependents.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Increasingly aggressive rhetoric from the
authorities and defamation suits against
critical journalists had a chilling effect on
freedom of expression, as did the failure to
effectively investigate crimes against
journalists. In May the NGO Reporters
Without Borders downgraded Georgia in its
World Press Freedom Index, in part due to
interference by public officials undermining
freedom of expression and increasing threats
against journalistic work, trends which
continued throughout the year.
On 4 April, Tbilisi City Court sentenced six
people to five years’ imprisonment each for
the violent attacks against journalists at the
Tbilisi Pride march in July 2021, which
resulted in the death of camera operator
Lekso Lashkarava. The alleged organizers of
the violent mob, however, were not
prosecuted.
In July a former senior security services
official published a letter from pretrial
detention alleging that the kidnapping and
rendition of Azerbaijani journalist Afgan

171

Mukhtarli from Georgia to Azerbaijan in 2017
was carried out by Georgian security officials.
Afgan Mukhtarli told Georgian-critical TV
Pirveli in October that he recognized a senior
Georgian security official from photos as one
of his kidnappers. His kidnapping was not
effectively investigated and no charges had
been brought by year’s end.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
On 6 September parliament overrode a
presidential veto and adopted controversial
amendments giving law enforcement
authorities increased powers to conduct
covert surveillance. The new law extended
the scope and duration of covert investigative
activities and permitted an individual to be
surveilled indefinitely without their
knowledge.
Covert surveillance continued to be used
against members of the opposition, critical
media and NGOs. In July, pro-government
media published a secretly obtained audio
recording of employees of the critical Mtavari
TV channel, discussing editorial matters. In
September other leaked material, including
audio and photos detailing information about
their private lives, showed journalists,
opposition party members and activists being
allegedly spied on by the security services.
An investigation into a potential
“unauthorized recording and eavesdropping
on a private communication” was opened by
the newly created Special Investigation
Service but no results were made public by
the end of the year.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Growing government influence over the
judiciary, the use of selective justice and the
politically motivated prosecution of political
opponents and critical media remained
ongoing concerns.
In January Mamuka Khazaradze and Badri
Japaridze, leaders of the Lelo opposition
party, together with Avtandil Tsereteli, founder
of TV Pirveli, were each sentenced to seven
years’ imprisonment on politically motivated
fraud charges, but were allowed to walk free
as the statute of limitations had passed at the

172

time of the ruling. Badri Japaridze was
stripped of his parliamentary mandate as a
result of his conviction.
The trial of Georgia’s former president
Mikheil Saakashvili continued as his health
deteriorated. Despite medical reports pointing
to possible “heavy metal poisoning” and a
“significant increased risk of mortality”, by
the end of the year a court in Tbilisi had not
deferred serving his prison sentence on
medical grounds. In March, the European
Court of Human Rights admitted for review
complaints over violations of the former
president’s fair trial rights. In May Nika
Gvaramia, director of Mtavari TV, was
sentenced to 42 months’ imprisonment on
unfounded charges of abuse of authority. The
Court of Appeals upheld the sentence in
November.1
In June the Council of Europe’s Venice
Commission noted that the speed and scope
of 2021 amendments to the law on Common
Courts may create a “chilling effect on
judges’ freedom of expression and internal
judicial independence” with a perceived aim
to “control and silence” them. In April, five
judges challenged the new law at the
Constitutional Court over violations of the
constitutional protection of freedom of
expression.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 12 January the State Inspector’s Service
tasked with investigating human rights
violations by the police was abolished and
replaced with two new agencies. The moves
were criticized by civil society as leading to
less effective and less independent agencies,
negatively impacting on the state’s ability to
effectively investigate human rights violations
by police, including allegations of torture and
other ill-treatment and deaths in custody,
or to ensure justice for these crimes.

RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS
Between January and September, 14 cases
of murder and 23 cases of attempted murder
of women were reported in the media,
prompting concerns that femicide and other
forms of gender-based violence continued to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

be on the rise. Measures to reduce infant and
maternal mortality remained insufficient.
Economic inequalities also remained
alarming: in March the World Bank estimated
that 50% of women were kept out of the
labour force due to domestic tasks compared
to only 5% of men, while women continued
to earn roughly 16% less than men.

ABKHAZIA AND SOUTH OSSETIA/
TSKHINVALI REGION
The human rights records of Georgia’s two
breakaway regions continued to deteriorate
in several areas, including the right to
freedom of expression. Impunity for past
abuses persisted.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Gennady Kulayev, a resident of South
Ossetia/Tskhinvali Region, died on 31 August
from injuries sustained as a result of beating
and other ill-treatment in detention in 2020.
His case, and that of Inal Dzhabiev who died
in custody in 2020 as a result of torture,
remained without effective investigation.
The death of Anri Ateiba in custody in
Abkhazia in 2021 also remained without
effective investigation. Irakli Bebua,
imprisoned for burning the Abkhaz flag in
2020, was reportedly denied access to
adequate care for his chronic illnesses.
1. “Georgia: Sentencing of pro-opposition media owner Nika Gvaramia a
political motivated silencing of dissenting voice”, 17 May

GERMANY
Federal Republic of Germany
Head of state: Frank-Walter Steinmeier
Head of government: Olaf Scholz
Inadequate investigations into allegations of
racial profiling violated the right to nondiscrimination. Justice, truth and reparation
for discriminatory abuses by police
continued to be hampered by the lack of an
independent complaints mechanism. A
court ruling held that permanent protest
camps were protected by the right to
freedom of assembly. Some protests were

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

disproportionately restricted. The
government launched a humanitarian
admission programme for vulnerable
Afghans and their families. A court ruling
found the German Telecommunications Act
incompatible with the right to privacy.
Section 219a of the Criminal Code on
“advertising abortion” was repealed.
Germany supported the establishment of an
international financial facility for climaterelated loss and damage.

DISCRIMINATION
In May, the Federal Ministry of the Interior
reported significant increases in hate crimes
related to antisemitism (28.8%), sexual
orientation (50.5%), gender (66.7%) and
disability (81.5%) compared with the
previous year, although xenophobic hate
crimes remained the most common in
absolute terms.
An action plan against right-wing extremism
presented by the minister of the interior in
March did not recognize or address
institutional and systemic racism. In May, the
National Discrimination and Racism Monitor
found that racism was part of everyday life in
Germany.
In August, a 16-year-old Senegalese refugee
was killed by several shots from a machine
gun in a disproportionate police operation.
Criminal investigations against five police
officers were ongoing at the end of the year.
In October, the European Court of Human
Rights ruled that Germany’s inadequate
investigations into allegations of racial
profiling had violated the right to nondiscrimination (Basu v. Germany). The lack
of an independent complaints mechanism at
federal and state levels continued to hamper
investigations into allegations of ill-treatment
by police. Police at federal level as well as in
six federal states were still not required to
wear identification badges, despite a coalition
agreement to introduce this for federal police.
LGBTI PEOPLE
In June, the Ministries of Family Affairs and
Justice presented plans for a SelfDetermination Act, which would enable
transgender, non-binary and intersex people

173

to obtain legal recognition of their gender and
change their name by making a simple
declaration at a registry office. The new law
would replace the 1980 Transsexuals Act,
which obliged transgender people to undergo
discriminatory psychological assessments
and a court procedure to obtain legal gender
recognition.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
A new law in the federal state of North RhineWestphalia, in force since January,
disproportionately restricted the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly by extending
state control and intervention powers.
Changes made to the law following strong
criticism were insufficient to address critical
provisions, including criminal penalties for
protest organizers who failed to submit prior
notification.
In May, the Federal Administrative Court
confirmed in a landmark ruling that protest
camps, including necessary infrastructure,
were comprehensively protected under
Article 8 of the Constitution on the right to
freedom of assembly.
Often denounced as a “danger to public
security” by the authorities, some protests
were disproportionately restricted. In June,
only 50 protesters were allowed on the site of
the G7 summit hosted by Germany.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, under the principle of universal
jurisdiction, the Koblenz Higher Regional
Court convicted the main defendant in the
first criminal trial to address crimes under
international law by officials of the Syrian
General Intelligence Directorate. The former
intelligence officer was sentenced to life
imprisonment for crimes against humanity. A
second trial for crimes against humanity and
torture against a Syrian doctor at the
Frankfurt Higher Regional Court was pending
at the end of the year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

other factors following the 2021 Taliban
seizure of power in Afghanistan had arrived
in Germany by the end of the year. In
October, the government launched a
humanitarian admission programme aiming
to approve admission for 1,000 such at-risk
people and their family members per month.
People at risk who had already left
Afghanistan for neighbouring countries were
excluded from the programme. The
government outsourced to NGOs the timeconsuming task of proposing and registering
individual cases and commissioned an
automated algorithm system to score and
select people for admission, prompting
concerns over fairness and transparency.
Some 1,021,700 Ukrainian refugees
received temporary protection in Germany
under the provisions of the EU Temporary
Protection Directive.
In December, the ministers of the interior of
the federal states agreed to temporarily halt
deportations to Iran, except for individuals
convicted of crimes or considered so-called
“potential attackers”.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, the Federal Constitutional Court
found multiple provisions of the Bavarian
Constitution Protection Act to be
unconstitutional. The court held that
government surveillance powers, such as the
screening of devices and blanket data
retention, were neither sufficiently specific
nor proportionate and violated German
constitutional rights to information, selfdetermination, the privacy of
telecommunications and the inviolability of
the home.
In September, the European Court of Justice
ruled that the German Telecommunications
Act, which required general and
indiscriminate retention of customers’ traffic
and location data by internet service
providers, was incompatible with EU law,
including the right to privacy. The German
Ministry of Justice announced that it would
reform the law.

More than 27,000 of 40,000 people deemed
at particular risk due to their employment or

174

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In May, the Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Climate Action denied investment
guarantees for Volkswagen’s business in
China due to human rights concerns.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
In October, the Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Climate Action announced key
elements of a future arms export control law.
The proposal envisaged binding criteria for
the approval of arms exports, including a
human rights assessment with a focus on
women, girls and marginalized groups in the
recipient state.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In July, Section 219a of the Criminal Code,
which had resulted in doctors being
criminalized for “advertising abortion”, was
repealed, allowing doctors to provide detailed
information on options for terminating a
pregnancy without fear of criminal
prosecution. Judgments issued under the
Section 219a provision were to be repealed.
However, Section 218 – regulating abortion
within the criminal law – remained in place
and no commission began work to fully
decriminalize abortion, contrary to such plans
set out in the coalition agreement.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The German Environment Agency predicted
that Germany would fail to meet its selfimposed targets to reduce emissions from
their 1990 levels by at least 65% by 2030
and 88% by 2040. The government
accelerated domestic climate action, in
particular the expansion of renewable energy,
but approved investments in liquid natural
gas import infrastructure as well as a
temporary tax reduction on petrol and diesel.
Germany maintained its contribution to
climate finance but failed to deliver on its
pledge to increase funding to EUR 6 billion.
Germany supported the establishment of an
international financial fund to support
countries incurring climate-related loss and
damage at COP27. Germany also launched

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

the Global Shield against Climate Risks and
committed additional funding in this area.

GHANA
Republic of Ghana
Head of state and government: Nana Addo Dankwa
Akufo-Addo
There were several violations of the right to
freedom of expression and police use of
excessive force. Forced evictions continued.
Two bills to abolish the death penalty were
introduced to parliament. A bill further
criminalizing LGBTI people remained
pending. Women continued to experience
discrimination. Child labour was reported.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The 2022 Reporters Without Borders World
Press Freedom Index noted a regression in
freedom of expression in Ghana.
In February, radio host Oheneba Boamah
Bennie was sentenced to two weeks in prison
and fined GHS 3,000 (USD 243) for
contempt of court after he published a video
alleging that President Akufo-Addo conspired
with judges to influence the 2020 presidential
elections.
In August the Kumasi Traditional Council in
the Ashanti Region ordered the suspension of
radio station Oyerepa FM after it broadcast
an interview with an opposition party leader
who accused the traditional authority of
ignoring illegal mining activities in the region
and said he would organize a protest. Three
days later, the station was allowed to resume
operations after its management apologized.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Various incidents were reported of police
officers using excessive force.
On 3 February a group of plain-clothes
security officers assaulted a radio presenter,
reportedly damaging his eardrum, when he
refused to surrender his phone. The
presenter had filmed the officers escorting
handcuffed suspects in Takoradi.

175

On 17 May protesters attacked a police
station during a violent protest in Nkoranza,
Bono East Region. The police fired shots,
killing a bystander. At least five protesters
sustained injuries including gunshot wounds.
On 13 June the media reported that police
used tear gas and fired warning shots into the
air to disperse a student protest in the
Ashanti Region. At least 25 students were
treated for respiratory issues and other
injuries. The government denied that any live
shots were fired at the students. An
investigation was opened and three police
officers were disciplined as a result.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In February, social activist Oliver BarkerVormawor was charged with treason after he
threatened to stage a coup if parliament
passed the electronic levy bill. He alleged
that, during his arrest and two-month
detention, he was beaten for more than three
hours by security officials, occasionally held
in solitary confinement and that the police
threatened to subject him to enforced
disappearance. His case was still pending at
the end of the year.
In March, investigative journalist Michael
Aidoo was reportedly assaulted and tortured
by soldiers of the Afari Military Hospital for
filming an office belonging to the ruling party
on the hospital grounds. They allegedly hit
him repeatedly and forced him to do pushups, including with a block of cement around
his waist.
In December, Human Rights Watch
reported that chaining of people with actual
or perceived mental health conditions in
traditional healing or faith-based facilities
persisted, despite such practices being
banned. The organization visited five facilities
and observed more than 60 people being
held in chains or cages, including children.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Incidents of forced evictions continued.
In June the Greater Accra Regional Security
Council, directed by the regional minister,
demolished hundreds of homes in an
informal settlement in Frafraha, in the capital,

176

Accra, located on land belonging to the
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research. The residents were given 48
hours’ notice and were not relocated,
therefore being made homeless.

DEATH PENALTY
In April the Armed Forces (Amendment) Bill
2022 and the Criminal Offences
(Amendment) Bill were introduced to
parliament to replace the death penalty with
life imprisonment for military and ordinary
crimes. At the end of the year, the bills were
still under consideration in parliament. The
amendments would not abolish the death
penalty for high treason, which is provided for
by the Constitution.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Discrimination against LGBTI people
continued. The Promotion of Proper Human
Sexual Rights and Ghanaian Family Values
Bill 2021 was pending in parliament at the
end of the year. The bill further criminalized
LGBTI people and introduced prison
sentences for anyone expressing support or
“sympathy” towards LGBTI people.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Affirmative Action Bill remained pending
at the end of the year. The bill was an effort
to address gender imbalance in the private
and public sectors.
Hundreds of women accused of being
witches remained banished to six “witch”
camps. In August, seven people were
arrested and charged over the deaths of a
man and a woman who were forced to drink
a concoction made by a priest after they were
accused of being witches. At the end of the
year, a draft bill remained pending to amend
the Criminal and Other Offences Act 1960
(Act 29). The bill would prohibit declaring,
accusing, naming or labelling someone as a
witch or employing another person to do so.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Child labour persisted, especially in
agriculture. In April, a documentary by the
UK-based Channel 4 television station

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

showed footage of children as young as 10
working with machetes in cocoa farms. In
August, 60 Ghanaian children between the
ages of five and 17 accused a cocoa
producer of violating child labour laws. The
children’s lawyers claimed that they suffered
physical injuries and reptile bites, were
exposed to toxic pesticides and fertilizers,
and often missed school.

GREECE
Hellenic Republic
Head of state: Katerina Sakellaropoulou
Head of government: Kyriakos Mitsotakis
Reports of unlawful use of force against
peaceful protesters persisted. Pushbacks of
refugees and migrants persisted. The
authorities’ crackdown on NGOs working to
help refugees and migrants continued. A
controversial bill that lacked effective
safeguards for individuals subjected to
surveillance became law. Violations of the
rights of conscientious objectors to military
service persisted. A collective complaint
filed with the European Committee of
Social Rights detailed the devastating
health impacts of austerity measures.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Reports of unnecessary and excessive use of
force by law enforcement officials during the
policing of demonstrations persisted. In May,
student Yiannis Dousakis sustained serious
injuries to his mouth and jaw after riot police
reportedly used unlawful force including stun
grenades to disperse students peacefully
protesting at Thessaloniki University.
In November, a court rejected the
authorities’ appeal against a first instance
decision that found the Greek state
responsible for the serious injury of journalist
Manolis Kypreos by police in 2011.

RIGHT TO LIFE
In May, a court found two men guilty of lethal
bodily harm in connection with the death of
LGBTI activist Zak Kostopoulos in 2018. Four

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

police officers also charged in connection
with Zak Kostopoulos’s death were acquitted,
raising concerns around impunity.
In September, a prosecutor proposed that
seven police officers be referred for trial on
charges of homicide with possible intent in
relation to the killing of Nikos Sambanis, an
unarmed 18-year-old Roma man who died
following a fatal shooting by police in October
2021.
In December, Kostas Frangoulis, a 16-yearold Roma was shot in the head during a
police chase and died in hospital eight days
later. A police officer was charged with
homicide with possible intent and illegally
firing his weapon and was released on
conditional bail.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 18,000 refugees and migrants arrived
by sea and land, compared with some 9,000
in 2021. The mortality rate increased
dramatically, with 326 estimated dead and
missing people, compared to 115 in 2021.
As tragic shipwrecks in October and
November led to dozens of deaths and
missing people, UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, and the International Organization for
Migration called for safe pathways.
On Samos, authorities continued to illegally
detain some of the asylum seekers residing in
the EU-funded “closed-controlled island
facility”, by preventing them from exiting.
PUSHBACKS
NGOs and journalists continued to report
pushbacks and other abuses against
refugees and migrants on land and at sea. In
several instances, groups were stranded in
harrowing conditions on islets in the Evros
river. In some cases, despite the European
Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ordering
interim measures in favour of the individuals
and asking Greece not to remove them,
rescue operations by the authorities were
reportedly late, or people were pushed back.
In March, the National Transparency
Authority (NTA), a body tasked by the
government to investigate pushbacks,
announced the conclusion of an investigation
which found no irregularities in the conduct

177

of the Greek authorities. NGOs requested that
the NTA release the full report, called for
accountability and transparency and restated
that the NTA could not be considered
constitutionally independent.
The ECtHR delivered a milestone ruling in
July concerning the sinking of a migrant boat
off the island of Farmakonisi in 2014, when
11 of the 27 passengers died. The applicants
argued that the boat had capsized because
the Greek coastguard used dangerous
manoeuvres to push them towards Türkiye.
The ECtHR found Greece responsible for
several violations, including of the right to life,
due to shortcomings in Greece’s rescue
operations and investigation of the incident.
Several pushback cases remained pending
before the ECtHR and the UN Human Rights
Committee at the end of the year.
In October, news outlets leaked a report by
OLAF, the EU’s anti-fraud agency, which
examined serious allegations against the EU
Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex),
including the “possible involvement in and/or
cover-up of illegal pushbacks” in Greece. The
report found serious faults in Frontex’s
handling of incidents, which raised
fundamental rights issues.
ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL RIGHTS
In February the authorities announced the
termination of the EU-funded ESTIA urban
housing scheme for asylum seekers in
vulnerable situations and reduced
accommodation places. NGOs expressed
concerns that those affected were transferred
from apartments, with little notice, to camps
in isolated locations, with negative
implications for their access to essential
services.
NGOs reported that recognized refugees
returned to Greece under the EU’s Dublin
Regulation faced obstacles, including in
receiving identification documents, which
affected their access to healthcare, housing
and other services.
HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In June, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders
denounced the criminalization of
humanitarian assistance and the onerous

178

registration requirements imposed on
organizations working in this field.
Criminal proceedings against human rights
defenders Sarah Mardini and Séan Binder
arising from their work rescuing and assisting
refugees and migrants remained open.
In December, the founder of the NGO Greek
Helsinki Monitor, Panayote Dimitras, under
criminal investigation for his work on the
rights of refugees and migrants, was
summoned to appear before a judge for
felonies related to his work with asylum
seekers and risked house arrest and a ban
on his work for the NGO.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In April, media reports revealed that the
phone of Greek journalist Thanasis Koukakis
had been infected by the spyware Predator
between July and September 2021 and had
also been wiretapped by the Greek National
Intelligence Service (NIS) in 2020. The leader
of the PASOK-KINAL opposition party and
member of the European parliament Nikos
Androulakis, and Christos Spirtzis, a former
minister of the SYRIZA opposition party, were
also targeted with Predator. The phone of
Nikos Androulakis was additionally
wiretapped by the NIS. A judicial
investigation began in April into the spyware
allegations, and in November another judicial
inquiry was initiated after a newspaper
published a list of high-profile individuals
allegedly under state surveillance and/or
targeted with Predator. In December,
parliament passed a controversial bill that
lacked effective safeguards for individuals
subjected to surveillance, and legalized the
use of spyware technology by the authorities.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In February, human rights defenders
Panayote Dimitras and Andrea Gilbert were
convicted of “false accusation” after they had
submitted a complaint about what they
deemed an antisemitic and discriminatory
statement made by a senior bishop of the
Greek Orthodox Church in 2017.
In May, a court in Athens heard a lawsuit
against journalist Stavroula Poulimeni and the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

independent media cooperative Alterthess for
allegedly breaching data protection laws by
reporting on the conviction of a gold mining
company’s senior executive for environmental
damage.

applications. Greece has not implemented
the 2021 UN Human Rights Committee
decision in the case of conscientious objector
Lazaros Petromelidis, which found multiple
violations of the ICCPR.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS

In September, the president of the Federation
of Greek Hospital Doctors’ Associations was
referred to trial after being charged under a
controversial law on public outdoor
assemblies for alleged insubordination and
obstruction of traffic during a health workers’
protest in September 2020.
Concerns arose about the prosecution of
two Amnesty International activists indicted
on several misdeamenor charges following
their arrest by police after a protest in
November.

During the year, 17 women were killed by
their partners or former partners.
In October, a 19-year-old woman reported
being raped by two police officers in Omónia
police station in Athens. The two officers
were charged with group rape and released
on conditional bail. A third officer was
charged as an accessory. The investigation
was ongoing at year’s end.

DISCRIMINATION
In April, the Racist Violence Recording
Network reported 72 incidents of racist
violence in 2021.
The appeal trial in the case of the far-right
Golden Dawn party commenced in June. In a
landmark verdict in October 2020, the first
instance court found, among other things,
that the party’s political leadership had been
guilty of running a criminal organization
whose members had committed a series of
violent crimes including against migrants and
refugees.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
Serious violations of the rights of
conscientious objectors to military service
continued, including trials and repeated
sentencing by military courts. According to
official data, revealed in 2022, in 2021 the
percentage of recognition for conscientious
objectors who invoke non-religious grounds
had fallen to 0%. Several appeals to the
Supreme Administrative Court against the
discriminatory rejection of applications for
conscientious objector status were pending at
the end of the year. In December, a
retrogressive proposed legal amendment
sought to increase the number of military
members of the committee examining such

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In November, Amnesty International filed a
Collective Complaint with the Council of
Europe’s European Committee of Social
Rights. This documented how the Greek
authorities breached the rights to health and
non-discrimination because of the impact of
austerity measures introduced following the
economic crisis of 2009-2010 and how this
continued to affect the health system’s ability
to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In October, civil society expressed concerns
that new legislation reforming the
Correctional Code would further limit
prisoners’ rights, including that of temporary
release, and contribute to the persistent
overcrowding in Greek prisons.

GUATEMALA
Republic of Guatemala
Head of state and government: Alejandro Giammattei
Falla
Civic space shrank as judges and
prosecutors, human rights defenders and
protesters faced unfounded criminal
proceedings. Authorities failed to protect
the right to health and the rights of LGBTI

179

people. Thousands were forced to leave the
country because of high levels of violence,
impunity, poverty and inequality.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS AND
JOURNALISTS
Authorities failed to protect human rights
defenders from attack and actively
participated in their criminalization. The Unit
for the Protection of Human Rights
Defenders in Guatemala (UDEFEGUA)
recorded 2,273 attacks on human rights
defenders and those working in the
administration of justice between January
and October.
In March, a judge granted human rights
defender Bernardo Caal release on parole; he
had spent more than four years in jail.
However, he reported that he was still subject
to another unfounded criminal proceeding
that had not been completed at the end of
the year.
Journalists reporting on corruption and
impunity often faced unfounded criminal
complaints and smear campaigns.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
According to local organizations, the Public
Prosecutor’s Office lodged an appeal against
the closure of the case against two people
accused of defacing cultural property
by daubing paint on the Congress building
during the November 2020 protests, despite
the lack of evidence against them.
Other activists and human rights defenders
were informed of alleged criminal
investigations against them for organizing or
participating in the November 2020 protests.
However, they were not allowed to see the
criminal files on them, which remained under
restricted access.

IMPUNITY
International human rights bodies and
experts expressed multiple concerns over
new attacks on the independence of judges,
prosecutors and lawyers involved in key
cases of crimes under international law,
human rights violations and corruption.
Authorities failed to protect them from

180

constant intimidation, surveillance, threats
and smear campaigns on social media and in
the media designed to discredit their work.
Authorities often used unfounded criminal
proceedings against them. As a
consequence, more of those involved in the
administration of justice were forced to leave
the country, among them judges Erika Aifan
and Miguel Ángel Gálvez. Others were
dismissed, suspended or imprisoned,
including former prosecutor Virginia Laparra
who was sentenced in December to a fouryear jail sentence, despite the fact that there
was no evidence against her.
Amid strong criticism from civil society
organizations, the Prosecutor’s Office closed
cases against people accused in large-scale
corruption cases.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Some progress was made in the
investigations into crimes under international
law and human rights violations perpetrated
during the internal armed conflict
(1960-1996), although the majority remained
stalled.
A judge indicted at least nine retired military
and police officers in the “Diario Militar”
case. They were suspected of involvement in
enforced disappearances, extrajudicial
executions and other crimes under
international law between 1983 and 1985
against at least 183 people considered
political opponents.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Health services were overwhelmed and
unable to cover the basic needs of the
population. Guatemala was one of the
countries in the region that invested the least
in public health as a percentage of GDP
(2.2%), less than half the 6% recommended
by the WHO.1
Covid-19 vaccination rates remained very
low compared to the rest of region,
particularly in rural and Indigenous areas,
due to authorities’ failure to develop a
comprehensive strategy that included

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

providing information to Indigenous leaders
and communities.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion remained criminalized except when
the pregnancy endangered the life of the
pregnant person. Decree 18-2022, shelved in
March by Congress, sought to amend the
Penal Code to prosecute people who have
miscarriages and impose prison sentences
on anyone who “promotes or facilitates
means for carrying out the abortion”.2

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Levels of violence against women and sexual
violence against girls remained high.
Proceedings remained stalled against some
of those accused in connection with the
deaths in 2017 of 41 girls in a fire at the
state-run Hogar Seguro Virgen de la
Asunción shelter.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
According to the National Observatory for
LGBTIQ+ Rights, at least 29 people were
killed because of their sexual orientation or
gender identity in 2022.
Same-sex marriage was not recognized. In
March, following national and international
pressure, Congress shelved Decree 18-2022,
which expressly prohibited same-sex
marriage and the teaching of sexual diversity
and gender equality in schools. However, Bill
5940, which sought to prohibit the
dissemination of information on transgender
identities and non-heterosexual relationships
in school sexuality education programmes,
was in the final stage of approval at the end
of the year.

FAILURE TO TACKLE THE CLIMATE
CRISIS AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DEGRADATION
In May, the government announced a new
NDC, committing to reduce by 11.2% its
greenhouse gas emissions with its own
resources and up to 22.6% of its total
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030,
compared to 2016 levels, with technical and
financial support from the international

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

community. In its NDC, Guatemala also
committed to combat deforestation. However,
human rights defenders and Indigenous
experts reported that illegal logging, the
destruction of natural areas, the expansion of
monocultures and the contamination of
watersheds continued, as well as attacks
against environmental defenders and
Indigenous communities.
1. Americas: Unequal and Lethal, 27 April
2. “Guatemala: Discriminatory law puts lives and rights at risk”, 11
March

GUINEA
Republic of Guinea
Head of state: Mamadi Doumbouya
Head of government: Bernard Goumou (replaced
Mohamed Béavogui in July)
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly were
violated. Members of civil society who
expressed criticism over the political
transitional period were arbitrarily arrested
and detained. Protesters were killed during
protests by members of the defence and
security forces. The trial about the 28
September 2009 massacre opened, 13
years after the events. Victims of sexual
violence continued to be denied appropriate
medical and psychological care and faced
obstacles to justice.

BACKGROUND
In October, the National Committee of the
Rally for Development (CNRD) – which took
power in a coup on 5 September 2021 –
agreed with ECOWAS a two-year transition for
the restoration of the constitutional order.
However, the start date of this transition was
subject to debate.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities violated the rights to freedom
of expression, association and peaceful
assembly. On 13 May the CNRD announced

181

a ban on “all demonstrations on the public
highway likely to compromise social peace
and the proper execution of the activities
contained in the timetable... for the time
being until the election campaign periods”.1
On 8 August, the transitional authorities
dissolved the National Front for the Defence
of the Constitution (FNDC), a coalition of civil
society organizations and political parties
demanding the return to constitutional order.
On 15 August, the UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights stated that “such a
measure constitutes a serious infringement of
the rights to freedom of association and
peaceful assembly” and asked the authorities
to reverse this decision.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 5 July, three FNDC leaders, Oumar Sylla,
Mamadou Billo Bah and Djanii Alfa, were
arrested by the police while holding a press
conference at their headquarters in the
capital, Conakry. After being accused of
“public insults, contempt of court, and
disturbance of public order and public
security” and detained in Conakry prison,
they were released without charge on 8 July.
On 29 July, legal proceedings were
launched against the organizers and
participants of a banned march on 28 July
during which violence erupted and five
people were killed. The following day, FNDC
leaders Oumar Sylla and Ibrahima Diallo, and
the secretary general of the Union of
Republican Forces, Saïkou Yaya Barry, were
arrested, then charged on 1 August for
“alleged acts of unlawful demonstration,
destruction of public and private buildings,
provoking a mob, assault and battery,
criminal association, obstruction of freedom
of movement and complicity”. Saïkou Yaya
Barry was provisionally released on 12
October after his health deteriorated while
Oumar Sylla and Ibrahima Diallo remained in
detention at Conakry prison at the end of the
year. Both started a hunger strike in
November to demand a trial.

182

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 1 June, 19-year-old Thierno Mamadou
Diallo was killed by security forces in Conakry
during a protest against fuel price increases.
The public prosecutor’s office announced on
13 June the indictment and detention of a
police officer for alleged murder and the
indictment of four other members of the
defence and security forces for alleged
“criminal abstention”.
In July, August and October, 13 people were
shot dead by alleged members of the
defence and security forces during protests
to call for the return to constitutional order,
according to reports from civil society and
human rights organizations. Following
announcements by the Ministry of Justice of
the opening of investigations into these facts,
no new information was available as of
December.
On 6 September in Kondiaran, Kankan
region, two people were shot dead during
violent protests against a mining company
accused of not doing enough to improve local
living conditions. The Ministry of Justice
again announced an investigation into this
event, with no new information available as of
December.
On 17 September, the minister of justice
and human rights ordered legal proceedings
for “voluntary manslaughter” against a police
commander, and for “complicity in voluntary
manslaughter” against 10 other police
officers, after a shopkeeper in the Kipé
district in Conakry was shot dead on 17
September during an anti-drug operation.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In a memo to the heads of courts and
prosecution offices on 24 June, the minister
of justice and human rights deplored
“horrible realities, particularly within the
courts and prisons”, constituting violations of
the UN Nelson Mandela Rules on the
treatment of prisoners. Among other things,
he highlighted “29 cases of severe
malnutrition and nine mental illnesses” in
one prison, insufficient and poor-quality food
and water, and “skeletal, paralysed or even
dying” prisoners.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 4 May the General Prosecutor of the
Conakry Court of Appeal announced legal
proceedings against former president Alpha
Condé and 26 other people who held power
during his presidency, for various alleged acts
including “wilful attacks on human life, in
particular murder, assassination and
complicity in murder and assassination”,
committed in the context of the referendum
and presidential elections in 2020.
On 28 September, the trial of those accused
of the 28 September 2009 massacre, during
which more than 150 demonstrators were
killed and more than 100 women were
victims of sexual violence, finally opened. As
a consequence, the Prosecutor of the ICC
closed its 13-year preliminary examination
into Guinea.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Victims of rape continued to experience lack
of protection, access to and availability of
medical care, sexual and reproductive health
services, psychological support and legal and
social support. Despite frequent awarenessraising campaigns, the government failed to
prevent the crime, while “socio-cultural
pressures” continued to weigh heavily on
victims and their families, who were often
forced into silence, extrajudicial settlements
in cases of rape or stigmatization.2

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The Guinean authorities and NGOs reported
serious pollution and risks of environmental
damage and human rights violations as a
result of mining activities in several regions.
On 31 January, Prime Minister Béavogui
visited the town of Fria, Kindia region, to
assess the socio-economic situation of
workers and the reported pollution in the
town, where the Russian bauxite mining
company Rusal was operating. Following the
visit, the prime minister instructed Rusal’s
management to comply with international
pollution control standards by 1 May.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

1. “Guinea: Ban on demonstrations ‘until election campaign periods’”,
18 May (French only)
2. Guinea: Shame Must Change Sides: Ensuring Rights and Justice for
Victims of Sexual Violence in Guinea, 27 September

HAITI
Republic of Haiti
Head of state and government: Ariel Henry (acting)
Some 4.5 million Haitians did not have
enough to eat as fuel prices rose, and gang
violence displaced thousands. Impunity
remained entrenched for massacres,
kidnappings and sexual violence. Haitians
continued to flee to countries in Latin
America and the USA in search of safety
but received limited access to international
protection and faced anti-Black
discrimination, in some cases amounting to
race-based torture.

BACKGROUND
Gang violence caused widespread insecurity,
led to a kidnapping crisis and left thousands
internally displaced.
In September, the UN ordered the
evacuation of non-essential staff from Haiti.
In October, after gangs were reported to be
blocking access to fuel, the UN Security
Council approved sanctions targeting gang
leaders, including an assets freeze, travel ban
and arms embargo against those deemed to
be engaging in or supporting criminal activity
and violence.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Thousands of people protested over food
scarcity and fuel shortages throughout the
year, with protests escalating in September
after the prime minister announced fuel price
hikes.
By September, 4.5 million people, more
than 40% of the population, were facing
crisis or emergency hunger levels, according
to the World Food Programme.
By late October, after several years with no
reported cases, 1,700 suspected cases of

183

cholera, a disease which killed many
thousands of Haitians following the 2010
earthquake, were detected, half among
children, according to UNICEF.

IMPUNITY AND VIOLENCE
Impunity for massacres, kidnappings and
sexual violence remained chronic.
From January to the end of June, the UN
human rights office, OHCHR, documented
934 killings, 684 injuries and 680
kidnappings across the capital, Port-auPrince. In just five days in July, at least 234
people were killed or injured in gang-related
violence in the city’s Cité Soleil area, also
according to OHCHR.
In late April, a territorial dispute between
gangs left 188 people dead in Port-au-Prince.
According to OHCHR, the battle involved
extreme forms of violence including
“beheadings, chopping and burning of
bodies, [and] the killing of minors accused of
being informants for a rival gang”, as well as
the use of sexual violence, including gang
rape of children as young as 10, to “terrorize
and punish people living in areas controlled
by rival gangs.”
Human rights defenders and journalists also
remained at risk. In early September, two
journalists reporting in Cité Soleil were killed
and their bodies burned, according to the
Committee to Protect Journalists.
In October, OHCHR issued a report on the
use of rape and other forms of sexual
violence as a weapon by gangs to instil fear
and expand their area of influence. It
concluded: “Women, girls, boys, and men
have been affected. LGBTI+ persons,
traditionally marginalized and rejected within
the Haitian society, have also been
particularly targeted”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
As the human rights and humanitarian
situation continued to deteriorate rapidly,
Haitian asylum seekers resorted to fleeing the
island by boat, leading to drownings at sea.
Between September 2021 and May 2022,
the USA expelled more than 25,000 Haitians,
making significant use of Title 42, an order

184

that allows authorities to summarily expel
migrants and asylum seekers to their home
country or most recent transit country, in
violation of national and international law.
The US authorities subjected Haitian
asylum seekers to arbitrary detention and
discriminatory and humiliating ill-treatment
that amounted to race-based torture.1
The ill-treatment Haitians experienced in US
detention facilities included lack of access to
sufficient food, healthcare, information,
interpreters and lawyers. Haitian asylum
seekers also reported that they were returned
to Haiti by plane in handcuffs and shackles,
causing severe psychological pain and
suffering due to its association with slavery
and criminality, in violation of international
human rights law which absolutely prohibits
torture and other ill-treatment.
1. USA: “They Did Not Treat Us Like People”: Race and Migration-related
Torture and Other Ill-treatment of Haitians Seeking Safety in the USA,
22 September

HONDURAS
Republic of Honduras
Head of state and government: Xiomara Castro
(replaced Juan Orlando Hernández in January)
Human rights defenders faced high levels of
violence. Authorities failed to provide
sufficient funding for public health. Illegal
logging continued to threaten the
environment. Authorities failed to bring to
justice members of the security forces
suspected of criminal responsibility for
excessive use of force against protesters in
2017.

BACKGROUND
Thousands left the country due to violence,
impunity, climate change, poverty and
inequality. Former president Juan Orlando
Hernández was extradited to the USA on
drug trafficking charges in April.
Congress derogated the law on Employment
and Economic Development Zones (ZEDE),

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

which had caused concerns over possible
risks to human rights in such zones.

amnesty also covered people accused of
corruption.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS

RIGHT TO HEALTH

Human rights defenders faced high levels of
violence and most attacks against them
remained unpunished.
In June, a tribunal sentenced David Castillo
to 22 years’ imprisonment for his role in the
2016 killing of Indigenous Lenca and
environmental defender Berta Cáceres.
However, no progress was made in bringing
to justice those who planned the killing.
Following a Supreme Court ruling citing
violations of the right to due process, eight
defenders of the Guapinol River case were
released in February.1 They had been
arbitrarily detained for more than two years.
In a separate decision, this court annulled
similarly unfounded criminal proceedings
against another five Guapinol defenders.
Members of the Black Fraternal
Organization of Honduras (OFRANEH) and
its coordinator, Miriam Miranda, reported that
they were subjected to attacks and several
new unfounded criminal prosecutions during
the year.
By the end of the year, Honduras had not
signed the Escazú Agreement.

Health services remained under serious
strain. Honduras continued to invest far less
in public health than the 6% of GDP
recommended by the WHO.2
Abortion remained banned in all
circumstances. In December, authorities
authorized the use of emergency
contraception for survivors of sexual violence.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
There was concern at the failure to ensure
the free, prior and informed consent of
Indigenous peoples to the implementation of
proposed projects in line with the EU’s Forest
Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade
initiative to address the country’s extensive
problem of illegal logging.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND IMPUNITY
No member of security forces who used
excessive force against protesters during the
2017 crackdown was brought to justice
during 2022.
In February, Congress passed a law
providing for a broad amnesty, including for
people criminalized for participating in
protests since the 2009 coup and for
defending territories and the environment.
However, there were concerns that the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED
DISCRIMINATION AND VIOLENCE
Same-sex marriage was not allowed by law
and levels of violence against LGBTI people
remained high.
In May, in line with a 2021 ruling by the
Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
authorities recognized their responsibility for
human rights violations against trans sex
worker and rights defender Vicky Hernández,
who was killed in 2009.
1. “Honduras: Further information: Prisoners of conscience released”,
10 March
2. Americas: Unequal and Lethal, 27 April

HUNGARY
Hungary
Head of state: Katalin Novák (replaced János Áder in
May)
Head of government: Viktor Orbán
Discrimination against LGBTI and Roma
people persisted. Women’s sexual and
reproductive rights suffered significant
rollback. Teachers were denied the right to
strike. Pushbacks of refugees and migrants
continued in violation of EU law. The
European Court of Human Rights ruled that
Hungary had violated the ban on collective
expulsions. Other judgments from the Court
were not fully implemented.

185

BACKGROUND
In early April, incumbent Prime Minister
Viktor Orbán secured a majority of seats in
the new parliament and began his fourth
consecutive term in office. The first woman
president, Katalin Novák, took office in May.
In late April, the European Commission
notified Hungary that it had activated the
conditionality mechanism, which allows the
EU to cut off funding to a member state if it
breaches principles underpinning the rule of
law.
In December, the European Commission
recommended the implementation of more
rule of law and anti-corruption measures to
protect the suspended EU funds.
The war in Ukraine was used as a pretext to
amend the Constitution (known as the
“Fundamental Law”) in May, for the 10th
time, providing the government with powers
to declare a state of emergency in the event
of armed conflict, war or humanitarian
disaster in a neighbouring country.
The European Parliament declared in
September that Hungary could not be
considered a full democracy. It adopted a
report which found that, since the triggering
of the EU’s Article 7 procedure against the
country in 2018, fundamental rights had
further deteriorated due to the “deliberate
and systematic efforts of the Hungarian
government”.
Hungary was placed under the full
monitoring procedure by the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) in
October. PACE expressed concerns over the
government’s approach to the rule of law,
women’s and LGBTI rights, the electoral
framework and the use of the “special legal
order” power since 2020 to trigger states of
emergency.
The war-related special legal order was
extended to the end of May 2023.

DISCRIMINATION
The Office of the Commissioner for
Fundamental Rights (the Ombudsman) was
downgraded in status by the Global Alliance
of National Human Rights Institutions due to
failures to adequately address a range of

186

human rights concerns, including violations
against ethnic minorities, LGBTI people,
refugees and migrants.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
A nationwide referendum in April on
“protecting minors”, based on the 2021 antiLGBTI law, was invalidated following a
successful campaign by NGOs including
Amnesty International Hungary and the
Háttér Society, the country’s oldest LGBTI
organization. Valid votes were received from
less than 50% of the electorate after 1.7
million people (nearly 21% of voters)
deliberately spoiled their votes by declining to
answer the four referendum questions, while
many others abstained. The National Election
Commission found the NGOs in violation of
the law and issued fines, but the Kúria, the
country’s highest court, overturned some of
the decisions on appeal.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Hungary had still not ratified the Council of
Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention).
In September, protests took place against a
new regulation requiring pregnant women
seeking an abortion to first demonstrate – by
providing a clinician’s report – that they had
listened to the “fetal heartbeat”. On this
basis, abortion remained legal up to 12
weeks of pregnancy.
A report titled “Is pink education occurring
in Hungary?” published in July by the State
Audit Office, warned that “overrepresentation” of women in higher
education could cause “demographic
problems”, making it harder for women to
find a partner and potentially leading to a
reduction in childbearing. Several academics
and NGOs criticized the analysis, expressing
concern over the stereotyping of women.
ROMA
In May, the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) ruled that Hungary violated the right
to privacy of a Roma man when local
authorities conducted unlawful inspections of
homes in the town of Gyöngyöspata in 2011.
The ECtHR held in July that Hungary
violated the prohibition of inhuman and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

degrading treatment in 2014 when police
handcuffed and beat a Roma man in the
town of Encs. The judgment required the
state to pay EUR 19,500 compensation to the
victim.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Teachers’ unions applied to the ECtHR in
September to challenge the government’s
unlawful restrictions on their right to strike.
Thousands of people protested throughout
the year in solidarity with teachers
demanding the right to strike and reform of
public education. Teachers were unfairly
dismissed from several schools for taking part
in the demonstrations.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In September, the ECtHR reiterated its former
judgment that no independent external
control existed over secret surveillance in
Hungary and no remedies had been provided
for the victims of related human rights
violations. The ECtHR also found that the
Data Protection Authority lacked the
competencies to be an effective check on the
secret services.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
More than 2,000,000 people who had fled
Ukraine through Hungary since the start of
the war received first assistance there. Some
33,168 people had applied for temporary
asylum by end of December.
Pushbacks of refugees and migrants at the
southern border continued, reaching
157,879 cases by the end of December.
Frontex (the EU Border and Coast Guard
Agency), having suspended its operations in
Hungary in January 2021, declared in
September that it would provide support for
the repatriation of third-country nationals only
if Hungary complied with EU rules.
The ECtHR ruled in September that
Hungary violated the ban on collective
expulsions when in 2016 an Iranian asylum
seeker was part of a group pushed back to
Serbia and was abused by the Hungarian
police.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The ECtHR issued three judgments against
Hungary, in February, June and August,
concerning the illegal and arbitrary detention
of asylum seekers in the transit zone between
Serbia and Hungary.
The Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe expressed profound concern in
September that – almost three years after the
ECtHR judgment in Ilias and Ahmed v.
Hungary found that authorities failed to meet
their obligation to assess the risks of illtreatment before removing asylum seekers to
Serbia – a reassessment of the legislative
presumption of “safe third country” in
respect of Serbia had not been carried out.
In September, the European Court of Justice
ruled against Hungarian legislation allowing
authorities to deny international protection for
asylum seekers based on “non-reasoned”
security concerns and without providing
applicants with reasons for their decision.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
The Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe issued an interim resolution in March
noting that the Baka judgment of 2016
against the “undue and premature” dismissal
of Chief Justice András Baka had still not
been implemented. The Committee
expressed concerns about lack of progress in
ensuring effective oversight by an
independent judicial body in cases involving
the potential removal of a judge from office.
The Committee also noted the “chilling
effect” of violations affecting judges’ freedom
of expression.

ICELAND
Republic of Iceland
Head of state: Guðni Th. Jóhannesson
Head of government: Katrín Jakobsdóttir
Solitary confinement in pretrial detention
was used excessively and existing
safeguards were insufficient. There were
serious concerns about the application of
solitary confinement to children,

187

neurodiverse people or those who have
mental health conditions.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In April, the 4th periodic review of the UN
Committee Against Torture raised a series of
concerns about the legal framework for
solitary confinement in pretrial detention and
its use for prolonged periods and on children
and people with disabilities.1 The Committee
cast doubt on Iceland’s account of the
safeguards used to ensure it was only used
when necessary. It also criticized the
government for failing to ensure that the
legislation defined torture as a specific crime
consistent with the UN Convention against
Torture. In response, the government stated
that it would revise its legislative and
procedural framework.
Official data indicated the widespread
application of solitary confinement during
pretrial detention; initial court orders for
solitary confinement were issued to 61% of
pretrial detainees in 2021. Despite some
overall reduction in this number over the past
decade, the reduction was insufficient and
inconsistent. Ten of the 825 people held in
pretrial solitary confinement between 2012
and 2021 were aged between 15 and 17
years. These figures suggest that the
application of solitary confinement is being
used much more widely than only in
exceptional cases as a last resort, as required
by UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners (Mandela Rules).
According to the Prison and Probation
Administration, the longest period of pretrial
solitary confinement was 57 days in 2013
and 37 days in 2021.
The legal framework in Iceland does not
prevent the imposition of solitary confinement
on individuals at particular risk of severe
harm such as children, neurodiverse people
and those with mental health conditions or
disabilities.
1. “Iceland: Submission to the UN Committee Against Torture, 73rd
Session, 19 April-13 May 2022”, 31 March

188

INDIA
Republic of India
Head of state: Droupadi Murmu (replaced Ram Nath
Kovind in July)
Head of government: Narendra Modi
Laws and policies that were passed without
adequate public and legislative consultation
eroded the rights of human rights defenders
and religious minorities. The government
selectively and viciously cracked down on
religious minorities, and explicit advocacy
of hatred by political leaders and public
officials towards them was commonplace
and went unpunished. Punitive demolitions
of Muslim family homes and businesses
were carried out with impunity. Peaceful
protesters defending minority rights were
presented and treated as a threat to public
order. Repressive laws including
counterterrorism legislation were used
rampantly to silence dissent. Authorities
intimidated human rights defenders using
digital technologies, including unlawful
surveillance. Adivasis and marginalized
communities including Dalits continued to
face violence and entrenched
discrimination.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
In a welcome step, on 11 May the Supreme
Court suspended the enforcement of Section
124a of the Penal Code, a 152-year-old
provision that penalizes sedition, until the
government re-examines it.
In a continuing pattern of harassment and
intimidation, unlawful and politically
motivated restrictions were placed on civil
society organizations and human rights
defenders including activists, journalists,
students and academics.
On 14 July the lower house of parliament
banned a number of ordinary words from
being spoken during parliamentary debates
including, among others, “corrupt”, “sexual
harassment”, “criminal”, “eyewash”,
“incompetent” and “hypocrisy”. The ban was

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

an attempt to police the speeches of
opposition members of parliament.
On 7 September the Income Tax
Department conducted coordinated raids –
presented as “surveys” – on the offices of
NGOs including Oxfam, the Independent and
Public-Spirited Media Foundation and the
Centre for Policy Research, for alleged
contraventions of the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act.
On 27 and 28 September, mass raids were
carried out against the NGO Popular Front of
India (PFI) and its affiliates across India.
More than 300 of PFI’s senior leaders and
members were arrested. Subsequently, the
Ministry of Home Affairs declared PFI to be
an “unlawful association” under the Unlawful
(Activities) Prevention Act (UAPA), a
counterterrorism law, for its alleged
involvement in the “funding of terrorism and
terrorist activities”, despite there being no
charges brought against those arrested and
no trials conducted.
On 27 July the Supreme Court upheld
provisions of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act (2002) relating to the powers
of arrest, confiscation of property and search
and seizure conferred on the Enforcement
Directorate, India’s primary agency for
investigating financial crimes. These powers
have been repeatedly abused to repress civil
society and limit dissent.
Throughout the year the authorities routinely
used international travel bans to stifle
independent voices including the human
rights activist and former head of Amnesty
International India, Aakar Patel, journalist
Rana Ayyub and at least two Kashmiri
journalists who were scheduled to speak
abroad on India’s human rights situation.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
ARBITRARY ARRESTS
The government cracked down on critics by
resorting to arbitrary arrests, including
without following due process, under
draconian and repressive laws.
On 25 April, Jignesh Mevani, an
independent Dalit member of the Gujarat
Legislative Assembly, was re-arrested

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

immediately after he was granted bail by a
court in the state of Assam. His first arrest
came after he posted on Twitter calling on
Prime Minister Narendra Modi to maintain
peace in the state of Gujarat, which was
witnessing religious violence.
On 25 June, prominent human rights
defender Teesta Setalvad and former police
officials Sanjeev Bhatt and RB Sreekumar
were arrested and detained by the authorities
for charges including committing forgery and
fabricating evidence. The charges appeared
to be in reprisal for their work with victims of
the 2002 Gujarat riots.
On 28 June, Mohammed Zubair, co-founder
of the independent fact-checking website
ALT News, was arrested by police in the
capital, New Delhi, for allegedly “hurting
religious sentiments” and “promoting enmity”
on Twitter for denouncing discrimination
against minorities and criticizing increased
censorship.
On 10 June, police detained human rights
activist Javed Mohammed, his wife and their
daughter, along with many others, for
allegedly being the “key conspirators” of
communal violence that erupted in Prayagraj,
Uttar Pradesh state.
PROLONGED DETENTION
Eleven human rights activists continued to be
detained without trial in Maharashtra state
under the UAPA. They were academics
Shoma Sen and Hany Babu; tribal rights
activist Mahesh Raut; poet Sudhir Dhawale;
lawyer Surendra Gadling; civil rights activists
Rona Wilson, Arun Ferreira and Vernon
Gonsalves; and three members of the cultural
group Kabir Kala Manch – Ramesh Gaichor,
Jyoti Jagtap and Sagar Gorkhe. They were
arrested between 2018 and 2020 by the
National Investigation Agency, India’s main
counterterror agency, for their alleged
involvement in violence during the Bhima
Koregaon celebrations near the city of Pune
in 2018.
At least eight Muslim students, councillors
and human rights activists continued to be
detained without trial under the UAPA for
allegedly orchestrating religious violence in

189

Delhi in February 2020 that killed at least 53
people, mostly Muslims.
Journalist Siddique Kappan and three
others remained detained under laws on
sedition and the UAPA. At the time of his
arrest in October 2020, Siddique Kappan was
on his way to Hathras District in Uttar
Pradesh to report on the gang rape and
murder of a young Dalit woman.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Between April and June, communal violence
broke out in Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Delhi, Rajasthan and West
Bengal during the festivals of Ram Navami
and Ramzan. Shortly after the violence,
various political leaders and public officials in
Madhya Pradesh made statements
threatening the demolition of protesters’
properties. They included the deputy
inspector general of police of Khargone and
the commissioner of police and the home
minister of Madhya Pradesh. The latter was
quoted as saying: “Whichever houses were
involved in stone pelting, we will ensure they
are turned into piles of stones themselves”.
These statements were followed by the
authorities’ unlawful demolition of private
property of people suspected of rioting,
reportedly without notice or other due
process requirements, in Madhya Pradesh,
Gujarat, Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. Most of the
demolished properties were owned by
economically disadvantaged Muslims.
On 10 June the media reported an incident
in which police personnel used batons
against protesters, threw stones and shot
bystanders during protests in Ranchi,
Jharkhand state. One bystander was shot six
times by the police while returning from the
market. Two protesters, including a 15-yearold boy, were fatally shot in the head by the
police.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
RESTRICTIONS ON THE RIGHT TO PROTEST
The authorities imposed new restrictions on
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. On 3 March the High Court of
Karnataka upheld a state order restricting all

190

protests to a designated area in the state
capital, Bengaluru.
On 26 September the Gujarat state police
detained human rights activist Sandeep
Pandey along with seven others who were
due to participate in a march demanding a
public apology to gang-rape survivor Bilkis
Bano. Those convicted of raping Bilkis Bano
had been released from prison by the Gujarat
government.
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The police used unlawful force and
committed other human rights violations,
including abusing laws to intimidate people
and silence dissent.
On 10 June, in a video reported by multiple
media outlets, police officers repeatedly hit
detained male protesters with batons in
Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh. One protester
complained of a fractured arm. Instead of
criticizing the use of force, it was celebrated
by former police officers and politicians of the
ruling Bharatiya Janata Party on social
media.
On 4 October, Gujarat state police tied nine
men to a pole in Kheda city for allegedly
throwing stones at a Hindu festival
celebration and publicly flogged them with
lathis (batons) while spectators cheered.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION
Criminal laws were used disproportionately
against religious minorities, particularly
Muslims. The police routinely arrested
Muslims for allegedly “promoting enmity
between groups” and “outraging religious
feelings” for acts including offering namaz
(prayers), conducting legitimate business
transactions, consensually marrying Hindu
women and eating beef.
In May, July and August, scores of Muslims
were either charged in criminal cases or with
administrative penalties for offering namaz in
public spaces and private homes.
In the states of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Kerala and Gujarat, public
calls were made by some Hindu groups for
the economic boycott of Muslim businesses.
On 23 March the minister of law,
parliamentary affairs and legislation in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Karnataka state said that non-Hindus cannot
engage in any kind of trade near Hindu
temples and institutions. Calls were also
made in Karnataka to boycott meat shops
owned by Muslims during the Hindu festival
of Dussehra. On 4 April the mayor of South
Delhi ordered the closure of all meat shops,
which were predominantly owned by
Muslims, during the Hindu festival of
Navratri.
Explicit incitement to violence against
Muslims, including to rape and murder
Muslim women, were made with impunity by
Hindu priests in Uttar Pradesh and Delhi.
On 17 May, Karnataka state government
passed a law, without public or legislative
consultation, criminalizing marriages where
there is an allegation of forced religious
conversion by relatives or colleagues of the
alleged victim. The law made these
conversions punishable by up to 10 years’
imprisonment. On 11 November, five people
were arrested in Karnataka on allegations of
forced conversion. Uttar Pradesh, where a
similar law was passed in 2021, witnessed
attacks and violence against Christians on
allegations of forced conversion.

DISCRIMINATION
HATE CRIMES BASED ON CASTE
Hate crimes including violence against Dalits
and Adivasis were committed with impunity.
More than 50,000 suspected crimes against
members of Scheduled Castes and more
than 9,000 crimes against Adivasi people
were reported in 2021. More than threequarters of India’s prison population were in
pretrial detention, with Dalits, Adivasis and
members of other disadvantaged groups
being disproportionately represented.
Throughout the year, media reports
demonstrated that the Dalit community,
including Dalit children, faced increasing
oppression and violence from members of
dominant castes, including loss of life for
exercising their basic rights such as drinking
water from a common well.
Despite a formal ban on manual
scavenging, at least 19 sanitation workers
suffocated to death after being forced to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

clean sewers and septic tanks by private
businesses, political leaders and the police.
Almost three-quarters of sanitation workers
across India belonged to Scheduled Castes.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
On 28 June the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change passed the Forest
Conservation Rules, permitting private
businesses to cut down forest without
obtaining free, prior and informed consent
from forest-dwellers, including Adivasi
peoples, who self-identify as Indigenous.
On 17 July, independent journalist Rupesh
Kumar Singh was arbitrarily detained by
Jharkhand police in retaliation for his
extensive reporting on the rights of Adivasi
peoples in Giridih district, Jharkhand state.
More than 60 forest dwellers, environmental
human rights defenders and Adivasi people
were arrested during the year for protesting
against a steel project by Jindal Steel Works
in the village of Dhinkia, Odisha state, which
was approved by the government based on a
fraudulent environmental impact assessment.

JAMMU AND KASHMIR
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Several Kashmiri journalists were arrested,
including Fahad Shah, Aasif Sultan and
Sajad Gul. After being granted bail by local
courts, they were re-arrested almost
immediately under the UAPA. In a continuing
crackdown on freedom of expression and
movement, journalists Aakash Hassan and
Sanna Irshad Mattoo were prevented from
travelling abroad by the immigration
authorities without a court order, warrant or
even a written explanation. Human rights
defender Khurram Parvez remained detained
under the UAPA without trial since November
2021.
UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
According to official data, Jammu and
Kashmir accounted for the highest proportion
of deaths involving the police in India
between April 2020 and March 2022. Media
reports suggested that at least 19 civilians
were killed by armed groups during 2022, of

191

which seven belonged to the regional Hindu
minority community.

recognizing marital rape as a form of violence
against women.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

On 6 April, parliament passed the Criminal
Procedure (Identification) Act (2022) allowing
police officers to collect signatures,
handwriting samples, and biological samples
including blood, semen, hair, swabs and
DNA analyses of all convicts and arrested
people including those under administrative
detention. Under the Act, these could be
stored for up to 75 years in a central
database without a data protection framework
in place.
On 25 August the Supreme Court refused to
make public an investigatory report it had
commissioned into allegations of unlawful
surveillance of the mobile devices of
journalists, politicians, scientists and human
rights activists by government authorities
using Pegasus spyware.

In August, India updated its NDC,
strengthening its target to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions by 2030. However, the Climate
Action Tracker rated India’s climate target
and policies as “highly insufficient”.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Perpetrators continued to commit sexual and
domestic violence with impunity.
The government of the state of Karnataka
imposed a ban on women and girls wearing
headscarves (hijab) in public schools. The
ban was upheld by the High Court of
Karnataka in March. In October, the Supreme
Court issued a split verdict and referred the
case to a larger panel of judges. Meanwhile
the ban remained in place, resulting in
ongoing harassment of Muslim women and
girls.
There was some progress on women’s
rights. On 26 May the Supreme Court upheld
the right of sex workers and their children to
live with dignity and ordered police officers to
not abuse them verbally or physically. On 29
September the Supreme Court progressively
interpreted the 1971 Medical Termination of
Pregnancy (MTP) Act and granted the right
to abortion to all women, notwithstanding
their marital status. The Indian government
had previously refused to criminalize marital
rape and the judgment’s recognition of it
under the MTP Act was a step forward in

192

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The government lacked adequate disaster
preparedness policies and failed to effectively
respond to floods and air pollution. The
north-eastern state of Assam remained
vulnerable to intense floods which affected
more than 4.8 million people in July. From
April onwards, India faced average
temperatures of up to 4.5˚C above the normal
range, particularly affecting people living in
poverty and those in certain professions such
as daily wage labourers, farmers and street
vendors. From October onwards, air quality
seriously deteriorated in Delhi, largely due to
stubble burning, the use of firecrackers
during the Diwali festival and vehicle
emissions, violating the human rights to life
and health.

INDONESIA
Republic of Indonesia
Head of state and government: Joko Widodo
Authorities repeatedly used excessive force
to break up protests, including by local
communities protesting against mining
operations. The crackdown on political
dissent in Papua and West Papua provinces
continued. Dozens of Indigenous Papuans
were arrested and some faced charges
carrying lengthy prison terms. Freedom of
expression continued to be curtailed as
human rights defenders, journalists and
others were subjected to physical and
online attacks, and were arrested and
prosecuted under repressive laws. A new
law was adopted criminalizing various
crimes related to sexual violence, but rape

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

victims were denied effective access to
justice. The judicial punishment of flogging
was used in Aceh province. Security forces
committed unlawful killings, including in
Papua and West Papua, largely with
impunity.

BACKGROUND
In June, parliament passed legislation
creating three new provinces that divided the
existing provinces of Papua and West Papua
into smaller administrative areas. The
government said that this would accelerate
development and improve public service
delivery, but fears that it would lead to an
increased military presence sparked renewed
protests in a region where there was already
a long-standing, pro-independence
movement.
In December, parliament adopted a new
criminal code that violated rights to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, privacy and sexual and
reproductive rights standards, and
discriminated against women, LGBTI people
and minorities. The new law, that will
supersede the previous criminal code over a
three-year period, reinstated prison
sentences for insulting the president, vice
president, the government and other state
institutions and banned unauthorized
demonstrations. It also made consensual
sexual relations outside marriage a criminal
offence, thereby permitting state intrusion
into private decisions of individuals and
families and could potentially be misused to
criminalize victims of sexual assault or target
members of the LGBTI community.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities arrested, detained and used
excessive force against protesters, including
those defending land rights and the
environment. On 8 February, security forces
assaulted people in Wadas village, Central
Java province, who were protesting against
the environmental and social impacts of
planned rock quarrying. The arrival of
hundreds of military and police officers in the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

village to secure land for the quarry led to
clashes with local residents. Sixty-seven
people were arrested during the confrontation
but released without charge. The police
refuted claims that excessive force was used
against protesters.
On 12 February, a 21-year-old man, Erfaldi,
was shot dead during a protest against a
gold-mining operation in Parigi Moutong
Regency, Central Sulawesi province.
Members of the Police Mobile Brigade
reportedly used tear gas and fired live
ammunition to disperse hundreds of people
who were blocking the Trans-Sulawesi
highway after the provincial governor failed to
attend a meeting to discuss community
concerns about the impact of the mine on
local livelihoods.1 The trial of a police officer
charged with Erfaldi’s death was ongoing at
year’s end.
PAPUA AND WEST PAPUA
Protests in Papua and West Papua provinces
were met with disproportionate force and
dozens of protesters were arrested during the
year. On 10 May, police arrested seven
political activists following a protest in
Jayapura, the capital of Papua province,
against the planned division of Papua and
West Papua provinces. All were released
without charge. The same day, police kicked
and used rubber batons and wooden clubs to
beat protesters as they prepared to march to
the district parliament in the town of
Abepura, Papua province. One student who
had been negotiating with the police had a
gun held against his head and was beaten
until he lost consciousness. At least 36 other
protesters also sustained injuries.2
In November, police forcibly broke up a vigil
at Jayapura University of Technology and
Science to commemorate the 21st
anniversary of the abduction and killing of
pro-independence leader Theys Eluay.
According to reports, police fired tear gas to
disperse the students who had raised the
Morning Star flag – a symbol of Papuan
independence. Fifteen people were arrested,
three of whom were subsequently charged
with treason and six with offences relating to
violence against police officers. The three

193

students charged with treason remained in
detention at year’s end, while the others were
released on bail.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The Electronic Information and Transaction
(EIT) law and other restrictive laws were used
to prosecute and intimidate human rights
defenders, activists, journalists, academics
and others. Police launched investigations
under the EIT law into three of the 67 people
arrested in Wadas village on 8 February in
connection with sharing videos on social
media of the day’s events. None were
charged, but their mobile phones were
confiscated. Subsequently, the official Twitter
accounts of the Wadas anti-mining protest
and the personal accounts of at least seven
activists involved in the protests were
suspended.3
On 6 April, the Ciamis District Court in West
Java sentenced Muhammad Kosman to 10
years’ imprisonment for “spreading false
news”. He was arrested in August 2021
under EIT law provisions on “advocacy of
hatred” and law No. 1/1946 on
misinformation after uploading a video on
YouTube in which he allegedly insulted Islam
and the Prophet Muhammad.4
In May, police launched a criminal
investigation into protests by lecturers and
other staff at a university in West Java
province following a complaint of defamation
under the EIT law against them by a former
dean of the law faculty. The complaint related
to their criticism of faculty policies and
practices and calls for the dismissal of the
dean. At least 14 lecturers and other staff
members involved in the protests were
questioned, but no one had been charged by
year’s end.
In March, police formally charged Haris
Azhar and Fatia Maulidiyanti with defamation
under the EIT law. The two human rights
activists were accused in 2021 of “spreading
false information” in connection with a
YouTube video in which they reported
allegations that a minister and members of
the military were involved in the mining

194

industry in Papua. The two faced up to four
years in prison if convicted.
JOURNALISTS
At least 53 cases of physical assault, digital
and other attacks targeting at least 63
journalists or media institutions were reported
during the year. According to media reports,
police slapped and choked a journalist who
was covering a student demonstration in
Kendari, Southeast Sulawesi province, in
April. The journalist’s mobile phone was
seized and videos he had taken of police
beating a demonstrator were deleted against
his will.
Between 23 and 30 September the devices
and social media accounts of at least 38
journalists and other media workers from the
online media outlet Narasi were the targets of
a coordinated hacking attack.5 At the same
time, Narasi’s website was temporarily
disabled following a cyberattack. Narasi is
known for its coverage of corruption, crimes
involving public officials and other
controversial issues.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
At least 35 cases of physical and digital
attacks targeting 150 human rights defenders
or organizations were reported during the
year. There were concerns that an arson
attack at the premises of the Papua Legal Aid
Institute (LBH Papua) in Jayapura on 9 May,
in which a motorbike was destroyed, was
related to the NGO’s work in defence of
human rights in Papua. LBH Papua filed a
report with the police but those responsible
were not identified.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 12 April, the House of Representatives
adopted the Sexual Violence Crime Bill into
law. The law, first proposed by women’s rights
activists in 2012, criminalized nine forms of
sexual violence including, for the first time,
forced marriage and physical, non-physical
and cyber sexual harassment.
On 24 October, the independent news
website Konde.co was temporarily disabled
by a digital attack hours after publishing a
report about the failure of the authorities to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

investigate the rape of a woman in 2019,
allegedly involving employees of the Ministry
of Cooperatives and Small and Medium
Enterprises. According to the report the
survivor was forced to marry one of the
alleged perpetrators, apparently as a form of
“restorative justice”, which resulted in police
investigations being halted and the release of
all suspects in the case.6 Konde.co, which
reports on women’s issues and on
marginalized groups, had experienced
previous cyberattacks for its reporting.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
At least 168 people were subjected to
flogging in Aceh, the only Indonesian
province to implement this form of
punishment. In January, a woman collapsed
twice while being flogged 100 times for
sexual relations outside marriage. Her male
partner received 15 lashes. Three other men
received 100 lashes each on the same day
for adultery or “facilitating adultery”.7

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
Thirty-six incidents of suspected unlawful
killings by security forces, involving 41
victims, were recorded during the year. Five
of these incidents, involving nine victims,
took place in Papua province, bringing the
total number of victims of suspected unlawful
killings in Papua and West Papua since
February 2018 to 105.
PAPUA AND WEST PAPUA
On 15 March, police shot dead two people
and injured three others when they opened
fire on protesters in Yahukimo Regency who
were demonstrating against the division of
Papua and West Papua.
Police detained 10 people, including six
members of the Indonesian military, in
connection with the killing and
dismemberment of four Papuan men in
Mimika Regency in August. An Indonesian
Army Strategic Reserve commander told
journalists that these constituted murders as
a criminal matter, but not human rights
violations.8 On 29 August, security forces
detained and tortured three men in Bade
village, Mappi Regency, resulting in the death

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

of Bruno Kimko and serious injury to the two
others.9 Eighteen members of Yonif Raider
600/Modang military unit were arrested but
had not been charged by year’s end.
In March, UN experts raised concern about
the deteriorating human rights situation in
Papua and West Papua provinces and called
for full and independent investigations,
including into unlawful killings.
On 8 December, the Human Rights Court in
Makassar, South Sulawesi province,
acquitted a former military commander of the
unlawful killing of four Papuan high school
students in Paniai Regency in 2014. The trial
was marred by concerns about its credibility,
including because only one suspect was
charged in the case and all of the witnesses
except two were former members of the
security forces. Previous investigations by
Indonesia’s National Human Rights
Commission, known as Komnas HAM, found
that members of the XVII/Cenderawasih
military unit had opened fire on a crowd of
Indigenous Papuans who were protesting
against the alleged beating of Papuan
children by military personnel, resulting in
the deaths of four boys and injuries to 21
others. According to Komnas HAM, the
incident constituted a systematic and
widespread attack against civilians.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Two separate investigations found that
excessive use of force by police against
football supporters at Kanjuruhan Stadium in
Malang, East Java, on 1 October was the
primary cause of a disaster that left 135 dead
and another 433 injured. A fact-finding team
established by the president and parallel
investigations by Komnas HAM found that
the use of tear gas had led to panic and a
subsequent stampede in which supporters
were crushed to death. According to Komnas
HAM, police fired a total of 45 tear gas
canisters into the crowd.10 Seven people,
including three police officers and one
member of the Indonesian army, were named
as suspects and faced criminal charges.

195

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Indonesia updated its NDC in September,
bringing forward its target for reaching net
zero by 10 years to 2060 and improving its
unconditional target from 29% to 32% below
its “business-as-usual” (BAU) scenario, and
its conditional target from 41% to 43% below
BAU. Both targets have been rated “critically
insufficient” by independent analysts, and
Indonesia’s over-reliance on coal and
inadequate policies to support its
replacement with renewables was criticized.
1. “Indonesia: Investigate alleged shooting towards protester in Parigi
Moutong, Central Sulawesi”, 13 February (Indonesian only)
2. Indonesia: Silencing voices, suppressing criticism: The decline in
Indonesia’s civil liberties, 7 October
3. “Indonesia: Investigate attacks and intimidation against Wadas
residents and activists”, 16 February (Indonesian only)
4. “Indonesia: Stop criminalizing the right to freedom of expression”, 14
April
5. “Indonesia: Attacks against Narasi journalists are a form of
silencing”, 26 September (Indonesian only)
6. “Indonesia: KKJ denounces efforts to silence press freedom through
digital attacks against Konde.co”, 25 October (Indonesian only)
7. “Indonesia: Woman collapses twice while publicly flogged 100 times
for adultery in Aceh”, 27 January
8. “Indonesia: Mutilation case comments show state’s knee-jerk
response to allegations of violence involving security forces in
Papua”, 16 September
9. “Indonesia: Open Letter to Commander of the Indonesian National
Armed Forces to investigate alleged abuse and unlawful killings by
military officers”, 5 September (Indonesian only)
10. “Indonesia: Security forces must be held accountable for human
rights violations of the Kanjuruhan tragedy”, 3 November (Indonesian
only)

IRAN
Islamic Republic of Iran
Head of state: Ali Khamenei (Supreme Leader)
Head of government: Ebrahim Raisi (President)
Iran was rocked by an unprecedented
popular uprising against the Islamic
Republic system. Security forces unlawfully
fired live ammunition and metal pellets to
crush protests, killing hundreds of men,
women and children and injuring
thousands. Thousands of people were

196

arbitrarily detained and/or unfairly
prosecuted solely for peacefully exercising
their human rights. Women, LGBTI people,
and ethnic and religious minorities suffered
intensified discrimination and violence.
Enforced disappearances, torture and other
ill-treatment, including through the
deliberate denial of medical care, were
widespread and systematic. Cruel and
inhuman punishments, including flogging,
amputation and blinding, were imposed
and/or carried out. The use of the death
penalty increased and public executions
resumed. Trials remained systematically
unfair. Systemic impunity prevailed for past
and ongoing crimes against humanity
relating to prison massacres in 1988 and
other crimes under international law.

BACKGROUND
An unprecedented popular uprising rocked
Iran from September, with people calling for
an end to the Islamic Republic system.
Protests were ongoing at the end of the year.
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur on Iran. In November, the same
body established a fact-finding mission to
investigate human rights violations relating to
the uprising.
All independent UN experts and
international monitors other than the Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of the
unilateral coercive measures on the
enjoyment of human rights were denied entry
to Iran.
In March, Iran signed a bilateral treaty with
Belgium – the Transfer of Sentenced Persons
– raising concerns about its potential use to
grant impunity for Iranian state agents
arrested and convicted abroad of serious
human rights violations. In December, the
Constitutional Court of Belgium partially
suspended implementation of the treaty and
was due to rule on its annulment in early
2023.
Iran continued to provide military support to
government forces in the armed conflict in
Syria (see Syria entry).

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Iran supported the Russian government’s
invasion of Ukraine by providing Shahed 136
drones, which were used to target and
destroy civilian infrastructure.
In September/October, the Revolutionary
Guards attacked Kurdish opposition groups
inside the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, resulting
in the deaths of more than a dozen people,
including a pregnant woman.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities ramped up already
suffocating levels of repression, leaving no
space for peaceful dissent.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND ASSOCIATION
The authorities censored media, jammed
satellite television channels and, from
September, added Instagram and WhatsApp
to the list of blocked and/or filtered mobile
apps and social media platforms, which
included Facebook, Signal, Telegram, Twitter
and YouTube.
The authorities repeatedly shut off or
disrupted internet and mobile phone
networks during protests to suppress
mobilization and hide the scale of violations
by security forces.
The Internet User Protection Bill, which
would further erode online freedoms and
access to the global internet, remained
pending. In September, an executive
directive was issued further limiting access to
online content.
The authorities banned all independent
political parties, civil society organizations
and independent trade unions, and
subjected striking workers to reprisals.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities systematically adopted a
militarized response to localized and
nationwide protests.
In May, security forces in Khuzestan
province, as well as Chaharmahal and
Bakhtiari province, unlawfully used live
ammunition, birdshot, tear gas and water
cannon to crush largely peaceful protests
over soaring food prices and a deadly
building collapse in Abadan, Khuzestan
province. At least four people were killed.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Scores of others, including children,
sustained injuries from birdshot, the use of
which violates the prohibition of torture and
other ill-treatment.1
The death in custody of Mahsa (Zhina)
Amini at the hands of Iran’s “morality” police
on 16 September sparked a nationwide
uprising that continued the rest of the year.
The authorities extensively and unlawfully
fired live ammunition, metal pellets and tear
gas and subjected protesters to severe
beatings. Amnesty International recorded the
names of hundreds of protesters and
bystanders unlawfully killed by security
forces, including dozens of children.2
Hundreds were blinded or sustained other
serious eye injuries due to security forces
firing metal pellets. Thousands more
sustained injuries for which many did not
seek medical care due to fear of arrest.
More than half of those killed belonged to
the oppressed Baluchi minority in Sistan and
Baluchestan province and the oppressed
Kurdish minority in the provinces of
Kurdistan, Kermanshah and West Azerbaijan.
Peacefully protesting university students
and schoolchildren were expelled and
subjected to violent raids, beatings and other
ill-treatment.

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Thousands of people were arbitrarily detained
and/or unfairly prosecuted throughout the
year for peacefully exercising their human
rights; many remained unjustly imprisoned.
According to a leaked audio-recorded
official statement, between 15,000 and
16,000 people were detained during the first
weeks of the uprising. The authorities
continued mass arbitrary arrests until the end
of the year and subjected many to unjust
prosecutions and unfair trials.
Two young men were arbitrarily executed in
relation to the nationwide uprising after sham
trials and without advance notice to their
families, while scores of others were under
the sentence of death or remained on trial for
overly broad capital charges including

197

“enmity against God” (moharebeh) and
“corruption on earth” (efsad-e fel-arz).
The authorities further suppressed civil
society, subjecting hundreds of human rights
defenders, lawyers, journalists, political
dissidents, activists, conservationists, writers,
artists, musicians, university students and
schoolchildren, to arbitrary detention and/or
unjust prosecution.
Hundreds of workers, including teachers,
faced arbitrary detention for going on strike,
taking part in International Workers’ Day
rallies, and/or otherwise raising concerns
about workers’ rights.
The practice of arbitrarily detaining foreign
and dual nationals for leverage continued
and, in some cases, constituted the crime of
hostage-taking.3
The arbitrary house arrest of dissidents
Mehdi Karroubi, Mir Hossein Mousavi and
Zahra Rahnavard entered its 12th year.
The judiciary lacked independence and
oversaw a repressive apparatus replete with
systematic due process violations, including
denial of access to a lawyer at the
investigation stage, enforced disappearance,
incommunicado detention, admission of
torture-tainted “confessions” as evidence,
and summary and secret sham trials bearing
no resemblance to judicial proceedings,
resulting in imprisonment, flogging and death
sentences.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment, including
through prolonged solitary confinement and
deliberate denial of medical care, remained
widespread and systematic. Forced
“confessions” obtained under torture and
other ill-treatment were broadcast on state
television.
Prison and prosecution authorities, working
under the judiciary, held prisoners in cruel
and inhuman conditions characterized by
overcrowding, poor sanitation, inadequate
food and water, insufficient beds, poor
ventilation and insect infestation.
Dozens of people died in custody in
suspicious circumstances involving credible
reports of physical torture and/or denial of

198

medical care. No investigations were
conducted in line with international
standards.
The Penal Code retained punishments
violating the prohibition of torture and other
ill-treatment, including flogging, blinding,
amputation, crucifixion and stoning.
Between May and September, the
authorities amputated the fingers of at least
five men convicted of theft: four in Evin
prison, Tehran province, and one in Raja’i
Shahr prison, Alborz province.4
In October, the cases of two men and a
woman were sent to the Office for
Implementation of Sentences in Tehran to
carry out their sentences of blinding under
the principle of qesas (retribution-in-kind).
No public information emerged on their
implementation by the end of the year.
Courts issued at least 178 flogging
sentences, according to Abdorrahman
Boroumand Center.

DISCRIMINATION
ETHNIC MINORITIES
Ethnic minorities, including Ahwazi Arabs,
Azerbaijani Turks, Baluchis, Kurds and
Turkmen, faced widespread discrimination,
curtailing their access to education,
employment, adequate housing and political
office. Continued under-investment in
minority-populated regions exacerbated
poverty and marginalization.
Persian remained the sole language of
instruction in primary and secondary
education, despite repeated calls for
linguistic diversity.
Security forces unlawfully killed scores of
unarmed Kurdish cross-border couriers
(kulbars) between the Kurdistan regions of
Iran and Iraq and Baluchi fuel porters
(soukhtbar) in Sistan and Baluchestan
province. Authorities failed to investigate the
killings and hold those responsible
accountable.
RELIGIOUS MINORITIES
Religious minorities, including Baha’is,
Christians, Gonabadi Dervishes, Jews,
Yaresan and Sunni Muslims, suffered
discrimination in law and practice, including

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

in access to education, employment, child
adoption, political office and places of
worship. Hundreds were arbitrarily detained,
unjustly prosecuted, tortured or ill-treated
and/or subjected to other forms of
harassment for professing or practising their
faith. People born to parents classified as
Muslim by the authorities risked arbitrary
detention, torture or the death penalty for
“apostasy” if they adopted other religions or
atheism.
Members of the Baha’i minority were
subjected to widespread and systematic
violations for practising their faith, including
arbitrary detention, interrogation, torture and
other ill-treatment, and enforced
disappearance. Authorities forcibly closed
Baha’i businesses, confiscated dozens of
Baha’i properties, demolished their homes
and cemeteries, and banned Baha’is from
higher education. In June, an appeal court
upheld a verdict authorizing the confiscation
of 18 Baha’i properties in Semnan province.
In August, the authorities bulldozed six
Baha’i houses and confiscated more than 20
hectares of land in a village in Mazandaran
province, resulting in loss of livelihood.5
Authorities raided house churches and
subjected Christian converts to arbitrary
arrest, confiscation of personal property,
prosecution on national security charges, and
punishments such as imprisonment, fines
and internal “exile”.
Several Gonabadi Dervishes remained
unjustly imprisoned.
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI people suffered systemic
discrimination and violence. Consensual
same-sex sexual relations remained
criminalized with punishments ranging from
flogging to the death penalty. State-endorsed
“conversion therapies” amounting to torture
or other ill-treatment remained prevalent,
including against children. Hormone therapy
and surgical procedures including
sterilization were mandatory for legal gender
changes. Gender non-conforming individuals
risked criminalization and denial of access to
education and employment.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In August, LGBTI rights defender Zahra
Sedighi-Hamadani, known as Sareh, and
another woman, Elham Choubdar, were
sentenced to death for “corruption on earth”
by a Revolutionary Court in Urumieh, West
Azerbaijan province, due to their real or
perceived sexual orientation and/or gender
identity and their social media activities in
support of LGBTI communities.6 The
Supreme Court quashed their conviction and
sentence in December and sent their case for
retrial.
WOMEN AND GIRLS
The authorities continued to treat women as
second-class citizens, including in relation to
marriage, divorce, child custody,
employment, inheritance and political office.
The legal age of marriage for girls remained
at 13, and fathers could obtain judicial
permission for their daughters to be married
at a younger age.
Women and girls were at the forefront of the
popular uprising, challenging decades of
gender-based discrimination and violence,
and defying discriminatory and degrading
compulsory veiling laws that result in them
facing daily harassment and violence by state
and non-state actors, arbitrary detention,
torture and other ill-treatment, and denial of
access to education, employment and public
spaces.
There was a stricter enforcement of these
laws in mid-2022, culminating in the death in
custody of Mahsa (Zhina) Amini in
September, days after she was violently
arrested by Iran’s “morality” police amid
credible reports of torture and other illtreatment.
Authorities failed to provide adequate
gender-specific healthcare to women
prisoners.
The “Defending dignity and protecting
women against violence” bill, introduced over
a decade earlier, stalled in parliament.
Lawmakers failed to revise the bill to define
domestic violence as a separate offence,
criminalize marital rape and child marriage,
or ensure men who murder their wives or
daughters face proportionate punishments.

199

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Security forces unlawfully fired live
ammunition at Afghan men, women and
children attempting to cross the Afghanistan/
Iran border, resulting in unlawful killings.
Afghans who managed to enter Iran were
arbitrarily detained and subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment before being
unlawfully and forcibly returned.

DEATH PENALTY
Executions increased from the previous year
and public executions resumed after a twoyear hiatus.
The authorities used the death penalty as a
tool of political repression against protesters,
dissidents and ethnic minorities.
The oppressed Baluchi minority made up a
disproportionate number of those executed.
The death penalty was imposed after grossly
unfair trials, including for offences not
meeting the threshold of the “most serious
crimes” such as drug trafficking, financial
corruption, vandalism and for acts protected
under international human rights law,
including the peaceful exercise of the right to
freedom of expression.
Several people were executed for offences
that occurred when they were children;
scores of others who were below 18 years of
age at the time of the crime remained on
death row.

IMPUNITY
No public official was investigated or held
accountable for extrajudicial executions and
other unlawful killings, torture, enforced
disappearance and other grave human rights
violations committed in 2022 or previous
years.
The authorities covered up the real number
of those killed by security forces during
protests by blaming deaths on “rioters” or, in
some cases, including those of children
killed, claiming their deaths resulted from
suicide or accidents. They dismissed
complaints by victims’ families and
threatened to kill or harm them or their
children if they spoke out.

200

No independent investigation was carried
out into Mahsa (Zhina) Amini’s death in
custody. The authorities denied responsibility,
concealed vital evidence, and threatened her
family and others disputing the official
narrative and calling for truth and justice.7
Relatives seeking truth and justice and
witnesses from the November 2019 protests
who testified at the International People’s
Tribunal on Iran’s Atrocities in London, UK,
faced arbitrary detention and other forms of
harassment.8
No independent investigations took place
into the use of unlawful force against
prisoners in Evin prison in October or into the
circumstances surrounding the deaths of at
least eight prisoners.9
The authorities continued to conceal the
truth surrounding the January 2020 missile
strike against Ukraine International Airlines
Flight 752, which killed 176 people. In
August, the judiciary announced the return of
the case of 10 low-ranking officials tried
before a military court for their involvement in
the missile strike to the prosecutor’s office
due to a “flawed investigation”.
Impunity prevailed for ongoing crimes
against humanity relating to the mass
extrajudicial executions and enforced
disappearances of 1988, with many of those
involved holding top positions, including the
president. High concrete walls were erected
around the Khavaran mass graves where the
remains of several hundred victims are
believed to be buried, raising concerns about
the security of the site.10 In July, a Swedish
court sentenced former Iranian official Hamid
Nouri to life in prison over crimes relating to
the 1988 prison massacres, following an
historic trial under the principle of universal
jurisdiction.

FAILURE TO PREVENT CLIMATE CHANGE
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Environmental experts criticized the
authorities’ failure to address Iran’s
environmental crisis, marked by loss of lakes,
rivers and wetlands; deforestation; air
pollution; water pollution caused by the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

discharge of wastewater into urban water
sources; and land subsidence.
In July, Iran was one of only eight countries
to abstain from a UN General Assembly
resolution, adopted with 161 states in favour,
which declared access to a clean, healthy
and sustainable environment a universal
human right.
1. Iran: They are Shooting Brazenly: Iran’s Militarized Response to May
2022 Protests, 3 August
2. Iran: Leaked Official Documents Ordering Deadly Crackdown
Highlight Need for International Action, 30 September
3. Iran: The Crime of Holding Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe Hostage Must
Not Go Unpunished, 1 June
4. “Iran: Finger amputation risk for eight prisoners”, 16 June
5. “Iran: Intensified assault on Iran’s Baha’i minority”, 23 August
6. “Iran: Iranian LGBTI defender sentenced to death: Zahra SedighiHamadani & Elham Choubdar”, 15 September
7. Iran: Urgent International Action Needed to Ensure Accountability for
Mahsa Amini’s Death in Custody, 27 September
8. Iran: Authorities Violating Absolute Prohibition of Torture Through
Harassment of Witnesses Involved in Iran Atrocities Tribunal, 7 April
9. “Iran: Tortured prisoners at Evin prison are in urgent need of
international protection”, 18 October
10. “Iran: Walls erected around graves of massacre victims show urgent
need for international investigation,” 13 September

IRAQ
Republic of Iraq
Head of state: Abdul-Latif Rashid (replaced Barham
Ahmed Salih in October)
Head of government: Mohammed Shia’ Al-Sudani
(replaced Mustafa Al-Kadhimi in October)
Amid continuing political instability and
sporadic clashes between armed actors,
dozens of people were killed and thousands
more joined the 1.2 million people already
internally displaced. Kurdistan Regional
Government security forces repressed
freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. Impunity continued to prevail for
past unlawful killings as well as for torture
and other ill-treatment. Reports of genderbased violence increased while stateprovided paths to protection remained
minimal in both the Kurdistan Region of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Iraq and central Iraq. Proposed legislation
further threatened LGBTI people’s rights.
Hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced people continued to face
obstacles in accessing vital services and
dignified, safe return to their areas of
origin. Courts continued to hand down
death sentences following unfair trials. The
authorities failed to provide adequate
support to marginalized communities most
affected by droughts, heatwaves and
prolonged sandstorms.

BACKGROUND
A new government was formed in October
more than a year after parliamentary
elections. The delay was caused by disputes
between political parties allied to the Popular
Mobilization Units (PMU), which are affiliated
to Iraq’s central authorities and were
designated as part of the Iraqi armed forces
in 2016, and the “Sadr Bloc” of
parliamentarians supporting popular cleric
Muqtada Al-Sadr, which won the majority of
seats. The political impasse occasionally
spilled over into armed clashes between
rivals. After Muqtada Al-Sadr called on “Sadr
Bloc” parliamentarians to resign in August,
his supporters and members of the affiliated
Saraya al-Salam militia stormed parliament in
the Green Zone and clashed with PMU
fighters using rockets, mortars and rocketpropelled grenades, leading to tens of deaths
and hundreds of injuries. Clashes between
Muqtada Al-Sadr’s followers and PMU
factions perceived as aligned with Iran
spread to Basra city between late August and
early September and led to at least four
deaths.
Türkiye continued to carry out air strikes
and shelling as part of its ongoing military
operation targeting members of the Kurdistan
Workers Party (PKK) based in northern areas
of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KR-I). The
Iranian Revolutionary Guards claimed
responsibility for attacks targeting locations of
Kurdish Iranian opposition parties in Erbil
governorate. Such attacks led to deaths and
displacement.

201

Sporadic attacks by the armed group
Islamic State, which targeted security forces’
barracks and checkpoints, continued in
Anbar, Kirkuk and other governorates
previously controlled by Islamic State. Media
reported Islamic State abductions of at least
10 residents of Kirkuk and Diyala
governorates, who were freed after their
families paid ransoms.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)
security forces continued to repress the right
to freedom of expression and assembly.
KRG security forces arbitrarily arrested,
prosecuted and imprisoned journalists,
activists and perceived critics. Two journalists
and three political activists, detained since
August 2020 and convicted in February 2021
on national security-related charges, went on
three hunger strikes during 2022 in protest at
their continued detention, despite a decree
issued in February by the KRG president
Nechirvan Barzani to reduce their sentence
from five to two years.
On 6 August, KRG security forces used tear
gas and rubber bullets to disperse peaceful
protests in the cities of Erbil and Sulaimaniya
in the KR-I against delayed payment of
government wages and lack of employment
opportunities, resulting in several injuries.
Asayish forces, the KRG’s primary security
and intelligence agency, briefly detained at
least 20 journalists in connection with protest
coverage. The New Generation Party, an
opposition party that called for protests,
reported that Asayish forces arrested dozens
of its members at their homes or during the
protests in Erbil and Sulaimaniya. After
several days in detention, they were released
on bail without being informed of any
charges.
In September, Asayish forces arrested a
journalist working for a media outlet aligned
with the opposition during his coverage of a
Turkish drone attack targeting PKK fighters in
Erbil governorate. He was released the next
day without charge after signing a pledge to
no longer cover similar incidents. In October,

202

Asayish forces arrested two journalists near
Erbil under the vaguely worded 2008 Law to
Combat the Misuse of Electronic Devices,
used in the past to prosecute individuals for
posting content deemed critical of officials.
They were released by the end of the month.
The prevailing climate of impunity for armed
actors targeting protesters, activists and
journalists undermined the right to freedom
of expression in central Iraq. In October,
armed supporters of Muqtada al-Sadr
stormed and destroyed al-Rabiaa TV channel
offices in the capital Baghdad after a media
host reported the destruction of state
buildings by Muqtada Al-Sadr’s followers and
criticized his former militia known as the
Mahdi Army. Iraqi authorities condemned the
attack and announced an investigation, but
no further measures to protect media workers
or hold perpetrators accountable were
announced.
On 5 December, a court in Baghdad
sentenced activist Hayder Hamid al-Zaidi to
three years in prison under article 226 of the
Penal Code for a tweet deemed to mock a
deceased PMU leader. Hayder Hamid alZaidi had been arrested in June and released
two weeks later on bail. On 7 December,
security forces opened fire on protests in the
southern city of Nasiriyah to denounce the
sentence, killing at least two and injuring at
least 17.

IMPUNITY
Impunity prevailed for hundreds of unlawful
killings during the October 2019 protests with
little progress in investigating suspected
perpetrators. The Iraqi authorities failed to
announce the results of investigations by
committees established in the aftermath of
protests to investigate protest violence as well
as the targeted killings and attempted killings
of tens of activists between 2019 and 2021.
Armed actors continued to threaten to kill or
disappear activists as well as relatives of dead
or disappeared protesters and activists,
prompting them to go into hiding or flee
abroad.
In February, an investigative court in
Nasiriyah city, Thi Qar governorate, launched

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

an investigation into the role of a senior
military officer in the crackdown against
October 2019 protesters in the governorate;
no further information was made available.
Also in February, Ali Al-Bayati, a former
member of the Iraqi High Commission for
Human Rights – a national institution – was
questioned in a Baghdad investigative court
on charges of defamation because he raised
torture concerns in a media interview in 2020
and officials lodged a complaint against him.
In September, Iraqi authorities announced
an investigation into the fatal shooting of
Zainab Essam Majed al-Khazali, a 15-yearold girl, during live-fire drills at a US military
base near Baghdad International Airport. US
authorities stationed in Iraq did not
acknowledge the incident. No further
developments were made public.
In October, a court in Diwaniya, al-Qadsiya
governorate sentenced Kifah al-Kuraiti, a
former member of Muqtada Al-Sadr’s Saraya
al-Salam, to death for the murder of
prominent activist Thaer Al-Tayeb in
December 2019.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In its concluding observations published on
15 June, the UN Committee Against Torture
expressed concerns about the widespread
use of torture, especially during investigative
stages, in official and unofficial places of
detention throughout Iraq, and the lack of
impartiality of judicial authorities mandated to
investigate torture complaints.
Conditions of detention for prisoners on
death row in Nasiriyah prison, Thi Qar
governorate, violated the absolute prohibition
of torture and other ill-treatment. Sources
reported that prisoners were subjected to
frequent beatings; kept in overcrowded and
filthy cells; and denied adequate healthcare,
sufficient food and drinking water unless they
paid for it, and regular family visits.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Proceedings against hundreds of suspected
Islamic State members and supporters,
among them boys, continued in Iraq,
including in the KR-I, amid serious concerns

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

over their fair trial rights, including the right to
adequate defence. Long prison terms and
death sentences were imposed following
convictions based primarily on torture-tainted
“confessions”.
Over 200 Iraqi boys were detained in
Baghdad after their transfer from northern
Syria. They remained held without charge or
trial on suspicion of belonging to Islamic
State.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Iraqi parliament continued to fail to
criminalize domestic violence despite an
increase in “honour killings” and other forms
of gender-based violence documented by
national NGOs.
Effective state-provided paths to protection
from gender-based violence remained
severely limited in the KR-I and central Iraq.
A limited number of shelters overseen by the
KRG’s Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
operated in KR-I cities, but national NGOs
noted the inadequacy of rehabilitation
services for survivors. Only one shelter, able
to accommodate some 100 survivors,
operated in central Iraq with the backing of
the UN Population Fund. NGOs in Baghdad
continued to be harassed for running
unofficial women’s shelters, including by
being summoned for questioning following
complaints by parliamentarians from
conservative parties.
The KR-I witnessed an increase in reports of
women and girls killed by male relatives,
including for converting to a different religion
and for identifying as transgender women. A
coalition of women’s organizations
documented the killings of at least 16 women
and one girl, aged 15, by male relatives
between January and March alone; the
actual number is believed to be much higher.
Authorities failed to carry out independent
and impartial investigations into most of these
killings amid a social climate of victimblaming, including on social media, and
apathy of legislators.
In September, Iraq’s Ministry of Interior
announced that the “community police” – a
force established in 2016 under the Ministry

203

of Interior with a broad mandate to support
local police in a range of tasks – received
over 1,100 calls from survivors of domestic
violence. According to women’s rights NGOs,
this force merely operated as a “hotline” and
took no effective action to protect survivors or
investigate reports of domestic violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In July, a number of parliamentarians in
central Iraq announced an initiative for a
draft bill to criminalize homosexuality. In
September, a bill was introduced in the KR-I
parliament to criminalize overt support for
LGBTI rights.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
At least 1.2 million people remained
internally displaced, according to the
International Organization for Migration
(IOM). After the central Iraqi authorities’
closure of camps in 2021, some 75% of
internally displaced people were left to fend
for themselves. Around 15% were housed in
14 camps that remained open in the KR-I
and parts of Ninewa governorate controlled
by the KRG. The remaining 10% were able to
return to their areas of origin.
Thousands of internally displaced people
faced obstacles to their dignified and safe
return to their areas of origin in Anbar, Diyala,
Ninewa and Salah Al-Din governorates due to
risks of arbitrary arrest and other harassment
by armed actors and security forces, as well
as lack of livelihood opportunities and access
to services. Previously displaced children
across Anbar, Diyala, Dohuk, Kirkuk, Ninewa
and Salah Al-Din governorates faced major
obstacles to accessing formal education due
to the lack of identity documents for children
born in territories under Islamic State control.
Since 2016, Iraqi civil and security
apparatuses have subjected thousands to
collective punishment for their perceived
affiliation to Islamic State, denying them civil
status documents necessary to access
essential services and move about freely.
Hundreds of families returned to Iraq from
Syria after they fled there in the context of the

204

conflict involving Islamic State. Most
remained in limbo in poorly equipped
“reception centres” in Ninewa governorate.
The government failed to devise any plans for
their safe and dignified return to their areas
of origin and reintegration.
In May, clashes between Iraqi forces and a
Yezidi faction of the PMU displaced at least
3,000 individuals from Sinjar district,
Nineveh governorate, to private settings in
Duhok governorate and camps in the KR-I.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The effect of climate change, including
droughts, heatwaves and sandstorms,
impacted the lives of millions of people
across Iraq. The IOM reported that by
September over 10,000 families remained
displaced because of drought, land
degradation and increased salinity in rivers
across 10 governorates.
Iraq’s healthcare infrastructure, already on
the brink of collapse due to the Covid-19
pandemic and years of neglect and
corruption, failed to meet the needs of people
impacted by heavy and protracted
sandstorms.
Day labourers were
disproportionately affected by the closure of
public institutions during particularly heavy
sandstorms between April and June due to
their loss of livelihoods in the absence of any
social security system.
RIGHT TO WATER
In October, Iraq’s Water Sources Ministry said
that 2022 was the driest year since 1930.
Water shortages resulting from drought,
failure of desalination plants blamed on
corruption, and the drying out of river beds
and marshlands had devastating human
rights impacts, particularly on the rights to
health, work, water and sanitation of millions
of Iraqis. Iraqi authorities failed to provide
adequate support to those most affected and
to marginalized rural communities, including
inhabitants of marshlands whose threatened
livelihoods led thousands to relocate to urban
areas.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

NDC
Iraq committed to voluntarily cut 1-2% of
overall emissions by 2030 from their 2021
level, when it became a party to the Paris
Agreement, and indicated its aim to raise its
commitment to 15% conditional on
international financial and technical support.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts in Iraq imposed death sentences for
murder, rape of children and “terrorism”related acts, frequently following trials that
failed to meet international fair trial
standards. There was a notable decrease in
the number of executions, but thousands
remained on death row.

IRELAND
Ireland
Head of state: Michael D. Higgins
Head of government: Leo Varadkar (replaced Micheál
Martin in December)
Criminalization of aspects of sex work put
sex workers at higher risk of violence. The
UN Human Rights Committee (HRC) found
inadequacies in redress schemes for women
and children who had resided or been
confined in state-funded institutions, and
for women subjected to surgical procedures
during childbirth without their informed
consent. Concerns continued over access to
adequate housing, including for Ukrainians
and other refugees. Objections were raised
over plans to introduce facial recognition
technology in policing public spaces.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Research published in January found that
Ireland’s criminalization of aspects of sex
work placed sex workers at higher risk of
abuse and violence, including rape.1 It
showed that 2017 legislation criminalizing the
purchase of sex forced sex workers to take
more risks to earn an income and that
retaining the offence of “brothel keeping”
prevented their working together in the same
premises for safety. It further found that sex

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

workers’ mistrust of the police and social
stigma were reinforced by the criminal law.
Sex workers reported a fear of police
harassment and violence and of landlords
being targeted, leading to potential eviction
and homelessness.
These findings were echoed in further
research published in August, which revealed
that street-based sex workers faced
discriminatory behaviour from the police,
including sexual exploitation and abuse of
power by some officers. The research was
based on interviews with sex workers by a
team of researchers and peer-researchers, in
a collaboration between the University of
Limerick and Gender, Orientation, Sexual
Health, HIV (GOSHH).
The report of a three-year review of the
2017 law by the Department of Justice had
not been published by the end of 2022.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In its observations on Ireland’s fifth periodic
report, the UN HRC raised concern at gaps
in the state’s response to past abuse of
women and children who resided or were
confined in state-funded institutions operated
until the late 1990s by religious orders. These
institutions included “mother and baby
homes” for unmarried women to give birth,
“Magdalene Laundries” where women and
girls were forced to live and work, and
institutional homes for children. The HRC
criticized deficits in the state redress system
offered to survivors. It called for a transitional
justice mechanism to establish the truth of
what happened in these institutions and to
ensure effective remedies, including
compensation.
The HRC also called for a prompt,
independent and thorough criminal
investigation into the past medical practice of
symphysiotomy, a surgical procedure
involving partial cutting of pubic bones to
facilitate vaginal childbirth, without women’s
knowledge or informed consent. It
recommended adequate redress for all
women affected including through the

205

removal of barriers to accessing the state’s
compensation scheme.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
A bill was introduced in October to provide
“safe access zones” to protect the safety and
privacy of women entering medical facilities
to access abortion care.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Concerns over the availability and
affordability of housing intensified, as record
numbers of people experienced
homelessness. The government established a
Housing Commission to review policy and
manage a public consultation on a possible
constitutional right to housing.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, the government waived visa
requirements for people fleeing the war in
Ukraine.
In March, it activated the EU Temporary
Protection Directive, allowing Ukrainian
refugees to access social protection,
employment, healthcare and education, as
well as free temporary accommodation,
where needed. However, due to a lack of
available housing, the government stated in
October that accommodation could no longer
be guaranteed.

MASS SURVEILLANCE
NGOs and experts raised concerns at draft
legislation proposing to introduce facial
recognition technology for police law
enforcement, including in public spaces.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
The Electoral Reform Act passed in July did
not amend provisions in the Electoral Act that
severely impact civil society organizations’
rights to freedom of association and
expression, as NGOs had hoped. These
provisions continued to impose a blanket ban
on overseas, and severe limits on domestic,
donations to campaigning work for broadly
defined “political purposes”. Such
restrictions continued to affect the general

206

advocacy work of many human rights and
other organizations, including outside of
election or referendum periods.
The HRC raised concern at reports of
excessive use of force by police during
Covid-19 protests and disproportionate
pandemic restrictions on freedom of
movement and peaceful assembly. It called
on the government to conduct a full human
rights review of its Covid-19 response.
1. Ireland: “We Live Within a Violent System”: Structural Violence
Against Sex Workers in Ireland, 25 January

ISRAEL AND THE
OCCUPIED
PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES
State of Israel
Head of state: Isaac Herzog
Head of government: Benjamin Netanyahu (replaced
Yair Lapid in December, who replaced Naftali Bennett
in July)
Israel’s continuing oppressive and
discriminatory system of governing
Palestinians in Israel and the Occupied
Palestinian Territories (OPT) constituted
a system of apartheid, and Israeli officials
committed the crime of apartheid under
international law. Israeli forces launched a
three-day offensive on the occupied Gaza
Strip in August during which they
committed apparent war crimes. This
compounded the impact of a 15-year
ongoing Israeli blockade that amounts to
illegal collective punishment and further
fragments Palestinian territory. Israel
escalated its crackdown on Palestinians’
freedom of association. It also imposed
arbitrary restrictions on freedom of
movement and closures that amounted to
collective punishment, mainly in the
northern West Bank, ostensibly in response

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

to armed attacks by Palestinians on Israeli
soldiers and settlers. The year saw a rise in
the number of Palestinians unlawfully killed
and seriously injured by Israeli forces
during raids in the West Bank.
Administrative detentions of Palestinians
hit a 14-year high, and torture and other illtreatment continued. Israeli forces
demolished al-Araqib village in the Negev/
Naqab for the 211th time. A further 35
Palestinian-Bedouin towns in Israel were
still denied formal recognition and residents
faced possible forcible transfer. Authorities
failed to process asylum claims for
thousands of asylum seekers, and imposed
restrictions on their right to work.

BACKGROUND
In March, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
human rights situation in the OPT
determined that the “political system of
entrenched rule” in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza Strip “satisfies the prevailing
evidentiary standard for the existence of
apartheid”. In November, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the right to adequate housing
reached the same conclusion in relation to
Israel’s policies of home demolitions. Some
states, including South Africa, condemned
Israeli apartheid, echoing statements by
Palestinian, Israeli and international human
rights organizations. Despite this growing
recognition, Israel continued to enjoy
impunity thanks to the support of its key
allies.
In October, the United Nations Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, and in Israel, concluded that the
occupation of the OPT is unlawful due to its
permanence and Israel’s measures to annex
Palestinian land in law and in practice. In
2022, such measures included retroactive
authorization of settlement outposts,
including by the Israeli Supreme Court.
In November, Israel held its fifth elections in
three years after the collapse of an
ideologically diverse coalition government,
which continued to discriminate against
Palestinians on both sides of the Green Line.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The vote was polarized between those
supporting and opposing former prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu, while
consensus on maintaining Israel’s occupation
of Palestinian and Syrian territories remained.
The right-wing bloc, led by Benjamin
Netanyahu and a religious-nationalist
coalition, secured a majority of seats and
formed a government in December.

APARTHEID
In February, Amnesty International released a
280-page report showing how Israel was
imposing an institutionalized regime of
oppression and domination against the
Palestinian people wherever it exercised
control over their rights, fragmenting and
segregating Palestinian citizens of Israel,
residents of the OPT and Palestinian refugees
denied the right of return. Through massive
seizures of land and property, unlawful
killings, infliction of serious injuries, forcible
transfers, arbitrary restrictions on freedom of
movement, and denial of nationality, among
other inhuman or inhumane acts, Israeli
officials would be responsible for the crime
against humanity of apartheid, which falls
under the jurisdiction of the ICC.1
In March, Israeli authorities re-enacted the
Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law
(temporary order) that imposes sweeping
restrictions on Palestinian family unification
between Israeli citizens or residents and their
spouses from the OPT to maintain a Jewish
demographic majority.
In July, the Israeli Supreme Court upheld a
law authorizing the interior minister to strip
citizens of their citizenship if convicted of
acts that amount to “breach of allegiance to
the state”. Since its enactment in 2008,
application of the law has only been
considered against Palestinian citizens. On
20 September, the Israeli Appeals Tribunal
approved the revocation of stay or temporary
residency permits of 10 Palestinians – four
children, three women and three men – living
in Jerusalem because they are distant
relatives of a Palestinian assailant. On 18
December, Israel deported FrenchPalestinian human rights defender Salah

207

Hammouri following the revocation of his East
Jerusalem residency.2

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
ARMED CONFLICT BETWEEN ISRAEL AND PALESTINIAN
ARMED GROUPS IN GAZA
On 5 August, Israel launched an offensive on
the Gaza Strip targeting the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and its armed wing, destroying
or damaging some 1,700 Palestinian homes
and displacing hundreds of civilians. The
Israeli army and Palestinian armed groups
committed apparent war crimes during the
three days of fighting. (See State of Palestine
entry.)3
According to the UN, 49 Palestinians were
killed, including 31 civilians. Amnesty
International established that Israeli forces
killed 17 of the civilians, including eight
children. Seven civilians, including four
children, were killed by a rocket that
misfired apparently launched by a Palestinian
armed group. On 7 August, an Israeli missile,
apparently fired by a drone, hit Al-Falluja
cemetery in Jabalia refugee camp, killing five
children and injuring one, in an apparent
direct attack on civilians or indiscriminate
attack.
WEST BANK
Israeli forces killed 151 Palestinians in the
occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and injured 9,875, according to
OCHA-OPT, amid a surge of military
incursions that involved excessive use of
force, including unlawful killings and
apparent extrajudicial executions.4 Defense
for Children International-Palestine reported
that Israeli forces or settlers killed 36 children
across the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
On 11 May, Israeli soldiers killed Shirin Abu
Akleh, a Palestinian-US Al Jazeera
correspondent, and injured her colleague,
while they were covering an Israeli army raid
in Jenin Camp. In September, the Israeli
authorities admitted that an Israeli soldier
“likely” killed the journalist but concluded
that no criminal offence had been
committed.

208

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Israeli authorities continued to refuse to
cooperate with the investigation by the ICC
Office of the Prosecutor, despite a 2021
decision by the ICC to initiate an investigation
into the situation in Palestine. The authorities
also failed to adequately investigate violations
and crimes under international law.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
In the West Bank, 175 permanent
checkpoints and other roadblocks, as well as
scores of temporary irregular barriers and a
draconian permit regime, supported by a
repressive biometric surveillance system,
continued to control and fragment Palestinian
communities.
In October, Israeli authorities placed
additional restrictions on freedom of
movement in the occupied West Bank
reportedly in response to Palestinian attacks
on Israeli soldiers and civilians, through
sweeping and arbitrary closures that severely
disrupted everyday life and amounted to
unlawful collective punishment. In April, the
Israeli army closed checkpoints into Jenin in
a move that appeared designed to stifle
Jenin’s businesses and trade with Palestinian
citizens of Israel. In October, Israeli forces reimposed a closure on Jenin and closed off
Nablus for three weeks, and Shufat refugee
camp in occupied East Jerusalem for over a
week, gravely affecting the freedom of
movement of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinian civilians living in those areas and
restricting access to medical aid and other
essential services.
According to COGAT, a unit of the defence
ministry, Israel revoked the permits to work in
Israel of 2,500 Palestinians as a means of
collective punishment.
A new procedure issued by the Israeli
military authorities came into effect in
October, restricting the ability of foreign
passport holders to live with their Palestinian
spouses in the West Bank by limiting their
visas to a maximum of six months, requiring
couples to request permanent residency

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

status in the West Bank, which is subject to
Israeli approval.
In Gaza, the illegal Israeli blockade entered
its 16th year. According to Gaza-based
human rights organization Al-Mezan, nine
patients, including three children, died while
waiting for Israeli permits to receive lifesaving treatment outside of the Gaza Strip,
amid a complex bureaucratic entanglement
between Israel, the Palestinian Authority and
the Hamas administration.
The only power plant in Gaza was forced to
shut for two days in August because of a
week-long Israeli closure of all crossings,
which prevented the delivery of fuel.

FORCED EVICTIONS
Tens of thousands of Palestinians remained
at risk of forced evictions in Israel and the
OPT, including some 5,000 living in
shepherding communities in the Jordan
Valley and South Hebron Hills. Israeli
authorities demolished 952 Palestinian
structures across the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, displacing 1,031
Palestinians, and affecting the livelihoods of
thousands of others.
On 4 May, the Israeli Supreme Court upheld
a decision to forcibly transfer over 1,000
residents of Masafer Yatta in the South
Hebron Hills from their ancestral land, which
Israel had designated as “firing zone 918”, a
military training zone closed to Palestinian
access.
In July, the Israeli Supreme Court legalized
the settlement outpost of Mitzpe Kramim,
built on private Palestinian land in the
occupied West Bank, claiming that it was
“purchased in good faith”. This reversed its
2020 decision that ordered the government
to evacuate the outpost.
According to OCHA, 2022 was the sixth
consecutive year that saw an increase in
state-backed settler violence against
Palestinians in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank, reaching a peak in October during the
olive harvest season. The Israeli army and
police continued to fail to investigate
complaints by Palestinians about such
violence.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In Israel, the authorities continued to deny
official recognition to 35 Palestinian villages
in the Negev/Naqab, depriving them of
essential services. In January, the Israeli
Land Authority and the Jewish National Fund
began planting trees on lands belonging to
the village of Saawa al-Atrash in the Negev/
Naqab to forcibly transfer its Palestinian
population.
In December, Israeli authorities demolished
tents and structures in al-Araqib for the
211th time since 2010.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Israeli authorities increased their use of
administrative detention, prompting a mass
boycott of Israeli military courts by hundreds
of detainees including Salah Hammouri, who
went on hunger strike together with 29 others
in protest at their detention without charge or
trial. By 31 December, 866 individuals, all
but two of them Palestinians, were
administratively detained, the highest
number in 14 years.
On 15 April, Israeli police arrested more
than 400 Palestinians, including children,
journalists and worshippers, during a raid on
the al-Aqsa mosque compound in the Old
City of Jerusalem. According to the
Palestinian Red Crescent, at least 152
Palestinians were injured by rubber bullets,
live ammunition and stun grenades, and
were beaten. Most were released after several
hours.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Israeli forces continued to subject Palestinian
detainees to torture and other ill-treatment.
As in previous years, the internal investigation
unit of the police, Mahash, failed to properly
investigate complaints of torture. On 24
November, the Beersheba District Court
extended, by four months, the solitary
confinement of Ahmad Manasra, imprisoned
as a 13-year-old in 2015 and held in solitary
confinement since November 2021, an act
that amounts to torture. The same court had
rejected in September his appeal for early
release on medical grounds despite his
severe mental health condition.

209

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
EXPRESSION
On 18 August, Israeli soldiers raided the
offices of seven Palestinian civil society
organizations in Ramallah, vandalizing
equipment, seizing files, and issuing closure
orders based on the 1945 Defense
(Emergency) Regulations.5
On 29 September, the Israeli Central
Elections Committee disqualified the
Palestinian party Balad from running in
Israeli parliamentary elections because it
called for a “state for all of its citizens”, in
violation of Israel’s Basic Law. The Israeli
Supreme Court reversed the decision in
October.
On 24 November, the Israeli military
renewed by 45 days and for the fourth time
the detention of four Jewish Israeli teenagers
– Einat Gerlitz, Evyatar Moshe Rubin, Nave
Shabtay and Shahar Schwartz – who were
first imprisoned in September for refusing, on
grounds of conscience, to enrol in
compulsory military service.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
On 28 June, the government introduced a
climate bill, which proposed to reduce Israel’s
greenhouse gas emissions by 27% by 2030.
The bill remained pending. Meanwhile,
Israel’s military industrial complex, including
its August offensive in Gaza, exacerbated
environmental damage caused in previous
attacks that Israel continued to disregard.
In March, Israeli planes resumed aerial
spraying of herbicides on the buffer zone in
the Gaza Strip, damaging Palestinian
farmland.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
On 14 February, Israel’s health ministry
published a circular banning medical
practitioners from conducting medical
“conversion therapy” to change the sexual
orientation of gay and lesbian individuals, but
failed to grant it legislative status.

210

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In Israel, marriage and divorce remained
under the exclusive jurisdiction of religious
courts, leading to systematic discrimination
against women in personal status matters.
Despite legal protections against domestic
violence, 24 women were killed by partners
or relatives according to the Israeli police.
Some 69 women were killed between
January 2020 and August 2022. Of the 40
femicides against Palestinian women in Israel
during that period, 58% were not resolved by
the police while all 29 femicides of JewishIsraeli women in the same period were
resolved.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Israel welcomed tens of thousands of people
fleeing Ukraine and allowed thousands of
Jewish Ukrainians to settle under the 1950
Law of Return, while continuing to deny
Palestinian refugees their right of return.
Israel continued to reject asylum
applications of nearly 30,000 African asylum
seekers, primarily from Eritrea and Sudan.
Following a 2021 court decision, over 2,000
Sudanese asylum seekers from Darfur, Blue
Nile and the Nuba mountains were given
temporary residence permits, including
access to national health insurance and other
benefits.
In October, a commission appointed by
Israel’s minister of interior concluded that
asylum seekers from Darfur and the Nuba
mountains were no longer at risk of
persecution on ethnic grounds and could be
returned safely to Sudan’s capital Khartoum,
amid concerns of a possible reversal of
Israel’s general non-deportation policy.
Government regulations banning some
20,000 asylum seekers from work in 17
Israeli cities unless they seek employment in
construction, agriculture, hospitality and
institutional nursing, came into effect in
October.
1. Israel’s Apartheid against Palestinians: a cruel system of domination
and a crime against humanity, 1 February

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

2. “Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories: A perfect storm of
apartheid policies led to Salah Hammouri’s deportation”, 21
December

symbols reminiscent of Benito Mussolini’s
fascist regime.

3. “﻿They Were Just Kids: Evidence of War Crimes During Israel’s August
2022 Gaza Offensive”, 25 October

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

4. Israel/OPT: Continuing patterns of unlawful killings and other crimes
further entrench apartheid, 11 May
5. “Israel/OPT: The stifling of Palestinian civil society organizations
must end”, 18 August

ITALY
Republic of Italy
Head of state: Sergio Mattarella
Head of government: Giorgia Meloni (replaced Mario
Draghi in October)
Concerns about torture persisted. Police
used excessive force against demonstrators.
Restrictive measures against unauthorized
musical gatherings risked undermining
freedom of assembly. High levels of
violence against women persisted. People
rescued at sea were left stranded for many
days before being allowed to disembark.
The government approved new rules to
restrict rescue operations by NGO ships.
Cooperation with Libya on migration was
extended, despite abuses. Access to
abortion was not guaranteed in some parts
of the country. Poverty levels rose, gravely
affecting children and non-nationals.
Parliament failed to extend protection
against hate crimes to LGBTI people,
women and people with disabilities.
Whistle-blowers were not adequately
protected in law. Mandatory vaccination
against Covid-19 ended for medical staff
working in hospitals and care homes.

BACKGROUND
In July, Mario Draghi resigned. Parliamentary
elections in September delivered a strong
majority for the far-right coalition, including
the Brothers of Italy party, led by Giorgia
Meloni, who became prime minister in
October. During the electoral campaign and
in her first speech to the parliament, Giorgia
Meloni condemned racism and antisemitism,
but her party continued to use language and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In November, 105 prison officers and other
officials went on trial accused of multiple
offences, including torture, for the violent
suppression of a protest in the Santa Maria
Capua Vetere prison in April 2020.
In December, a police officer was placed
under house arrest, accused of torture in the
case of Hasib Omerovic, a Roma man with a
disability. He had fallen from the window of
his home outside the capital, Rome, in still
unclarified circumstances during an
unauthorized police inspection in July. Four
other police officers were suspended,
accused of making false statements.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Police used excessive force against protesters
on several occasions. In January, anti-riot
police in Turin used batons to beat students
who were demonstrating against the workrelated death of an 18-year-old boy. About 20
people were injured, one seriously.
In December, parliament approved the
introduction of a new offence that punishes
trespassing aimed at organizing a musical or
other entertainment gathering deemed
dangerous for public health and safety.
Organizers of such gatherings could face up
to six years’ imprisonment and a fine of up to
EUR 10,000. There was concern that the
new legislation could infringe on freedom of
assembly and expression.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
There were 100 killings of women in
domestic violence incidents, with 59 killed by
their partners or former partners, a slight
decrease from 2021.
Parliament failed to adopt a bill introduced
in 2021 to strengthen safeguards to combat
violence against women.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 160,000 people fleeing from Ukraine
requested temporary protection in Italy under

211

the EU Temporary Protection Directive. The
authorities granted them priority access to
residence permits and a subsistence
allowance.
On other routes, 1,373 people went missing
at sea trying to reach safety in Italy. Many
had departed from Libya. There were
105,140 people who arrived irregularly by
sea, up from 67,477 in 2021, with many
requiring rescue at sea. Over 12,000 were
unaccompanied children. In June, 21
European countries agreed a voluntary
solidarity mechanism for the relocation of up
to 10,000 asylum seekers from Italy and
other countries in the Mediterranean.
The government refused to assign a place of
safety for disembarkation to hundreds of
rescued people on board NGO rescue ships
and then attempted to introduce a selection
process for disembarkation. The French
government authorized the disembarkation in
France of a group of people refused by Italy,
but then retaliated by suspending transfers
from Italy to France under the relocation
mechanism. In December, the government
approved a law with immediate effect to
restrict NGOs’ life-saving activities at sea.
NGO crews must now request a port for
disembarkation and make their way there
after each rescue, limiting the possibility of
saving more people in one operation; they are
also expected to determine, while still at sea,
whether rescued people intend to seek
asylum. Violation of the new rules carries
administrative penalties ranging from fines to
the temporary or permanent seizure of the
ship.
In December, the Tribunal of Rome found
one Italian Navy official and one Coastguard
official guilty of refusing to authorize a
rescue, which contributed to the deaths of
about 268 people, including dozens of
children, when a refugee boat was
shipwrecked in October 2013. However, the
officials could not be sentenced due to the
statute of limitations.
Reports of labour exploitation of migrant
workers continued, with agriculture one of
the sectors where people were most
frequently underpaid and made to live in

212

substandard and dangerous accommodation.
In November, five people were arrested for
exploiting workers employed to pick tomatoes
near Foggia, Apulia.
COOPERATION WITH LIBYA
Italy’s support to Libya to contain people
there continued despite persistent grave
violations by Libyan authorities and militias.
During the year, the Libyan authorities
intercepted over 24,000 people at sea and
returned them to Libya, with Italy’s logistical
and material support.
In July, parliament approved the extension
for another year of military missions providing
assistance to Libyan authorities intercepting
refugees and migrants at sea and returning
them to Libya. In November, the
Memorandum of Understanding with Libya
on migration and border control was tacitly
renewed for a further three years.
CRIMINALIZATION OF SOLIDARITY
Court cases continued based on the offence
of “facilitation of irregular entry”, although in
some cases courts recognized that acts of
solidarity could not constitute offences. In
May, the Court of Cassation annulled the
conviction of four Eritrean nationals accused
of facilitating irregular migration for offering
hospitality to other Eritreans in a case that
began in 2014. They spent 18 months in
pretrial detention.
The preliminary hearing continued in
Trapani, Sicily, in the case against the crews
of the Iuventa and other NGO rescue ships
for alleged facilitation of irregular migration in
connection with rescue operations in 2016
and 2017. In December, the government
joined the proceedings as a complainant.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Access to abortion remained difficult in many
areas of the country due to the high number
of doctors and other healthcare providers
who refused to deliver abortion care. Their
number reached 100% of competent
medical staff in some regions.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In October, the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)
expressed concern about rising levels of
poverty, including child poverty, and the
disproportionately high level of absolute
poverty among non-nationals. The committee
also highlighted the inhumane living and
working conditions endured by workers in the
informal economy.

DISCRIMINATION
Parliament again failed to pass legislation
extending to LGBTI people, women and
people with disabilities the same protections
available to other victims of hate speech and
hate crimes based on racist, religious, ethnic
and nationalist motives.
Parliament also failed to adopt a bill,
decades in the making, to ensure effective
access to citizenship for the children of
foreign nationals who were born and/or grew
up in Italy. Over 1.5 million children
continued to face discrimination and
challenges in accessing their rights.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Parliament failed to meet the 31 December
2021 deadline to transpose EU directive
1937/2019 on whistle-blower protection. This
lack of safeguards contributed to the
challenges faced by health and care workers
who raised concerns about working
conditions in care homes during the Covid-19
pandemic.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Continuing disproportionate limitations on
visits to older care home residents to stem
the spread of Covid-19 infringed their right to
a private and family life.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In July, a part of the Marmolada glacier in the
Alps collapsed, causing the deaths of 11
people. Experts attributed the detachment of
the ice block to rising global temperatures.
In October, the CESCR expressed concern
that current emission-reducing policies may

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

not be sufficient for Italy to meet its
obligations to combat climate change.

JAPAN
Japan
Head of government: Fumio Kishida
The authorities’ response to the climate
crisis was insufficient. Long-standing
discrimination against women, migrants,
asylum seekers, ethnic Korean people and
LGBTI people remained ongoing. Prolonged
detention and inhumane treatment of
foreign nationals in immigration detention
facilities continued to be reported.

BACKGROUND
Former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe died in
hospital after being shot at a political
campaign event in July. In November,
Minister of Justice Yasuhiro Hanashi resigned
after making a joke about the death penalty,
in which he stated that the justice minister
can only make the news headlines by signing
off execution warrants.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Japan continued to be the world’s biggest
public financier of oil, gas and coal projects
and one of the largest users of coal in
electricity generation, policies which
undermined the objectives of the Paris
Agreement.
The Sixth Basic Energy Plan, approved by
Prime Minister Fumio Kishida’s cabinet in
October 2021, remained in place. The plan
aimed to decarbonize Japan’s economy by
2050 and to achieve a 46% greenhouse gas
reduction (on the base year of 2013) by
2030; targets which did not reach the level
needed to achieve the 1.5°C average
warming goal of the Paris Agreement. The
plan also retained 19% of coal-fired power
generation, inconsistent with the almost total
phase-out of coal needed by 2030. A total of
166 coal-fired power plants were in
operation, delaying the transition to
renewable energy sources. Japan continued

213

to plan for the construction of new coal-fired
power plants.

DISCRIMINATION
Online advocacy of hatred directed towards
ethnic Korean people continued to
proliferate. Disinformation was circulated on
social media, erroneously claiming that
ethnic Korean residents of Japan were
behind the assassination of former Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe. In August, a man was
sentenced to four years in prison for burning
down seven buildings in Kyoto’s ethnic
Korean district of Uji. The perpetrator was
allegedly influenced by anti-Korean
comments on social medial platforms and
admitted that the purpose of the attack was
to make Koreans afraid to live in Japan.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The National Diet (parliament) again failed to
pass a bill to eliminate discrimination based
on sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression, and sex characteristics. In June,
Osaka District Court rejected the claims of
three same-sex couples – two male and one
female – who argued that Japan’s ban on
same-sex marriage was unconstitutional.1
Also in June, the Tokyo metropolitan
government adopted legislation recognizing
same-sex partnerships, extending some
rights that already applied to married
heterosexual couples. It began issuing
partnership certificates from November, but
this fell short of allowing same-sex unions as
legal marriages. Tokyo District Court upheld
the Japanese government’s ban on same-sex
marriage but acknowledged that the absence
of any legal route for same-sex couples to
have families was an infringement of their
human rights.2

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Japan ranked 116th in a survey of 146
nations conducted by the World Economic
Forum which measured progress towards
gender equality based on economic and
political participation, education, health and
other opportunities for women. Women were
severely under-represented in politics

214

nationwide, accounting for just 10.6% of all
prefectural assembly members.
In July, the Supreme Court upheld a High
Court ruling which ordered Noriyuki
Yamaguchi to pay journalist Shiori Ito around
JPY 3.32 million (USD 24,000) in damages.
The High Court had previously ruled that he
had raped Shiori Ito at a hotel while she was
unconscious. Shiori Ito continued to speak
out about her experience, influencing the
#MeToo movement in Japan and prompting
other people to speak publicly about their
experiences of sexual harassment and
violence.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Foreign nationals continued to be subjected
to prolonged detention and inhumane
treatment in immigration control facilities.
The government decided not to resubmit a
controversial bill revising the Immigration
Control and Refugee Recognition Act, days
after demonstrations against the revisions
were held across Japan. The bill maintained
the presumption of detention, and the
proposed amendments did not provide for
maximum periods of detention and continued
to deny due process to individuals by failing
to allow for judicial review of detention orders.
Protesters in central Nagoya included the
family of Ratnayake Liyanage Wishma
Sandamali, a Sri Lankan woman who died
during detention at the Nagoya Regional
Immigration Services Bureau in March 2021.
In January, two asylum seekers sued the
government, claiming that arbitrary
detentions by the country’s immigration
authorities violate international law. The two
men, from Iran and Türkiye, were each
detained at Japanese immigration facilities
for more than 1,350 days between 2016 and
2020. Both were designated for deportation
and had been repeatedly detained, and
received provisional release status for more
than 10 years.

DEATH PENALTY
In July, Tomohiro Kato was executed by
hanging while in the process of requesting a
retrial. He had been convicted of killing seven

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

people in 2008. This marked the second
execution carried out since Prime Minister
Fumio Kishida assumed office in October
2021.
1. “Japan: ‘Discriminatory’ ruling on same-sex marriage a crushing
blow to equality”, 20 June
2. “Japan: Tokyo ruling on same-sex marriage a sign of hope”, 30
November

JORDAN
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Head of state: Abdullah II bin al-Hussein
Head of government: Bisher Al-Khasawneh
The authorities continued to restrict
freedom of assembly, expression and
association for journalists, political activists
and workers through arbitrary detention and
the use of repressive laws. Human rights
defenders and journalists were targeted with
surveillance. Women and girls continued to
face discrimination in law and practice.
Refugees faced challenges in accessing
essential services due to cuts in
international aid.

BACKGROUND
The state of emergency declared at the start
of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 remained
in force despite a statement by King Abdullah
in May that it would be lifted in the next few
months.
The king restricted freedom of movement
and contact with the outside world for former
crown prince Hamzah bin Hussein, who was
placed under house arrest in 2021 for
allegedly planning a coup, an accusation he
denied.
In September, parliament adopted the
Children’s Rights Law.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Local governors continued to use the Law of
Crime Prevention to administratively detain
anyone considered “a danger to the people”,
without charge or the ability to challenge their
detention before a competent judicial

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

authority. In March, the authorities used this
law to arrest at least 150 activists, journalists,
teachers and others in an apparent effort to
stop them from organizing multiple protests,
including one to commemorate youth-led
anti-government protests that took place in
March 2011. The authorities released all of
them shortly after their arrest.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to use the
Cybercrime Prevention Law and criminal
defamation provisions under the Penal Code
to suppress free speech.
In February, the authorities arrested 11
political activists without a warrant and
interrogated them in connection with
“spreading false information” and “inciting
sectarian and racial strife” under the
Cybercrime Prevention Law and the Penal
Code.
Journalists Taghreed Risheq and Daoud
Kuttab were detained on their entry to Jordan
and interrogated at Amman’s international
airport on 6 and 8 March, respectively, under
the Cybercrime Prevention Law about their
writing. Taghreed Risheq was released on bail
the same day while Daoud Kuttab was
released but ordered to appear before a court
in Amman, the capital, where the judge
ordered a temporary suspension of his arrest
order. The same month, according to
Reporters Without Borders, the authorities
arrested and charged three journalists for
“spreading fake news” in relation to their
coverage of the Pandora Papers, which
included leaked documents exposing the
names of offshore companies, secret bank
accounts and luxurious items belonging to
business people, politicians and others,
including King Abdullah.
On 15 August, the authorities arrested
Adnan al-Rousan, a writer and political
activist, and charged him with “slandering an
official body” and “spreading false and
exaggerated news that undermines the
prestige of the state”.

215

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In January, a Front Line Defenders
investigation found that the phone of Hala
Ahed Deeb, a Jordanian lawyer and a
women’s human rights defender, had been
infected with the Pegasus spyware. In June,
Front Line Defenders and the University of
Toronto’s Citizen Lab revealed that the
phones of four other human rights defenders
and journalists in Jordan had been hacked
with Pegasus spyware between August 2019
and December 2021. According to their
investigation, agencies of the Jordanian
government were likely to be responsible.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The authorities reversed a decision to amend
the Law on Associations, which arbitrarily
restricts the activities of NGOs and allows the
government to interfere in their work. NGOs
continued to struggle to obtain government
approval to access grants from foreign
donors. In early 2022, the government opted
to continue using a mechanism established
in 2019 under the prime minister’s office to
ease the processing of requests for foreign
funding by NGOs. In September, the
Community Media Network submitted a
complaint to the National Centre for Human
Rights over the authorities’ rejection of a USD
35,200 grant from the German development
agency GIZ to produce a campaign on
recycling.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
The authorities failed to conduct prompt,
impartial and independent investigations into
allegations of torture.
On 6 September, the family of Zaid Sudqi
Ali Dabash received a call from prison
authorities in Marka, in the suburbs of
Amman, informing them of his death.
According to the family’s lawyer, the body of
Zaid Sudqi Ali Dabash showed signs of
torture, including bruises on his arms, legs,
back, stomach and ears. The lawyer added
that the coroner’s office failed to provide the
family with a forensic report. The case was
transferred to the military justice system for
investigation, rather than the civilian justice

216

system, in violation of human rights
standards.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Jordan continued to struggle with a high
unemployment rate, especially among
women and youth, according to the World
Bank.
On 27 March, members of the Unemployed
Movement were arrested after they staged a
43-day sit-in in front of a government
building in al-Tafilah, a town 300km south of
Amman, protesting against the lack of
employment opportunities. They were all
released the following day.
On 29 March, 163 teachers from the
Jordanian Teachers’ Syndicate (JTS) were
arrested while protesting in front of the
education ministry in Amman against the
dissolution of the syndicate in 2020. All were
released.
On 26 June, the court of first instance in
Amman upheld an appeal to end the
prosecution of JTS members arrested in
2020 for “illegal assembly and inciting
hatred” but also upheld the decision to
dissolve the syndicate.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In February, the senate amended Article 6 of
the constitution to state that Jordanian men
and women shall be equal before the law and
banned “discrimination between them as
regards to their rights and duties on grounds
of race, language or religion”. However, no
steps were taken to amend legislation or
regulations to reflect the constitutional
amendment. For example, women continued
to require the permission of a male guardian
to marry or travel abroad with their children
and risked arrest if they fled their homes.
Women and girls continued to be subjected
to gender-based violence, and authorities
failed to adequately investigate such crimes
or strengthen protection against them. A local
organization reported the murder of 11
women and girls, including five killed by
family members. The Law on Protection from
Domestic Violence of 2008 fails to include a
definition of gender-based violence or

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

criminalize marital rape and other forms of
violence such as economic and psychological
abuse, and it excludes former spouses and
unmarried partners from the definition of
“family members”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
As of 30 September, according to UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, Jordan was hosting
676,606 Syrian, 65,818 Iraqi, 12,957
Yemeni, 5,522 Sudanese and 650 Somali
refugees. It was also hosting 2 million
Palestinian refugees registered with the UN
Relief and Works Agency.
All refugees in Jordan had limited access to
essential services such as water and
sanitation, education and healthcare due to
insufficient funding for the UN and its
implementing partners and international
organizations, as well as limited national
resources. Organizations trying to obtain
approval for aid projects targeting Yemeni,
Iraqi, Sudanese or Somali refugees faced
even greater obstacles.
In January, UNHCR announced that the
authorities had granted 62,000 work permits
to Syrian refugees, the highest number
issued since 2016 when work permits for
Syrian refugees were introduced.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government did not announce a new
NDC; in 2021, it had raised its
macroeconomic greenhouse gas emission
reduction target from 14% to 31% by 2030.

KAZAKHSTAN
Republic of Kazakhstan
Head of state: Kassym-Jomart Tokayev
Head of government: Alikhan Smailov (replaced Askar
Mamin in January)
The rights to freedom of expression,
assembly and association were unduly
restricted, including in the context of mass
protests in January. Security forces used
excessive force against peaceful protesters,
injuring and killing scores. Demonstrators

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

were arbitrarily arrested and faced torture in
detention. Law enforcement officers
generally enjoyed impunity for attacking
and ill-treating protesters. Journalists who
reported on the protests were targeted and
some were detained. Kazakhstan abolished
the death penalty for all crimes.

BACKGROUND
In January, protests erupted across
Kazakhstan after fuel subsidies were
abolished. More than 200 civilians were killed
as a result of clashes and the use of deadly
force by the authorities.
On 5 January, President Tokayev dissolved
the cabinet and sacked several top officials
believed to be close to the former president,
Nursultan Nazarbayev, who, in turn, was
removed from the chairmanship of the
Security Council and of the ruling Nur Otan
party.
Two sets of constitutional amendments were
enacted, on 8 June and 17 September. They
restricted presidential powers, limited the
presidency to one seven-year term, created a
human rights ombudsman, changed the
structure of the government and renamed the
country’s capital back to Astana, from NurSultan.
On 20 November, President Tokayev
claimed 81% of the votes in a snap
presidential election. Observers from the
OSCE criticized the election as “lacking
competitiveness” and noted that restrictions
on the rights to freedom of expression and
access to information “limited voters’ ability
to make an informed choice”.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Mass protests started on 2 January after a
sharp fuel price increase and demands soon
broadened from economic to political and
anti-corruption calls. In particular, many
protesters demanded the removal from power
of former president Nursultan Nazarbayev,
who retained significant political and
economic influence despite his formal
resignation in 2019.
The majority of protesters were peaceful,
but many committed acts of violence in a

217

number of cities, including Almaty.
Authorities responded with mass arbitrary
arrests and excessive use of force, including
rubber bullets and live ammunition. On 5
January, President Tokayev introduced a
nationwide state of emergency and night-time
curfew, called the protesters “terrorists” and
deployed the army to disperse them. More
than 10,000 demonstrators were arrested
and many were beaten, otherwise ill-treated
and held in inhumane conditions. More than
3,000 were placed under administrative
detention for up to 15 days. Around 1,600
faced criminal prosecution, mostly for
“participation in mass riots, accompanied by
violence” and other violent crimes.
On 27 October, parliament passed an
amnesty law for those prosecuted in relation
to the January protests. According to officials,
1,071 individuals had been covered by the
law, which excluded those accused of
terrorism, extremism, organizing mass riots,
corruption or torture.
Legislation governing peaceful assemblies
remained unduly restrictive. It allowed the
authorities to arbitrarily ban unwanted
protests on vague or technical pretexts,
which they routinely did. According to
Kazakhstani human rights groups, the
authorities denied permits for at least 154
peaceful protests in 2022. Law enforcement
agencies frequently conducted so-called
“preventative arrests” of prospective
protesters, which were often arbitrary.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In January, security forces used rubber
bullets and firearms indiscriminately and
unlawfully against peaceful protesters and
violent mobs, looters and bystanders. On 7
January, President Tokayev effectively
endorsed this practice when he publicly
stated that he had ordered the law
enforcement agencies and army to shoot
without warning.1 According to official figures,
at least 219 civilians and 19 law enforcement
officers were killed during these events.
The army was deployed to police the
protests despite having no appropriate
training or equipment. There were multiple

218

reports of armed men shooting at pedestrians
and cars during the curfew. At least some of
the attacks appeared to have been
committed by government forces. Most of
these incidents remained without
investigation at the end of the year. The
amnesty declared on 27 October may allow
officers who committed these killings to avoid
criminal prosecution.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Many of those arrested for participation in the
January protests faced torture or other illtreatment by law enforcement personnel.
Detainees were often held in irregular places
of detention, such as sports halls, or in
overcrowded cells, forced to stand in
uncomfortable positions, made to sleep on
the floor, provided with little or no food and
water and denied medical care, among other
violations of their rights. Officers, often
wearing black uniforms without insignia,
frequently beat detainees on arrival at
detention centres and throughout their
detention.
Local human rights groups reported that
hundreds of detainees were subjected to
torture or other ill-treatment to extract
confessions or to punish specific individuals.
The practices included beatings, electric
shocks, burning with steam irons, putting a
plastic bag over detainees’ heads and
inserting needles under their fingernails.
Officials admitted that six individuals died in
detention in January as a result of “unlawful
interrogation methods”.
The authorities did not conduct effective,
impartial and thorough investigations into
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment,
including those resulting in death. Even
where investigations nominally began, they
rarely led to prosecution. According to
officials, more than 300 cases of torture were
being investigated, but only 49 law
enforcement officers had been prosecuted as
of October on various charges relating to the
January events. In a rare exception, five
police officers were put on trial in the city of
Taldykorgan for torturing 24 detainees,
including two children.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

On 12 January, authorities arrested Raigul
Sadyrbaeva, a human rights defender who
had been monitoring the protests in the city
of Semey, and falsely charged her with
participating in a mass riot. She was held
incommunicado for two weeks, ill-treated,
subjected to a mock execution, threatened
with rape and denied medical care to
pressure her into incriminating herself. She
remained in pretrial detention until 14 March,
when she was moved to house arrest. She
was released in September, but banned from
travelling; her prosecution was continuing at
the end of the year. In October, the
authorities reportedly refused to investigate
her torture allegations, citing lack of evidence
of criminal wrongdoing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Law enforcement officials arbitrarily arrested
journalists covering the January protests.
Some were placed under administrative
detention for “participating in unlawful
peaceful assemblies”.
Media restrictions continued throughout the
year. On 3 July, law enforcement officers
arrested independent journalist Makhambet
Abzhan on accusations of extorting money
from a local businessman. There were
concerns that he was targeted for his
criticism of the authorities. He remained in
detention at the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Participation in organizations arbitrarily
designated “extremist” remained a criminal
offence under Article 405 of the Criminal
Code, punishable by up to six years’
imprisonment. Sixteen individuals were
prosecuted for this offence between January
and October, compared to 66 in the same
period in 2021.
On 25 February, police arrested Zhanbolat
Mamay, leader of the opposition Democratic
Party. He was initially placed under
“administrative arrest” for organizing a
peaceful vigil for those killed in the January
events. On 14 March, he was moved to
pretrial detention on criminal charges and on
2 November moved to house arrest where he

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

remained at the end of the year. Zhanbolat
Mamay stood accused of “disseminating
knowingly false information”, “insulting an
official” and “violating regulations governing
peaceful assemblies”. All the accusations
related to his exercise of his human rights.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Following Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine on 24 February, thousands of
Russians fled to Kazakhstan, which allowed
Russian citizens to enter and stay in the
country for up to 90 days using their
domestic passports. About 20,000 Russian
citizens arrived in Kazakhstan before 21
September, when mobilization began in
Russia, and up to 200,000 after, although
many subsequently returned or moved on to
other countries.
Kazakhstani authorities promised assistance
and generally sought to accommodate those
arriving from Russia, including by opening
additional facilities for registration of foreign
citizens and creating temporary shelters. In
October, the authorities proposed that
Russian citizens may have to provide their
international passports – documents issued
by Russian authorities for citizens travelling
abroad that only a minority of Russian
citizens have – to register for residence. Such
amendments, if passed, could force many to
return to Russia or to apply for asylum
through procedures that remained lengthy
and ineffective.

DEATH PENALTY
Amendments to the Criminal Code which
removed all references to the death penalty
came into force on 8 January, after being
adopted the previous month.
On 8 June, constitutional amendments
entered into force that enshrined the abolition
of the death penalty in the Constitution.
On 24 June, Kazakhstan’s ratification of the
Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR,
aiming at the abolition of the death penalty,
entered into force.

219

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

KENYA

had been demonstrating against the Kenya
Wildlife Service's inaction in dealing with
elephants after Felix Kilapae Moloma, a 27year-old teacher, was killed by an elephant.
The police officers opened fire on the
demonstrators on the Nairobi-Mombasa
highway. They said they were responding to
protesters throwing stones at them. The
cabinet secretary for the Interior and
Coordination of National Government ordered
the Inspector General of Police to investigate
the killings, but no further information was
provided by the end of the year.

Republic of Kenya
Head of state and government: William Samoei Ruto
(replaced Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta in September)

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON

Kazakhstan’s energy sector remained almost
entirely dependent on fossil fuels. The
government had not updated its NDC to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions since
2016.
1. “Kazakhstan: Ordering security forces to ‘fire without warning’ a
recipe for disaster”, 7 January

The police used excessive and sometimes
lethal force to break up protests. The right
to life continued to be violated. Over 100
people were unlawfully killed; the incoming
president disbanded a police unit he said
was responsible for such killings. Millions
suffered hunger due to prolonged drought.
The government continued to struggle to
protect social and economic rights,
including to housing and health. Steps were
made towards the realization of women’s
and girls’ rights. The High Court directed
parliament to enact legislation allowing
abortion in some circumstances.

BACKGROUND
The Supreme Court confirmed William Ruto
as the president following a contested
election. He was sworn in on 13 September.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
On 9 April, activists Anthony Kanyiri, Minoo
Kyaa, Nahashon Kamau and Clinton Ojiambo
were arrested in Kasarani for protesting
against high living costs. They were charged
with unlawful assembly and resisting arrest
and were later released on cash bail.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 2 June, General Service Unit officers
killed four protesters and injured seven
others in Masimba, Kajiado County.1 They

220

Elizabeth Ekaru, a human rights defender
and a member of the Isiolo Gender Watch
Community Group, was killed in Isiolo County
on 3 January following a suspected land
dispute. A suspect was arrested and
charged. The case was ongoing at the end of
the year.
Sheila Lumumba was found dead in her
house in Karatina, Nyeri County, on 17 April.
The pathologist’s report showed signs of rape,
broken limbs and multiple stab wounds to
the neck and chest areas. Two suspects were
arrested, and one of them was standing trial.
During the presidential election period,
Wafula Chebukati, chairperson of the
Independent Electoral and Boundaries
Commission (IEBC) complained of
intimidation, profiling, abduction and
harassment of electoral officials by security
agencies. The Embakasi East Constituency
returning officer, Daniel Mbolu Musyoka,
disappeared on 11 August and was found
dead four days later.2 The Director of Public
Prosecutions directed the Inspector General
of Police to investigate the disappearance
and killing within seven days. On 19 October,
four people were arrested in connection to
the killing and arraigned. A woman who was
in possession of the official’s phone agreed to
testify in court.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
According to Missing Voices, a coalition of
human rights organizations, including

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Amnesty International Kenya,128 people
were extrajudicially executed by the police in
2022. In January, 37 bodies were recovered
from the River Yala in western Kenya. The
bodies bore injuries, including deep cuts and
severed fingers, and some appeared to have
been suffocated by having their heads
covered by polythene bags; most of the
bodies were decomposed beyond
recognition.3 Officers of the Special Service
Unit (SSU), a branch of the National Police
Service (NPS), were suspected of having
questioned some of the victims before their
deaths or were seen accompanying them.
Some of the victims were suspects in criminal
matters, some had won cases against the
NPS and others had no record of criminal
cases. At the time the bodies were
discovered, no information was made public
about any impending or ongoing national
security threats.
On 16 October, the president disbanded the
SSU, noting that it was responsible for
extrajudicial executions in Kenya. He further
noted that the police unit had resorted to
killing people to restore security instead of
protecting them. Following this, nine
suspects were arrested in connection with
the bodies found in the River Yala. The case
was ongoing at the end of the year.
On 22 July, the High Court found police
officers Fredrick Leliman, Stephen Cheburet
and Sylvia Wanjiku, and police informer Peter
Ngugi, guilty of murdering Willy Kimani, his
client Josephat Mwenda and their taxi driver
Joseph Muiruri on 23 June 2016. Willy
Kimani was a human rights lawyer working
with the International Justice Mission. The
men were killed on their way from the
Mavoko law courts in Machakos County.

FORCED EVICTIONS
The government failed to resettle 18,988
households forcibly evicted in Mukuru Kwa
Njenga, an informal settlement in the capital,
Nairobi. In January, then President Kenyatta
apologized for the demolition of their houses
in November 2021, which had been carried
out to make way for the construction of a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

highway leading to Jomo Kenyatta
International Airport.
To mitigate the ongoing housing shortage in
Kenya, President Ruto’s new administration
committed to increasing the supply of new
housing to 250,000 units each year and the
percentage of affordable housing from 2% to
50%. On 8 December, the construction of
5,300 units in Mavoko, Machakos County,
began. The president promised to enhance
partnerships with local authorities and private
investors to create more affordable housing.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In February, Kenyans protested on social
media against the increased cost of food and
high cost of living. By December, inflation
had reached 9.5%, driven by the rise in the
price of food. The war in Ukraine affected
food prices because, according to the
Agriculture and Food Authority, 90% of wheat
consumed in Kenya had been imported from
Russia and Ukraine before the war there. The
cost of fertilizers had also risen by 70% since
2021, attributed to supply chain disruptions
caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Climate change is known to have led to
extreme weather conditions such as those
experienced in northern Kenya, which did not
have rain for the third consecutive year. It
was considered the worst drought in the Horn
of Africa in 40 years.4 Nearly 652,960
children under the age of five and 96,480
pregnant and lactating women were acutely
malnourished, according to official figures
from June. On 8 September, then President
Kenyatta declared the drought in northern
Kenya a national disaster, with 4 million
people continuing to suffer from hunger
among which 3.1 million faced acute food
insecurity.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Only 9.35 million Kenyans had been fully
vaccinated against Covid-19 despite a
government commitment to vaccinate 19
million adults by the end of June and the
entire adult population of 27 million people
by December. The shortfall was partly due to
vaccines expiring after the government

221

delayed in administering 840,000 doses
donated to Kenya.
On 21 June, President Kenyatta signed into
law the Mental Health (Amendment) Act
2022. The Act aimed to ensure that everyone
with mental health needs receives the highest
attainable standard of care in line with the
constitution.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In the August elections, seven women were
elected as governors, three as senators, and
26 as members of the national assembly.
One hundred others were elected as
members of county assemblies. Additionally,
President Ruto appointed seven women to
cabinet secretary posts and three to cabinetlevel roles, increasing their representation by
three women. However, the number of
appointments was less than half the 22
female cabinet secretaries he had promised
under the women’s charter prior to his
election.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
On 24 March, the High Court in Malindi
found that the police had violated the rights
of a minor (known as PAK) to privacy and
doctor-patient confidentiality after she was
arrested and charged under penal code
provisions with “procuring abortion”. In
2019, a doctor had examined PAK at a health
centre in Malindi and concluded that she had
suffered a “spontaneous
abortion” (miscarriage). He performed a
manual vacuum evacuation after which plainclothes police stormed the medical facility,
arresting PAK and the doctor. She took her
case to the High Court, challenging the
interpretation of penal code provisions that
criminalize abortion, based on her right to life
as recognized in the constitution, and on
grounds that she should enjoy access to the
highest health standards, freedom from
torture and from inhuman treatment, and the
right to privacy.
The court ruled that the right to abortion is
enshrined in the constitution while noting that
penal code provisions criminalize abortion
and do not recognize any permissible

222

grounds for it. The court directed parliament
to enact a law and public policy framework
that provides for abortion in some cases, in
line with the right to life.
1. “Kenya: Killing of four protestors by police in Masimba, Kajiado
County”, 3 June
2. “Kenya: Intimidation of IEBC officials and the murder of Daniel
Musyoka”, 18 August
3. “Kenya: Statement on the discovery of over 30 bodies in the Yala
River, Siaya County”, 22 January
4. Kenya: Missed Opportunities: A Human Rights Scorecard on the
Jubilee Administration and Lessons for the Next Government, 13 July

KOSOVO
Republic of Kosovo
Head of state: Vjosa Osmani
Head of government: Albin Kurti
Proceedings continued at the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers established in The
Hague in 2016. The Kosovo Assembly
failed to pass the Civil Code due to a
provision which would have paved the way
for legalization of same-sex unions.
Thousands of protesters demanded justice
for an 11-year-old girl who was raped by
five men in Pristina.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In March, the Supreme Court of Kosovo
upheld the guilty verdict of Zoran Djokić,
sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment in 2021
for war crimes committed in 1999 against
ethnic Albanians in Peja. In May, the Kosovo
Specialist Chambers convicted leaders of the
Kosovo Liberation Army Veterans
Organization, Hysni Gucati and Nasim
Haradinaj, for obstruction of justice,
intimidation during criminal proceedings and
violation of the secrecy of proceedings. They
were each sentenced to four-and-a-half
years’ imprisonment.
In September, Pristina Basic Court
sentenced Kosovo Serb Svetomir Bacević to
five years’ imprisonment for war crimes
committed during the Kosovo war of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

1998-1999. In December, Salih Mustafa – a
Kosovo Liberation Army unit commander –
was sentenced to 26 years’ imprisonment for
arbitrary detention, cruel treatment, torture
and murder.

five arrests and sparking a protest by
thousands of demonstrators. Following the
protest, police arrested a further six men
suspected of sexually abusing and trafficking
the same girl in June.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

More than 1,600 people remained missing.
The Humanitarian Law Center called on the
governments of Kosovo and Serbia to offer
full access to state archives and seek more
effective cooperation to discover the fate of
missing persons.

In December, six attacks against journalists
covering the tensions with Serbia took place
in the north of Kosovo. The Association of
Journalists of Kosovo and the European and
International Federation of Journalists called
on the authorities to take appropriate
measures to ensure the safety of journalists.

WARTIME SEXUAL VIOLENCE
As of October, a government commission
established in 2018 had granted the status of
survivor of wartime sexual violence to 1,373
of 1,808 applicants, granting them a small
pension, but many did not apply, fearing
stigmatization or family disapproval.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Reports of domestic violence increased
compared to 2021. In January, Lirije Qerimaj
reported her husband’s domestic violence to
police in Laushë. Following orders from the
prosecutor, Stojanka Kosalović, the police
interviewed but then released Skender
Qerimaj, who shot and killed Lirije Qerimaj
five days later. The Basic Court in Mitrovica
sentenced Skender Qerimaj to 24 years’
imprisonment. The prosecutor was held
responsible for prosecutorial misconduct and
received a public written reprimand.
In July, an EU Rule of Law Mission report
revealed that, in 2020-2021, 85% of sexual
violence survivors were girls. Over 50% of
guilty verdicts resulted in sentences below
the legal minimum due to “exceptionally
mitigating” circumstances. Disciplinary
proceedings found judge Florije Zatriqi
responsible for unlawfully sentencing the
rapist of a 15-year-old girl to a prison term
below the legal minimum, at only eight
months and eight days. Florije Zatriqi was
permanently transferred to the Basic Court of
Peja, Division for Minor Offences.
In August, five men raped an 11-year-old
girl in a public park in Pristina, resulting in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In March, the parliament failed to adopt the
Civil Code due to a provision that would have
paved the way for legalization of same-sex
unions. Some MPs opposing the measure
employed discriminatory and derogatory
language. Protesters demanded the
legalization of same-sex marriage and
denounced the MPs’ anti-LGBTI comments.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA, ASHKALI AND EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
In June, the Court of Appeals confirmed a
decision by the Basic Court in Gjakova
awarding damages to three children. It found
that, in 2012-2013, the municipal Directorate
of Education racially discriminated against
them by segregating them in separate classes
for Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian people,
thereby violating their right to education.

KUWAIT
State of Kuwait
Head of state: Nawaf al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah
Head of government: Ahmad Nawaf al-Ahmad alSabah (replaced Sabah al-Khaled al-Hamad al-Sabah
in July)
The government restricted criticism of its
actions and took steps to repress freedom of
assembly by arresting protesters in June
and August. The Bidun, native stateless
Kuwaitis, faced discrimination in access to

223

education and healthcare. There were
positive steps, however, in a constitutional
decision overturning the law against
“imitating the opposite sex” and in
government efforts to hire more women in
the public sector.

BACKGROUND
In April, the prime minister and cabinet
resigned under parliamentary pressure. In
June, Crown Prince Mishal al-Ahmad alJaber Al Sabah announced that he would
dissolve the parliament elected in 2020 and
convene new elections under Article 107 of
the constitution. The ruling family appointed
a new prime minister in July and a new
cabinet in August. Elections for the new
parliament were held in September.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities detained and prosecuted at least
two people for exercising their right to
freedom of expression.
In January, authorities prosecuted Safaa
Zaman, a computer expert, for “harming the
reputation of the state and endangering
relations with friendly countries” because she
said in a television interview that storage of
civil service records on servers in other
countries posed a data security risk.
However, the trial and appellate courts
acquitted Safaa Zaman in March and
September, respectively.
In March, prosecutors interrogated lawyer
AbdulAziz al-Mutawwa for days without a
lawyer on the charge that he had “insulted”
members of the ruling family on social media
and subsequently indicted him. The trial
court acquitted him.
In July, the Ministry of Information
announced that it had ordered the closure of
50 social media accounts previously licensed
as “electronic newspapers” in some cases
because the Law on Electronic Media only
allows Kuwaiti nationals with “a clean record
and good reputation” to electronically publish
content described as news or journalism.

224

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The government outlawed and threatened to
prosecute most protests, although in one
case it did not follow through with
prosecutions.
Kuwait’s Law on Public Meetings and
Assemblies bans all unlicensed
demonstrations and all demonstrations by
non-Kuwaitis. On 24 May, the Ministry of
Interior issued a warning that it had not
licensed a demonstration called for the
following day to protest against political
gridlock in parliament, stating that it would
hold anyone who attended legally
accountable. However, the demonstration
proceeded and no one was arrested.
In June, the government deported over a
dozen Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi
migrant workers because they had held a
spontaneous, peaceful street protest in alFahaheel neighbourhood against Indian
government statements that the workers
considered insulting to Islam.
Beginning on 30 August, the authorities
investigated 21 people – some Kuwaiti
nationals and some Bidun – for their
participation in a pro-Bidun peaceful
demonstration in the Taima area of al-Jahra
governorate on 26 August. Authorities held
those summoned for between four and 15
days, releasing all 21 on bail by 15
September, but referred them to trial on
charges of participating in an unlicensed
demonstration.1

DISCRIMINATION
From June to September, the government
stepped up its exclusion of the Bidun from
many government services provided free to
recognized nationals.
From June through the start of the new
school year in September, the government
barred Bidun families without a currently
valid card from the Central System for the
Remedy of the Situation of Illegal Residents
from registering their children at any school.
On 27 September, after public criticism, it
rescinded this decision. The rescinded policy
caused children from these families to miss
the beginning of the school year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The government continued to exclude
Bidun children who did not have either
Kuwaiti mothers or fathers who worked in
government from the free public school
system provided for children recognized as
Kuwaiti nationals.
From June through to September, the
government ordered the Ministry of Health
not to provide free healthcare to Bidun
Kuwaitis without a currently valid Central
System card. On 27 September, the
government rescinded this decision, again
allowing the Ministry of Health to provide
primary healthcare for Bidun whose cards
had expired. Bidun without any Central
System card at all could not receive
government healthcare and faced difficulties
finding private treatment.2

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Kuwait’s laws continued to discriminate
against women, including in the transmission
of nationality to children and custody of
children.
The government took positive steps to
increase women’s representation in public
employment and leadership roles by hiring
more women in the Ministry of Health and
the judicial system. The number of women
appointed to the upper managerial level in
the Ministry of Justice rose from 48 to 70,
and in August the Ministry of Health reported
that 60% of its new hires of medical
professionals for government hospitals were
women.
In August, the Ministry of Interior
announced a new policy under which all
Kuwaiti nationals aged 21 and over are
automatically registered as voters, which
benefits women by ensuring that they are not
prevented from registering due to duties at
home or pressure from male family
members.
However, the government failed to
adequately protect women victims of
domestic violence as, for the third
consecutive year, it did not open a women’s
shelter as called for by Kuwait’s 2020 Law on
Protection from Family Violence.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Kuwait established new financial and
administrative barriers to family unity for
migrant workers, and continued to use the
kafala (sponsorship) system for employment
of migrant labour, which puts migrants at
heightened risk of exploitation.
In January, the government set a new
annual fee of KWD 250 (over USD 800) for
migrants aged over 60 to remain in the
country, placing a significant financial burden
on older migrant workers whose employers
will not pay for their residency, and on
migrant families supporting older members
resident in Kuwait.
In June, the government indefinitely
suspended visitor visas for family members of
migrant workers, and in August it indefinitely
suspended issuance of migrant family
residency visas.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In a welcome move, in February the
Constitutional Court ruled that the law
criminalizing “imitation of the opposite sex”,
which had been used to prosecute
transgender people, violates the constitution’s
guarantee of personal freedom. Other laws
still use vague language criminalizing
consensual same-sex relations.3

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Kuwait did not update its NDC to carbon
reduction in 2022 and remained one of the
top five highest carbon emitting countries per
capita, according to World Bank data.
1. “Kuwait: Authorities must stop targeting pro-Bidun protesters as
elections loom”, 1 September
2. Kuwait: Submission to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child,
91st Session, 29 August-23 September 2022, 16 August
3. “Kuwait: Overturning law that criminalized ‘imitation of the opposite
sex’ a breakthrough for transgender rights”, 16 February

225

KYRGYZSTAN
Kyrgyz Republic
Head of state: Sadyr Japarov
Head of government: Akylbek Japarov
Peaceful demonstrators faced serious
restrictions. New forms of reporting were
introduced for NGOs receiving foreign
funding. Journalists and activists critical of
the government faced attacks on social
media and baseless prosecutions. Various
laws were used to restrict the right to
freedom of expression and prevent criticism
of public figures by journalists and the
media. Gender-based violence remained
systemic and under-reported; perpetrators
of such violence were seldom prosecuted.
Conditions of detention failed to meet
minimum human rights standards, in some
cases leading to deaths in custody.

BACKGROUND
In September, clashes involving residents
and border guards on both sides of the
border with Tajikistan left at least 15
Kyrgyzstani civilians dead and dozens
injured.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, the mayor’s office in the capital,
Bishkek, restricted the locations where public
assemblies could be held, banning the use of
popular sites including the areas surrounding
the parliament, the presidential
administration and the Russian embassy.
Later that month, authorities banned all
assemblies in central Bishkek, apart from in
one small park. Initially, the restriction was
justified as temporary and necessary “to
prevent and suppress possible mass riots on
inter-ethnic basis” in the context of Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. It was later extended
until 31 December and applied to any public
civil actions and gatherings.
Despite the restrictions, repeated protests in
support of Ukraine were held in Bishkek.
During peaceful meetings and pickets on 5
and 17 March, several activists and human

226

rights defenders were detained for expressing
solidarity with Ukraine and protesting against
unlawful restrictions on the right to freedom
of peaceful assembly. Four people were fined
for “disobeying lawful police orders”. In
contrast, on 7 March, a meeting in support of
Russia was allowed to go ahead in front of
the Russian embassy; no participants were
detained. Police continued to arbitrarily
detain peaceful protesters, including in the
designated park in Bishkek, during April. On
2 April alone, police detained 28 protesters
and filed administrative charges against 26 of
them. A court ruled, however, that they had
committed no offence.
In October, the authorities reported progress
in agreeing border delimitation with
Uzbekistan, although the details provoked
strong public discontent. Activists called a
kurultai (traditional public assembly) in the
town of Uzgen and formed a committee to
oppose the agreement and demand
transparency. Protests were also held
elsewhere. The authorities responded by
arresting 26 activists on baseless charges of
“preparing mass disorders”. Twenty-four
remained in pretrial detention and two under
house arrest at the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
On 22 March, the tax authorities approved
new rules for reporting on the use of foreign
funds by not-for-profit organizations. NGOs
were given one week to submit their reports,
which had to include information on their
assets, sources of funding and spending.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression was progressively
restricted over the year, in particular for
media workers and human rights defenders.
In September, the government published a
new draft bill that would authorize media
restrictions in times of war and emergency,
increase media registration requirements and
extend them to online resources, and compel
all media to re-register within two months of
the law’s adoption. The draft was still pending
adoption at the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The 2021 Law on Protection from False
Information was used to further restrict media
outlets. In July, the Ministry of Culture
blocked the website of the newspaper Res
Publica after it published information alleging
smuggling at an airport. Access to its website
remained blocked at the end of the year. On
26 October, the Ministry of Culture blocked
access to the websites of Azattyk Media and
the online TV channel, Current Time. On 27
October, Azattyk Media’s bank accounts were
frozen.
The authorities also used criminal charges
of inciting hatred, disobedience, riots or
violence to suppress freedom of expression,
including by targeting media workers and
preventing criticism of public figures by
journalists and the media.
On 23 January, journalist Bolot Temirov, a
dual Russian and Kyrgyzstani national, was
arrested, searched and accused of
possessing illegal drugs. On 20 April he was
additionally accused of document forgery and
illegal border crossing. In May, he was
stripped of his Kyrgyzstani citizenship. His
YouTube channel had previously published
an investigation alleging corruption in the
export of oil fuel. In September, he was
acquitted of all charges except forgery, for
which the statute of limitations had expired.
Nonetheless, on 24 November he was
deported to Russia.
On 3 March, the director of Next TV,
Taalaibek Duishenbiev, was detained for
sharing a former security official’s social
media post alleging that Kyrgyzstan had
promised military support to Russia in its war
against Ukraine. In September Taalaibek
Duishenbiev was given a non-custodial
sentence.
On 14 August, Yrys Zhekshenaliev was
detained for criticizing on Facebook
government plans to develop the Zhetim-Too
metal ore deposit. He was charged with
calling for active disobedience to the lawful
demands of government officials and mass
riots. On 26 October, he was transferred to
house arrest. His trial began on 7 December
and was ongoing at the end of the year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Gender-based violence remained systemic
and under-reported. Statistics on domestic
violence continued to present aggregated
data, thus obscuring the scale of violence
against specific groups, including women
and girls with disabilities.
In August, a court sentenced two police
officers and a third man to 10, 15 and eight
years in prison, respectively, for repeatedly
raping a 13-year-old girl over a period of
almost six months. They were also obliged to
pay compensation of KGS 100,000 (USD
1,000) each. The case was widely reported
and led to protests across Kyrgyzstan.
Reactions from senior officials were mixed
and included sympathy for the survivor,
regret that the case was harming tourism and
criticism of the media for giving the case
prominence.
In July, 27 women’s rights organizations
wrote an open letter to the president
demanding effective measures on violence
against women and highlighting systemic
problems in the criminal justice and law
enforcement systems. Their request for an
urgent meeting was not granted.
In September, the government signed off
the National Strategy for Achieving Gender
Equality until 2030 and an accompanying
National Action Plan for 2022-2024.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In October, the National Centre for the
Prevention of Torture (NCPT), the national
body entrusted with a role in implementing
the UN Convention against Torture, raised
concerns over the high number of deaths in
penitentiary institutions. It noted that one
third of pretrial detention centres were
located in damp, dark and poorly ventilated
basements. In the absence of pretrial
detention facilities in some regions, people
under investigation were sent to temporary
facilities.
In June, OHCHR, the UN human rights
office, expressed concern over government
plans to dissolve the NCPT, weakening
torture prevention in Kyrgyzstan.

227

LAOS
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Head of state: Thongloun Sisoulith
Head of government: Sonexay Siphandone (replaced
Phankham Viphavanh in December)
Prominent human rights defenders
remained imprisoned. There was no
progress in the investigation of various
cases of enforced disappearance of activists
and members of ethnic minorities.
Members of the ChaoFa Hmong ethnic
minority were continually blocked from
adequate access to food, water, sanitation
and healthcare. Trans-boundary hydropower
projects and other business activities raised
serious human rights concerns, including
forced eviction, ill-treatment and human
trafficking.

BACKGROUND
In August the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities made 94
recommendations to Laos, including
increasing the participation of people with
disabilities in organizations mandated to
implement and monitor their rights and
guaranteeing inclusive education for students
with disabilities.
Inflation reached 34% in September,
leading to significant increases in the cost of
food, consumer goods and fuel. External
debts adversely impacted the national
economy. Laos continued to take loans from
foreign creditors, especially China, to fund
trans-boundary infrastructure and
development projects.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Three Laotian human rights defenders –
Lodkham Thammavong, Soukane Chaithad
and Somphone Phimmasone – entered their
sixth year in detention. They were arrested
and tried when they returned to Laos after
participating in a protest in front of the Lao
embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, in 2016
where they expressed concerns about human
rights, corruption and deforestation in Laos.

228

The government took no action to address a
UN expert’s call from April 2021 to release
them immediately.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Civil society organizations continued to call
for the release of human rights defender
Houayheaung Xayabouly from prison. She
was found guilty of “conducting propaganda
activities against the state” under Article 117
of the Criminal Code for comments she made
on Facebook about the government’s
ineffective management of disastrous floods
in southern Laos in 2019. The UN Working
Group on Arbitrary Detention confirmed in
2021 that she was arbitrarily detained for the
peaceful exercise of her right to freedom of
expression. She had reportedly been
detained at Champassak Provincial Prison
since 12 September 2019.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
As 15 December marked the tenth
anniversary of the disappearance of civil
society leader Sombath Somphone, Amnesty
International joined calls with 65 other civil
society organizations and individuals around
the world calling for Lao authorities to
determine his fate and whereabouts and
deliver justice, truth, and reparation to his
family members.
In August, the UN Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
reported on six outstanding cases of enforced
disappearance in Laos. They included Lao
and Thai activists, as well as four members of
the minority ChaoFa Hmong ethnic group,
including two girls. The UN SecretaryGeneral reported in September that relatives
of the disappeared from the ChaoFa Hmong
community faced intimidation by the Lao
army after reporting the disappearances to
the UN in 2020.
In September, the UN Secretary-General
published details of the disappearance of Od
Sayavong, a Laotian refugee living in Thailand
who was last seen on 26 August 2019 after
he engaged with the UN Special Rapporteur
on extreme poverty and human rights. Thai

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

authorities closed the investigation into his
disappearance, citing a lack of evidence.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The ChaoFa Hmong community, a faction of
the Hmong ethnic minority groups that fled
state violence and persecution by Lao
authorities in the 1980s, continued to hide in
remote mountainous areas, including in the
jungle of Phou Bia region, Xienkhouang
province. The Lao military continually
destroyed their shelters, solar charging
panels, cooking stations and food sources,
thus severely impacting their access to food
and adequate housing. Community members
also had limited access to safe drinking
water, sanitation services and facilities and
healthcare. The government did not respond
to letters of concern on these issues that
were submitted by UN experts in August
2020 and April 2021. According to the UN
Secretary-General, as of 2022, independent
observers, humanitarian actors and
international organizations were denied
access to this area by the state authorities.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
UN experts submitted letters to the
government of Laos as well as other
governments and companies involved in the
collapse of an auxiliary dam in Laos’s Attapeu
province on 23 July 2018. The letters
addressed the prolonged human rights
impacts of the incident, including the death
or disappearance of at least 71 people and
the destruction of livestock, agricultural land
and infrastructure. The UN experts indicated
that the authorities had failed to promptly
provide long-term accommodation and
transparent compensation schemes to
affected communities and individuals, and
raised concerns about human rights
defenders facing retaliation for advocating for
the rights of survivors.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING
Throughout the year, the authorities found
hundreds of foreign nationals who had been
trafficked and were being held captive in the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Golden Triangle Special Economic Zones
(GTSEZ) in northern Laos. The victims came
from many countries including Malaysia,
India, Kenya and Pakistan and were put to
work conducting online scams from casinos
and resorts run by Chinese businesses. The
victims were reportedly ill-treated by their
employers.
Procedures for identifying and referring
victims of trafficking were not applied
consistently, there was low capacity and
awareness among border officials to prevent
human trafficking, and victim protection
services for male and LGBTI victims of
trafficking were lacking.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Key legal and policy instruments for tackling
climate change, including Laos’s 2021 NDC,
the 2019 Decree on Climate Change and the
2012 Environmental Protection Law, did not
include provisions regarding gender equality
or consider gender-related vulnerabilities to
climate change impacts. Only the 2019
Decree on Environmental Impact Assessment
required participatory consultations and
assessments with gender and ethnic
inclusion.

LATVIA
Republic of Latvia
Head of state: Egils Levits
Head of government: Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš
Refugees and migrants continued to face
violent pushbacks to Belarus. Various
groups faced discrimination. Over 43,000
people fleeing Ukraine were granted
protection.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The state of emergency introduced in August
2021 at the border with Belarus was renewed
repeatedly, allowing unlawful pushbacks of
refugees and migrants and preventing NGOs’
oversight of the area. Although asylum was
effectively suspended at border areas, from
April onwards people could file applications

229

at the Daugavpils detention centre and at
border crossing points. During the year,
Latvia admitted 200 people on humanitarian
grounds and reported over 5,000
“prevented” border crossings – effectively
summary returns. Most people transferred
from the border, including children, were
detained arbitrarily.
In October, research was published
documenting violent pushbacks to Belarus,
arbitrary detention in undisclosed areas of
the border, possibly constituting enforced
disappearances, ill-treatment sometimes
amounting to torture, and the use of force
and deception to return people to their
country of origin.1 Latvian border guards,
working with unidentified officers, were
described as the main perpetrators.
In December, NGOs documented new
incidents of people who had gone “missing”
at the border and pushbacks. An Afghan
citizen died of hypothermia as a result of the
cold temperatures at the border.
In May, the European Court of Human
Rights communicated a case against Latvia
brought by a group of Iraqi nationals (H.M.M.
and Others v. Latvia) concerning pushbacks
to Belarus and detention.
UKRAINE CONFLICT
Over 43,000 people fleeing Ukraine were
granted temporary protection status. In
March, a law was passed to ensure their
access to residency, employment and
broader support.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The European Committee of Social Rights
reported failings in the areas of health and
safety at work, and rights to health, social
security and social assistance.

DISCRIMINATION
There was no progress on the UN’s
recommendations to introduce
comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation.
The Council of Europe recommended
measures to address the gender pay gap.
A restitution law was passed in February,
granting compensation to the Jewish

230

community for properties seized during the
Nazi and Soviet occupations.
The number of people with “non-citizen”
status decreased but remained significant.
“Non-citizens” continued to face restrictions,
including on their right to vote and gaining
employment in the public sector.
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
The country made no progress towards
ratification of the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence (Istanbul Convention).
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Following a Supreme Court decision,
administrative courts started recognizing the
status of same-sex couples in order to
implement the Constitutional Court’s rulings,
given the parliament’s failure to approve a law
on civil unions. In December, the parliament
discontinued its work on this legislation.
1. Latvia: Return Home or Never Leave the Woods, 12 October

LEBANON
Republic of Lebanon
Head of state: Vacant (Michel Aoun until October)
Head of government: Najib Mikati (as caretaker from
May)
The authorities failed to address key
economic and social rights affected by the
country’s economic crisis, leaving residents
without adequate access to healthcare and
water. Impunity continued to protect
perpetrators of torture and other crimes.
Defamation laws were used against critics
of the authorities. Migrant workers,
particularly women domestic workers,
continued to face abuse under the
discriminatory kafala (sponsorship) system.
Women still faced discrimination in law and
in practice. Authorities stepped up their
deportation of Syrian refugees to Syria
despite risks of egregious human rights
abuses there. The authorities banned public
LGBTI events during Pride month.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
The authorities failed to address the
economic crisis due to a political stalemate.
In November, food cost inflation stood at
171.2%, according to the Central
Administration of Statistics, placing the
country’s food insecurity in second place
worldwide, according to the World Bank.
Power shortages meant people only had state
electricity one to two hours per day.
On 7 April, the International Monetary Fund
announced an Extended Fund Agreement of
around USD 3 billion contingent on
government implementation of eight reforms.
Only one of the reforms was accomplished by
the end of year, with the passing of the 2022
Budget Law that came into effect on 15
November.
After parliamentary elections on 15 May, in
which independent candidates supportive of
the 2019 protests won 13 out of 128 seats,
the new parliament named Najib Mikati as
prime minister. However, he had failed to
form a government by the end of the year.
On 31 October, the presidential term of
Michel Aoun ended. Parliament held 10
electoral sessions in November and
December but failed to elect a new president.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Medication, including for cancer and other
chronic diseases, remained unavailable and
unaffordable to most of the population since
the government failed to establish an
adequate emergency social security plan to
replace the subsidies that were lifted in
November 2021. The number of patients
seeking free or low-cost medication and
treatment at public healthcare centres had
increased by 62% since the beginning of the
economic crisis in 2019. However, the
authorities failed to increase funding to meet
those needs.
Health workers protested throughout the
year against low wages and lack of hospital
funding, and cancer patients protested
against shortages of medication.
The authorities failed to provide adequate
medical care for prisoners, forcing their
families to cover all their medical costs,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

including for hospitalization. At least three
prisoners died between August and
September after delays in transferring them
to hospitals in a timely manner. The
authorities announced an investigation into
two of the deaths.

RIGHT TO WATER
The authorities failed to ensure adequate
access to clean public water. Throughout the
year, water supplies remained irregular due
to power cuts, forcing people to buy
increasingly expensive water from private,
unsupervised entities, at prices six times
higher than in 2019 and beyond the reach of
most.
The government’s failure to adequately
maintain water infrastructure resulted in
drinking water being mixed with sewage in
some areas. Hundreds of new cases of
hepatitis A were reported in June, and in
October contaminated water led to at least
913 cases of cholera.

IMPUNITY
Impunity continued to protect officials and
security and military personnel from
accountability for human rights violations.
The investigation into the 2020 Beirut port
explosion remained frozen since December
2021 because of challenges filed against the
investigative judge by politicians he had
summoned for interrogation. Two of the
politicians, Ghazi Zeaiter and Ali Hassan
Khalil, were elected in June to the
parliamentary Committee for Administration
and Justice.1
On 23 April, a boat carrying around 80
Lebanese, Syrian and Palestinian migrants
trying to reach Cyprus sank off the coast of
the Lebanese port city of Tripoli. The
authorities accused smugglers of deliberately
overloading the boat, but survivors said
Lebanese naval forces had caused the
sinking by ramming the boat. Survivors and
families filed complaints with the Office of the
Public Prosecutor against one officer and 12
naval personnel on grounds of intentionally
causing death. Despite this, prosecutors
transferred the complaint to the military

231

prosecution, where it remained frozen at the
end of the year. The Army Intelligence
Directorate announced in April that it had
opened an internal investigation and found
no wrongdoing by the naval personnel.2

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Judicial authorities failed to investigate at
least 21 complaints, citing the 2017 antitorture law, filed against different security and
military personnel, according to the Tripoli
Bar Association.
In May, the UN Subcommittee on
Prevention of Torture visited Lebanon and
found little progress in torture prevention
since its initial visit in 2010.
On 30 August, security forces arrested
Syrian refugee Bashar Abed Al-Saud at his
home in Beirut, the capital. The family
received a call four days later asking them to
collect his body from State Security in
southern Lebanon. Shortly afterwards, a
newspaper leaked pictures and videos
showing bruises and gashes on Bashar Abed
Al-Saud’s body, causing a public outcry. State
Security issued a statement saying that he
had “confessed” to being a member of the
Islamic State armed group before he died. In
September, the military justice system
launched an investigation and ordered the
detention of five State Security officers, but
denied the family lawyer access to the case
documents. The first court session was held
in December.3

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Defamation laws continued to provide
grounds for security and military apparatuses
to control expression critical of the
authorities, with at least three summonses
and investigations taking place in 2022.
On 24 June, the military court convicted
comedian Shaden Fakih of “insulting” and
“harming the reputation” of the Internal
Security Forces and fined her LBP 1,858,000
(USD 50-70 at the market rate). The Office of
Cybercrime first interrogated her in May 2021
following a complaint by the Internal Security
Forces about a satirical call she made to their

232

hotline during the Covid-19 lockdown, asking
them to deliver sanitary pads to her house.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, including in the right to
equal custody of children. On 4 August,
Liliane Cheaito, a mother who was injured in
Beirut’s Port explosion and remained
hospitalized ever since, saw her two-year-old
son for the first time since 2020, following an
order from the Shi’ite religious court after a
two-year hearing. Her husband had barred
her from seeing their son, saying he did not
want the baby to see his mother injured in
the hospital, so her family filed a complaint
before the court.
In the parliamentary General Assembly on
27 July, a number of MPs including the
speaker verbally harassed three independent
women MPs who were newly elected to
parliament and critical of the authorities. One
of the three, MP Cynthia Zarazir, said that
parliament had not taken any action after she
filed a formal complaint of harassment.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Unlike previous years, the minister of labour
did not engage in discussions to reform the
kafala system, which increases the risk of
labour exploitation of migrant workers and
leaves women with little prospect of obtaining
redress.
On 4 August, the authorities attempted to
deport a Kenyan migrant domestic worker to
Kenya without informing her lawyer, even
though she had applied for refugee status at
UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency. The
General Security Office (GSO) had arrested
her on 4 April and the investigation against
her was closed on 21 April; yet she remained
in detention. The Anti-Racism Movement, a
local NGO, intervened at the airport to stop
the deportation, and the woman was returned
to the detention centre. On 7 October,
following calls by local and international
organizations, the GSO released her after she
had spent six months in arbitrary detention.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
Lebanon continued to host the largest
number of refugees per capita globally, with
an estimated 1.5 million Syrian refugees.
According to UNHCR in April, Lebanon’s
economic crisis and Covid-19 had left 88% of
Syrian refugees living in extreme poverty.
In September, in what amounts to
“constructive refoulement”, the prime
minister charged the director of the GSO to
resume the plan of returning Syrian refugees
to Syria, treating all regions in Syria as safe
for returns, despite the documented risk of
serious persecution upon return. On 26
October, the GSO organized the first
transportation back to Syria in 2022,
involving 551 refugees who had registered
their names on the GSO lists for return and
had been accepted by the Syrian
government.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The authorities continued to restrict public
events of LGBTI people and organizations
supporting their rights.
On 24 June, the minister of interior banned
all gatherings during Pride month that it said
aimed to promote “sexual perversion”. Two
days later, LGBTI organizations and
individuals called for a protest, but various
religious groups called for a counter protest
and threatened violence. The authorities did
not offer protection to the peaceful marches,
nor did they take action against those inciting
violence, and the LGBTI groups cancelled
their protest as a result. In August, local
organizations Legal Agenda and Helem
challenged the minister’s ban before the
Shura Council, the country’s top
administrative court, arguing that it incited
violence and hatred against marginalized
groups and violated LGBTI people’s
constitutional rights to equality, free
expression and free assembly. On 1
November, the Shura Council accepted the
appeal and froze the minister’s decision.

reduction target of 31% by 2030 and
increased its unconditional emissions
reduction target to 20%, it did not announce
a new NDC in 2022.
1. “Lebanon: Authorities should lift immunity and allow interrogation of
MPs into the Beirut port explosion”, 8 June
2. “Lebanon: Joint letter calling on the Lebanese authorities for an
independent, impartial, and transparent investigation into the
causes of the recent shipwreck off the coast of Tripoli”, 13 May
3. “Lebanon: Transfer investigation into death in custody of Syrian
refugee to the civilian justice system”, 6 September

LESOTHO
Kingdom of Lesotho
Head of state: Letsie III
Head of government: Sam Matekane (replaced
Moeketsi Majoro in October)
The Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
dropped murder charges against the former
prime minister and first lady. Protests were
prohibited with authorities denying permits
for assembly under Covid-19 regulations
until August. Police brutality, including
allegations of torture and other ill-treatment
and an unlawful killing, remained a serious
concern. Gender-based violence continued
to rise while women were marginalized in
the economic and political spheres. Access
to healthcare was limited, particularly for
women and girls in rural areas.

BACKGROUND
Parliament was dissolved in July in
preparation for the general elections in
October. It was recalled on 24 August, under
the state of emergency, and finally passed
long-standing constitutional reforms on 31
August. Following this, the High Court ruled
that the state of emergency was
unconstitutional and that therefore
parliament had no constitutional authority to
pass the bills amending the constitution.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

IMPUNITY

Even though the government had committed
in March 2021 to a conditional emissions

On 26 July, the DPP dropped the charges
against former prime minister Thomas

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

233

Thabane and his wife Maesaiah Thabane
over the 2017 murder of his former wife,
Lipolelo Thabane, and the attempted murder
of her acquaintance, Thato Sebolla, citing
lack of witnesses. Some witnesses to the
murder died under mysterious circumstances
while others left the country in fear for their
lives between 2017 and 2020.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Police brutality remained a serious concern
with some members of the security forces
implicated in the killing of a protester and the
torture and other ill-treatment of others.
Police authorities faced several legal claims
for damages amounting to millions of US
dollars, including for allegedly torturing
lawyer Napo Mafaesa in detention in Ha
Mabote Police Station in January and a Ha
Pita woman named Mateboho Matekane at
Lithoteng Police Station in the capital,
Maseru, in November 2021.
On 19 May, 35 people, including 16
women, were tortured by police officers and
members of the Lesotho Defence Forces after
they protested, including by barricading
roads, against electricity cuts in Liseleng
village in Thaba-Tseka district. They were
beaten and made to roll over several metres
of muddy track leading to the nearby
Matsoku River and back again. The
protesters were arrested and charged with
disturbing the peace. They were later
released on bail and appeared in ThabaTseka Magistrates Court in May and June.
The case was pending at the end of the year.
The National Police Commissioner told
Amnesty International that seven Lesotho
Mounted Police Service officers were
suspended after shooting at protesting
students at the National University of Lesotho
on 16 June, killing Kopano Francis
Mokutoane and injuring several others, and
were under investigation.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
Restrictions on the rights to freedom of
peaceful assembly and association,
implemented in 2020 under the guise of

234

containing Covid-19, were lifted in August,
allowing for political gatherings to take place
and nightclubs to reopen.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Gender-based violence continued to rise,
especially domestic violence, mainly affecting
women and children. Access to justice for
women, particularly those living in rural
communities, was limited partly owing to
inadequate transport and poverty which
prevented them from reaching police stations
and courts in towns.
Women continued to be excluded from
participation in the economy and politics, and
suffered the triple burden of poverty,
unemployment and inequality.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Poverty and inequality remained widespread,
exacerbated by the adverse effects of
Covid-19 on the economy. Economic
performance remained slow, exacerbated by
the pandemic, affecting industries such as
manufacturing, particularly textiles, mining,
construction and services. This impacted the
incomes of most households. The World
Bank said that poverty reduction would only
slowly improve as food and energy prices
increased and the fragile economic
environment limited the budgets and
livelihoods of poorer households. Poverty
rates were projected to improve slightly, by
dropping to 35.2% in 2022 compared with
36% in 2021.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In 2022, about 300,000 people of a
population of 2.3 million were living with HIV/
AIDS; the majority were women and
adolescent girls who were also more likely to
face social stigma. People, especially women
needing maternal and other crucial health
services, were prevented, partly by poor rural
road networks, from accessing healthcare
facilities. In addition, inadequate transport
continued to force women to give birth at
home rather than in health centres.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

LIBYA
State of Libya
Head of state: Mohamed al-Menfi
Head of government: Disputed (Abdelhamid alDebibah, head of the Government of National Unity;
Fathi Bashagha, head of the Government of National
Stability)
Militias, armed groups and security forces
continued to arbitrarily detain thousands of
people. Scores of protesters, lawyers,
journalists, critics and activists were
rounded up and subjected to torture and
other ill-treatment, enforced
disappearances and forced “confessions” on
camera. Militias and armed groups used
unlawful force to repress peaceful protests
across the country. Dozens of people were
arrested, prosecuted and/or sentenced to
lengthy imprisonment or death for their
religious beliefs; for their actual or
perceived gender identity and/or sexual
orientation; or for their LGBTI activism.
Authorities, militias and armed groups
imposed severe restrictions on civic space
and humanitarian access to affected
communities, and engaged in smear
campaigns against international and Libyan
rights groups. Militias and armed groups
killed and wounded civilians and destroyed
civilian property during sporadic, localized
clashes. Impunity remained widespread,
and authorities funded abusive militias and
armed groups. Women and girls faced
entrenched discrimination and violence.
Ethnic minorities and internally displaced
people faced barriers in accessing
education and healthcare. EU-backed
Libyan coastguards and the Stability
Support Authority militia intercepted
thousands of refugees and migrants at sea
and forcibly returned them to detention in
Libya. Detained migrants and refugees were
subjected to torture, unlawful killings,
sexual violence and forced labour.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
Libya’s political impasse deepened, with no
new dates set for parliamentary and
presidential elections initially scheduled for
December 2021. In March, parliament
unilaterally voted to amend the Constitutional
Declaration and appointed a new
government, the Government of National
Stability (GNS), with the backing of the
Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF), an armed
group in control of much of eastern and
southern Libya. Other political and military
actors rejected the move citing procedural
irregularities, and continued to back the
Government of National Unity (GNU), which
retained control of the capital Tripoli, despite
attempts by militias aligned with the GNS to
drive it out.
In June and July, the LAAF imposed an oil
blockade, leading to electricity shortages and
popular protests. They only lifted it after
reaching a deal with the GNU to replace the
head of the National Oil Corporation.
Failure to adopt a national budget and unify
financial institutions led to delayed wages for
public sector employees and disruptions to
government services.
In September, the Libyan Audit Bureau
released a report revealing widespread
corruption and mismanagement of billions of
Libyan dinars across government institutions
in 2021.

ARBITRARY DETENTION, UNLAWFUL
DEPRIVATION OF LIBERTY AND UNFAIR
TRIALS
Militias, armed groups and security forces
continued to arbitrarily detain thousands of
people; some had been held for over 11
years without charge or trial. However,
throughout the year, the GNU and LAAF
announced the release of scores of conflictrelated detainees and others held for political
reasons.
Dozens of people were arbitrarily arrested
for their actual or perceived political or tribal
affiliation or criticism of powerful militias or
armed groups, and subjected to enforced
disappearance or held incommunicado for

235

up to 11 months. Some were held as
hostages to extort ransoms.
In May, Stability Support Authority (SSA)
militiamen abducted Ahmed Al-Daykh, a staff
member of the Libyan Audit Bureau, from in
front of his workplace after he raised
concerns over domestic corruption. They
subjected him to enforced disappearance for
eight days, before releasing him without
charge.
Civilians and individuals accused of human
rights violations were tried by military courts
in grossly unfair proceedings. In June, the
Tripoli Court of Appeals referred 82
defendants accused of involvement in the
Abu Salim prison killings in 1996 to the
military judiciary, on the grounds that the
crime took place at a military location and the
accused were members of the armed forces.
Many of the defendants had been tortured or
otherwise ill-treated after their arrest following
the fall of Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi’s government
in 2011, and their torture-tainted
“confessions” were used in proceedings
against them.
Militias and armed groups abducted and
intimidated lawyers, prosecutors and judges.
Lawyers representing civilians on trial by
military courts in eastern Libya reported
harassment and intimidation by military
judges and prosecutors. In Benghazi, the
Internal Security Agency (ISA)-Benghazi, an
armed group, arrested lawyer Adnan al-Arafi
in May and detained him for 13 days, after
he filed a complaint against a military judge.
Criminal trials were held inside the Mitiga
base in Tripoli, controlled by the Deterrence
Apparatus for Combating Organized Crime
and Terrorism (DACOT) militia, amid lawyers’
and judges’ fears of reprisals for raising or
investigating claims of arbitrary detention,
torture and other ill-treatment by DACOT
militiamen.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Militias and armed groups systematically
tortured and otherwise ill-treated detainees
with impunity. Beatings, electric shocks,
mock executions, flogging, waterboarding,
suspension in contorted positions and sexual

236

violence were reported by relatives and
prisoners held by the DACOT, SSA and ISA in
Tripoli; by the Joint Operations Force (JOF) in
Misrata; and by armed groups, including the
ISA, Tariq Ben Zeyad (TBZ) and the 128th
brigade in eastern Libya.
Detainees were held in cruel and inhuman
conditions, characterized by overcrowding,
denial of healthcare and lack of hygiene,
exercise and sufficient food.
Dozens died in custody across Libya amid
reports of torture, denial of medical care and
malnutrition.
Militias and armed groups largely ignored a
decree passed by the Ministry of Interior in
May banning the publication of “confessions”
by detainees on social media.
Libyan legislation retained corporal
punishments, including flogging and
amputation.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Militias and armed groups abducted dozens
of civil society workers and activists, amid a
defamation campaign by GNU ministries and
affiliated militias against Libyan and
international human rights groups that
accused them of spreading atheism and
homosexuality and attacking Libyan “values”.
International and Libyan humanitarian actors
reported increasingly severe restrictions,
including denial of access to detention
facilities and communities in need, arrests,
summoning for questioning and other forms
of harassment.
In July, a Benghazi court ruled to
temporarily suspend Decree No. 286/2019
on regulating NGOs, but NGOs across Libya
remained severely restricted in their activities
and funding.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Throughout the year, militias and armed
groups abducted, arbitrarily detained and/or
threatened dozens of activists, journalists and
others for exercising their rights to freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly.
Between February and March, at least
seven men were arrested solely for peacefully

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

expressing their views and/or for their
affiliation to the civil society group Tanweer.
Judicial authorities accepted as evidence
their videoed torture-tainted “confessions”,
extracted while they were detained by the ISA
in Tripoli without access to lawyers. Six were
convicted of “insulting and offending the
Islamic religion” and the “misuse of internet
networks” and sentenced to between one
and 10 years in prison, following unfair trials.
Between May and August in the cities of
Sebha, Sirte, Benghazi, Misrata, Bayda and
Tripoli, militias and armed groups used
unlawful force, including lethal force, to
disperse people participating in generally
peaceful protests against their grip on power
and the deteriorating economic situation. At
least two men were killed and scores more
were injured. Armed actors also arbitrarily
detained activists for up to 14 weeks in
Misrata and Benghazi for supporting calls for
protests on their social media platforms, as
well as journalists in relation to their coverage
of protests.
In March in Sirte, ISA-Sirte abducted
journalist Ali al-Refawi for covering protests in
Sirte and handed him to the TBZ, which
detained him until July without charge or
trial.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
While the national ceasefire in place since
October 2020 generally held, militias and
armed groups violated international
humanitarian law during sporadic, localized
armed clashes, including by carrying out
indiscriminate attacks and destroying civilian
infrastructure and private property.
In August, clashes between militias in
densely populated Tripoli neighbourhoods left
32 people dead, including three children and
other civilians, and led to damage of scores
of civilian homes and other property, and at
least four medical facilities. In September, a
child and at least six others, mostly civilians,
were killed during clashes between rival
militias in the city of al-Zawyia.
Several countries, including Russia, Türkiye
and the United Arab Emirates, violated the
UN arms embargo, established since 2011,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

by retaining foreign fighters and military
equipment in Libya.
At least 39 people across the country died
as a result of landmines and unexploded
ordnance being detonated.

IMPUNITY
Officials and members of militias and armed
groups responsible for crimes under
international law enjoyed near total impunity.
Authorities continued to fund abusive armed
groups and militias, integrating their
members into state institutions without
vetting. In November, the GNU appointed
Emad Trabulsi, commander of the Public
Security Agency militia, as acting minister of
interior, despite his militia’s well-documented
involvement in crimes against migrants and
refugees.
Libyan authorities took no steps to hold JOF
militiamen accountable for the extrajudicial
execution of 27-year-old Altayeb Elsharari in
March, and continued to provide state
funding to the militia.
Throughout the year, mass graves were
discovered in the cities of Tarhouna and Sirte,
believed to contain the remains of individuals
killed by al-Kaniyat and Islamic State armed
groups, respectively. Ongoing investigations
into unlawful killings carried out by al-Kaniyat
while they controlled Tarhouna until June
2020 were marred by concerns over their
independence, effectiveness and
transparency, and the absence of
prosecutions in fair trials in front of regular
courts of those against whom there is
sufficient admissible evidence of involvement
in crimes.
In July, the UN Human Rights Council
extended the mandate of the Fact-Finding
Mission to investigate crimes under
international law committed in Libya since
2016 for a final, non-extendable period of
nine months.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Authorities failed to protect women, girls and
LGBTI individuals from killings, torture and
unlawful deprivation of liberty by militias,
armed groups and other non-state actors.

237

Women and girls faced barriers to seeking
justice for rape and other sexual violence,
including the risk of prosecution for engaging
in sexual relations outside marriage,
criminalized in Libya, and reprisals by
perpetrators if their victims lodged
complaints.
In September, 32-year-old Kholoud alRagbani was killed after asking for a divorce.
The authorities failed to investigate her
murder or ensure accountability.

DISCRIMINATION
ETHNIC MINORITIES AND INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Some Tabu and Tuareg, especially those
without national identity cards owing to
discriminatory laws and regulations governing
Libyan citizenship, faced discrimination in
southern Libya in accessing essential
services, including healthcare and education.
Some remained stateless due to the refusal of
Libyan authorities to recognize their Libyan
nationality.
WOMEN AND LGBTI PEOPLE
In October, the GNU issued Decree No.
902/2022 granting children born to Libyan
mothers and non-Libyan fathers access to
public education and healthcare, without
guaranteeing their right to nationality on a par
with children born to Libyan fathers and nonLibyan mothers.
Between February and May, police and
DACOT militia fighters arrested at least 26
people for cross-dressing in Tripoli, Misrata
and Zliten. Most were released without
charge.
INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE
Over 143,000 people remained internally
displaced, some for over 10 years.
Thousands of families from Benghazi, Derna
and other parts of eastern Libya were unable
to return home due to fear of reprisals by
LAAF-affiliated armed groups and destruction
of their property. They continued to face
delays or denials, or had to go through
complex bureaucratic procedures, or rely on
personal connections to obtain official
documents vital to access education and
health services, or collect state wages and
pensions. Hundreds were left to fend for

238

themselves in poorly equipped rented
shelters in Tripoli and Misrata.
Thousands of residents of Tawergha city,
forcibly displaced since 2011, were unable to
return to their homes due to lack of essential
services. Those who returned reported lack of
adequate housing, electricity, clean water or
compensation for property looted or
destroyed by Misrata-based militias.
In May, SSA militiamen ordered Tawerghan
residents of al-Fallah, the only remaining
camp for internally displaced Tawerghans in
Tripoli, to leave or face forced eviction.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Refugees and migrants were subjected to
widespread and systematic human rights
violations and abuses at the hands of state
officials, militias and armed groups with
impunity. Scores of migrants and refugees
died at sea in Libyan waters or on Libyan soil
on their journeys towards Europe.
EU-backed Libyan coastguards and the SSA
militia endangered the lives of refugees and
migrants crossing the Mediterranean by
shooting or otherwise deliberately damaging
their boats, leading to loss of life (see Italy
entry). On 18 February, SSA militiamen were
responsible for the death of one man and the
injury of others during the interception of a
boat carrying migrants and refugees across
the Mediterranean.
At least 19,308 refugees and migrants were
intercepted and forcibly returned to Libya,
where thousands were detained indefinitely
in harsh conditions in facilities run by the
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration
(DCIM) and by the SSA and other militias.
The UN Support Mission in Libya, UN
agencies, and humanitarian and human
rights organizations were denied access or
only allowed to deliver aid and provide
services but not to speak to detainees in
private. Thousands of other refugees and
migrants were forcibly disappeared or went
missing following disembarkation.
SSA militia arbitrarily detained thousands of
migrants and refugees in al-Mayah detention
centre and subjected them to beatings,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

forced labour, rape and other sexual violence,
including forced prostitution.
The DCIM continued to detain at least
4,001 migrants and refugees as of 27
November. They were held in inhuman
conditions, amid rampant torture and other
ill-treatment, extortion of ransoms to secure
their freedom, and denial of adequate
medical care. DCIM officials told Amnesty
International during a meeting in Tripoli in
February about DCIM’s closure of all but four
detention centres in Tripoli, but the closed
detention centres remained operational and
run directly by militias, including the
notorious al-Mabani detention centre
controlled by the Public Security Agency
militia.
Armed groups under the command of the
LAAF expelled thousands of migrants and
refugees towards Egypt, Sudan, Chad and
Niger without due process, and forced them
to board trucks without sufficient food or
water.
Out of 43,000 refugees and asylum seekers
registered with UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, 693 were resettled or evacuated
outside Libya by 15 October. At least 1,255
migrants were returned to their countries of
origin through the International Organization
for Migration, amid concerns over the
voluntary nature of their decision to return, in
accordance with the principle of free and
informed consent.

DEATH PENALTY
Libyan law retained the death penalty for a
wide range of offences not limited to
intentional killing. Death sentences continued
to be passed, including by military courts in
eastern Libya following grossly unfair trials.
No executions were carried out.
In September, a court in Misrata sentenced
Diaa al-Din Balaaou to death for apostasy.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Libya failed to communicate its NDC as a
party to the Paris Agreement. Experts
assessed the country to be extremely
vulnerable to climate change given its limited

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

water resources, arid soil and drought, and
poorly prepared to cope with environmental
degradation given years of conflict and
insecurity.

LITHUANIA
Republic of Lithuania
Head of state: Gitanas Nausėda
Head of government: Ingrida Šimonytė
People who fled Ukraine were welcomed
and assisted; other refugees and migrants
were forcibly returned to Belarus or
arbitrarily detained, denied access to
asylum and, in some cases, subjected to
torture and other ill-treatment. Same-sex
unions were still not legalized.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Lithuania granted access to and assisted at
least 71,932 people who had fled Ukraine
following Russia’s invasion. Non-European
refugees and migrants who arrived from
Belarus continued to be subjected to violent
pushbacks, arbitrary detention and other
violations.1 Border guards forcibly pushed at
least 11,097 people back to Belarus over the
year, despite the risk of torture and other illtreatment by Belarusian authorities.
In June, the Court of Justice of the EU ruled
that Lithuania’s emergency legislation
breached EU law because it deprived people
of the possibility of seeking asylum and
provided for their automatic detention on the
sole basis of their irregular entry. The
legislation remained in place at the end of the
year; in August the Ministry of Interior
proposed legislation that would further
formalize the practice of border pushbacks.
As of March, roughly 4,000 people
remained in prolonged arbitrary detention in
government-managed centres, where they
were denied access to adequate asylum
procedures. Following court decisions, most
were later allowed to leave the centres; by
December, 39 people remained in detention.
In detention centres, refugees and migrants
suffered overcrowding, disproportionate

239

restrictions to movement, and inadequate
access to toilets and medical assistance. In
January and July, the Ombudsperson
concluded that conditions in the Kybartai and
Medininkai centres constituted inhumane
and degrading treatment. The Medininkai
centre was subsequently closed, and
authorities decided to close the Kybartai
centre in early 2023.
Officers conducting forcible pushbacks at
the borders or responding to protests in
detention centres attacked asylum seekers
and migrants, including with batons, pepper
spray and taser guns.
On 1-2 March, an anti-riot squad raided the
Medininkai detention centre. Officers sexually
humiliated a group of Black women, forcing
them outside into the cold, half-naked with
their hands tied, and then locking them in a
container. In October, police authorities
terminated a pretrial investigation on the raid,
pointing to a lack of evidence and objective
reasons for a criminal case.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In May, the parliament started debating a
compromise bill introducing gender-neutral
civil unions, which would grant same-sex
couples some rights. A previous bill legalizing
same-sex partnerships had been voted down
in 2021.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In January, news emerged that Lithuania had
paid about €100,000 in compensation to Abu
Zubaydah, a Palestinian national detained in
Guantánamo Bay. In 2018, the European
Court of Human Rights ruled against
Lithuania for its deliberate facilitation of his
enforced disappearance and torture by the
CIA. Due to Abu Zubaydah’s ongoing
detention and assets freeze, he could not
receive the compensation.
In March, Lithuania signed an agreement
with Ukraine and Poland to establish a Joint
Investigation Team to investigate crimes
under international law committed in
Ukraine.

240

1. Lithuania: Forced Out or Locked Up – Refugees and Migrants Abused
and Abandoned, 27 June

MADAGASCAR
Republic of Madagascar
Head of state: Andry Rajoelina
Head of government: Christian Ntsay
The prolonged drought and recurrent
cyclones had a devastating impact on
access to food, water and sanitation.
Detention facilities were overcrowded and
conditions poor. The right to freedom of
expression was restricted. The judicial
persecution of human rights defenders,
activists and whistle-blowers persisted and
an environmental defender was murdered.
Cases of discrimination and violence
against people with albinism increased.
Abortion remained a criminal offence.

BACKGROUND
Between January and April, six tropical
storms and cyclones made landfall in the
country, compounding the effects of the
prolonged drought. Over 200 people were
killed, and the livelihoods of more than
570,000 people were disrupted; public
infrastructure, such as schools, roads and
health centres, were destroyed across the
country.
In February Imbiki Herilaza resigned as
minister of justice amid corruption allegations
after audio recordings of him requesting
bribes were shared on social media.
By September, around 1.4 million people,
representing 5.4% of the population, were
vaccinated against Covid-19.

RIGHT TO FOOD
The people of southern Madagascar
continued to suffer the impact of prolonged
drought and food insecurity. Consequently,
malnutrition rates in the region increased and
access to water, sanitation and hygiene
became more precarious. According to the
World Food Programme (WFP), 33% of the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

population in the Grand South region were
facing high food insecurity.
The tropical storms and cyclones made
landfall primarily in the east and central
regions, driving further food insecurity; the
WFP estimated that at least 470,000 people
in the affected regions needed urgent food
assistance.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Detention facilities were overcrowded and
conditions were poor. In June, President
Rajoelina commuted the sentences of 11,316
detainees and pardoned 2,902 sentenced
prisoners, including people convicted of
minor offences who had up to three months
left on their sentence.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In the first quarter of the year, civil society
actors held national consultations and
meetings with representatives of the minister
of justice to discuss the draft law on the
protection of human rights defenders and
activists, including environmental defenders
and whistle-blowers. Following this, on 18
October, a parliamentarian submitted
proposal 004-2022/PL for discussion at the
National Assembly. However, there was no
set date for its review. Malagasy human rights
organizations expressed concerns that it did
not incorporate key outcomes of the national
consultations.
UNFAIR TRIALS
Whistle-blowers and human rights defenders
were subjected to harassment and judicial
persecution for exposing cases of corruption.
In February, human rights defender and
schoolteacher Jeannot Randriamanana
exposed on social media allegations
concerning local authorities’ embezzlement
of humanitarian aid meant for populations
affected by cyclones Batsirai and Emnati in
the district of Nosy Varika. On 17 March the
Criminal Court of Mananjary sentenced him
to a two-year suspended prison term on
charges of “defamation and humiliation of
members of Parliament and public servants”
and identity fraud.1 After two months in
arbitrary detention, he was granted

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

provisional release on 10 May. On 12 July,
the Court of Appeal of Fianarantsoa upheld
the criminal court’s sentence. In September,
Jeannot Randriamanana’s lawyers filed an
appeal against his conviction before the
Supreme Court. The date for the appeal had
not been set by the end of the year.
On 26 May, the Criminal Court of
Antananarivo sentenced Ravo
Ramasomanana, who had been suspended
from his position with the Ministry of Public
Health, to a six-month suspended prison
term and a fine of MGA 2 million (around
USD 440). He was convicted on charges of
defaming public servants in relation to an
anonymous SMS that insulted members of
the national police.
RIGHT TO LIFE
On 2 June, Henri Rakotoarisoa, a 70-year-old
environmental defender and president of the
Mialo community association, was stabbed to
death in the eastern district of Moramanga.
On 18 November, the Criminal Court of
Ambatolampy sentenced eight people to life
imprisonment after convicting them of
murder under article 295 of the Penal Code,
and two people to three years’ imprisonment
after convicting them of “non-assistance to a
person in danger” under article 304 of the
Penal Code. The court acquitted two
defendants due to insufficient evidence. The
Court also sentenced the ten defendants to
pay damages of MGA 40 million (around
USD 8,880) to the family of Henri
Rakotoarisoa. Henri Rakotoarisoa was a
leading voice in the denouncing of timber
trafficking and illegal logging in
Ankazondandy forest.

DISCRIMINATION
PEOPLE WITH ALBINISM
There was an increase in cases of
discrimination and violent attacks against
people with albinism, including murders and
mutilations. According to a statement from
the UN Independent Expert on the enjoyment
of human rights by persons with albinism in
October, attacks in 2022 doubled compared
to the same period in 2021. Children were
the main targets, particularly in the south,

241

where dangerous superstitious
misconceptions about albinism persisted. In
February, a three-year-old child was
abducted in the city of Fort Dauphin in the
south. The child’s mother was murdered and
an uncle injured by the unidentified
assailants, believed to be cattle thieves. On 4
March, the mutilated body of a six-year-old
boy was found in the community of Berano,
Amboasary Atsimo district.
At the end of August, unidentified men
killed a woman and abducted her three-yearold child in Ikongo district in the south-east.
The police arrested four suspects and on 29
August hundreds of community members
gathered in front of the police station to
demand accountability. They allegedly threw
stones at the police station and the police
responded with gunfire, killing nearly 20
people. The child was still missing at the end
of the year.
In September, a private school in Ivato, a
neighbourhood in the capital, Antananarivo,
denied a 17-year-old boy’s enrolment
request, alleging that the school needed to
preserve its image and declaring that it was
“not ready to take in children with albinism”.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Abortion remained a criminal offence. In May
2022, the president of the Permanent
Commission of the National Assembly
rejected the proposed law 004-2021/PL to
modify article 317 of the Penal Code to
decriminalize abortion. The proposal had not
been presented for a vote before the National
Assembly. The member of the National
Assembly and permanent commission
spokesperson said the draft law was deemed
to be “incompatible with Malagasy culture
and values”. The proposed law had sought to
decriminalize abortion where pregnancy
presented a risk to the life of the pregnant
woman or girl, in cases of serious fetal
impairment, and pregnancy resulting from
rape or incest.
1. “Madagascar: Further information: Teacher released but conviction
upheld: Jeannot Randriamanana”, 27 July

242

MALAWI
Malawi
Head of state and government : Lazarus McCarthy
Chakwera
The NGO Amendment Bill was passed into
law and threatened to undermine the right
to freedom of association. Police used
excessive force against peaceful protesters.
Journalists, activists and several other
people faced arrest and prosecution for
social media posts. Parliament rejected a
motion to abolish the death penalty. The
government took steps to contain a cholera
outbreak.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In March, parliament passed the draconian
NGO Amendment Bill despite a 2018 court
injunction against its being tabled on grounds
it was inconsistent with international human
rights standards. It contained provisions that
threaten NGOs’ independence, existence and
operations. They included a restrictive NGO
definition which could exclude “non-public
benefit organizations” or “mutual benefit
organizations” such as federations, advocacy
groups or research institutions from
registering; the requirement of mandatory
registration; excessive discretion granted to
the official regulatory body with the authority
to suspend, cancel and revoke registration; a
prohibition on “electioneering and
politicking” by NGOs; and disproportionate
criminal sanctions against organizations and
their leaders for non-compliance with the Act.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In March, police in the capital, Lilongwe, fired
tear gas at hundreds of protesters marching
against alleged government corruption. The
demonstrators were led by Citizens Against
Impunity and Corruption, a civil society
group. In July, police again used tear gas
against protesters in Lilongwe who were
demonstrating against the high cost of living
and the judiciary’s handling of corruption
cases. They also arrested over 70 protesters,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

including eight human rights activists from
the Human Rights Ambassadors, a civil
society organization that had organized the
protests.

country to 26 of the 28 districts. As of 31
December, there were 17,448 confirmed
cases and 576 deaths reported.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

MALAYSIA

The right to freedom of expression was
increasingly threatened as a rise in cases of
unlawful surveillance by police, including
interception of people’s private conversations,
resulted in arbitrary arrests, prosecutions and
convictions. In April, police arrested
investigative journalist Gregory Gondwe for
publishing a story revealing alleged police
corruption involving payments to a company
owned by a businessman, himself accused of
corruption. The story claimed the payments
were for the procurement of police water
cannons, worth millions of US dollars.
Gregory Gondwe was released after several
hours, without charge.
On 1 May, Chidawawa Mainje was arrested
and charged with cyber harassment under
section 86 of the Electronic Transactions and
Cyber Security Act of 2016 in connection
with the accusation that he had insulted
President Chakwera in a WhatsApp
conversation.

DEATH PENALTY
In August, parliament rejected a Legal Affairs
Committee report which supported proposals
for the abolition of the death penalty. The
committee had earlier indicated that its wide
public consultations revealed more than 90%
of Malawians supported abolition.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
On 3 March, the Ministry of Health declared
a cholera outbreak following laboratory
confirmation of a case in the country. The
government, with the support of the WHO
and UNICEF, implemented a National
Cholera Response Plan to strengthen disease
surveillance, provide medical treatment for
patients, distribute laboratory supplies,
monitor water quality, and promote health
education and hygiene among affected and
at-risk communities. Despite these efforts,
the outbreak spread through most of the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Malaysia
Head of state: Al-Sultan Abdullah Ri'ayatuddin AlMustafa Billah Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Haji
Ahmad Shah Al-Musta'in Billah
Head of government: Anwar Ibrahim (replaced Ismail
Sabri Yaakob in November)
Authorities used repressive laws to restrict
freedom of expression. Peaceful protests
were prevented and protest organizers
prosecuted. Punitive treatment of refugees,
asylum seekers and migrant workers
continued, including indefinite detention
and refoulement to countries where they
were at risk of serious human rights
violations. Further custodial deaths were
recorded, including in immigration
detention centres, but no one was held to
account. LGBTI people continued to face
persecution.

BACKGROUND
Following parliamentary elections in
November, long-time opposition leader Anwar
Ibrahim became Prime Minister.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Authorities continued to use repressive laws
to silence critical voices both on- and offline.
According to the government’s own figures,
police conducted 692 investigations between
January 2020 and June 2022 under the
Communications and Multimedia Act (CMA),
resulting in 87 prosecutions including of
artists, performers and political activists.
There were reports of additional
investigations and arrests under the CMA in
the months that followed. The Sedition Act,
the Printing Presses and Publications Act
and the Film Censorship Act were also used
to restrict freedom of expression.
In February, police detained activist Fahmi
Reza for two days in connection with an

243

artwork on his Twitter account satirizing a
government minister.1 In July, police and
religious authorities charged two individuals
with offences under the CMA and other laws
for a comedy performance in which they
allegedly insulted Islam. Local authorities
ordered the closure of the comedy club. In
October, police briefly detained political
activist Jay Jay Denis over a tweet alleging
misconduct by a political leader.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Although most Covid-19 control laws that had
been used to prevent and disperse protests
were repealed, authorities continued to block
peaceful demonstrations and investigate and
charge protest organizers with criminal
offences.
In April, police questioned seven people in
connection with their participation in peaceful
vigils calling for clemency for Malaysian
national Nagaenthran Dharmalingam prior to
his execution in Singapore.2
In June, police stopped several hundred
lawyers from the Bar Council from marching
to parliament to protest against government
interference in the judiciary. Three leaders of
the Bar Council were subsequently
investigated under the Peaceful Assembly
Act (PAA). In August, police charged four
activists under the PAA for their role in
organizing anti-government protests in the
capital, Kuala Lumpur. They faced fines of up
to MYR 10,000 (approximately USD 2,290) if
convicted.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The harsh treatment of refugees and asylum
seekers continued and allegations of human
rights violations in immigration detention
facilities persisted. Six people died in April
during a breakout by Rohingya refugees from
a temporary immigration detention centre in
Sungai Bakap, Penang, where they were
indefinitely detained; a 14-year-old girl died
days later from her injuries. Despite calls on
the government to investigate the incident, it
remained unclear who was responsible for
the deaths.3

244

In June, a migrants’ rights organization
reported that 149 Indonesian nationals died
between January 2021 and June 2022 in
immigration detention centres in Sabah state
as a result of ill-treatment and poor
conditions. The government denied the
allegations and took no action to investigate
them.
Authorities forcibly deported thousands of
people including asylum seekers to Myanmar
despite an international outcry in light of
ongoing and serious human rights violations
there.4 In October, a government proposal to
take over the management of asylum seekers
and refugees from UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, raised concerns about their future
treatment.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
At least 21 people died in police custody
during the year.
In July, parliament passed the Independent
Police Conduct Commission bill establishing
a police oversight body. However, it lacked
the independence and investigative powers
needed to effectively investigate police
misconduct including in relation to custodial
deaths. Concerns included provisions
permitting the appointment of police officers
to the oversight commission and
requirements of prior notification for visits to
police stations and other police facilities.5
Also in July, parliament approved an
extension to the pretrial detention clause of
the Security Offences (Special Measures) Act
2012 that permits detention without access
to courts and/or lawyers for up to 28 days.6

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face systemic
persecution and discrimination in both law
and practice. Authorities censored cultural
content deemed to have “LGBT elements”,
including in films, resulting in distributors
pulling censored films from local cinemas. In
October, police and religious authorities
raided a Halloween party in Kuala Lumpur
and detained 20 people overnight, including
trans people and performers in drag, for
violating Islamic laws against cross-dressing.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Amendments to Sharia law in Terengganu
state were adopted in December that
criminalized attempted liwat, or sodomy, and
“women posing as men”. Sodomy remained
a crime under the national penal code.

5. “Malaysia: CSO joint statement: Reject the Independent Police
Conduct Commission”, 22 March

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

MALDIVES

In July, around 200 Indigenous people in
Perak state held a protest at the state
legislative assembly against the government’s
failure to protect their customary land from
logging. In October, authorities forcibly
relocated over 300 members of an
Indigenous community in Nenggiri, Kelantan
state, whose land had been requisitioned for
the construction of a dam, despite their
opposition to the project.

DEATH PENALTY
In October, the government tabled legislative
amendments in parliament to abolish the
mandatory death penalty for drug-related
offences and 10 other offences but proposed
alternative cruel and inhuman punishments
such as flogging. The bills did not progress
because of elections.7 A moratorium on
executions remained in place.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government’s July 2021 intended NDC,
which committed to reduce emissions by
45% by 2030 compared to 2005 levels and
was criticized by some groups for being
unambitious, remained in place.
In response to worsening flooding and
resulting evacuations of local communities
including in Klang Valley and Kuala Langat
districts, the government announced in June
that it would develop a national adaptation
plan to set out strategies for responding to
the impacts of climate change. The plan had
not been finalized by year’s end.
1. “Malaysia: Fahmi Reza charged: Laws must not be used to stifle
peaceful dissent”, 10 February
2. “Malaysia: Drop investigations into Nagaenthran vigils”, 28 April
3. “Malaysia: Deaths of six detainees at Sungai Bakap”, 21 April
4. “Malaysia: Halt forced deportation of people from Myanmar and
ensure access to asylum”, 21 October

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

6. “Malaysia: Media quote IPCC and SOSMA”, 25 July
7. “Malaysia: Move to abolish mandatory death penalty is ‘welcome
step’ in right direction”, 10 June

Republic of Maldives
Head of state and government: Ibrahim Mohamed Solih
The authorities took further steps to restrict
freedom of expression in law. The security
forces routinely used unlawful force to
suppress protests. Maldives retained the
death penalty and people remained on
death row.

BACKGROUND
Maldives remained one of the most
vulnerable countries to climate change.
Rising sea levels have already caused severe
erosion of inhabited islands and depleted
freshwater resources. At COP27 in
November, the Maldivian authorities
advocated vigorously for the establishment of
an international fund to support victims of
loss and damage in climate-vulnerable
countries.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In July, parliament passed a new Evidence
Act, section 136 of which allowed judges to
compel journalists to reveal their sources.
Local and international civil society groups
including Amnesty International had
previously warned against the passing of this
law given its restrictive effect on media
freedom. At the end of the year, the
government was considering amending
section 136.
Police used unlawful force to disrupt
protests on several occasions. In January,
protesters opposing Indian influence in
Maldives were arrested by police on grounds
that included the alleged obstruction of law
enforcement officers.

245

The authorities continued to use the
Freedom of Peaceful Assembly Act of 2013
to impose limitations on peaceful assemblies
and to give undue discretion to the police in
granting permission for protests, contrary to
international human rights law and
standards.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION
Some religious and political groups continued
to use religious arguments to call for
restrictions on human rights and the work of
civil society organizations. The Maldivian
Democracy Network remained unable to
function since it was shut down in 2019 due
to lobbying by religious groups.
Activist Mohamed Rusthum Mujuthaba
spent more than six months in pretrial
detention for blasphemy before being
released in August.1 The charges related to
comments he posted on social media about
religious freedom and human rights.
In October, participants at a yoga event
were attacked by people objecting to yoga as
“un-Islamic”. The authorities arrested 21
people and charged 18 under anti-terrorism
laws for disrupting the event. Two clerics
remained on trial on charges relating to
terrorism.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Concerns were raised by the UN Working
Group on discrimination against women and
girls about rising gender-based violence.
Women made up only 4.6% of
representatives in parliament, while quotas at
local government level increased women’s
representation to 39.5%.

IMPUNITY
Abdullah Rasheed died in police custody in
October. By the end of the year, no
investigation was known to have been
initiated into his death, nor that of Mohamed
Aslam who died in prison in 2021.
In January, two men were convicted and
sentenced to life imprisonment for the
murder of blogger Yameen Rasheed in 2017.
Civil society raised concerns around the
impartiality of the investigation and

246

prosecution and called for the Presidential
Commission on Investigation of Murders and
Enforced Disappearances (DDCom) to
investigate the case.
1. “Maldives: Further Information: Activist relieved from further
imprisonment – Mohamed Rusthum Mujuthaba”, 17 August

MALI
Republic of Mali
Head of state: Assimi Goïta
Head of government: Choguel Kokalla Maïga
Hundreds of civilians were killed by the
military and armed groups, including in
extrajudicial executions, in the context of
the armed conflict. Violence and
discrimination based on social status
continued. Government critics and
journalists faced threats, intimidation,
arbitrary arrest and detention, and
prosecution. Detainees were denied medical
treatment.

BACKGROUND
In January, ECOWAS imposed sanctions on
Mali after the latter made a unilateral
decision to extend the political transition
phase, which had followed the 2020 coup.
Sanctions were lifted in July following a new
transitional roadmap which scheduled
elections for March 2024.
The deployment of personnel, allegedly
from the Russian Wagner Group, a private
military company, was denounced by the EU
and others. The Malian authorities described
the personnel as “military instructors”. The
EU Training Mission suspended its operation
in May, and Mali withdrew from the Group of
Five for the Sahel in June. The French
military operation ended, after nine years, in
August.
In May, the authorities said they had
thwarted a coup d’état and arrested 10
political and military figures. In July, 49
Ivorian soldiers supporting the German
contingent of the UN Integrated and
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

were arrested and charged with “attempting
to undermine state security”.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ARMED GROUPS
In March, the Islamic State in the Sahel (ISS)
launched a deadly offensive in the Ménaka
and Gao regions, fighting elements of the
Movement for the Salvation of Azawad (MSA)
and the Imghad Tuareg Self-Defense Group
and Allies (GATIA).1 Indiscriminate ISS
attacks against the villages of Tamalat,
Inchinane, Emis-Emis and Anderamboukane
targeted combatants and civilians alike.
Hundreds of civilians were killed by the ISS
and over 73,000 people had fled to Ménaka
city by October, according to the UN.
Between May and September, Katiba Serma
combatants blockaded the road linking the
towns of Boni, Douentza, Hombori and Gossi
to deter local communities from
“collaborating” with the army, and forcing
traders to rely on military escorts. On 2
August, 19 trucks carrying goods were
attacked and burned by the armed group in
Hombori, while awaiting an armed escort.
On 18 June, alleged members of the Group
for the Support of Islam and Muslims (GSIM)
attacked the villages of Diallassagou, Dianweli
and Dessagou in the Bankass Cercle,
resulting in approximately 130 deaths, mostly
civilian, according to the government.
In September, after the ISS dislodged the
GATIA and the MSA from Talataye, Gao
region, they killed dozens of civilians,
according to media reports, and burned
houses and the market, all of which
amounted to war crimes. The town was left
deserted.
ARMED FORCES AND THEIR ALLIES
MINUSMA, the media and NGOs
documented hundreds of extrajudicial
executions by the army and its allies in the
context of “Operation Keletigui” since
January.
On 3 January, the army allegedly killed
seven Mauritanian civilians in Guiré, Nara
region, during a “clean-up” operation. The
Malian and Mauritanian authorities

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

established a joint investigation into the
incident in March.
On 27 January, army officers arrested and
extrajudicially executed 14 residents of
Tonou, Mopti region, including the village
chief, after an improvised explosive device
(IED) exploded on the outskirts of the village,
killing two soldiers and wounded five others.
In February, 21 traders in Niono town,
Ségou region were forcibly disappeared
during an army patrol. Soon afterwards, on 2
March, local villagers found 36 burnt corpses
near Danguèrè-Wotoro, near Niono. Some of
them were bound and blindfolded. Local
associations and civil society organizations
blamed the army for the killings.
After a skirmish with GSIM members, the
army with the support of foreign military
personnel, besieged Moura, Mopti region,
between 27 and 31 March. Hundreds of men
from Moura and neighbouring villages, who
were attending the weekly market, were
divided into groups for interrogation.
Hundreds were then extrajudicially
executed.2 On 1 April, the government
announced, in reference to the incident, that
203 “jihadists” had been killed and 51
individuals arrested during an operation in
Moura. Several days later, they announced
that the Mopti military court would investigate
the incident. The army denied MINUSMA
investigators access to Moura.
On 19 April the army, accompanied by
foreign military personnel, killed at least 50
civilians and arrested around 611 others on
market day in Hombori, after an IED had
killed one soldier and injured two others.
According to MINUSMA, they were detained
in the Hombori army camp and allegedly
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment.
Days later, the army released 548 of them
and transferred 36 others to the Sévaré
military camp. After armed groups attacked
army camps in Sévaré, Niono and Bapho, 20
of the 27 detainees who had remained in
Hombori were extrajudicially executed by one
soldier, according to government and UN
forces.
In September the army, accompanied by
alleged foreign military personnel and Dozo

247

hunters, attacked the villages of Nia Ouro,
Tandiama and Kankele, Mopti region. At least
12 women from Nia Ouro were raped,
according to MINUSMA, while others were
forced to undress and were photographed
naked by the foreign fighters.
Investigations launched into crimes
committed by the army against civilians since
2019 remained stalled in most cases.3

In July, the mutilated body of 69-year-old
Diogou Sidibé was found on her farmland in
Lany Mody village, Kayes region. Her murder
was linked to her refusal to be subjected to
discriminatory practices used against people
based on their work and descent. In August,
18 people were arrested for her murder.

director of the National Agency for State
Security. They were provisionally released
from the Bollé prison on 3 September.
In June and November, journalist Malick
Konaté was subjected to threats, intimidation
and damage to his property by unidentified
men, apparently in connection with his views
on the transitional government and his work
on abuses carried out by agents of the
Wagner Group.
In November, the Higher Communications
Authority (HAC) suspended Joliba TV station
for two months for “serious and repeated
breaches and violations of the code of ethics
for journalists”. The station had criticized the
transitional government and the HAC’s lack of
response to the harassment and intimidation
of journalists.

ARBITRARY DETENTION

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS

The detention of senior public servants
Kalilou Doumbia and Moustapha Diakité
continued despite an investigative judge
dismissing all charges against them in June.
They had been held since September 2021,
including for two months in illegal detention
premises, allegedly in General State Security
Directorate custody.

In March, Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, a
former prime minister who had been arrested
in August 2021 for alleged corruption, died in
custody after several calls by his family and
doctor for his medical evacuation were
ignored. The authorities refused to conduct
an autopsy.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

1. “Mali: New eyewitness testimony describes killings and mass
displacement amid surge in violence in Menaka”, 16 June

DISCRIMINATION

In January, Etienne Fakaba Sissoko, an
economist who was critical of the transitional
authorities, was arrested after he spoke on TV
about the ECOWAS sanctions in Mali. He was
provisionally released in June and forbidden
from leaving the country.
In March, the authorities suspended Radio
France Internationale and France 24 after
they published articles about torture and
unlawful killings by the army.
In April, the authorities accused Oumar
Mariko, a politician, of defaming the armed
forces after he denounced extrajudicial
executions in Moura. After months in hiding,
he reappeared in Moscow from where he
denounced the government’s attempts to
assassinate him.
In May, Sara Yara and sisters Faty and Amy
Cissé were arrested and accused of making
defamatory remarks on Facebook about the

248

2. “Mali: Allegations of crimes against civilians in Moura: An
independent investigation must take place”, 7 April (French only)
3. Mali: Crimes Without Convictions: Analysis of the Judicial Response
to Conflict Related Crimes in Central Mali, 13 April

MALTA
Republic of Malta
Head of state: George Vella
Head of government: Robert Abela
Recommendations of the public inquiry into
the killing of journalist Daphne Caruana
Galizia were not fully implemented. A total
ban on abortion remained in place, while
parliament discussed a proposal to
decriminalize abortion when needed to
protect the life or health of a woman from
grave jeopardy. Delays in coordinating sea

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

rescue operations of refugees and migrants
persisted. The unlawful detention of asylum
seekers, including children, continued.
Three asylum seekers were still waiting to
know whether they would face trial on
terrorism-related and other charges for
opposing their unlawful pushback to Libya.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In October, two of the three men accused of
making, planting and detonating the car
bomb that killed Daphne Caruana Galizia in
2017 were sentenced to 40 years’
imprisonment each. A third man implicated
in the killing had been sentenced to 15 years’
imprisonment in 2021. The trial of the
businessman accused of having
commissioned the killing had yet to start. In
September, the Council of Europe (CoE)
Commissioner for Human Rights reiterated
her call to step up efforts to bring all those
responsible to justice. The Commissioner
noted that journalists continued to face
challenges to access freedom of information
requests and recommended greater
involvement of civil society and the
journalism community to strengthen
legislative proposals concerning the media
sector and restrictions on the use of Strategic
Lawsuits Against Public Participation
(SLAPPs).
In July, the Daphne Caruana Galizia
Foundation and Article 19 Europe criticized
the failure of the government to implement
recommendations published in July 2021 by
the independent inquiry into the killing of the
journalist and concluded that journalists and
media freedom remained inadequately
protected.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In November, the government proposed an
amendment to the Criminal Code aimed at
freeing doctors and pregnant women from
the threat of criminal prosecution when the
termination of a pregnancy is carried out to
protect the life or health of a pregnant woman
from grave jeopardy. Abortion in all other
circumstances would remain illegal. The

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

government’s proposal was being discussed
by parliament at year’s end.
The move followed the case, in June, of a
US national in the process of a miscarriage
who was denied an abortion, despite the risk
of infection and impact on her mental health.
She was eventually airlifted to Spain where
she was able to terminate the pregnancy.
Also in June, a Maltese women’s rights NGO
petitioned the authorities on behalf of 188
people of child-bearing age, demanding the
legalization of abortion. The petition, known
as a “judicial protest” in Maltese law,
articulated the discriminatory aspects of the
abortion ban and its multi-faceted impact on
the health and dignity of those who had or
could need the procedure.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, 450 refugees and
migrants had reached the country by sea.
The authorities continued to pursue a
deadly policy of deterrence, ignoring or
responding slowly to distress calls from
refugees and migrants at sea.
In September, a four-year-old Syrian girl
died of dehydration on board a fishing boat
which had been drifting for days in the
Maltese search and rescue region before the
Armed Forces of Malta coordinated the
rescue. The CoE Commissioner for Human
Rights’ October 2021 report, published in
February, called on the government to ensure
effective search and rescue operations and to
suspend its cooperation on migration control
with Libya, which resulted in returns of
people to torture and other violations.
The Commissioner also recommended that
Malta stop detaining children and vulnerable
adult refugees and migrants and end
arbitrary detention. The government
continued to arbitrarily detain asylum
seekers, including unaccompanied children,
beyond permissible legal periods and without
adequate access to a remedy. Some
unaccompanied children were detained with
adults upon arrival. In January, three men
and three children were released from the
detention centre at Safi barracks following a
court action. In March, following an appeal to

249

the Immigration Appeal Board, three teenage
asylum seekers from Bangladesh were
moved from Safi barracks to separate
facilities for unaccompanied children in an
open centre, after nearly three months of
being detained with adults.
Three asylum seekers known as the “El
Hiblu 3”, who had opposed attempts to
unlawfully return them to Libya in 2019, were
still awaiting a decision on whether to take
the case to trial. The lengthy magistrate’s
inquiry into the case closed in November.
The three men faced charges, including
under counterterrorism legislation,
punishable by life imprisonment.1
1. “Malta: A textbook example of all that is wrong with EU institutions
and member states’ migration policies in the Central
Mediterranean”, 14 March

MEXICO
United Mexican States
Head of state and government: Andrés Manuel López
Obrador
The government continued to stigmatize
feminists and human rights defenders who
protested against government inaction on
gender-based violence and, in some states,
security forces violently repressed women
protesters. Killings of journalists remained
at record levels; many of the victims had
been granted official protection measures.
By the end of the year, more than 109,000
people were registered as missing and
disappeared. The militarization of public
security increased and legislation cemented
the involvement of the armed forces in
public security tasks until 2028. The
National Guard used excessive force in
several of its operations. A lack of
transparency, accountability and access to
information hindered access to truth,
justice and reparations for victims of human
rights violations and their families.

250

BACKGROUND
Mexican military forces often failed to protect
the right to life and security of all people. The
military have been involved in public security
operations for 16 years and during that time
the country has seen a significant increase in
homicides.
The National Guard and the Ministry of
Defence (SEDENA) were among the 10
federal institutions which received the highest
number of complaints for human rights
violations during the year. The National
Human Rights Commission received 476
complaints against the National Guard and
404 against SEDENA regarding multiple
crimes under international law and human
rights violations, including torture, killings,
enforced disappearances and arbitrary
detentions.
In September, Congress approved the
National Guard’s incorporation into SEDENA.
However, in October, a federal judge
suspended this decision. Congress also
approved the extension of a provision giving
the armed forces a role in public security
operations until 2028. These decisions were
promoted by the government and supported
by Congress, without civil society
participation.1 Civil society organizations,
human rights activists and families of the
disappeared took to the streets to protest
against the increasing militarization of the
country.
As of 2022, the National Guard was
responsible for 227 areas normally within the
remit of civilian bodies, of which 148 were
not related to public security, such as the
construction of airports and highways,
management of Covid-19 vaccination and
migration enforcement.
In November, the Supreme Court ruled that
a May 2020 Presidential Decree allowing the
permanent participation of armed forces in
public security operations until 2024 was
constitutional. Similar cases relating to the
unconstitutionality of the National Guard Law
and the participation of the armed forces in
public security were pending before the
Mexican Supreme Court at the end of the
year.2

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The year proved the deadliest in history for
the national press. At least 13 journalists
were killed with a possible connection to their
work. Many cases remained without proper
investigations and the Protection Mechanism
for Human Rights Defenders and Journalists
continued to fall short of its goal to safeguard
the lives and safety of these groups.
In his morning press conferences, the
president expressed strong criticisms of
journalists and civil society organizations that
had questioned government actions,
accusing them of being “conservatives” and
“opponents”. The day before International
Women’s Day, the president publicly stated
that feminist protesters were preparing with
hammers, torches and Molotov cocktails and
that this “does not aim for the defence of
women, they are not even feminist,
participants are conservatives against our
transformation policy”.
In April, armed police and plain clothes
policemen beat women who were protesting
at the Chimalhuacán Public Prosecutor’s
Office in Mexico State. The protesters were
demanding sanctions against three police
officers who beat and detained an activist
and human rights defender. She was kept in
incommunicado detention for two hours. The
police also sprayed tear gas at the women
outside the office. National Guard officers
were present and failed to act to protect the
protesters.
In May, protesters from a variety of
organizations and feminist movements
gathered in the city of Irapuato, Guanajuato
State, to peacefully protest against genderbased violence, including feminicides and
disappearances of women. Police officers
beat and arbitrarily detained at least 28
protesters.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Between January and November, 3,450
women were reported to have been killed;
858 of the killings were investigated as
feminicides, equivalent to an average of 2.5
per day. The states with highest rates of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

reported feminicides were Mexico State
(131), Nuevo León (85) and Mexico City
(70). Structural violence against women
continued to undermine women’s rights to
live a life free of violence and in a safe
environment without fear.
In January, a judge in the municipality of
Nezahualcóyotl, Mexico State, convicted a
man of the feminicide of Diana Velázquez in
2017. However, authorities failed to ensure
effective investigations to determine other
alleged perpetrators in the case.
In February, in response to a conflict of
interest and lack of due diligence on the part
of the San Luis Potosí State Public
Prosecutor’s Office, the Federal Attorney
General’s Office (FGR) took over the
investigation into the feminicide of Karla
Pontigo, who was killed in 2012. The State
Governor of San Luis Potosí failed to meet
Karla Pontigo’s mother, despite her repeated
requests.
In November, the Mexico State Public
Prosecutor’s Office cancelled for the third
time the public apology in which he promised
to recognize the lack of due diligence in the
investigations into the feminicides of Nadia
Muciño Márquez, Diana Velázquez Florencio,
Daniela Sánchez Curiel and Julia Sosa
Conde.3

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In April, in the city of Irapuato, Guanajuato, a
National Guard officer shot at a car in which
students from Guanajuato University were
travelling, killing one student and seriously
injuring another.
In August, in the city of Nuevo Laredo,
Tamaulipas State, National Guard officers
shot at a car in which a woman was travelling
with two children. One of the children, fouryear-old Heidi Mariana, was killed and her
seven-year-old brother, Kevin, was injured.
In October, National Guard officers shot live
ammunition in the air to disperse a peaceful
protest in Jalisco State.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
During the year, authorities registered at least
9,826 cases of missing and disappeared

251

persons, of whom 6,733 were men and
3,077 were women. This brought the total
number of reports of people missing and
disappeared in Mexico between 1964 and
the end of 2022 to over 109,000. Impunity
largely prevailed on this issue; according to
the Mexican Search Commission, there had
been just 36 convictions for the crime of
disappearance.
In 2022, the UN Committee on Enforced
Disappearances published a report in which
it highlighted the forensic crisis in the
country; the bodies of more than 52,000
people in the custody of the state authorities
had yet to be identified.
In August, the Mexican government
presented the report of the Commission on
Access to Truth and Justice (Covaj) on the
case of the 43 students from Ayotzinapa who
disappeared in 2014. Covaj recognized that
the disappearance of the students was a
state crime involving the criminal group
Guerreros Unidos and Mexican government
officials, including members of the armed
forces.
In September, Omar Gómez Trejo, the lead
prosecutor for the Attorney General’s Office’s
Special Unit for Investigation and Litigation
on the Ayotzinapa Case (UEILCA), resigned
citing undue interference by the FGR, which
withdrew 21 of the arrest warrants requested,
16 of which were against military personnel.
The Independent Group of Experts (GIEI) of
the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, which monitors progress in the
Ayotzinapa case, criticized this interference,
as well as the audit initiated by the FGR on 5
September regarding the work of the UEILCA.
Rosendo Gómez Piedra was appointed as the
new lead prosecutor for the UEILCA, despite
the lack of support for his appointment from
families of the victims and civil society
organizations.4
In August, the Under-Secretary for Human
Rights, Population and Migration announced
the creation of the National Centre for
Human Identification to support
investigations related to disappearances and
assist public prosecutors and attorneys.

252

In October, a federal judge resolved an
amparo petition filed by the human rights
organization Centro Prodh ordering the
creation of a national forensic database in 40
days, one of the measures pending since the
approval of the Federal Law on Enforced
Disappearance in 2017.
During the year, at least three mothers
searching for their disappeared children were
killed. In October, Rosario Lilián Rodríguez
Barraza and Blanca Esmeralda Gallardo were
killed in Sinaloa and Puebla States,
respectively, and in November, María del
Carmen Vázquez was killed in Guanajuato
State.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
In August, the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights held a public hearing
regarding the case of Daniel García
Rodríguez and Reyes Alpízar Ortiz, who had
been held in pretrial detention for more than
17 years. A ruling in the case was expected
in 2023.
In November, the Supreme Court struck
down automatic pretrial detention for the
crimes of tax fraud, smuggling and tax
evasion via fake invoices. Another case
relating to the constitutionality of
automatic pretrial detention was pending at
the end of the year.
In December, the Supreme Court ordered
the immediate release of Gonzalo García,
Juan Luis López and Héctor Muñoz after
seven and a half years of arbitrary detention
in Tabasco State. The Court considered that
their rights to presumption of innocence and
due process had been violated.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
According to the National Registry for the
Crime of Torture, there were 1,840 reports of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment by agents of the state
between January and September. This
brought the total number of reports since
2018 to 14,243. The states with the highest
numbers of reported cases were Mexico City,
Chihuahua and the State of Mexico. However,
the actual number of cases was believed to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

be much higher because over 93% of all
crimes in the country are not reported,
according to the National Survey on
Victimization and Perception of Public Safety
of the National Institute of Statistics and
Geography. One reason for this significant
under-reporting is that the majority of
reported crimes go unpunished.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights defenders continued to be
subjected to threats, stigmatization, unjust
imprisonment, torture and killings. Some of
the families of human rights defenders were
also threatened. Women human rights
defenders were additionally subjected to
sexual violence.
At least 10 human rights defenders were
killed during the year. A report published in
2022 by the NGO Global Witness stated that
54 defenders of the land and environmental
activists were killed in 2021, making Mexico
the deadliest country in the world for those
defending these rights.
In March, in a public statement, the
president referred to European
parliamentarians as “sheep” following a
statement by the European Parliament
highlighting attacks on and killings of human
rights defenders in Mexico.
In March, environmental rights defender
Trinidad Baldenegro was killed in the town of
Coloradas de la Virgen, Chihuahua State. He
was the latest member of the Rarámuri
Indigenous people to be killed for their
human rights work; previous victims included
Julián Carrillo, who was killed in 2018.
In June, three people were killed in a
church in the town of Cerocahui, Chihuahua
State, among them Javier Campos Morales
and Joaquín Mora, both priests and human
rights defenders who had worked to defend
the rights of Indigenous peoples in the Sierra
Tarahumara.
In October, new cases of the use of Pegasus
spyware came to light, this time against two
journalists, a human rights defender and an
opposition politician. These latest findings
indicated that there were contracts between
SEDENA and companies linked to previous

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

sales of Pegasus. In response to these
reports, the president claimed that the
government carried out intelligence work,
which was not spying. In the same month,
Guacamaya, a group of digital activists leaked
information from various servers belonging to
the armed forces revealing monitoring of the
activities of civil society and human rights
organizations, including Amnesty
International.5

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In October, same-sex marriage was legalized
in Tamaulipas State, making same-sex
marriage legal in all 32 states in Mexico.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Four more states decriminalized abortion
during the year, bringing to 11 the number of
states in which abortion is legal: Baja
California, Baja California Sur, Ciudad de
México, Coahuila, Colima, Guerrero, Hidalgo,
Oaxaca, Quintana Roo, Sinaloa and Veracruz.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In November, Mexico updated its NDCs
target of 22% to a 35% reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. During
COP27, Mexico announced new
commitments to address the climate crisis,
including doubling the production of clean
energy adding 105 gigawatts.
In May, a federal judge suspended the
construction of Section 5 of the Mayan Train,
stating that it endangered biodiversity and the
land rights of Indigenous peoples who
depend on the fragile ecosystems of the
Mayan jungle. Despite this, the president
categorized the project as one of national
security, enabling the construction to
continue.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The National Migration Institute received the
third highest number of complaints of human
rights violations (1,997 complaints) of any
state institution, while the Refugee
Commission ranked 10th (333 complaints).

253

Mexican authorities detained at least
281,149 people in overcrowded immigration
detention centres and deported at least
98,299 people, mostly from Central America,
including thousands of unaccompanied
children.
During the year, authorities detained several
refugees and migrants in airports around the
country and subjected them to inhuman and
degrading treatment.
The country’s refugee agency received
118,478 asylum applications. The largest
number of applications came from nationals
of Honduras, followed by Cuba, Haiti and
Venezuela.
Authorities continued to collaborate with the
USA in implementing US policies that
undermine the right to asylum and the
principle of non-refoulement. These included
summarily expelling people from Central
America and Venezuela under Title 42 of the
US Code, which drastically limits access to
asylum procedures at the US-Mexico border.
People expelled to Mexico from the USA were
subjected to multiple forms of violence,
including kidnappings, sexual violence and
robbery.
The Supreme Court issued two landmark
rulings for the protection of migrants. In May,
it declared that the immigration checkpoints
inside Mexico are unconstitutional on the
ground that they are discriminatory. In
October it recognized that the Executive
branch had failed to publish clear official
protocols for the protection of people
returned to Mexican territory under the US
“Remain in Mexico” protocol (also known as
the Migrant Protection Protocols, MPP).

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Congress again failed to pass a law to
regulate Indigenous peoples’ right to free,
prior and informed consent on projects
affecting them, guaranteed under ILO
Convention 169, despite a 2020 Supreme
Court ruling calling on it to do so.
1. “Mexico: Militarization of public security will lead to more human
rights violations and perpetuate impunity”, 9 September

254

2. “Americas: Attempts to militarize public security in the region are a
threat to human rights”, 29 November (Spanish only)
3. “Mexico: Rights of feminicide victims at risk”, 13 December
4. “Mexico: State must guarantee truth, justice, and remembrance for
families of Ayotzinapa students”, 28 September
5. “Americas: Military monitoring of civil society organizations shows
deteriorating respect for human rights”, 7 October

MOLDOVA
Republic of Moldova
Head of state: Maia Sandu
Head of government: Natalia Gavrilița
No visible progress was made in reducing
instances of torture and other ill-treatment
in detention. Impunity continued for past
human rights violations by law enforcement
agencies. New “temporary” restrictions on
public assemblies were introduced. The
rights of LGBTI people were not fully
realized, leading to cases of harassment,
discrimination and violence. Some refugee
reception centres turned away religious and
ethnic minority refugees. In the breakaway
Transdniestria region, prosecution and
imprisonment for peaceful dissent
continued.

BACKGROUND
Political tensions were heightened by
Russia’s aggression against neighbouring
Ukraine and the ongoing presence of
Russian troops in Moldova’s breakaway
Transdniestria region. Explosions were
reported in Transdniestria, briefly raising the
terror threat level.
Moldova remained one of the poorest
countries in Europe. Women, children, older
people, people with disabilities and those
living in rural areas were among the poorest
groups. The war in Ukraine exacerbated high
inflation and soaring energy prices, and in
November led to energy blackouts.
On 23 June, Moldova received EU
candidate status on condition of structural
reforms.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
No visible progress was made in addressing
institutional causes of torture and other illtreatment in detention. Overcrowding,
unsanitary and otherwise inadequate
detention conditions and poor health
provision remained common in adult, juvenile
and mixed penitentiary institutions.

IMPUNITY
Impunity remained endemic for past human
rights violations by members of law
enforcement agencies, including torture and
other ill-treatment of protesters in 2009.
No further progress was made in the case of
the abduction and forcible return to Türkiye
of seven Turkish teachers by Moldovan
security services in 2018. However, following
litigation by the wife of one of the teachers,
the Moldovan authorities were forced to
declassify details of criminal proceedings that
led to the conviction and fining of the former
director of the Security and Intelligence
Service (SIS), Vasilii Botnari, in 2020. He had
been convicted solely for an economic crime,
relating to the cost of the chartered flight on
which the teachers were transported. The
relevant court decision had been kept secret
until after the deadline for appeal by the
victims’ families. Nobody else appeared to
have been brought to justice in relation to the
abduction and illegal rendition of the seven
teachers, who were subsequently imprisoned
in Türkiye.
Despite this case and other abuses, the SIS
was not subject to reform. Instead, in
November, new draft legislation was tabled in
parliament to give the security services
additional surveillance and other powers.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
On 19 April, President Sandu signed into law
a prohibition on the use of symbols
associated with Russia’s military activities
abroad. These included the so-called ribbon
of St. George and the letters “Z” and “V”.
Their use was expected by pro-Russian
political groups at a traditional demonstration
held on 9 May to mark Victory Day in the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Second World War. While the event was
allowed to proceed uninterrupted, people
displaying the banned symbols either at the
event or on their cars were identified, and
later 196 fines were issued by police,
including to 16 parliamentarians from the
Bloc of Communists and Socialists.
On 13 October restrictions were imposed on
protests after President Sandu had asked the
government the day before to introduce
temporary legislative amendments to “allow
the police to ensure public order” during
protests by the opposition Shor party. The
Ombudsperson (Public Advocate) criticized
this decision. On 16 October police seized
tents from protesters in front of central
government buildings.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
During the UN Human Rights Council’s UPR
of Moldova in January, numerous states
called for strengthened protections for LGBTI
people. The Moldovan NGO GenderDoc-M
reported in early 2022 that anti-LGBTI views
remained common across Moldova and that
young LGBTI people continued to face
harassment and violence.
In February the Council for Preventing and
Eliminating Discrimination and Ensuring
Equality stated that Marin Pavlescu had been
subjected to harassment based on his sexual
orientation during his military service. In late
2021, the Ministry of Defence had threatened
to prosecute Marin Pavlescu for desertion
after he left the army following harassment
and humiliation, but in May 2022 the
prosecutor’s office declined to open a
criminal case against him. Marin Pavlescu
continued to face discrimination in finding
work due to being effectively outed as gay in
publicity surrounding his case.
In June, Moldova’s largest-ever Pride march
went ahead in the capital, Chișinău, despite
threats by the city’s mayor that he would ban
the event.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
More than 740,000 individuals crossed from
Ukraine into Moldova by December, putting
significant pressure on local services. Most

255

travelled further into Europe or returned to
Ukraine, leaving almost 90,000 refugees in
Moldova.
The Public Advocate noted that some
refugee reception centres had turned away
Roma and other religious or ethnic minority
refugees from Ukraine. Some centre
managers were allegedly contacted by local
police and warned that the centres should
not accept Roma people.

TRANSDNIESTRIA REGION
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
De facto authorities in Transdniestria
sentenced Viktor Pleshkanov to five days’
“administrative detention” for “petty
hooliganism” after he reportedly threatened
to hang the Ukrainian flag on his balcony as
an affront to the self-styled Ministry of State
Security. His lawyer reported that he was
then subsequently sentenced to 38 months’
imprisonment in a closed trial under
undisclosed extremism-related charges.

MONGOLIA
Mongolia
Head of state: Ukhnaa Khurelsukh
Head of government: Luvsannamsrai Oyun-Erdene
NGOs faced new restrictions on their
activities and those involved in protests
against mining and other development
projects faced imprisonment under
proposed legislation. Authorities failed to
protect herder communities from
environmental degradation caused by
mining operations. Human rights defenders
were subjected to intimidation and police
investigations. A national mechanism for
the prevention of torture was established
but torture and other ill-treatment of
detainees continued to be reported.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
A draft law that would restrict legitimate NGO
activities remained under discussion by
parliament. The bill, first tabled in 2021,

256

proposed the establishment of the Civil
Society Development Council to oversee
NGOs, but its broad mandate and vaguely
worded powers risked undue interference in
the internal affairs of NGOs and could place
burdensome administrative requirements
upon them. The bill also contained provisions
prohibiting legitimate activities and limiting
NGO funding.
In May, the government introduced a bill to
amend the Criminal Code providing for prison
sentences for obstructing mining and other
development projects. The bill followed
demonstrations in the capital, Ulaanbaatar,
by herders from across the Gobi region
protesting against mining operations and
calling for protection of their social and
economic rights.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION AND
ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Coal and other mining operations in the Gobi
region destroyed grasslands, contaminated
groundwater and depleted other water
sources. They also caused soil erosion, with
negative impacts on the health and
livelihoods of herder communities in the
region.
The government issued mining licences
without adequate consultation with affected
herder communities and failed to ensure that
those displaced or otherwise affected by
mining operations received adequate
compensation and accommodation and had
access to essential services and social
protection.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The government conducted smear
campaigns against human rights defenders,
including publicly labelling some as foreign
spies and criticizing others for obstructing
national development plans.
Authorities also used criminal investigations
to obstruct the work of human rights
defenders. In August, the General
Intelligence Agency launched an investigation
into Sukhgerel Dugersuren for “illegal
cooperation with a foreign intelligence agency

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

or agent” in relation to her work in exposing
human rights abuses and environmental
degradation resulting from development
projects.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Lack of adequate protections resulted in at
least 47 households in Ulaanbaatar being
made homeless by urban redevelopment
projects. Private developers confiscated land
for development without consent and failed to
provide adequate compensation to those
affected.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In July, the government established a
national mechanism for the prevention of
torture. The National Human Rights
Commission of Mongolia nevertheless
reported incidents of torture and other illtreatment of people in detention, including to
obtain “confessions”.

MONTENEGRO
Montenegro
Head of state: Milo Đukanović
Head of government: Dritan Abazović (caretaker since
August, replaced Zdravko Krivokapić in April)
Impunity persisted for crimes under
international law, torture and attacks on
journalists. Police failed to respond
adequately to domestic violence. Verbal
abuse and threats against discriminated
groups exacerbated ethnic divisions.

BACKGROUND
Two prime ministers were ousted by noconfidence votes triggering a political crisis.
Mass protests were held demanding early
parliamentary elections, a functioning
Constitutional Court and changes to a law
limiting presidential powers.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION

forcibly disappeared by Montenegrin police in
1992.
In August, the Special State Prosecutor
examined allegations that retired admiral
Dragan Samardžić participated in the
unlawful shelling of Split in Croatia in
November 1991.
Proceedings continued in December against
a former Bosnian Serb Army soldier,
Slobodan Peković, charged with raping a
protected witness and killing two other people
in Foča in 1992.
The former president of the Supreme Court
and president of the Commercial Court were
detained on suspicion of corruption in April
and May respectively; the Special State
Prosecutor was arrested for abuse of office in
December. In October, the European
Commission urged Montenegro to implement
legislation strengthening judicial
independence, integrity, accountability and
professionalism.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In May, the UN Committee against Torture
reiterated long-standing concerns about
conditions and rights of detainees in police
custody and prisons, and the lack of
independent investigations of ill-treatment.
In March, five police officers were charged
with torturing a witness, Marko Boljević in
2020, to extract a statement; a police
inspector was similarly charged in June with
respect to Marko Boljević and for torturing a
suspect, Benjamin Mugoša.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Twenty-five attacks on journalists were
reported. In September, the government
requested assistance from foreign experts in
re-investigating historic cases, including the
2004 murder of Duško Jovanović, editor of
Dan newspaper.
In June, the Supreme Court ordered
another retrial of investigative journalist Jovo
Martinović, after quashing his 2020
conviction for allegedly participating in drug
trafficking.

In May, the chief of police apologized to
grieving families of 66 Bosniak refugees

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

257

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Two women were killed by their partners or
former partners. One had previously been
hospitalized and reported her husband’s
violence to the police. In May, the UN
Committee Against Torture questioned the
low level of prosecutions and lenient
sentencing in domestic violence cases.
Women active in public life were subjected
to misogynistic abuse, including by officials.

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The government’s failure to harmonize
provisions of the 2020 Law on Life
Partnership prevented couples married
abroad from registering. Perpetrators were
charged with attacks on NGO Juventas’
premises. In July, the president of Queer
Montenegro received death threats on social
media. NGO Spektra drafted a gender
recognition law.
ROMA AND EGYPTIAN PEOPLE
According to UNHCR, the UN Refugee
Agency, in November, fewer than 500
individuals remained stateless, including
Roma and Egyptians displaced from Kosovo,
and 250 Roma children born in Montenegro
who lacked documentation required to
access essential social and economic rights.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN Refugee
Agency, 6,758 refugees and migrants had
entered Montenegro by October but only 2%
applied for asylum. The UN Committee
Against Torture judged that most were denied
access to an effective asylum process,
highlighting the lack of procedural
safeguards, including against refoulement.

MOROCCO/
WESTERN SAHARA
Kingdom of Morocco
Head of state: Mohamed VI
Head of government: Aziz Akhannouch

258

Authorities continued to crush dissent,
disperse peaceful protests and restrict the
activities of several organizations they
deemed oppositional. They tightened their
crackdown on Sahrawi activists.
Criminalization of abortion led to at least
one girl dying as a result of an unsafe
abortion following rape. Border guards used
excessive force against people attempting to
cross the border between Morocco and the
Spanish enclave of Melilla, causing at least
37 deaths. Domestic legislation remained
inadequate to protect and promote the right
to a clean and healthy environment.

BACKGROUND
In March, Spain’s prime minister declared his
support for the Moroccan government’s
autonomy plan over Western Sahara. In
response, Algeria announced it was
suspending a cooperation treaty with Spain.
Relations between Morocco and Algeria
remained strained, despite calls in July by
King Mohamed for restoration of diplomatic
ties between the two countries.
In October, the UN Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara was
renewed, but still lacked a human rights
mandate. Human rights organizations could
still not access Western Sahara.
During the year, 1,445 people died from
Covid-19. By the end of 2022, 66.8% of the
population had received at least one dose of
the Covid-19 vaccine.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to target critics and
activists in Morocco and Western Sahara.
They investigated, prosecuted and
imprisoned at least seven journalists and
activists for criticizing the government, as well
as people who spoke online about religion or
expressed solidarity with activists.
In March, police in Settat city summoned
and interrogated Brahim Nafai, a teacher and
member of youth organization Annahj
Addimocraty (Democratic Way) for sharing
posts on social media calling for a boycott of
fuel. He was not informed of any follow-up,
but the case remained open.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In April, a court in Casablanca city
sentenced human rights defender Saida
Alami to two years in prison for social media
posts denouncing repression of journalists
and activists. In September, the Casablanca
appeals court increased the sentence to
three years. She remained in prison.
In June, a court in Tangier city acquitted on
appeal Fatima Zahra Ould Belaid, an activist
and member of the Moroccan Association for
the Taxation of Transactions and for Citizen
Action (ATTAC Morocco) and the Committee
for the Abolition of Illegitimate Debt
(CADTM). Police had arrested her in
November 2021 accusing her of having
organized “illegal” protests at Tangier’s
university.
In August, the first instance court in Oued
Zem city sentenced blogger Fatima Karim to
two years in prison, under Article 267-5 of
the Penal Code, for “insulting” Islam in social
media posts.1
In November, a Casablanca court
sentenced human rights defender Rida
Benotmane to three years’ imprisonment for
“insulting a body regulated by law”, “insulting
public officials while carrying out their duties”
and “broadcasting false allegations” for
online posts in which he criticized the
authorities for ignoring demands for social
justice.2 He remained in prison.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
In March, analysis by Amnesty International’s
Security Lab found that two phones
belonging to Sahrawi human rights defender
Aminatou Haidar were targeted and infected
by NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware.3 Amnesty
International’s analysis showed that one of
her phones contained traces of Pegasus
targeting dating back to September 2018,
and the other had further traces of infection
in October and November 2021.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities used excessive force to disperse
peaceful protests on at least two occasions,
including protests demanding better working
conditions for teachers and protests for

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Sahrawi rights, and arrested some
participants.
In March, police forcibly dispersed protests
by teachers across Morocco. In Taounate
town, police beat one teacher so badly that
he needed hospital treatment. Police in the
capital, Rabat, arrested teacher Hajar
Belhouari for joining a peaceful protest.
Protests by Sahrawi activists in Western
Sahara were even more violently suppressed.
In April, police officers hit and kicked student
journalist Abdelmounaim Naceri until he lost
consciousness. He had been filming a sit-in
outside the prefecture of Smara, a city in
Western Sahara, organized by young
Sahrawis to protest against social conditions.
The same month, local authorities in
Laayoune city, also in Western Sahara,
refused to allow the newly elected executive
office of the Sahrawi Association of Victims of
Grave Violations of Human Rights Committed
by the Moroccan State (ASVDH) to register,
on the grounds that it hinders the work of
public administrations. On 2 July, police
surrounded ASVDH’s headquarters in
Laayoune and violently prevented members
from entering, injuring at least 10 people by
hitting them with their hands and kicking
them, and subjected them to racist insults.
Throughout the year, the authorities
arbitrarily restricted the licensing and
activities of at least seven organizations seen
as oppositional, and harassed members of
some associations. The authorities refused to
accept the application of the Amazigh
Network for Citizenship-Azetta Amazigh to
register as an official organization, claiming
that legal conditions had not been met.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Courts breached fair trial procedures,
including by using identical police records for
multiple defendants and limiting defendants’
access to lawyers. Courts failed to investigate
defendants’ complaints that “confessions”
had been extracted under torture.
On 3 March, the Appeals Court in
Casablanca upheld a six-year prison
sentence against Omar Radi on espionage
and rape charges. During his trials, he had

259

limited access to his lawyers, his defence
team were denied the right to cross-examine
prosecution witnesses, and several defence
witnesses were excluded.
On 21 July, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention concluded that the
authorities had violated journalist Suleiman
Raissouni’s right to a fair trial so gravely that
his detention was arbitrary.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In April, Morocco ratified the Optional
Protocol to CEDAW. However, domestic
legislation continued to entrench gender
inequality, including in relation to inheritance
and custody of children.
In June, the CEDAW Committee raised
concerns about high rates of maternal
mortality and female illiteracy in rural
Morocco.
Research in 2022 by the NGO Mobilising for
Rights Associates found that the legal
provisions criminalizing sexual relations
outside marriage and adultery under sections
490-493 of the Penal Code prevent women
survivors of violence from reporting it, thereby
depriving them of protection, prevention,
adequate remedy and reparation. They also
found that the provisions allow perpetrators to
commit violence against women with
impunity.
Abortion remained illegal unless deemed
necessary to protect a pregnant woman’s
health, and punishable by six months to five
years in prison for those who undergo or
carry out an illegal abortion. Bill 10-16, which
would decriminalize abortion in a limited
number of cases, remained stalled in
parliament since 2016. In September, a 14year-old girl from a village near Midelt, central
Morocco, died following to an unsafe abortion
performed after she was raped. Several
women’s rights organizations blamed the
strict abortion laws for her death.
In March and April, police and security
agents used physical, verbal and sexual
violence against 12 women Sahrawi activists
who were expressing solidarity with the
activist Sultana Khaya (see below). No
investigations were conducted into the

260

alleged assaults. In April, the UN Special
Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights
Defenders denounced Moroccan authorities
for using sexual violence to intimidate
Sahrawi women human rights defenders.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment continued with
impunity both inside and out of prisons,
particularly against Sahrawi activists.
Several times in March, prison guards beat
Sahrawi activist Mohamed Lamine Haddi, a
member of the Gdeim Izik protest camp in
Western Sahara, who had been held in
solitary confinement in Tiflet II prison in
north-west Morocco since 2017.
In May, prominent Sahrawi activist Sultana
Khaya escaped house arrest and travelled to
Spain to seek medical treatment for the
torture she endured during various police
assaults since her house arrest in 2020.4
There were no investigations into the rape
and other serious human rights violations
against her and her family.
In June, police arrested Labbas Sbai and
detained him in Zagora prison in southern
Morocco for denouncing corruption. Prison
guards repeatedly beat him, abuse that the
prison director defended. Labbas Sbai was
released in July.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, the LGBTQ+ Travel Safety Index by
Asher & Lyric ranked Morocco as the 30th
most unsafe country worldwide for LGBTI
travellers. It cited Article 489 of Morocco’s
Penal Code, which punishes same-sex sexual
conduct or “unnatural” acts with six months
to three years in prison plus fines.
In June, the Ministry of Culture refused to
include Fatima Zahra Amzkar’s book Lesbian
Diaries in the Rabat 2022 International Book
Fair, after a campaign was launched using
hashtags such as #NoToHomosexuality. The
culture minister said that the book had never
been authorized for the book fair.
The campaign #Fetrah (meaning primitive,
nature or instinct in Arabic), which promoted
the idea that there are only two genders and
went against LGBTI rights’ defenders, went

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

viral in Morocco. In July, Facebook closed its
page, but the Moroccan authorities did not
denounce the campaign.
In July, the CEDAW Committee called on
Morocco to repeal articles of the Penal Code
that criminalize LGBTI people.

MIGRANTS’ AND REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
In June, around 2,000 people, mostly from
Sudan, attempted to cross the border
between the city of Nador in northern
Morocco and the Spanish enclave of Melilla.
Security forces on both sides responded with
excessive force, leaving 37 sub-Saharan
African people killed and 77 others missing.
The National Human Rights Council of
Morocco reported that 217 people were
injured, including 140 members of the
Moroccan security forces. The security forces
pelted people with rocks, beat them and fired
tear gas in enclosed spaces. Migrants injured
by security forces were denied medical
assistance and many were forcibly
transferred on buses to various destinations
in Morocco.5 Local prosecutors announced
that they had opened an investigation, but
took no steps to interview witnesses,
including injured migrants. Instead, the
authorities prosecuted at least 79 migrants
for irregular entry.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Morocco had yet to update its 2030
emissions target to ensure it is fully aligned
with the 1.5°C imperative. Nor had it adopted
human rights-consistent adaptations or
disaster risk reduction measures to
adequately protect people from the
foreseeable and unavoidable impacts of the
climate crisis.
In February, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change said that the amount of land
suitable for growing argan trees in Morocco
was likely to shrink by up to 32% by 2070,
threatening livelihoods and Morocco’s
biodiversity.
1. “Morocco: Release blogger jailed for offending Islam: Fatima Karim”,
14 October

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

2. “Morocco: Human rights defender jailed for online posts: Rida
Benotmane”, 26 October
3. “Morocco/Western Sahara: Activist targeted with Pegasus spyware in
recent months – new evidence”, 9 March
4. “Morocco/Western Sahara: Further information: Activist successfully
leaves home after 18 months: Sultana Khaya”, 16 September
5. Morocco: “They Beat Him in the Head, To Check if He Was Dead”:
Evidence of Crimes Under International Law by Morocco and Spain at
the Melilla Border, 13 December

MOZAMBIQUE
Republic of Mozambique
Head of state and government: Filipe Jacinto Nyusi
Armed conflict-driven human rights
violations continued in northern
Mozambique, aggravating the humanitarian
crisis. Armed groups continued to burn
villages, behead people and abduct women
and girls. Meanwhile government security
forces operating in the area also committed
human rights violations against the
population, including enforced
disappearances, harassment and
intimidation of civilians, and extortion of
payments from traders. Internally displaced
people continued to live in deplorable
conditions with little access to food, water
and housing. The rights to peaceful
assembly and expression were repressed. A
new NGO law threatened to limit civic
space if implemented.

BACKGROUND
The trial of co-conspirators in the secret loans
scandal, in which the former and current
presidents were implicated, laid bare the
betrayal of public trust and abuse of state
institutions for personal financial gain.
Furthermore, the trial exposed the depth and
breadth of economic, social and political
vulnerabilities to which the country had been
exposed under successive Mozambique
Liberation Front governments.
Meanwhile, the armed conflict between
government forces and armed groups locally
known as “Al-Shabaab” (with no known
connection to Al-Shabaab in Somalia) in the
northern province of Cabo Delgado continued

261

unabated. The joint offensives against armed
groups by the Mozambican, Rwandan and
Southern African Development Community
Mission in Mozambique (SAMIM) forces
failed to end the insurgency. Armed groups
dispersed and launched new fronts of attack
in previously unaffected regions, moving west
and southwards into Niassa and Nampula
provinces. Simultaneously, the unbearable
cost of living, predominantly driven by
increasing fuel prices, heightened popular
unrest. All these factors eroded public
confidence in President Nyusi’s government.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Al-Shabaab armed groups committed war
crimes by beheading civilians, abducting
women and girls, and looting and burning
villages. On 21 May alone, they attacked
Chicomo, Nguida and Nova Zambezia
villages in Macomia district and burned
houses, ransacked crops, beheaded 10
people and abducted women and girls. In
June, Al-Shabaab insurgents attacked
Mitopue village in Memba district, Nampula
province, burning homes and looting
property. In the same district, on 6
September, they burned more homes and a
hospital, ransacked people’s property, and
killed six civilians including a Catholic nun.
On the night of 2 September, insurgents set
fire to houses, a health post and a school,
displacing 40,000 people from the Erati
district. By the end of the year, all the
northern provinces – Cabo Delgado,
Nampula and Niassa – had been attacked.
The Mozambican security forces in Cabo
Delgado province abducted and forcibly
disappeared traders for the purposes of
extortion. On 13 May, residents of Macomia
demanded the withdrawal of the police’s
Rapid Intervention Unit after officers illtreated civilians, including by extortion, the
abduction of traders for ransom, and by
subjecting them to threats. Soldiers stationed
at the navy base in Pemba city subjected
civilians passing through the area to physical
aggression, extortion and theft of their
property.

262

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
The expansion of the armed conflict
exacerbated the humanitarian situation. The
OCHA estimated that 1.5 million displaced
people in Cabo Delgado, Nampula and
Niassa provinces needed some form of
humanitarian assistance and protection due
to the conflict. Food and water insecurity,
malnutrition, precarious health and
inadequate housing marked the conditions in
which they lived. According to the OCHA, in
Cabo Delgado province the most affected
districts were Chiure, Macomia, Metuge,
Mocímboa da Praia, Montepuez, Mueda,
Nangade, Palma, Pemba and Quissanga. For
instance, Pemba city added 152,000
internally displaced people to its original
population of 224,000, while Metuge’s
population grew from 101,000 residents to
228,000. About 80% of displaced people
were hosted by friends and families, placing
a heavy burden on their limited resources.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
The rights to freedom of peaceful assembly
and association were repressed in tandem
with legal efforts to shrink civic space. On 5
February, heavily armed police with dogs
stopped a group of young people from
holding a peaceful protest against toll fees on
the ring road in Maputo, the capital. The
group’s leader, Clemente Carlos, was arrested
and detained at the 18th Police Station,
where he was physically and verbally abused.
He was released several hours later without
charge.
On 18 August, the police violently
suppressed a peaceful protest by traders in
Gondola district, Sofala province, who were
protesting against their eviction, without
consultation and adequate notice, by the
municipal authorities. The police used live
ammunition and shot and injured three
protesters.
Amid growing repression, in September the
Council of Ministers drafted a new Non-Profit
Organizations Law, giving the government
enormous discretionary powers to further

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

shrink civic space. It remained before
parliament pending public consultations on
the bill’s provisions to begin in February
2023.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalists and human rights defenders were
subjected to threats, intimidation and
arbitrary arrest for criticizing the government
and its officials. On 22 January, unidentified
individuals suspected of being state agents
broke into the office of the human rights
lawyer, João Nhampossa, and stole his
computer, flash drives, mobile phones and
various documents. He had been working on
sensitive cases including the infamous secret
loans scandal, and cases relating to toll gates
and the extractive industry. In the second
week of April, the governor of Tete province
and the mayor of Tete town ordered the
arrest, detention and interrogation of a man
known as Anastácio after he had accused
two government officials of a conflict of
interest in connection with their owning land
plots in Chingodzi, in an area reserved
exclusively for military personnel.
On 16 August, Adriano Nuvunga, the
executive director of the civic organization
Centre for Democracy and Development
received death threats. Two unused bullets
were found in his front yard wrapped in
paper with the message, “Beware,
Nuvunga”. On 19 September, two
unidentified men presented an unused bullet
to Armando Nenane, a journalist and director
of the magazine Crónica Jurídica e
Juduciária, in downtown Maputo. The men
claimed to be executing orders from their
superiors, after a court had cleared Armando
Nenane of document forgery and defamation
charges pressed by the former minister of
national defence. After being cleared,
Armando Nenane pressed charges of
“slanderous denunciation” and defamation
against the former minister and members of
intelligence and counter-intelligence.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

MYANMAR
Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Head of state: Win Myint (UN-listed); Myint Swe
(military-appointed)
Head of government: Disputed
The crackdown against opposition to
military rule intensified. Thousands of
people were arbitrarily detained and more
than 1,000 opposition politicians, political
activists, human rights defenders and
others were convicted in unfair trials.
Widespread torture of detainees continued.
Four men were executed following unfair
trials on politically motivated charges.
Indiscriminate military attacks on civilians
and civilian objects resulted in hundreds of
deaths and mass displacement. Foreign
companies were found to have supplied
aviation fuel to the Myanmar military that
was responsible for carrying out aerial
attacks killing hundreds of civilians. Tens of
thousands of ethnic Rohingya people
remained in squalid displacement camps
and their rights remained severely curtailed.
Military authorities continued to restrict the
delivery of humanitarian aid.

BACKGROUND
While Win Myint was still listed by the UN as
the president and head of state, military rule
continued under Myint Swe, appointed by the
military as acting president, and the State
Administration Council, led by Min Aung
Hlaing, an army general. Both non-violent
and armed resistance continued against this
military rule, which was imposed following
the February 2021 coup and the
imprisonment of civilian leaders. Fighting
intensified between military forces and ethnic
armed organizations, as well as the People’s
Defence Forces and other armed groups set
up to resist the coup, spreading to central
Myanmar and other areas previously
unaffected by armed conflict. The military
continued with its “Four Cuts” strategy to cut
off armed groups from funding, food,
intelligence and recruits with devastating

263

consequences for civilians. The National
Unity Government, formed in 2021 by
representatives of the deposed National
League for Democracy (NLD)-led
government, ethnic armed organizations and
civil society continued their opposition to
military rule. On 21 December, in its first
resolution on Myanmar in over 70 years, the
UN Security Council expressed deep concern
at the grave impact of the military coup and
called for an end to the violence, the release
of political prisoners, unimpeded
humanitarian access and respect for the
rights of women and children.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Mass arbitrary arrests and detentions of NLD
members and other supporters of the anticoup movement persisted. According to the
NGO Assistance Association for Political
Prisoners (Burma) (AAPP), military
authorities arrested at least 5,415 people
during the year.
In November, 402 political activists were
among more than 5,000 prisoners released
to mark National Day. At least 13,272 people
arrested since the coup for political reasons
were still detained at year’s end.
The military authorities often denied
detentions and the whereabouts of many
detainees remained unknown for extended
periods, amounting to enforced
disappearance. The right to petition to
challenge unlawful detention remained
suspended. Children and others were
arbitrarily detained as proxies for their
parents or relatives. At year’s end, military
authorities were reportedly holding at least
277 people, including 38 children, because
of their relationship with a wanted person.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
Authorities intensified both on- and offline
surveillance, further diminishing the space
for freedom of expression and severely
restricting other rights including to privacy,
information, association and movement.
People were stopped and searched at
random at numerous checkpoints in towns

264

and cities throughout the country and plainclothes informants were employed in every
ward.1 There were reports of CCTV cameras
with facial recognition capabilities being used
in major cities. Authorities continued to
impose periodic internet and
telecommunications shutdowns, particularly
in regions affected by armed conflict.
In October, the State Administration Council
adopted a revised Organization
Registration Law that imposed tighter
restrictions on NGOs. Under the law,
humanitarian and other NGOs carrying out
“social tasks” are required to register with
boards made up of government
representatives and to comply with broad and
vaguely worded provisions, including
prohibitions on “mentioning false data” and
“interference in the internal affairs of the
state or politics”. Non-compliance was
punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment.
Military authorities attempted to starve the
resistance of funds by seizing the property
and other assets of individuals accused of
being members of or providing financial or
other support to the National Unity
Government or armed resistance groups.
Others were arrested for donating money for
internally displaced people after authorities
traced donations from mobile banking
records.
JOURNALISTS
Two journalists were killed during the year
including Aye Kyaw, a freelance
photojournalist who had documented anticoup protests in the Sagaing region. He was
arrested by military authorities on 30 July and
died in custody the same day. At least 74
media workers were among those detained at
year’s end. Independent media outlets
remained banned and the military authorities
subjected those continuing to publish to
harassment and threats of arrest and
prosecution.

UNFAIR TRIALS
Grossly unfair trials of people arrested since
the coup took place behind closed doors in
makeshift courts inside prisons. In areas
under martial law, trials took place in military

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

courts where defendants were denied legal
representation and the right to appeal. Prodemocracy activists, opposition politicians,
human rights defenders and journalists were
among more than 1,000 people convicted
during the year and sentenced, including to
death and long prison sentences with hard
labour. Lawyers defending political detainees
faced arrest, threats and harassment.
Former State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi
was sentenced to 31 years’ imprisonment in
a series of trials for corruption and other
bogus charges, in addition to the two years
she was already serving.
In October, Magway District Court
sentenced ex-NLD parliamentarian Win Myint
Hlaing to 148 years in prison on terror-related
charges. Around the same time, Aung Khant,
Kyaw Thet and Hnin Maung were also found
guilty of involvement in the armed resistance
movement and sentenced to prison terms of
between 95 and 225 years under the
Counter-Terrorism Law.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment of detainees
remained widespread, routinely occurring
after arrest and in military and police
interrogation centres and in prisons. Some
detainees, including men, women and people
of diverse gender identity or sexual
orientation, were subjected to sexual
violence, harassment and humiliation,
including invasive body searches, as a
method of torture during interrogation and
detention.2 At least 356 people were known
to have died in custody in connection with
torture during the year.

DEATH PENALTY
The first executions since the 1980s took
place in July. Phyo Zeya Thaw, a
parliamentarian and NLD member,
prominent democracy activist Kyaw Min Yu
(also known as Ko Jimmy), Hla Myo Aung
and Aung Thura Zaw were executed following
secretive trials in military tribunals.3 Dozens
of people were sentenced to death during the
year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Hundreds of people were reportedly killed in
military ground and air attacks, which were
indiscriminate or directly targeted at civilians
or civilian objects, as well as through
extrajudicial executions by the military of
individuals suspected of supporting
resistance to the coup or on the basis of their
ethnicity. Systematic looting and burning of
villages also continued, further contributing to
mass displacement and a deepening
humanitarian crisis.
Military operations in Kayin and Kayah
states against ethnic armed organizations
and other armed groups in early 2022 took
the form of collective punishment against
Karen and Karenni civilians resulting in
hundreds of deaths and the displacement of
more than 150,000 people by March.
Between December 2021 and March 2022,
Amnesty International documented 24
artillery or mortar attacks in eastern Myanmar
killing at least 20 civilians and seriously
injuring 38 others, as well as causing
widespread damage to homes and other
buildings.4 The military also conducted air
strikes using fighter jets and helicopters in
both indiscriminate and direct attacks on
civilians and civilian objects there, as well as
in Chin and Kachin states and the regions of
Sagaing and Magway.
On 17 January, military fighter jets dropped
two bombs on an internally displaced
people's camp in Hpruso township in Kayah
State, killing one man and two young girls
and destroying the camp’s kitchen. On 23
October, an air strike on a concert near A
Nan Pa village in Kachin State killed and
injured dozens of people. Musicians, children
and other civilians present at the event were
among the casualties.5 According to media
reports, state security forces blocked medical
care for the injured.
Air strikes on schools, hospitals and
religious buildings also resulted in deaths and
damage and destruction of protected civilian
objects. At least 13 people died, including
children and volunteer teachers in an attack
by helicopter gunships and troops on a
temple school in Tabayin township, Sagaing

265

region, on 16 September. On 9 August, a
military fighter jet fired at a health centre in
Daw Par Pa village, Kayah State, killing the
elderly father of one of the patients and
causing damage to the clinic consistent with
a rocket attack.
The use of cluster munitions in aerial
attacks was documented in Chin, Kayah and
Kayin states, indicating that Myanmar had
developed and was deploying a new weapon
system that is banned under international
law.6 The military also increased its use of
internationally banned anti-personnel
landmines, laying them in or around homes,
toilets, churches and on paths to rice fields
and other locations frequented by civilians.7
According to UNICEF, at least 86 people
including 27 children were killed by
landmines or explosive remnants of war in
the first 10 months of 2022 and 247 people
were injured.
Security forces deliberately killed civilians.
In January, soldiers shot and killed at least six
civilians as they tried to escape to Thailand
across the Moei river. On 3 March, soldiers
shot and killed a 13-year-old boy who was
collecting fruit on a riverbank in Kayin State.
The bodies of three farmers from San Pya 6
Mile village in Kayah State were found with
their throats slit after they left a displacement
site to collect vegetables from their village.
Security forces shot at relatives as they tried
to retrieve the men’s bodies.
Military-backed militias were also
responsible for grave human rights violations.
According to media reports, members of
the Pyu Saw Htee militia and soldiers set fire
to houses in Ngatayaw village in Magway
region in August, forcing more than 4,000
residents to flee. Other militias believed to be
backed by the military were reported to be
responsible for targeted killings of NLD and
pro-democracy activists.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
As of 26 December, an estimated 1,505,700
people were displaced within Myanmar, most
since the coup. There were also more than

266

one million refugees and asylum seekers
from Myanmar in neighbouring countries.
Internally displaced people lived in
deplorable conditions in makeshift camps
and shelters without adequate access to food
and water, healthcare and other basic
services. The military continued to obstruct
access to crucial humanitarian assistance for
internally displaced people and other
marginalized groups, including via the
imposition of onerous restrictions on NGO
registration, banking, visas and travel. There
were ongoing reports by aid organizations of
deliveries being blocked or explicitly denied
by the Myanmar military. On 15 September,
following renewed fighting between the
military and Arakan Army, the military issued
a directive banning all international
organizations from six of the most conflictstricken townships in north and central
Rakhine State.
An estimated 130,000 Rohingya and other
Muslims remained in squalid camps in
Rakhine State where they have been since
2012. Rohingya continued to be denied basic
rights including access to adequate food,
healthcare and education. Their freedom of
movement was highly restricted and those
travelling outside their designated townships
faced arrest and imprisonment for “illegal
movement”.
In July, the International Court of Justice
affirmed its jurisdiction in a case brought by
Gambia of alleged violations against the
ethnic Rohingya population in Rakhine State
during military operations in 2016 and 2017.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
Some armed groups failed to take feasible
precautions to protect civilians from the
effects of military attacks, in some cases colocating near or visiting villages or
displacement settlements. Some groups used
internationally banned antipersonnel
landmines or improvised explosive devices,
placing civilian lives in danger. Opposition
armed resistance groups reportedly
assassinated civilian administrators working
for the military authorities.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
Puma Energy, the main foreign company
involved in the handling and distribution of
aviation fuel in Myanmar, announced in
October that it was leaving the country and
selling its business in Myanmar.8 Aviation fuel
imported and distributed by foreign and
domestic companies was essential to the
Myanmar military in carrying out air strikes.
At least three other foreign companies
announced that they were ending or
suspending their involvement in the provision
of aviation fuel to Myanmar during 2022.
Meta’s (formerly Facebook) algorithms and
business practices were found to have
substantially contributed to grave human
rights violations suffered by the Rohingya
during 2017 by amplifying anti-Rohingya
content and enabling and encouraging
Myanmar military action against them.9
1. “Myanmar: International community must do more to protect brave
protesters”, 22 April
2. “Myanmar: 15 days felt like 15 years: Torture in detention since the
Myanmar coup”, 2 August
3. “Myanmar: First execution in decades mark atrocious escalation in
state repression,” 25 July
4. Myanmar: “Bullets rained from the sky”: War crimes and
displacement in eastern Myanmar, 31 May
5. “Myanmar: Deadly air strikes in Kachin State appear to fit pattern of
unlawful attacks”, 24 October
6. Myanmar: Deadly Cargo: Exposing the supply chain that fuels war
crimes in Myanmar, 3 November
7. “Myanmar: Military’s use of banned landmines in Kayah State
amounts to war crimes”, 20 July
8. “Myanmar: Puma Energy to leave amid scrutiny of aviation fuel
supplies”, 5 October
9. Myanmar: The social atrocity: Meta and the right to remedy for the
Rohingya, 29 September

NAMIBIA
Republic of Namibia
Head of state and government: Hage Geingob

privacy. Early marriage persisted. Survey
results showed that most Nambians believe
gender-based violence is common in their
communities. Parliament held public
consultations on petitions to decriminalize
abortion. LGBTI people’s rights were
curtailed. Mining companies’ activities
threatened to damage the environment and
undermine the rights of Indigenous peoples.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 13 May, Namibian Police Force officers
used excessive force against peaceful
protesters in the capital, Windhoek. Local
traders were protesting after the authorities
destroyed counterfeit goods confiscated from
the traders. Police fired tear gas and rubber
bullets at the crowd, injuring protesters. A
Namibian Broadcasting Corporation journalist
was injured in the leg by a rubber bullet.
CYBERCRIME LEGISLATION
In February, the Institute for Public Policy
Research raised concerns about the
Electronic Transactions and Cybercrime Bill,
which was tabled before parliament in the
same month. If enacted, it could curtail the
rights to freedom of expression, association,
assembly and privacy. In particular, concerns
were raised over provisions which would
allow for arbitrary secret search warrants and
grant excessive powers to the minister of
information and communication technology.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In March, UNICEF reported that 64,200 girls
and women in Namibia were married when
they were below the age of 18, and 15,500 of
them were below the age of 15. According to
UNICEF, 38% of women and girls in early
marriages, surveyed in Namibia, reported
having experienced gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, within the
marriage.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Police continued to use excessive force
against protesters. A cybercrime bill
threatened to curtail the rights to freedom
of expression, association, assembly and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In March, research network Afrobarometer
released survey findings showing that 57% of
Namibians believe that gender-based
violence is common in their communities. In

267

one case reported in December, a 32-yearold woman was killed by her intimate partner
with an axe.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, the CEDAW Committee
recommended that the government amend
the pre-independence era Abortion and
Sterilisation Act (No. 2 of 1975) to
decriminalize abortion in all cases,
“recognizing” that such criminalization “is a
form of gender-based violence against
women”. In October, following petitions from
women’s rights organizations to decriminalize
or legalize abortion, the parliamentary
Standing Committee on Gender Equality,
Social Development and Family Affairs held
public consultations with a view to amending
the law.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, the High Court of Namibia
dismissed applications by spouses of
Namibian citizens who were seeking to
regularize their immigration status on the
basis of same-sex marriages concluded
outside the country. The court ruled that their
marriage status was not recognized under
Namibian law. While it expressed sympathy
for the couples’ situations, the court said it
was bound by a previous Supreme Court
judgment.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In July, the High Court dismissed an urgent
application made by several organizations, in
which they asked the court to stop a
Canadian mining company, Reconnaissance
Energy Namibia, from continuing its
exploration activities in the Kavango regions.
Conservation activists and organizations had
been challenging the company’s drilling for
oil since 2020. Indigenous peoples and local
communities continued to express concerns
about the potential decline in the water table
and loss of valuable wildlife and wild plant
products as a result of the operations.

268

NEPAL
Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal
Head of state: Bidya Devi Bhandari
Head of government: Pushpa Kamal Dahal (replaced
Sher Bahadur Deuba in December)
The authorities carried out arbitrary arrests
to limit freedom of expression and security
forces continued to use unnecessary and
excessive force to disperse protests. At least
one protester was shot dead. Efforts toward
securing truth, justice and reparation for
crimes under international law and other
human rights violations committed during
the 1996-2006 conflict remained grossly
inadequate. The authorities failed to carry
out credible and independent investigations
into deaths in custody.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to intimidate, arrest
and prosecute individuals exercising their
rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly.
In August, police in the capital, Kathmandu,
arrested comedian Apoorwa Kshitiz Singh
after complaints were filed against a video he
posted online. He was indicted under the
Penal Code on four different charges,
potentially leading to a prison sentence of up
to five years. In October, the Kathmandu
District Court released him on bail.
In October, the Election Commission
threatened to seek prosecution of the
operators of a social media group “No Not
Again”, demanding that they shut down the
group and delete posts criticizing politicians.
In November, the Supreme Court ordered the
Commission to refrain from taking any action
against the campaigners and respect their
right to freedom of expression. Also in
November, the Commission demanded that
an online portal – Setopati.com – remove a
news story about an electoral candidate. The
Commission later retracted the demand after
widespread criticism.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The authorities clamped down on victims of
loan sharks, mostly farmers from low
economic backgrounds who gathered and
protested in Kathmandu, and called for
justice for financial crimes suffered. In
September, the police baton-charged
peaceful protesters, injuring at least five, and
detained more than 20.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The government failed to make any progress
towards delivering truth, justice and
reparation to the tens of thousands of victims
of grave human rights violations committed
by the state security forces and Maoist rebels
during the 1996-2006 internal armed
conflict. The Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Commission of
Investigation on Enforced Disappeared
Persons, which had respectively collected
more than 60,000 and 3,000 complaints
from victims, failed to resolve a single case.
Despite both Commissions’ mandates being
extended by the government in October,
neither body had commissioners in office
after the previous commissioners’ terms
expired in July.
In July, the government proposed a bill to
amend the Investigation of the Enforced
Disappeared Persons, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission Act of 2014. The
amendment bill marked some progress on
reparations for conflict victims but failed to
address other shortcomings as ordered by a
Supreme Court ruling in 2015 to bring it in
line with domestic and international human
rights standards. The bill did not progress as
it was not endorsed before the parliament’s
term ended in September.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
There were frequent reports of torture and
other ill-treatment being used in pretrial
detention to intimidate detainees and obtain
“confessions” or other evidence. Although
the 2017 Criminal Code criminalized torture
and other ill-treatment, no one had been
convicted under the law by the end of the
year. No credible investigations were

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

conducted into deaths in custody suspected
to have resulted from torture.
In May, a Dalit man, Sundar Harijan, was
found hanging in a toilet of Rolpa district
prison. The police claimed that he had
committed suicide. His family rejected the
claims but the authorities failed to order an
independent investigation into his death. In
June, an investigation committee of the
Ministry of Home Affairs concluded that the
prison administration officials had illegally
switched Sundar Harijan’s identity to release
another prisoner, making Sundar Harijan
serve another man’s jail term. The authorities
did not publish their report by the end of the
year.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
The government failed to reform the National
Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1973,
which did not meet international standards.
Indigenous people, evicted from their
ancestral lands during the establishment of
national parks and conservation areas,
remained landless and continued to live in
informal settlements facing risks of further
forced evictions.
In June, while firing live ammunition at
protesters in Bardiya district, police shot
dead an Indigenous woman, Nabina Tharu,
and injured a man. The protesters were
demanding protection from wild animals for
people living near the national park, after a
woman was attacked by a tiger.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Gender-based discrimination continued. The
government failed to reform constitutional
provisions which denied women equal
citizenship rights.
The restrictive statute of limitations for rape
and sexual violence in the Penal Code
prevented survivors from registering
complaints and accessing justice. Following
protests in May and widespread calls from
civil society, in July the parliament adopted a
law to extend the one-year statute of
limitations for filing complaints to two years,
or up to three years in some cases.

269

RIGHT TO FOOD AND HOUSING

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

The authorities did not amend the 2018
Right to Housing law, which failed to
adequately guarantee the right to housing.
The law did not guarantee protection from
forced eviction for those living in informal
settlements and did not define key terms
such as homelessness and security of tenure.
Hundreds of families living in informal
settlements across the country remained at
risk of forced evictions as authorities
threatened evictions.
In November, the High Powered Committee
for Integrated Development of the Bagmati
Civilization under the Ministry of Urban
Development published a 10-day eviction
notice for people living in informal
settlements along the bank of the Bagmati
river. The Committee threatened demolition
of the settlements without due process and
alternative arrangements, saying they
hindered “beautification” work.
The government also failed to take steps to
amend the 2018 Right to Food and Food
Sovereignty Act, which did not meet
international human rights standards.
The lack of a necessary policy framework
and regulation hindered the implementation
of provisions within existing laws to ensure
access to food and housing.

State authorities housed thousands of asylum
seekers, including children, for months in
emergency reception centres only
appropriate for very short-term stays, such as
sports halls. The centres were unsanitary and
failed to provide adequate food, healthcare,
privacy or proper protection from the
weather. In August hundreds of asylum
seekers were forced to sleep outside the only
registration centre in Ter Apel, Groningen
province, as the government failed to ensure
sufficient accommodation. In October, in
Groningen province, the local government
issued an emergency regulation imposing a
maximum penalty of three months’
imprisonment or a EUR 4,500 fine for anyone
providing tents to homeless asylum seekers.
In October, to alleviate the overcrowding in
asylum reception centres, the government
introduced a measure delaying the family
reunification process, placing it in breach of
its obligations under the EU Family
Reunification Directive and the right to family
life.
In contrast, the government invoked state
emergency law to allow municipalities across
the country to take urgent measures to
welcome more than 60,000 refugees
fleeing the Russian invasion of Ukraine,
ensuring they had accommodation, were
allowed to work and did not need to apply for
asylum.
In January the government of the
Netherlands suspended its aid for
immigration detention in Curaçao, one of the
constituent countries of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, after concerns were raised,
including about inhumane conditions. In July,
a Curaçaoan judge ruled that the immigration
detention of four Venezuelan women and six
Venezuelan men in a prison was unlawful
and ordered their immediate release.

NETHERLANDS
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Head of state: Willem-Alexander
Head of government: Mark Rutte
Thousands of asylum seekers were
temporarily housed in unsanitary and
inadequate reception centres. A bill
ensuring sex without consent is punishable
as rape came before parliament. The Senate
voted to abolish the mandatory waiting
period of five days for abortion. The
authorities continued to use discriminatory
algorithmic systems to combat fraud.

270

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In October, the Minister of Justice and
Security sent a bill to the House of
Representatives to bring rape legislation into
line with human rights and change the
definition of rape to one that is consent-

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

based. The bill also makes the use of
coercion, violence or threats aggravating
circumstances rather than a condition for
criminal liability. Civil society urged the
authorities to ensure prompt discussion of
the bill in parliament and its subsequent swift
implementation.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, the Senate voted in favour of
abolishing the previously mandatory waiting
period of five days for abortion, which created
an unnecessary access barrier. This positive
reform will enter into force on 1 January
2023.

DISCRIMINATION
During the year the government made a
number of commitments to safeguard
people’s rights when using algorithms in the
public sector. This followed Amnesty
International’s 2021 exposure of how the tax
authorities had utilized a discriminatory
algorithmic system, disproportionately
affecting those from a migrant background
and from low-income households, to detect
potential benefit fraud. By the end of the
year, however, no action had been taken to
introduce human rights compliant regulation
of algorithms to combat crime or to prohibit
the use of nationality and race as “risk
factors”.

NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand
Head of state: Charles III (replaced Elizabeth II in
September), represented by Cynthia Kiro
Head of government: Jacinda Ardern
An independent inquiry called for an end to
the detention in correctional facilities of
people seeking asylum. Reports highlighted
ongoing concerns about the prison system.
Civil society strongly criticized a new
oversight system for Oranga Tamariki/the
Ministry for Children.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
Two new authorities were launched in July. Te
Aka Whai Ora - Māori Health Authority has
the stated aim of bringing transformational
change to the way health services
understand and respond to the health and
well-being needs of whānau Māori (the Māori
community). Whaikaha - the Ministry of
Disabled People was launched “to lead
transformation of the disability support
system in partnership with the community.”

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In May, the government released an
independent review into the practice of
detaining people seeking asylum in criminal
detention facilities. The review found the
immigration detention framework was “a
recipe for arbitrary detention”, and
recommended revisions to the Immigration
Act and an end to holding asylum seekers in
correctional facilities. The government
accepted the report’s recommendations.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Reports highlighting concerns across the
prison system persisted.
In April, the Office of the Inspectorate
released its report of an unannounced
inspection of Invercargill Prison, raising
serious concerns including about poor
conditions leading to ill health in the Remand
Unit. In August, the Office of the
Ombudsman reported on its unannounced
inspection of Otago Corrections Facility and
stated that they believed the experiences of
several people held in the Management Unit
constituted prolonged solitary confinement.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The government passed legislation reforming
the oversight system of Oranga Tamariki/the
Ministry for Children. However, civil society
groups raised multiple concerns about both
the development and content of the new
system. These included concerns about
breaches of Te Tiriti o Waitangi (a treaty
signed between the British Crown and over
500 Māori chiefs in 1840) as well as the new
system not being adequately independent.

271

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government released its first Emissions
Reduction Plan in May, covering the period
2022 to 2025, setting out strategies and
actions needed to meet long-term emissions
reduction targets.
Climate Action Tracker, a consortium
providing global scientific analysis, continued
to rate New Zealand’s NDC as “highly
insufficient”. The rating was given as the
policies and action proposed were not at all
consistent with limiting warming to 1.5°C.

NICARAGUA
Republic of Nicaragua
Head of state and government: Daniel Ortega Saavedra
The human rights crisis persisted. Human
rights defenders, journalists and other
activists continued to be harassed and
criminalized. Those detained in the context
of the crisis faced harsh conditions of
detention and were not guaranteed fair
trials. Indigenous peoples’ rights remained
at risk.

BACKGROUND
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
established an independent accountability
mechanism for human rights violations and
crimes against humanity perpetrated since
2018 in Nicaragua.1 The Council expressed
its concern at Nicaragua’s disengagement
with international human rights mechanisms.
During the year, the government reduced its
diplomatic relations with other international
actors. In March, it expelled the Apostolic
Nuncio. During April and May, the
government withdrew its diplomats from the
OAS, demanded that the organization’s staff
leave the country and seized its offices in the
capital, Managua. In September, the
government expelled the EU Ambassador.
The government barred most political
parties from participating in the November
municipal elections by removing their legal
status. Following the November elections,
police repressed demonstrations by

272

supporters of the Indigenous political party
YATAMA in the North Caribbean Coast region;
at least 19 people were arbitrarily detained.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The government continued to tighten
unlawful restrictions on the rights to freedom
of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, hindering social and political
movements.
Political activists and those perceived as
opponents of government policies faced
various forms of harassment. In August,
police prevented the Bishop of Matagalpa,
who had spoken out against the
government’s repressive policies, from going
to the cathedral to celebrate mass. In August,
the government launched a criminal
investigation against the bishop; he was held
under house arrest at the end of the year.
Journalists and media outlets continued to
face obstacles to their work, while attacks
and harassment against them remained
unpunished. At least two journalists were
sentenced to prison terms in unfair trials. At
least 15 radio and television stations were
shut down during the year. In August, police
raided a Catholic chapel in Sébaco in an
operation to seize the equipment of a radio
station it had closed down.
The government refused to allow perceived
critics, including some with Nicaraguan
citizenship, to enter the country. Those
affected included artists, human rights
defenders, scholars and priests.
In October, UN and Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights (IACHR)
experts urged the government to refrain from
using the law arbitrarily and applying abusive
practices to restrict citizens’ participation and
freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly
and association.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities revoked the legal status of
more than 1,000 organizations during the
year, continuing the trend of closing down
civic spaces that began in 2018, continued
with the 2020 Law on Foreign Agents and
intensified in 2022 with the General Law on

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Regulation and Control of Non-Profit
Organizations.
Human rights defenders and NGOs
continued to be harassed and intimidated.
Organizations whose legal status had been
revoked since 2018 continued to be unable
to work without fear of reprisal and their
assets were not returned to them.
Human rights defenders in exile in Costa
Rica and other countries in the region could
not return to Nicaragua under safe conditions
and continued to carry out their work from
abroad.
At least 12 universities had been closed by
the government by the end of the year; the
closures appeared to be in retaliation for the
political stances of some of their members of
staff and students.

others who were, or had been, detained in
the Evaristo Vásquez police compound in
Managua city.

UNFAIR TRIALS

Impunity persisted for past crimes under
international law and for human rights
violations, including arbitrary detention,
enforced disappearance and torture and
other ill-treatment.

Fair trial guarantees were constantly infringed
by investigating and prosecutorial authorities.
In February, the Attorney General's Office
announced the start of the trials of detained
dissidents and government critics. The
authorities failed to guarantee the rights of
the accused to meet their lawyers with
enough time and privacy to prepare their
defence. Lawyers were not able to review
court files in advance of hearings.
At least 50 people detained in the context of
the political unrest that started in 2018 were
tried during the year. Many were convicted
and sentenced to up to 13 years’
imprisonment for political and corruptionrelated offences. Some cases were tried at a
penitentiary instead of a normal court.
Observers continued to be barred from
proceedings, which were held behind closed
doors.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

By the end of the year, 225 people (26
women and 199 men) remained detained in
connection with the human rights crisis that
began in 2018.
Detainees were held in conditions in breach
of international human rights law and
standards. NGOs and relatives of detainees
raised concerns about prolonged
incommunicado detention, denial of
healthcare, prohibition of family visits and
other violations of the rights of people
deprived of their liberty. Women faced
gender-specific violations, including sexual
insults, prolonged solitary confinement and
additional restrictions on visits with their
young children. Some detainees were held at
police facilities instead of in formal detention
centres.
In February, Hugo Torres Jiménez, a
prominent opposition politician detained in
2021, died in state custody. The UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed
her concern over this case and the health of

Indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants
continued to face discrimination and
obstacles to exercising their rights.
In February, the IACHR granted an
extension of precautionary measures to
safeguard the life and integrity of members of
the Musawas, Wilú and Suniwas
communities of the Mayangna Indigenous
people. They were at risk due to ongoing
difficulties in the process of regularizing
ownership of their territories.
In April, at least 25 Miskito families were
forcibly displaced from their settlements in
the hamlet of Sang Sang in the Caribbean
Coast region because of threats from armed
individuals, in the context of land
dispossession.
In August, the CERD Committee expressed
concern over violence against Indigenous
peoples and Afro-descendant communities
and called on the authorities to protect their
rights.

IMPUNITY

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

273

1. “Nicaragua: UN accountability mechanism is a crucial step towards
justice”, 31 March

for defamation and insults by way of
electronic communications and replacing
them with fines.

NIGER

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY

Republic of Niger
Head of state: Mohamed Bazoum
Head of government: Ouhoumoudou Mahamadou
The cybercrime law was revised to improve
protection of freedom of expression.
Freedom of association was threatened by
new legislation. Military forces and armed
groups committed human rights violations
and abuses. Women and girls continued to
suffer discrimination. The rights of migrants
and detainees were violated. The armed
conflict fuelled food insecurity for people
living in affected areas.

BACKGROUND
Niger faced ongoing armed conflicts in its
western and south-eastern regions with the
presence of armed groups including Islamic
State in the Sahel (ISS), Group of Support for
Islam and Muslims, and Boko Haram. The
redeployment of the French military in Niger,
after its withdrawal from Mali, was approved
by a parliamentary vote in April, leading to
protests in Niamey. The humanitarian
situation remained critical, with around
200,000 internally displaced people due to
the conflicts.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 3 January, Niamey High Court sentenced
journalists Samira Sabou and Moussa Aksar
under the 2019 cybercrime law, to onemonth and two-month suspended prison
sentences respectively, for relaying the
conclusions of a May 2021 report by the
Global Initiative against Transnational
Organized Crime.1 According to the report, a
huge quantity of drugs seized by the
authorities was subsequently bought back by
the traffickers.
Niger revised its 2019 cybercrime law in
June to conform with international human
rights standards, by removing jail sentences

274

In February, the authorities promulgated a
new decree (number 2022-182 of 24
February 2022) governing the work of NGOs,
severely limiting the autonomy of NGOs
working in Niger. Article 41 warranted all
programmes and projects initiated by NGOs
to be approved by the government; other
articles imposed administrative hurdles and
required NGOs’ objectives to conform with
the government’s national priorities for them
to continue their activities in Niger.
In August, a planned demonstration against
the presence of foreign military forces in the
country, organized by a coalition of several
civil society groups called M62, was banned
by the authorities.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In May, the authorities closed the
investigation into the deaths of three
individuals in November 2021 during the
blockade of a French military convoy in Téra
by violent protesters. The investigation
concluded that it could not determine who
was responsible for the deaths of the three
protesters and the wounding of 18 others,
but recommended the payment of financial
compensation to the victims and their
families by the French and Niger authorities.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Women continued to be discriminated
against by law and cultural practices: 76% of
girls were married before their 18th birthday,
according to the Ministry for the Promotion of
Women and Child Protection. Niger
maintained reservations about certain
provisions of the CEDAW, and national
legislation still discriminated in the areas of
marriage, divorce, inheritance and land
ownership.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
Detainees’ rights were violated, especially at
the maximum-security Koutoukalè detention
centre. The right to health was denied to
many detainees, including access to a doctor,
and the right to receive visitors was restricted.
Families were prevented from delivering food,
medicines and drinking water to detainees.
On 7 March, Colonel Hamadou Djibo, who
was arrested following the coup attempt of
March 2021, wrote a public letter
denouncing his ill-treatment in detention and
the slowness of the judicial procedure.2 A
week later, the authorities began allowing
family members to visit detainees in
Koutoukalè.

MIGRANTS’ AND INTERNALLY
DISPLACED PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Over the course of the year, thousands of
migrants – including 14,000 between
January and May – were violently expelled
from Algeria to a place called “Point Zero” on
the border with Niger. More than 70% of
them testified that they had been subjected
to violence and ill-treatment in Algeria,
according to Doctors Without Borders. In
June, the bodies of 10 migrants were found
near the border with Libya. In September,
around 2,100 people fled the internally
displaced people’s camp in Kablewa, Diffa
region, seeking refuge elsewhere following
threats by Boko Haram combatants.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
ARMED GROUPS
Armed groups in Tillabéri and the Lake Chad
Basin areas carried out several attacks and
killings, some of which were unlawful and
could constitute war crimes. In February,
according to the government, members of an
armed group attacked a truck on its way to
Tizigorou, Tillabéri region, causing the deaths
of 18 civilians and wounding eight others. In
March, at least 20 villagers were killed when
five villages in the Diffa region were attacked
by Boko Haram combatants from Nigeria,
according to media sources. Also in March,
in Tillabéri, at least 19 civilians were killed in
an attack, attributed to ISS, that targeted a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

traders’ convoy near Petelkole town,
according to the Ministry for Public Safety.
MILITARY FORCES
In February, a strike by the Nigerian army
killed seven children and wounded five
people in Nachade, Maradi region. The strike
was targeting bandits, according to the
governor of Maradi.
In October, the army was accused of
unlawfully killing artisanal gold miners in
Tamou in air strikes, following an attack by an
armed group against a police station that
killed two police officers and wounded one.
The government denied any unlawful killings
and announced that seven combatants were
killed and 24 wounded in a communiqué. In
December, the National Human Rights
Commission announced after investigations
that the airstrike targeted the arms depot of
an armed group not far from the mining site,
which killed 11 individuals and was followed
by a mop-up operation that wounded 25
individuals including civilians.

RIGHT TO FOOD AND WATER
The conflict and the resulting displacement
of people heightened food insecurity and
shortages of water. Drought and floods also
reduced agricultural yields. According to
government data, more than 4.4 million
people were experiencing food insecurity –
almost 20% of the population.
Shortages of food and water affected
internally displaced people, especially
children. Girls suffered additionally by being
removed from school by their families or
being forced into early and/or forced
marriage.
1. “Niger: Conviction of investigative journalists marks deepening
repression of media freedom”, 13 January
2. “Niger: The authorities must guarantee the rights of detainees at
Koutoukallè high security prison”, 21 March (French only)

275

NIGERIA
Federal Republic of Nigeria
Head of state and government: Muhammadu Buhari
Thousands of civilians were killed, injured
or displaced by the armed conflict between
the armed groups Boko Haram and Islamic
State’s West African Province (ISWAP) and
the Nigerian military in north-eastern
Nigeria. All parties to the conflict
committed violations of international law,
including war crimes, with impunity.
Elsewhere, unlawful killings and violence
were perpetrated by bandits and the
authorities responded with enforced
disappearances, torture, arbitrary detention,
and severe restrictions to freedoms of
expression and peaceful assembly. Media
outlets and journalists had their freedom of
expression curtailed by the authorities.
Activists and protesters faced restrictions
on their rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. More than 60,000
people were forcibly evicted from their
homes. Failure to protect people from the
effects of climate change led to deaths and
displacement.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
The state failed in its responsibility to protect
people from various abuses committed by
Boko Haram and ISWAP as well as unknown
gunmen. According to media reports, they
killed at least 6,907 people, abducted 6,157
and forcibly transferred or internally
displaced at least 2,000.
Attacks by Boko Haram, which had been
predominantly in the north-east, spread to
some states in north-central and northwestern Nigeria during the year. Attacks by
Boko Haram directed against civilians, such
as those targeting villagers, farming
communities and highway and train
passengers, amounted to war crimes.

276

Civil society organizations reported that, on
26 May, Boko Haram killed at least 60 people
in Rann community, Borno state.
On 5 July, gunmen attacked Kuje Prison in
Abuja and freed more than 60 suspected
Boko Haram members.
According to media reports, on 15
November, Boko Haram reportedly killed
more than 15 women in Gwoza community,
Borno state, after accusing them of being
witches.
Of the hundreds of schoolchildren abducted
by Boko Haram in previous years, 110 girls
remained in captivity at the end of the year.
SECURITY FORCES
Security forces consistently violated human
rights in the context of military operations
conducted against Boko Haram in northeastern Nigeria.
In December, Reuters reported that the
Nigerian military had conducted a secret
forced abortion programme in the north-east
since 2013, ending at least 10,000
pregnancies without the consent or prior
knowledge of the women and girls
concerned, which could amount to war
crimes and a crime against humanity.
The Nigerian authorities consistently failed
to hold security officials accountable for
crimes committed against civilians.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 13 January, the government lifted a
seven-month ban on the social media
platform Twitter. On 14 July, the ECOWAS
court declared that the Twitter ban had been
unlawful and ordered the Nigerian state to
respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights
to freedom of expression, information and
media freedom.
On 2 February, the Nigerian Broadcasting
Commission (NBC) suspended a programme
on the Vision FM radio station for discussing
the alleged incompetence of the head of the
National Intelligence Agency, Rufai Abubakar.
On 3 August, the NBC sanctioned four media
outlets for showing a documentary perceived
to “promote” terrorism.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

On 16 October, Zamfara state government
shut down five media outlets for broadcasting
an opposition party’s campaign rally.
On 7 November, a court in Kano sentenced
social media celebrities Mubarak
Muhammad, known as Uniquepikin, and
Nazifi Muhammad to a week’s detention,
flogging and a fine for allegedly defaming the
Kano state governor in a comedy sketch.
ACTIVISTS AND PROTESTERS
The government continued to clamp down on
protests. On 5 April, Mubarak Bala, president
of the Humanist Association of Nigeria, was
sentenced in Kano to 24 years’ imprisonment
under criminal charges for breaching the
peace. The charges related to Facebook
posts from April 2020 in which he allegedly
insulted Prophet Muhammad.
On 14 May, the governor of Kaduna state,
Nasir el-Rufai, banned religious protests in
the state.
On 27 July, the Chief Judge of Akwa Ibom
State committed activist Inibehe Effiong to
prison without trial for one month for
“contempt”.
Prisoners of conscience Omoyele Sowore
and Olawale Bakare continued to face
trumped-up charges and prolonged trials for
organizing peaceful protests to demand
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
On 20 October, police used tear gas against
protesters during the two-year
commemoration of the #EndSARS protest at
Lekki toll gate. At least four people were
arrested and detained.
JOURNALISTS
On 21 March, a Federal High Court in
Calabar dismissed trumped-up charges of
treason against journalist Agba Jalingo. He
had previously been detained for more than
179 days.
On 13 May, blogger Bashiru Hameed was
detained for publishing the alleged criminal
records of the governor of Ogun State. He
was released after being compelled to
withdraw the publication.
On 13 October, journalists Abdulrasheed
Akogun from Fresh Insight TV and Dare
Akogun from Sobi FM radio station were
detained by police in Ilorin Kwara State over a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

WhatsApp message which alleged
misappropriation of public funds by the
Kwara State governor.
On 22 July, five staff of the Peoples Gazette
were arrested in Abuja following an allegedly
defamatory report published by the
newspaper about the former Chief of Army
Staff.
Umaru Maradun, a Leadership newspaper
correspondent in Zamfara State, was
detained for undisclosed reasons on 23 July
and released the following day without
charge.
On 4 August, Casmir Uzomah, a radio
worker in Imo State, was detained for more
than two months by the State Security
Service for airing a song considered
“offensive” to the state governor.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
At least 40 protesters remained in detention
without trial in Agodi Prison, Ibadan, and
Kirikiri Prison, Lagos, two years after
participating in the #EndSARS protests
against Nigerian security forces. On 4
February, 21 #EndSARS protesters held
incommunicado for 15 months at Afaraukwu
Prison, Umuahia, were released without
charge.
On 23 June, the Abuja High Court awarded
damages to Glory Okolie over her detention
for 150 days on allegations of spying for the
separatist group Indigenous People of Biafra
(IPOB).
On 13 October, the Court of Appeal cleared
IPOB leader Nnamdi Kanu of criminal
charges and declared his abduction from
Kenya to Nigeria illegal and a violation of his
right to a fair trial.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
pervasive within the criminal justice system.
At least 21 #EndSARS protesters were
tortured while in detention. At the Criminal
Investigation Department, Umuahia, and in
other police facilities, police officers tortured
the arrested protesters by tying their hands to
iron bars and flogging their ankles with rods.
Victims reported to Amnesty International

277

that at least two protesters were tortured to
death.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Several men were forcibly disappeared by the
authorities in response to the activities of
IPOB.
Sunday Nwafor, Uzonwanne Ejiofor and
Wilfred Dike, who had been secretly detained
by the military without charge or trial since 27
February 2020, were released on 14
September.
Government critic Abubakar Idris remained
missing since his abduction by suspected
state agents in 2019.

EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE
Security forces used excessive force to
disperse peaceful protests and assemblies.
On 19 October, police fired tear gas at paraathletes protesting in the Surulere district of
Lagos over their exclusion from the National
Sports Festival.
On 17 October, a coroners’ court found that
police had shot dead Jumoke Oyeleke during
a Yoruba Nation rally in Ojota, Lagos State.
On 4 October, police killed one person and
injured two others who were protesting
against harassment by officials of the
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission
in the town of Ughelli, Delta state.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
Nigerian security forces killed at least 122
people in response to increasing violence and
killings of their officers in south-eastern
Nigeria.
On 17 July, at least seven people were
extrajudicially executed by state-sponsored
Ebubeagu paramilitary agents in the town of
Awo-Omamma, Imo State.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 17 August, officials of the Federal Capital
Territory Administration (FCTA) and security
agencies demolished around 100 structures
in the Dubaidna Durumi 3 Indigenous
community, Abuja. Security agents used
unnecessary and excessive force, tear-

278

gassing and physically assaulting residents.
Some residents sustained injuries and several
children were exposed to tear gas, resulting
in two children passing out. The pressure on
the Indigenous community to vacate their
ancestral land persisted.
Other communities in the Federal Capital
Territory – including in the Airport Road area,
Gishiri and Banana Village – were
demolished, while several others remained
under threat of forced evictions by the FCTA.
On 29 January, Rivers State authorities
forcibly evicted thousands of residents of
waterfront communities from their homes in
Diobu, Port Harcourt. The forced eviction was
conducted without adequate notice or
consultation.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
Authorities ignored early predictions of heavy
rainfalls and floods, which the UN said were
exacerbated by climate change, and failed to
put in place sufficient measures to mitigate
the impact. According to the UN, more than
1.9 million people were affected by floods
across 25 states, at least 500 people were
killed, and more than 1.4 million were
internally displaced across Nigeria. The
floods triggered an outbreak of waterborne
diseases, especially in north-eastern states.
More than 320 deaths were reported from
cholera in Yobe, Borno and Adamawa States.
Banditry activities intensified in the northwest, including attacks and abductions. Due
to a lack of measures to protect communities
by the authorities, competing armed groups
effectively gained control of some areas of
Nigeria, imposing taxes and curfews, and
limiting people’s movement and livelihood
pursuits. In the south-east, unidentified
gunmen carried out hit-and-run attacks,
killings and theft of property leading to
hardship in local communities.
Military operations were carried out against
banditry in the north-west, and against the
Eastern Security Network of IPOB in the
south-east. Security forces consistently
violated human rights in the context of these
operations. According to media reports, on

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

17 April, military officers opened fire on
civilian residents at Orlu, Imo State, killing an
estimated four people.
Vigilante attacks became commonplace.
Between January and December, there were
more than 75 reported deaths from vigilante
attacks across Nigeria. Security experts
attributed the increasing incidence of these
attacks to people’s lack of confidence in the
justice system.
On 28 March, at least 65 people were
abducted and eight killed by gunmen who
attacked a train between the capital, Abuja,
and the city of Kaduna.1

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Oil-related pollution and environmental
damage continued to undermine people’s
human rights in the Niger Delta. On 16 June,
Nigeria’s Supreme Court upheld a lower court
ruling which prevented Shell from selling its
Nigerian assets until the resolution of a
dispute in relation to compensation to the
Niger Delta community over a 2019 oil spill.
The clean-up by Shell remained inadequate.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
More than 1,776 schoolchildren had been
abducted by armed groups since 2014.
Nigerian authorities continued to fail to
investigate these attacks and to protect
children.
According to UNESCO, an estimated 20
million children and young people were not
attending school in Nigeria due to economic
barriers and socio-cultural practices that
discouraged formal education. This was
exacerbated by the high level of insecurity
and abduction of schoolchildren.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In March, the National Assembly voted
against five bills that sought to promote
gender equality. After several protests by
women’s groups and civil society
organizations, the National Assembly
committed to reconsidering three of the bills.
The Federal Capital Judiciary designated
four judges to prosecute all sexual and
gender-based violence cases within the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Federal Capital Territory – the area of central
Nigeria that includes Abuja – to accelerate
hearing of such cases and ensure access to
justice for victims.
Borno, Taraba, Gombe and Zamfara states
passed the Violence Against Persons
Prohibition Act during the year, bringing the
number of states that have passed the Act to
35 out of 36. Nevertheless, violence against
women and girls remained endemic and
there were increased reports of domestic and
sexual violence.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, three gay men – Abdullahi Beti,
Kamilu Ya’u and Mallam Haruna – were
arrested under the Same Sex Marriage
(Prohibition) Act 2013 and subsequently
sentenced to death by a Sharia court in
Ningi, Bauchi state.
On 1 May, around 50 LGBTI activists
protested in Abuja against a bill criminalizing
“crossdressing”.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
There remained more than 2.4 million
internally displaced people in north-eastern
Nigeria. In an attempt to resettle all internally
displaced people living in Maiduguri, the
Borno state government closed four camps in
July and resettled 11,000 households. Most
of the resettled people lacked sufficient food
and access to basic amenities.

DEATH PENALTY
Courts across Nigeria continued to impose
death sentences. No executions were carried
out. On 28 June, Zamfara State amended its
laws to allow the death penalty for
kidnapping.
In August, the Court of Appeal ordered the
retrial of musician Aminu Yahaya-Sharif, who
was sentenced to death for blasphemy in
2020.
1. “Nigeria: 50 days into their abduction, at least 62 Kaduna-Abuja
train passengers remain in captivity”, 17 May

279

NORTH KOREA

were present to monitor the implications of
these restrictions, including in relation to
freedom of expression and civic space.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Head of state: Kim Jong-un
Head of government: Kim Tok-hun

RIGHT TO INFORMATION

Freedom of movement and right to
information remained severely restricted
due to border closure. The government
declared victory over Covid-19, but there
was no evidence of vaccinations taking
place. People including children were
subject to forced labour and some people
were forced into state-designated
employment. Political prison camps were
believed to remain in operation. There were
reports that detainees were tortured and
otherwise ill-treated.

BACKGROUND
A “maximum national emergency” was
declared after the country’s first officially
reported Covid-19 outbreak. North Korea
implemented multiple missile launches and
its confrontational rhetoric and military
exercises escalated tensions in the region.
North Korea sent its ambassador to COP27 in
a rare in-person diplomatic appearance
during the pandemic. In March, the OHCHR
reported there were reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes against humanity had
been committed.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
The government kept North Korea’s borders
closed for three years due to Covid-19 and
continued to impose temporary quarantine
and movement control in several areas. The
movement of people and goods between
regions remained limited due to the
quarantine policy. By the end of the year, at
least 67 North Koreans (32 women and 35
men) had escaped to South Korea,
the second lowest number since 2003 when
official records were first made public. Most
of these people had moved to other countries
such as China before the pandemic and later
entered South Korea. As a result of border
controls, no NGOs or independent media

280

The closure of the country’s borders in
response to the Covid-19 pandemic further
restricted people’s access to information from
outside the country. There were reports of an
increased military presence along the border
and the installation of CCTV cameras and
motion detectors, making it more difficult for
information to enter the country.
Since the introduction of the Reactionary
Thought and Culture Denunciation Law,
issued in December 2020, the crackdown on
accessing foreign information and
punishment for violators continued.
Teenagers were reportedly executed for
watching and sharing a South Korean TV
show.
Daily mobile phone use became more
common and increasing numbers of people
had mobile phone subscriptions; however,
access to and use of international mobile
phone services were tightly restricted across
the country. Overseas calls by citizens were
almost completely blocked and only a very
small number of ruling elite people were
allowed to use the internet.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
There was no evidence of Covid-19
vaccinations being given to the public. The
international community, including COVAX,
proposed vaccine assistance repeatedly, but
the authorities did not accept any help. The
25 million population were put at grave risk
from the virus because they had no access to
vaccines in a country with one of the most
fragile health systems.1 On 12 May, the North
Korean authorities officially announced the
occurrence of confirmed cases of Covid-19.
The authorities declared a “victory” over
Covid-19 on 10 August, claiming that they
had completely eradicated it from the
country. Suspected cases continued to
appear. In September, the government stated
that vaccinations could begin.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHTS TO FOOD, WATER AND
SANITATION
More than 40% of the population were
undernourished and required humanitarian
assistance. Many people suffered from
chronic malnutrition. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations again designated North Korea as a
country in need of external food assistance.
Cross-border freight trains between China
and North Korea operated intermittently, but
at a lower frequency than prior to Covid-19.
The inflow of food from overseas through
imports and aid from the international
community was still lower than before
Covid-19. There were reports that North
Korean authorities had requested food aid
from countries including India and Viet Nam.
Continued natural disasters such as spring
drought and summer typhoons were reported
to have exacerbated low productivity in the
agricultural sector.
As part of the quarantine policy, smuggling
at the border between North Korea and China
was strongly prohibited. Smuggling by some
individuals appeared to continue and there
were reports that unofficial state-led
smuggling was also carried out secretly.
Food shortages faced by marginalized
groups, such as people with disabilities,
children, older people and those living
outside towns and cities, were particularly
serious. Water supply facilities and sewage
systems were poor in many areas.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Some people who completed secondary
education were assigned to a workplace
designated by the state. Most workers not
engaged in national priority sectors such as
the military and law enforcement agencies
received wages that did not allow them to
access an adequate standard of living. There
were multiple reports of people involved in
illegal activities such as smuggling, theft and
drug production/selling to survive.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

CHILD LABOUR
Some children were forced by the state to
work in coal mines and on farms under
dangerous conditions. In addition to their
education, children were required to perform
state-imposed tasks such as cleaning,
farming and working in construction.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
Open criticism of the authorities or leadership
was not allowed. Extreme anxiety and fear
was pervasive among people who were at risk
of being detained for political reasons and
charged with anti-party or anti-state crimes.
Four political prison camps (kwanliso)
remained in operation, although their
existence was denied by the authorities. Up
to 120,000 detainees were believed to be
held and subjected to forced labour, torture
and other ill-treatment.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
The number of people arrested or detained
was believed to have increased. Arrests were
made on the grounds of violations of
quarantine rules such as smuggling, isolation
and cross-border travel attempts, as well as
drug use, engagement in religious practices
(no alternative belief systems are tolerated by
the authorities) and accessing foreign
information.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Despite some reports that treatment of
detainees had partially improved over the
past few years, verbal abuse, beatings,
torture and executions allegedly occurred
inside detention facilities run by law
enforcement agencies, including the Ministry
of State Security and the Ministry of Social
Security. In particular, it was reported that
beatings, torture and dietary restrictions were
used by officials of detention facilities to
extract confessions or control detainees.
1. “North Korea: Government must ensure access to Covid-19 vaccines
during Omicron outbreak”, 12 May

281

NORTH MACEDONIA
Republic of North Macedonia
Head of state: Stevo Pendarovski
Head of government: Dimitar Kovačevski
Legislation aimed at protecting journalists
and media freedom was proposed. A law
protecting women from violence was not
fully implemented. Inter-ethnic tensions
were exacerbated by hate speech. At least
18,000 refugees and migrants were pushed
back to Greece.

BACKGROUND
Bulgaria continued to oppose North
Macedonia’s accession to the EU, claiming its
history, cultural identity and language were
Bulgarian. A solution proposed by France
included recognizing the Bulgarian minority
in the constitution for the first time; this was
met with large public protests in July and
political opposition. In September, the
European Commission initiated a screening
process towards eventual EU membership.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Two women were killed by a family member.
The 2021 Law on Prevention and Protection
from Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence was not yet fully implemented. The
authorities failed to adopt relevant by-laws,
budgets and procedures and police were
often reluctant to act.
In February, after an outcry from women’s
NGOs, the manslaughter charge against Pale
Illovska was changed to self-defence. She
had stabbed her police-officer husband in
September 2021 as he punched, kicked and
attempted to strangle her. Neighbours and
family testified that they had repeatedly
reported his violence to the police, who had
failed to respond.
A March report from Šuto Orizari’s Roma
women’s rights group analysed how low
reporting levels of domestic violence were
due to structural discrimination including
poverty, poor access to medical care and
distrust of NGOs and authorities.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

A new criminal code proposed in July
included provisions to protect the rights of
journalists, including an increased penalty for
their assault or murder, and obliged the
authorities to initiate prosecutions.

In March, lacking parliamentary support, the
government abruptly withdrew the NGOsupported 2021 gender recognition bill,
which provided that trans people could
legally change their gender identity through a
simplified notary procedure. A redrafted law
was anticipated for 2023.
In May, Bekim Asani, director of NGO LGBT
United, based in Tetovo, was verbally abused
by four men as he sat with his mother at his
father’s graveside; one of them subsequently
assaulted him. He was twice assaulted in
August, for which one perpetrator was
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment; the
other case remained pending.
In June, hate speech and online abuse
increased around the 10th Skopje Pride.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

DISCRIMINATION

In May, on retrial, a police officer known as
GP was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment –
the first officer to serve a custodial sentence
for ill-treatment. A witness had videoed GP in
2020 kicking Nevzat Jasharov, a Roma man,
as he lay on the ground.

The Helsinki Committee cautioned that interethnic hate speech on social media
contravened legislation against spreading
racist and xenophobic material online. NGOs
and international actors expressed concern at
widespread discriminatory speech fuelled by

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Over 20 years since the internal armed
conflict, at least 22 people remained missing.
In July, former prime minister Nikola
Gruevski was convicted in his absence to
seven years’ imprisonment for stealing and
laundering EUR 1.3 million.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

282

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Bulgaria’s opposition to North Macedonia’s
EU accession.
ROMA
The European Roma Rights Centre brought
successful discrimination cases against local
authorities responsible for segregation in a
Skopje school and denying Roma
communities access to clean water in Prilep.
In December, the European Court of Human
Rights also found that two schools in Bitola
and Štip had violated Roma children’s right to
non-discrimination through segregation.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Over 20,591 refugees and migrants entered
the country; as of 30 October, 65 had applied
for asylum. Over 18,000 were subsequently
pushed back to Greece, many after having
their biometric data recorded at the Vinojug
Transit Centre, as reported by 44 people in
July.
In August, 35 people were injured when a
truck concealing 49 Syrians overturned.
Police reported the interception of 83
migrant-smuggling operations up to October.
At least 619 individuals were unlawfully
detained for up to 24 days as witnesses
against alleged smugglers.

RIGHT TO LIFE
In December, proceedings finally opened
against two hospital managers and a doctor
indicted for causing the deaths of 12 patients
and two visiting relatives in a fire at the Tetovo
Covid-19 unit in 2021.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In April, a report released by NGO
Bankwatch based on monitoring in 2021
documented adverse health impacts on the
local population of emissions from the Bitola
lignite power plant, open-cast mines and ash
disposal sites. Dust and sulphur dioxide
emissions regularly exceeded legal limits and
WHO guidelines. No measures were taken by
the government to reduce emissions.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

NORWAY
Kingdom of Norway
Head of state: Harald V
Head of government: Jonas Gahr Støre
Norway received over 36,122 people fleeing
Ukraine. A law on human rights in business
and the supply chain entered into force in
July. A report by the Group of Experts
monitoring Norway’s implementation of the
Istanbul Convention urged the government
to redefine rape in criminal law as sexual
intercourse without freely given consent.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Norway received and assisted over 36,122
people fleeing the war waged by Russia in
Ukraine. Norway also received 268 asylum
seekers from Russia, among them Russians
fleeing military mobilization. The resettlement
of refugees from various other countries
continued under Norway’s annual
resettlement quota commitment to accept
3,000 refugees per year.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In July, the 2021 Transparency Act, based on
the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development’s Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises and building upon
the UN Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights (UNGP), entered into force.
The new law applied to around 9,000
companies, requiring them to carry out due
diligence and disclose key findings with
respect to human rights, including in relation
to working conditions, as well as to respond
to specific enquiries on how the enterprise
addresses negative impacts in relation to its
products and services.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In October, Norway raised its official
emissions reduction target to at least 55% by
2030, but continued to pursue international
cooperation and emission quota trading
rather than actual cuts to emissions. Global
emissions linked to consumption of

283

Norwegian petroleum resources were not
included in Norwegian emissions accounts.
In October, Statistics Norway reported that
the country’s emissions had fallen by just
0.7% in 2021 and by 4.7% in total since
1990.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
In November, the Group of Experts (GREVIO)
monitoring the implementation of the Council
of Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence Against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention),
concluded in its first baseline report
on Norway that not all forms of sexual
violence are criminalized as required by the
Convention. It urged the government to
amend legislation on sexual violence and
rape to ensure that these offences are firmly
rooted in lack of freely given consent.

OMAN
Sultanate of Oman
Head of state and government: Haitham bin Tariq
Authorities continued to detain and
prosecute people who expressed views
critical of the government’s actions and
decisions or religious beliefs deemed to be
outside official Islamic practices. Migrant
workers continued to face exploitation,
forced labour and harsh working conditions.
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice, in the domestic and
professional spheres. Some progress
towards climate change policies was made.

BACKGROUND
Authorities continued to pursue their
Omanization policy, with an increased rate of
replacing foreign workers with nationals. In
July, Oman banned foreign nationals from
working in 207 professions.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to be intolerant of
voices critical of the government’s actions
and decisions. On 4 August, Ahmed Issa

284

Qattan, an environmental activist, was
detained for a second time in 18 months and
charged for commenting on Twitter against a
governmental decision banning camel
grazing in the plain of Dhofar governorate in
preparation for construction of housing
complexes. He began a hunger strike to
protest against his detention and was
released on bail on 16 August.
In late August, activists reported the arrest
of three men who had begun a peaceful sit-in
in the capital, Muscat, calling for reforms,
including an end to government corruption
and improved social benefits. Security forces
arrested them a few hours into their sit-in and
after their announcement video went viral.
Their whereabouts were unknown until their
release on bail on 20 October. On 27
October, a court convicted one of the men,
Hani Al-Sarhani, to one year in prison under
articles 123 and 115 of the Penal Code for
what it stated were acts of “undermining the
prestige of the state” and calling for a
gathering.
On 30 October, a royal decree was issued to
expand on article 97 of the Penal Code which
stipulates that challenging the rights and
prerogatives of the Sultan, his wife, heir
apparent or his children or dishonouring their
person is punishable by at least three years'
imprisonment.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
Authorities continued to use Article 269 of
the Penal Code to prosecute people for
actions the authorities characterize as hostile
to Islam or denigrating of Islamic values.
On 7 June, a court in north Oman convicted
two of four people arrested between 24 July
and 2 August 2021 based solely on their
online discussions and private messages on
issues related to freedom of thought, religion
and atheism. The court sentenced Maryam
al-Nuaimi to three years in prison and Ali alGhafri to five years. It referred the case
against Abdullah Hassan to the Specialized
Court for review and acquitted Ghaith alShibli.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Authorities took no steps to reform the kafala
sponsorship system that facilitates abuses of
migrant workers, nor to become a party to the
1990 International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families.
Despite short-term waivers of fines and
reduction of fees for residency and work
permit processes and delays, migrant
workers continued to face exploitation, forced
labour and harsh working conditions. These
conditions included long working days of 16
to 20 hours and unpaid wages, without the
ability to end their employment because their
employer held their travel documents.
In late March, 14 migrant workers died and
five others were injured in a rockslide while
working at a quarry in Ibri, Al-Dhahira
governorate. Despite calls from the General
Federation of Oman Workers for authorities to
urgently investigate the company’s failures
leading to the incident, no information
regarding such steps was made public.

PAKISTAN
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Head of state: Arif Alvi
Head of government: Shehbaz Sharif (replaced Imran
Khan in April)
Grave human rights violations continued,
including enforced disappearances, torture,
crackdowns on peaceful protests, attacks
against journalists and violence against
religious minorities and other marginalized
groups. A backlash against legal gains in
transgender rights led to growing violence
against transgender people. The senate
passed an act which would criminalize
torture by state officials for the first time.
Political upheaval led to major uncertainty.
An economic crisis severely hampered
people’s economic rights. Climate change
exacerbated heatwaves followed by
devastating floods, which killed many and
undermined a range of rights.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

BACKGROUND

Oman failed to take steps to end
discrimination against women despite civil
society’s increased demands for equal rights
for women, including with respect to
marriage, divorce, inheritance, nationality
and child custody, and restrictions on
movement and on the type of work allowed.
Abortion continued to be criminalized.
The authorities finally designated a hotline
for reporting domestic violence, including
child abuse, following a campaign by
activists, but they again failed to pass laws
that define domestic violence or take steps to
establish formal shelters, rendering access to
protection non-existent.

On 9 April, Imran Khan was ousted as prime
minister after a controversial vote of noconfidence in parliament. On 11 April,
parliament elected Shehbaz Sharif, leader of
the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PMLN), as the new prime minister. Imran Khan
and his party, the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf
(PTI), accused the USA and the Pakistan
Democratic Movement (a loose coalition of
opposition parties) of colluding to remove
him, prompting weeks of political unrest
during which Imran Khan’s supporters
protested across the country.
The ousting was widely viewed as Imran
Khan falling out of favour with the country’s
all-powerful military, which was alleged to
have supported the move to remove him from
power. The protests continued for months,
prompted by the PTI’s demand to hold snap
elections. On 3 November, during a long
protest march from the city of Lahore to the
federal capital, Islamabad, Imran Khan
survived an apparent assassination attempt.
The shooting marked a pivotal point in an

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Oman began to update climate affairs
regulations, draft a national strategy that
includes a climate change law, and establish
a national database to monitor commitments
made in 2021 on reducing carbon emissions
by 7% by 2030.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

285

already tense political environment, with
demonstrations taking place outside military
facilities.
Between March and May, climate change
wrought some of the highest recorded
temperatures in Pakistan for 60 years.1 Some
of the areas worst affected were in Upper
Sindh and Lower Punjab. The resulting
drought was exacerbated by a deadly cholera
outbreak coinciding with water scarcity in
May. Flooding followed, mostly affecting the
provinces of Sindh and Balochistan. More
than 1,100 people died and 33 million were
affected. Nearly 750,000 people were left
without access to safe and adequate housing,
education or health infrastructure. Large
swathes of agricultural land were flooded,
creating fears of a looming food shortage
crisis, driving up prices. At the COP27
climate change meeting in November, Prime
Minister Shehbaz Sharif said that an
estimated USD 30 billion in international
funding was required to compensate
Pakistan for loss and damage.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
State officials continued to use enforced
disappearances to target human rights
defenders, journalists and people voicing
criticism of the authorities. According to the
Commission of Inquiry on Enforced
Disappearances, as of 31 October at least
2,210 cases – likely many more – remained
unresolved. Intimidation of families and
victims seeking justice frequently continued
for years after their loved one was forcibly
disappeared.
In June, journalists Nafees Naeem and
Arsalan Khan were abducted separately by
the authorities; both were released after 24
hours.2 On 28 April, Baloch student Bebagr
Imdad was forcibly disappeared while visiting
a friend at Punjab University in Lahore. He
was released 13 days later.
For the second time in just over a year, on
21 October the National Assembly reportedly
passed a bill criminalizing the practice of
enforced disappearances. Media reports
stated that several parliamentarians called for
the removal of wording making a “false”

286

allegation of enforced disappearance
punishable by a fine and jail sentence. By the
end of the year, the bill was not enacted as it
had not been passed by the senate, and it
had not been made available to the public.
Amnesty International documented the
frequent use of enforced disappearances in
the province of Balochistan. These increased
following a suicide bombing at the University
of Karachi on 25 April, claimed by the
Balochistan Liberation Army, which killed
four people. Baloch activists told the media
that the state was using the attacks as an
excuse to target Baloch women, activists and
protesters. The media reported that two
Baloch women activists had been abducted
within a week. On 7 June, students Doda
Ellahi and Gamshad Baloch were forcibly
disappeared from their homes in Karachi.
Following four days of peaceful protests they
were released on 14 June.3

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities severely curtailed the right to
freedom of peaceful assembly, harassing,
arresting and detaining critics and political
rivals as well as forcibly dispersing protests
and assaulting journalists and others.
Supporters of ousted prime minister Imran
Khan launched nationwide protests. Some
turned violent; in Islamabad, protesters threw
stones at the police, set fire to trees and
damaged vehicles. Some protests were met
with excessive force. On 25 May, police fired
tear gas shells into peaceful protests in
Lahore.
Activists and families of people forcibly
disappeared held peaceful protests which
were largely met with unlawful use of force,
intimidation or arbitrary detention. On 13
June, the police used unlawful force to
disperse protesters outside the Sindh
Assembly in Karachi. One video of the
incident showed uniformed police officers,
some holding sticks, approaching sitting
protesters. The police proceeded to violently
grab men and women and drag them along
the ground, before throwing or forcing
protesters into police vehicles.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

On 27 June, people in Karachi began
protests against water and electricity
shortages during the hottest summer on
record. According to media reports, police
used batons and tear gas to violently disperse
protesters blocking a road to the port.4

refuge after facing threats in Pakistan. A twomember government committee was tasked
with investigating and in December,
concluded that the killing had been a
“planned assassination.”

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Blasphemy allegations continued to spark
violence against both religious minorities and
Muslims. In January a woman was sentenced
to death for allegedly “blasphemous”
messages she sent over WhatsApp. A man
was lynched to death by a group of people
after being accused of burning pages of the
Holy Qur’an in February in the district of
Khanewal. In October, in Ghotki, a man with
physical disabilities was forcibly drowned at
the shrine where he lived by a visitor after
being accused of blasphemy.
In September the Supreme Court issued a
landmark order calling for “utmost care” by
“all concerned that no injustice in the
administration of justice takes place,” in
recognition of the numerous due process
violations in the investigation and
adjudication of blasphemy cases.

The authorities further tightened control of
the media. Media workers reported increased
coercion, censorship and arrests of
journalists.
On 13 April the Federal Investigation
Agency (FIA) arrested eight people in the
province of Punjab for allegedly organizing a
smear campaign on social media against
state institutions.
On 5 July, police arrested journalist Imran
Riaz Khan on sedition-related charges related
to criticism of the military. He was arrested
under provisions of the Penal Code, including
defamation, and various sections of the
draconian Prevention of Electronic Crimes
Act. On 7 July, a court ordered his release
but the police immediately re-arrested him.
On 9 July he was released on bail. He had
not been brought to trial by the end of the
year.
On 21 May, Shireen Mazari, a senior leader
of the PTI political party, was detained by
police near her home in Islamabad. She was
arrested in connection with a 1972 land
dispute, but her family suggested that the
arrest was politically motivated due to her
criticism of the government and the military.
She was freed the same day on the orders of
the Islamabad High Court. A case was
registered against her daughter, Imaan HazirMazari, for making “derogatory” statements
against the army following her mother’s
arrest. On 20 June, the charges against
Imaan Hazir-Mazari were dropped after she
issued a statement of regret.
On 1 July, unidentified men attacked Ayaz
Amir, a senior analyst with Dunya News. Days
earlier he had allegedly criticized Imran Khan
and the military during a seminar.
In October, Arshad Sharif, a journalist and
well-known supporter of Imran Khan, was
killed in Kenya, where he had allegedly taken

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The Domestic Violence (Prevention and
Protection) Bill (2021) was not enacted by
the National Assembly, despite being passed
by the senate in 2021. Several highly
publicized cases highlighted the ongoing
problem of violence against women.
On 24 February, Zahir Jaffer was sentenced
to death for the torture, rape and murder of
Noor Mukadam in 2021. Convictions were
otherwise very low in cases of gender-based
violence, making the guilty verdict against
Zahir Jaffer significant. However, far-reaching
procedural and institutional reform – not
resorting to the death penalty – were still
needed to tackle the endemic problem of
violence against women.

TRANSGENDER PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Despite the Transgender Rights Act of 2018,
transgender people continued to face
violence and discrimination. In September,
Senator Mushtaq Ahmad Khan of the Islamic

287

political party Jamat-e-Islami challenged the
Act in the Federal Shariat Court, alleging that
it did not conform with the injunctions of
Islam under the Constitution and “promotes
homosexuality”. The Council of Islamic
Ideology urged the government to form a
committee to review the legislation.
Transgender activists reported being
targeted by social media campaigns, fuelling
anti-transgender rhetoric and inciting
violence and hate speech against them. They
reported receiving threats, having to go into
hiding and amending their day-to-day
routines to avoid being targeted. Between
October 2021 and September 2022, 18
transgender people were reported by the
Trans Murder Monitoring Project to have
been killed in Pakistan, the highest figure in
Asia.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In October the senate passed the Torture and
Custodial Death Act. The Act will, for the first
time, criminalize torture by a “public official
or person working in an official capacity”.
The use of torture and other ill-treatment
remained routine. On 9 August, Shahbaz Gill,
a senior PTI politician, was arrested in
Islamabad after publicly criticizing the
military. He was released on bail on 16
September. Shahbaz Gill and PTI officials
alleged that he was tortured while in
detention, although medical reports and
government officials refuted this.
Senator Azam Khan Swati was arrested by
the FIA and charged with sedition after
tweeting criticism of the chief of the military.
He told reporters that he was stripped and
tortured, particularly near his genitals. He
was released on bail before being re-arrested
in November for the same tweets.

DISCRIMINATION
Forced conversions of Hindu, Christian and
Sikh women and girls continued. Victims,
particularly those from lower socio-economic
backgrounds, were unable to access justice.
Scheduled Caste Hindus (also known as
Dalits) were disproportionately disadvantaged
in accessing services, resources and

288

opportunities. Many remained trapped in
bonded labour and were subjected to rape
and violence. Ahmadis reported facing
continued discrimination. In July, five
Ahmadis were arrested for performing a ritual
animal sacrifice at Eid-ul-Adha, an act
allowed only for Muslims. In the same month
the Punjab chief minister announced that the
Punjab provincial government would add a
mandatory condition that a bride and groom
must swear that the Prophet Muhammad is
the final prophet in order to obtain a marriage
certificate. This was especially discriminatory
towards Ahmadis.
1. “Pakistan: Deadly floods reminder to wealthy countries to remedy
unfettered climate change”, 31 August
2. Pakistan: Submission to the 42nd Session of the UPR Working Group,
30 January 2023, 13 July
3. Braving the Storm: Enforced disappearances and the right to protest
in Pakistan, 11 August
4. “Pakistan: Authorities must respect and facilitate people’s right to
protest”, 28 June

PALESTINE (STATE
OF)
State of Palestine
Head of state: Mahmoud Abbas
Head of government: Mohammed Shtayyeh
Palestinian armed groups in Gaza
committed apparent war crimes during
three days of fighting with Israel in August,
using unguided rockets in populated civilian
areas and killing at least seven Palestinian
civilians. Palestinian authorities in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip continued to
heavily restrict freedom of expression,
association and assembly. They also held
scores of people in arbitrary detention and
subjected many to torture and other illtreatment. Justice for serious human rights
violations remained elusive. The Hamas de
facto authorities in Gaza carried out the
first executions in five years.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip continued to face Israel’s oppression,
domination, fragmentation and segregation
under its brutal occupation and apartheid
(see Israel and the Occupied Palestinian
Territories entry).
Palestinian authorities failed to hold
parliamentary and presidential elections that
had been delayed again by President Abbas
in 2021. The last elections for the Palestinian
Legislative Council were in 2006. President
Abbas continued to rule by decree amid
popular discontent.

ABUSES BY ARMED GROUPS
In August, Israel launched a three-day
military offensive on the occupied Gaza Strip
targeting the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ)
and its armed wing. Khaled Mansour and
Taysir al-Jaabari, two high-ranking PIJ
commanders, were killed by Israeli strikes in
addition to 10 other PIJ fighters. In total, 31
Palestinian civilians were killed during the
offensive, of which 17 were killed in Israeli
attacks including in apparent war crimes.
Palestinian armed groups in the Gaza Strip
committed apparent war crimes during three
days of military confrontations with Israel in
August, using unguided rockets in populated
civilian areas. On 6 August, a rocket
apparently fired by the PIJ towards Israel
missed its target and hit a street in Jabalia
refugee camp, killing seven civilians,
including four children, and wounding at
least 15 others. Seven other Palestinian
civilians, including five children, were killed
in four other attacks in Izbat Beit Hanoun, Al
Bureij and Jabalia refugee camps and in Beit
Hanoun, after which remnants of weapons
were immediately removed. The removal of
all remnants of the weapons used in attacks
is a recurrent pattern in the aftermath of
misfired Palestinian rockets. Hamas
authorities stated they would investigate all
deadly attacks but failed to publish any
reports.
Between March and April, attacks by armed
Palestinian individuals killed 18 people in
cities and towns across Israel. While the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

individuals appeared to have no direct
affiliation with Palestinian armed groups, their
attacks were praised by the de facto
authorities in Gaza in what could amount to
incitement to violence. The call by Hamas’s
leader in Gaza, Yahya Sinwar, on Palestinians
to use any means available to attack Israelis
reportedly contributed to attacks carried out
afterwards.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Authorities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
continued to unduly restrict freedom of
expression, association and assembly, at
times using excessive force to disperse
peaceful gatherings. In the Gaza Strip, a
general climate of repression, following a
brutal crackdown on peaceful protests
against the rising costs of living in 2019,
effectively deterred dissent, often leading to
self-censorship.
In the West Bank, the Fatah-controlled
Palestinian authorities continued to repress
public events that honoured opposition
figures or waved opposition flags. In June,
security forces in Hebron dispersed a
peaceful protest against rising costs of living
and detained the organizers. On 4 August,
security forces fired tear gas to disperse a
peaceful gathering in Tubas, in northern West
Bank, celebrating the release from 20 years
in Israeli detention of a member of a
dissident faction of Fatah.
On 23 October, President Abbas issued a
decree dissolving the Palestinian Doctors’
Syndicate, dominated by representatives
affiliated with opposing factions, and
appointing an unelected “constitutive
council”. He reversed his decision after
doctors across the West Bank went on strike.
On 4 November, security forces banned the
Palestinian People’s Congress, an umbrella
group of activists and politicians calling for
reforms of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization, from convening in Ramallah in
the West Bank. On 8 November, police
officers without a judicial warrant raided and
forcibly dispersed a press conference held by
the same group at its headquarters in

289

Ramallah, threatening participants and
journalists with batons.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
According to the Independent Commission
for Human Rights (ICHR), over 200
Palestinians were arbitrarily detained in the
West Bank and some 105 in the Gaza Strip.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained rife
in detention and interrogation centres in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, and complaints
were particularly common in the Jericho
detention centre in the West Bank run by the
interior ministry. Detainees reported being
beaten with clubs and batons, whipped on
the soles of their feet and subjected to stress
positions for hours. The ICHR received at
least 130 complaints of torture and other illtreatment against detaining authorities in the
West Bank, and at least 160 against the
police and internal security services in the
Gaza Strip.
According to the ICHR and the Palestinian
human rights NGO Lawyers for Justice,
authorities failed to take effective measures to
investigate torture allegations. In June, West
Bank security forces arrested without warrant
six men in relation to an explosion at a
carpentry workshop in Ramallah and tortured
and otherwise ill-treated them, according to
complaints submitted to the ICHR.1 Five of
them were placed in solitary confinement,
denied family visits, and subjected to further
abuse for going on hunger strike in
September.
On 16 October, Nasser Abu Obeid, a retired
major in the National Security Forces, died in
hospital after being transferred from a
Hamas-run military police detention centre in
Gaza where he was held under interrogation.
The ICHR called on the Gaza authorities to
investigate allegations of torture and medical
neglect during his detention. It appears that
the authorities did not act on the request.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Twenty years after their enforced
disappearance by Palestinian authorities from

290

a detention centre in the West Bank town of
Salfit, the fate of six men remained unknown.
Meanwhile, in order to pressure Israel into
signing a prisoner exchange deal, the de
facto authorities in Gaza published new
footage of Hisham al-Sayed, a Palestinian
citizen of Israel with mental disabilities, who
went missing after crossing into Gaza in
2015. The fate and whereabouts of Avera
Mengistu, an Israeli citizen with mental
disabilities who entered Gaza without
authorization in 2014, continued to be
unknown.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
According to the Women’s Centre for Legal
Aid and Counselling, 29 women were killed in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip by their
family members in apparent cases of
domestic violence. In September, the Gaza
authorities prevented sisters Wissam and
Fatimah al-Assi, aged 24 and 20 respectively,
from pursuing complaints for domestic
violence through courts by impeding them
from accessing a prosecutor to testify.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Authorities failed to prevent and investigate
homophobic and transphobic threats and
attacks.
On 9 July, security forces stood by and
watched as a mob beat youths and children
participating in a parade organized by Ashtar
Theatre in Ramallah that included rainbow
flags. The attack came amid a wave of
incitement to violence and hate speech
against LGBTI people and feminists that the
authorities failed to investigate.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In the West Bank, the trial of 14 low-ranking
security officers charged over the death of
Nizar Banat, a prominent dissident killed in
June 2021 shortly after his violent arrest,
proceeded before a military court amid
delays and smears of witnesses. No senior
officers were questioned or investigated as
part of the legal proceedings.2

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Authorities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip
failed to investigate unlawful killings and
attacks, including against Israeli civilians,
amongst other serious violations. This was
despite publicly renewing their commitment
to cooperate with independent investigations,
including by the ICC, into possible war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed
since 2014, and with the International Court
of Justice inquiry into the illegality of Israel’s
occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.
On 28 October, President Abbas issued a
decree creating the Supreme Council of
Judicial Bodies and Authorities and
appointed himself as its head. The council,
with full power over the judicial system,
further tightened the president’s grip on the
judiciary, hampered its independence, and
increased its subordination to the executive
power.

DEATH PENALTY
According to the Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights, courts in Gaza issued 27 new
death sentences in 2022, 11 more than in
2021. In a new trend, the courts of appeal in
the Gaza Strip increased five sentences
issued by lower courts from life imprisonment
to the death penalty. This occurred after
Gaza’s justice ministry established the
Supreme Criminal Committee, which
encouraged harsher sentencing ostensibly to
deter violent crime.
On 4 September, Hamas authorities carried
out the first executions in Gaza in five years.
One of the prisoners, convicted of murder,
had faced a grossly unfair trial.
1. “Palestinian authorities must investigate torture allegations of
hunger-striking prisoners and ensure their fair trial”, 2 November
2. “Palestine: Authorities have failed to ensure accountability for the
killing of Nizar Banat”, 24 June

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Head of state: Charles III (replaced Elizabeth II in
September), represented by Bob Dadae
Head of government: James Marape
During violence around national elections
dozens of people were killed. Dismissals of
journalists and new restrictions on them
undermined media freedom. Laws aimed at
strengthening protection against sexual and
gender-based violence were adopted, but
high rates of violence against women and
girls continued to be reported, including
following accusations of sorcery. Access to
adequate healthcare remained severely
restricted. The death penalty was abolished.

BACKGROUND
Parliament certified the Climate Change
(Management) (Amendment) Act 2021 in
February. The Act was aimed at declaring a
climate emergency, improving access to
climate adaptation funds and updating
national plans in line with the commitments
under the Paris Agreement. In October, the
first National Climate Change Summit was
held with government, business and civil
society partners, reaffirming climate
adaptation and mitigation priorities.
Parliamentary elections in August were
accompanied by widespread violence in
which an estimated 90,000 people were
displaced and schools and other public
buildings damaged or destroyed.

RIGHT TO LIFE
Election-related violence, fuelled by preexisting intercommunal tensions, resulted in
an estimated 50 deaths between May and
August.
In July, a 22-year-old woman was shot and
killed by police at a polling station in the
capital, Port Moresby. The police said they
were investigating but no one had been
charged by year’s end.

291

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In February, national broadcaster EMTV
dismissed all 24 staff in its newsroom after
they walked out in protest against the
suspension of EMTV’s head of news and
current affairs. Sincha Dimara was
suspended and later dismissed following her
critical reporting of police investigations into
possession of firearms and other illegal
activities by a high-profile Australian
businessman.
On 31 August, the Prime Minister’s office
took out advertisements in two daily
newspapers stating that the Prime Minister
would no longer accept direct inquiries from
the media and requiring journalists to submit
questions in writing. The following month,
more restrictive procedures for visa
applications by foreign journalists were
announced.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS AND GENDER-BASED
VIOLENCE
Parliament passed amendments to the
Family Protection Act in January which
included expanded definitions of assault,
psychological abuse, sexual assault and
aggravated family violence. It also removed
court fees for applications for protection
orders. However, discrimination against
women and gender-based violence remained
pervasive.
In April, a Special Parliamentary Committee
on gender-based violence, established in
2020, published its final report. Key findings
included severe under-resourcing of
protection services for women, such as those
relating to health, policing, counselling, safe
houses and prosecution. The government
had not acted on the Committee’s
recommendations by year’s end including
one calling for improved representation of
women in parliament; only two out of 118
members of parliament elected in August
were women. Women also remained severely
underrepresented in other areas of political
and public life.
In January, parliament passed amendments
to the Criminal Code criminalizing the act of
making accusations of sorcery against others,

292

or claiming to have supernatural powers to
identify “sorcerers”. Nevertheless, violent
attacks, predominantly against women and
girls, following accusations of sorcery
continued to be reported. In July,
approximately 12 women, including one who
was pregnant, were sexually assaulted and
burnt by community members in Enga
province after being accused of sorcery. Four
of the women died and others suffered
serious injuries.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Despite the ending of the offshore processing
agreement between the Papua New Guinean
and Australian governments in 2021,
approximately 100 refugees and asylum
seekers remained in Papua New Guinea. The
Australian government continued to provide
funding to Papua New Guinea but claimed to
have no further responsibility for those
remaining there.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
By the year’s end only approximately 5% of
the population was fully vaccinated against
Covid-19. Health clinics, particularly in rural
areas, were badly affected by electoral
violence and inter-ethnic fighting and some
were forced to close.

DEATH PENALTY
Amendments to the Criminal Code to abolish
the death penalty entered into force in April.1
1. Papua New Guinea: Increased Participation of Civil Society Hailed a
Success in Human Rights Review, 13 April

PARAGUAY
Republic of Paraguay
Head of state and government: Mario Abdo Benítez
Authorities continued to criminalize social
protest. Investigations into cases of torture
and other ill-treatment did not make
progress. Forced evictions remained a
serious problem, affecting the rights of
thousands of small-scale farmers and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Indigenous families. Authorities failed to
take action to protect LGBTI people and
human rights defenders. Sexual abuse of
children and girls’ forced pregnancies
remained serious concerns.

BACKGROUND
There were allegations of mismanagement in
the Attorney General’s Office and the
Ombudsman’s Office, resulting in the
resignation of the ombudsman.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
EXPRESSION
Restrictions on freedom of expression
persisted. In December, the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights issued a judgment in
the case of Santiago Leguizamón, a journalist
killed in 1991. The Court found Paraguay
responsible for violating the right to freedom
of expression, among other rights, and
ordered the state to provide reparation.
Several students, including activist Vivian
Genes, continued to face charges of arson in
connection with a fire at the ruling party’s
headquarters in 2021. The fire occurred in
the context of social protests over the
mismanagement of resources to deal with the
Covid-19 pandemic. Judicial authorities
decided to proceed to an oral and public trial
in the case.
In April, after years of criminal proceedings,
Aurora Lezcano, a student criminalized for
participating in a social protest at her
university in 2017, was acquitted.
Journalist Juan Carlos Lezcano was
acquitted of charges of defamation in the
second of five cases brought against him for
reporting on irregularities in public
administration. In November, he as well as
the director of the print media outlet for
which he worked were convicted of
defamation in the third of these cases and
fined.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Impunity for torture and other ill-treatment
persisted.
In April, the National Mechanism for the
Prevention of Torture confirmed that senior

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

cadets at the military academy “Francisco
Solano López” had inflicted torture and other
ill-treatment on junior personnel. It also
stated that human rights violations persisted
in penitentiary facilities.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office failed to
make progress regarding the complaints
relating to 35 survivors of torture and illtreatment at the naval base of Ciudad del
Este in 2020.

IMPUNITY
Ten years after the Curuguaty massacre – an
operation in which police forcibly evicted 70
members of a small-scale farming
community, including women and children,
and which resulted in the deaths of 11
farmers and six policemen – the authorities
had yet to establish responsibility for the
violations that took place or ensure justice,
truth and reparation for victims and their
families.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Authorities made insufficient progress in
realizing economic, social and cultural rights,
affecting the most marginalized
communities above all.
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights held a hearing on agrarian policies
that have led to a growing number of forced
evictions. These evictions have resulted in
arbitrary detentions and killings and left
thousands of small-scale farmers and
Indigenous families without livelihoods.
Legislators passed a new law creating a
commission to study the recovery of
improperly obtained lands during the military
dictatorship.
Despite the deficiencies of the health
system exposed by the Covid-19 pandemic,
the state had still not taken concrete steps to
establish, through participatory processes, a
universal public health system that
guaranteed minimum basic needs and
primary healthcare for the population.

293

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Paraguay remained one of the countries most
vulnerable to climate change in South
America. However, authorities continued to
allow the expansion of monocultures,
possibly undermining native ecosystems.
Marginalized communities were those most
affected by this and other aspects of
environmental degradation, such as
deforestation and the use of agrochemicals
and fertilizers.

accordance with their gender identity since
2016. In December, the Supreme Court of
Justice removed legal obstacles to the case of
Mariana Sepúlveda proceeding and being
heard by the relevant courts.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Despite numerous recommendations from
UN treaty bodies and special procedures,
authorities failed to establish a specific
protection mechanism for human rights
defenders.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

Authorities continued to disregard the rights
of Indigenous peoples.
The Tekoha Sauce community of the Avá
Guaraní were still waiting for the return of
lands seized decades earlier by Itaipú
Binacional. During the year, the company
pursued an ongoing lawsuit in an attempt to
evict members of the community from
another part of their ancestral land where
they were living.
In June, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights noted that Paraguay continued to
violate the rights of the Yakye Axa Indigenous
community of the Enxet people and
announced stronger monitoring measures to
guarantee the community’s access to its own
territory, as well as the Court’s intention to
visit the country in the coming months.

The Ministry of Children and Adolescents
announced the content of the National
Programme to Prevent Sexual Abuse of
Children and Adolescents and Provide
Comprehensive Care was being
developed and, from August, provided
updates on its progress.
The Public Prosecutor's office documented
1,452 cases of ill-treatment and 3,804 cases
of sexual abuse of children during 2022.
As of November, the Ministry of Public
Health and Social Welfare had recorded
10,332 births to adolescents between the
ages of 15 and 19, of whom 570 were
Indigenous adolescents, and 420 cases of
births to girls aged between 10 and 14, of
whom 84 were Indigenous girls.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

The Ministry of Women’s Affairs recorded 36
cases of femicide during the year.
An appeals court declared that the statute
of limitations had expired in the case of a
priest convicted in 2021 of sexually harassing
Alexa Torres and dismissed the case. Alexa
appealed this decision to the Supreme Court,
which at the end of the year had not yet ruled
on the case.
In November, the press published a leaked
internal Ministry of Foreign Affairs circular
calling on all Paraguayan diplomats to avoid
using language that refers to “gender issues”,
as well as terms such as “diversity”,
“intersectionality” and “sexual and
reproductive rights”. The Education Ministry
publicly called on all teachers and school

Authorities continued to neglect the rights of
LGBTI people.
No progress was reported in criminal cases
concerning attacks on LGBTI people during a
2019 Pride march in the city of
Hernandarias. The Hernandarias municipality
had banned the march in part as “contrary to
public morals”. A lawsuit against the
municipality’s decision filed by Amnesty
International in October 2019 remained
stalled.
Paraguay was denounced before the UN
Human Rights Committee for violating the
rights of Yren Rotela and Mariana Sepúlveda,
two trans women who have been demanding
the right to legally change their names in

294

WOMEN’S RIGHTS

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

directors to continue to abide by a 2017
resolution banning educational materials on
gender issues and calling on all teachers to
file official complaints if such material is
found.

PERU
Republic of Peru
Head of state and government: Dina Boluarte Zegarra
(replaced José Pedro Castillo Terrones in December)
Authorities undermined freedom of
expression and assembly. By the end of the
year, at least 22 people had died; dozens
more, including a number of police
officials, had been injured, many of them
by firearms, in the context of the unlawful
repression of demonstrations. Authorities
failed to meet the needs of communities
affected by environmental pollution. Six
human rights defenders were killed in
regions affected by illegal logging and drug
trafficking. The right to comprehensive
sexuality education was put at risk. Women
and girls, including Venezuelan refugees,
continued to experience multiple forms of
violence. Discrimination and attacks on
LGBTI people persisted.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Official statements undermined freedom of
the press. The National Press Association
reported 303 attacks on the press during the
year, 63 of them in the context of the political
crisis in December.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND IMPUNITY
At least three people died during protests
following National Police interventions during
the first half of the year.
In December, during the political crisis that
followed the ousting of former president
Pedro Castillo, protests broke out in different
regions and violence in the country spiralled.
In several instances, the response of the
authorities to protests resulted in human
rights violations, including unlawful use of
force. At least 22 people died during

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

demonstrations in the Apurímac, Ayacucho,
Arequipa, La Libertad and Junín regions and
dozens more were injured. Investigations into
the deaths were continuing at the end of the
year.
The Police Protection Law remained in
force, effectively limiting accountability for
human rights violations by security forces.
Former president Manuel Merino and other
high-ranking officials continued to enjoy
immunity from prosecution regarding deaths
and injuries during protests in November
2020 and the judiciary suspended
investigations into the police officials
implicated.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Congress again shelved a bill to ratify the
Escazú Agreement.
Authorities failed to address the needs of
communities affected by pollution caused by
metals and other toxic substances, despite a
special multisectoral plan involving a range of
ministries and available funding for six
regional governments for specialized medical
care for these communities.
In February, a UN verification mission found
that an 11,000-barrel oil spill in January by
La Pampilla refinery, operated by the Spanish
multinational Repsol, had impacted the
livelihood of five local communities in Lima
and Callao. In July, the Ombudsperson’s
Office noted that some of those affected had
yet to be identified and receive reparation
and that neither the authorities nor the
company had ensured an adequate clean-up
of the affected area.
In September, 2,500 barrels of oil were
spilled in the Loreto region by the company
PetroPerú. According to the Ombudsperson’s
Office, it seriously affected the community of
Cuninico and other Indigenous communities,
leaving them without food and water for
several days and violating their right to live in
a healthy environment.
Peru did not submit an update to its 2020
NDC. According to the Climate Action
Tracker, its current NDC was rated
“insufficient”.

295

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
There were official reports that at least six
human rights defenders were killed during
the year in the Madre de Dios, Loreto, Junín
and Huánuco regions. The authorities failed
to provide sufficient security in regions where
human rights defenders faced heightened
risks due to illegal logging and drug
trafficking.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
High levels of inequality, low investment in
public health, due in part to insufficient tax
revenue, played a key role in Peru
experiencing the highest Covid-19 death rate
per million people of any country in the
region. Despite this, there were no major
reforms to the health system or health
spending, which remained at 3.2% of GDP,
far below the 6% recommended by the
WHO.1

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In March, a Constitutional Court ruling
declared a lawsuit filed by Indigenous
communities regarding mining concessions
on their territories inadmissible on grounds
that prior consultation does not have
constitutional rank. The Court did not take
into consideration the constitutional rank of
international human rights treaties ratified by
Peru.
In June, Congress recognized Self-Defence
and Rural Development Committees, which
often operate in rural areas, as part of the
national security system with the right to use
lethal weapons. There were concerns this
could undermine the rights of traditional
communities entitled to have their own
traditional guards to protect their territories.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Between January and November, the Ministry
of Women and Vulnerable Populations
recorded 25,403 cases of sexual violence
(95% of the victims were women) and 7,549
rapes of minors.
The Ombudsperson’s Office reported 124
femicides; in 21 cases the women had
initially been reported as missing. The

296

Ministry also classified disappearances of
women as a form of gender-based violence.
According to the National Registry of
Information on Missing Persons of the
Ministry of the Interior, 11,524 girls and
women were reported missing during the
year, constituting 61% of the total number of
cases.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In May, Congress passed a law allowing some
parents’ organizations to veto aspects of
school curriculums, undermining the right to
comprehensive sexuality education.
In June, a bill was submitted to Congress
which, if approved, would jeopardize access
to abortion.
The trials of former president Alberto
Fujimori and three of his ministers related to
forced sterilizations started in March. In
November, the Judiciary ordered
administrative reparations be awarded to
survivors of forced sterilizations who had still
not received reparations.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Peru remained one of the few countries in
South America not to recognize transgender
identity or same-sex marriage.
In June, the organization Féminas reported
that a transgender woman was shot and
injured. The authorities failed to keep an
official register of continuing threats and
attacks against transgender people.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Thousands of people were unable to access
migratory regularization programmes, which
remained onerous and inadequate. The
system to process asylum applications
remained suspended.2
Venezuelan refugee women living in Peru
faced multiple forms of violence.3
Discrimination and negative stereotypes
related to their nationality and gender identity
hindered their access to justice and
healthcare.
In April, authorities summarily expelled 29
female foreign nationals without due process.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Authorities did not consider their protection
needs, whether they were victims of
trafficking, or the risks they faced on return to
their country of origin. In November, human
rights organizations initiated a lawsuit against
the officials for these actions.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Thirty years after the Cantuta massacre, the
Public Prosecutor’s Office recommenced a
forensic investigation to recover the remains
of five of the victims not yet found.
In March, the Constitutional Court ordered
the release of former president Alberto
Fujimori from prison, restoring the so-called
humanitarian pardon granted in 2017. The
Inter-American Court of Human Rights urged
the authorities not to comply with an order
that was in breach of a previous ruling
invalidating the pardon. He remained
detained at the end of the year.
1. Americas: Unequal and Lethal, 27 April
2. Peru: Submission to the 34th Session of the Committee on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families, 23 February (Spanish only)
3. Unprotected: Gender-based Violence against Venezuelan Refugee
Women in Colombia and Peru, 12 July

PHILIPPINES
Republic of the Philippines
Head of state and government: Ferdinand Marcos Jr.
(replaced Rodrigo Roa Duterte in June)
Unlawful killings under the “war on drugs”
continued and impunity for thousands of
past killings remained entrenched.
Repression of dissent intensified and
freedom of expression was further restricted
as human rights defenders, political
activists, journalists and others were
subjected to unlawful killings, arbitrary
arrest and detention. Authorities blocked
the websites and ordered the closure of
independent media.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

BACKGROUND
In May elections, the son of former President
Marcos, Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos Jr.,
was elected president and Sara DuterteCarpio, daughter of former President Duterte,
vice president. The “war on drugs”, initiated
in 2016 and associated with grave human
rights violations, continued. In October, over
150 people died in floods and landslides
triggered by a severe tropical storm.

EXTRAJUDICIAL KILLINGS AND
IMPUNITY
The number of killings committed in the
context of the “war on drugs” rose after the
new administration took office. According to
the university-based research group Dahas,
324 drug-related killings by the police and
other unknown assailants were recorded
during 2022, 175 of which took place after
July.
In September, the Department of Justice
announced it was filing murder charges
against at least 30 police officers involved in
raids in Calabarzon region in 2021 targeting
activists in which nine people were killed. In
August, the Department announced it would
review 250 cases involving killings in Central
Luzon during anti-drug operations. However,
the vast majority of killings related to the “war
on drugs” remained uninvestigated.
In June, the ICC Prosecutor filed an
application with the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber to
resume investigations into crimes against
humanity, including in the context of the “war
on drugs”. The Prosecutor stated that
investigations by national authorities were
inadequate and that the suspension of ICC
investigations in late 2021 at the request of
the Philippine government was therefore
unwarranted.1 The government maintained
its position of non-cooperation with the ICC.2
In October, the UN Human Rights Council
failed to renew OHCHR’s mandate to monitor
and report on the human rights situation and
progress towards accountability in the
Philippines, despite a recommendation by
the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights that it should do so.3 The joint UN
human rights capacity-building and technical

297

assistance programme continued but was
criticized for lack of progress in key areas.
In November, activists Ericson Acosta and
Joseph Jimenez were killed after they were
reportedly captured by government security
forces. The killings took place amid
increasing armed clashes between the
military and the armed opposition group, the
New People’s Army, in Negros Occidental
province.4

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The continued linking of organizations and
individuals to communist groups by the
authorities and their supporters, known as
“red-tagging”, led to further killings, arbitrary
detentions and harassment of human rights
defenders, political activists and others.
On 15 January, unknown assailants shot
dead Silvestre Fortades and Rose Maria
Galias, both members of a “red-tagged”
farmers’ and labour rights organization, in
Sorsogon province.
On 18 February, police arrested Natividad
Castro, a “red-tagged” doctor who provided
medical care for Indigenous communities in
Mindanao. In March, the Bayugan City
Region Trial Court dismissed charges of
kidnapping and illegal detention against her,
but reversed the decision in June. The courtordered warrant to re-arrest Natividad Castro
had not been acted on at year end.
In August, police arrested Adora Faye de
Vera, a “red-tagged” human rights defender
in Metro Manila. She was previously
arbitrarily detained during the martial law
period in the 1970s under former President
Marcos and continued to campaign for
justice for other martial law victims. Adora
Faye de Vera remained in police detention at
year end, accused of murder and rebellion in
relation to an alleged ambush in 2009 in
which members of the security forces were
killed.5
The “red-tagging” in September of a judge,
Marlo Magdoza-Malagar, by a former
spokesperson of the National Task Force to
End Local Communist Armed Conflict drew
strong criticism from the Supreme Court. The
“red-tagging” was connected with the judge’s

298

dismissal of a Department of Justice petition
seeking to designate the Communist Party of
the Philippines and its armed wing, the New
People’s Army, as terrorist groups.
Prisoner of conscience and former Senator
Leila de Lima spent her sixth year in
detention over politically motivated drugrelated charges, despite the retraction of
testimonies by key witnesses.6 In August, the
Office of the Ombudsman dismissed a
separate bribery case against her.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Physical attacks and judicial harassment of
journalists intensified and independent news
sites were blocked.
At least two journalists were killed in 2022,
including prominent radio broadcaster
Percival Mabasa (known as Percy Lapid) who
was shot on 3 October in Las Piñas City,
Metro Manila.7 A man allegedly involved in
the killing was murdered in prison shortly
afterwards. The head of the Bureau of
Corrections, who Percy Lapid had criticized
on air for corruption, was subsequently
named as a suspect in investigations which
remained ongoing at year end.
In June, the National Telecommunications
Commission (NTC) ordered internet service
providers to block access to 28 websites,
including those belonging to independent
media groups accused by the government of
affiliation with or supporting “terrorists and
terrorist organizations”. In response to a legal
challenge by news outlet Bulatlat, the NTC
was ordered to lift the order to block its
website. In October, Bulatlat managing editor
Ronalyn Olea was “red-tagged” by a news
anchor on a pro-government TV network who
accused her on air of being an internet
operator for communist organizations.
In July, the Court of Appeals upheld the
conviction for cyber libel against Nobel
laureate Maria Ressa and Reynaldo
Santos Jr. A second appeal was rejected in
October. The case against the two,
respectively the founder and a former
researcher with the independent media outlet
Rappler, was connected with a 2012 article
alleging links between a businessman and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

drugs/human trafficking. They faced over six
years in prison if their final appeal to the
Supreme Court is unsuccessful.8 At least
seven other cases against Maria Ressa
remained pending at year end. An order to
close Rappler remained under appeal.
In August, activist and former vicepresidential candidate, Walden Bello, was
arrested on charges of cyber libel filed by the
former public information officer for Vice
President Sara Duterte. A motion by Walden
Bello to dismiss the charges, which related to
comments linking the officer to drugs but
which were widely regarded as aimed at
silencing an opposition voice, was pending at
year end.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS

5. “Philippines: Torture survivor faces third arrest: Adora Faye de Vera”,
18 October
6. “Philippines: Immediately end arbitrary detention of Senator de Lima,
guarantee safety of witnesses, and investigate serious allegations of
coercion”, 6 May
7. “Philippines: Radio journalist killing bears ‘hallmarks of extrajudicial
execution’”, 4 October
8. “Philippines: Media repression worsens as court affirms cyber libel
conviction against Maria Ressa”, 8 July
9. “Philippines: Driven from their ancestral land, the ManoboPulangiyon struggles to survive by the side of a road”, 30 September

POLAND
Republic of Poland
Head of state: Andrzej Duda
Head of government: Mateusz Morawiecki

In April, security guards for a private
plantation firm fired shots injuring at least five
people during a visit by a presidential
candidate to meet with leaders of the
Manobo-Pulangiyon community in Bukidnon
province.
In September, the community called on the
government to investigate the shooting,
legally recognize their ancestral land claims
and put an end to land encroachment by
private companies that has displaced the
community.9

Access to abortion was further limited.
Criminal charges were used to curtail
freedom of expression. The authorities
continued to erode the independence of the
judiciary. Freedom of peaceful assembly
was restricted. Violations of LGBTI rights
persisted. Positive moves were made to
accommodate between 1 and 2 million
refugees from Ukraine, although official
hostility continued towards refugees and
migrants who arrived since 2021 via
Belarus.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

President Marcos Jr. committed to tackle
climate change on taking office. However,
budget cuts, including to the national Climate
Change Commission, and a push towards the
use of nuclear and fossil fuels raised
concerns among environmental groups about
whether adaptation plans and commitments
to increase the use of renewable energy
sources would be met.

A Constitutional Tribunal ruling that abortion
on the grounds of serious fetal impairment
was unconstitutional entered into force in
January and further limited access to
abortion. In April, UN experts again urged the
authorities to decriminalize abortion.
The family of a pregnant woman called for
an investigation into the role the denial of
abortion services may have played in her
death; the case led to protests in October and
November calling for justice and reforms. In
June, the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) formally requested a response from
Poland on a further five cases regarding
denial of access to abortion services.
In July, the government published data
indicating that only 107 abortions were
provided by hospitals in 2021, a drastic drop

1. “Philippines: Justice another step closer as ICC Prosecutor requests
to resume investigation in Philippines”, 24 June
2. “Philippines: Decision to not rejoin the ICC statute will not prevent
investigation”, 10 August
3. “Philippines: Lack of action by the UN Human Rights Council risks
abandoning victims of human rights abuses”, 15 September
4. “Philippines: Investigate killing of activists and address violence in
Negros province”, 6 December

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

299

from 1,076 the year before. However, in
October, the organization Abortion Without
Borders published data showing that in the
12 months since October 2021 they had
supported 44,000 people, including 1,515
women fleeing the war in Ukraine, to access
abortion services.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
In April, the trial began of human rights
defender Justyna Wydrzynska, charged
under draconian and discriminatory laws for
providing information to and supporting a
pregnant woman who needed a safe
abortion.1 Also in April, UN experts called on
the authorities to drop all charges against her
and to cease targeting human
rights defenders, in
particular those who advocate against the
country’s restrictive abortion law.

UNFAIR TRIALS
During the year, the government continued to
target judges and prosecutors who raised
concerns over reforms to the judiciary. Two
judges remained suspended by the
Disciplinary Chamber. One of them, Piotr
Gąciarek, was not allowed to work despite the
ruling restoring his full judicial rights.
Numerous disciplinary proceedings were
pending against other independent judges,
some of them suspended for applying rulings
of the ECtHR and the EU Court of Justice.
International concern over the erosion of
judicial independence continued. In
February, the ECtHR ruled that changes to
the procedure for appointing judges to the
Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court meant
that body could no longer be regarded as an
independent and impartial court. In October,
the ECtHR ruled in the case Juszczyszyn v.
Poland that the suspension of Judge Paweł
Juszczyszyn by the Disciplinary Chamber of
the Supreme Court violated his rights to a fair
trial and a private life.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, several NGOs, including CIVICUS,
criticized the continued practice by the
government and its supporters of using so-

300

called “cyclical assemblies”, defined as those
organized on a regular basis, to impede
lawful and peaceful counter protests being
held at the same place and time. In October,
a “cyclical assembly” was used by members
of the ruling Law and Justice party to prevent
counter protests during a monthly
commemoration in the city of Kraków of the
Smolensk plane crash which killed a former
president.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
By the end of the year, 79 Polish
administrative units still declared themselves
so-called “LGBT-free zones”, although many
others were forced to withdraw a similar
resolution as a result of pressure from civil
society and the European Commission.
LGBTI rights defenders faced ongoing
criminal and civil proceedings. Some, like
activists from the interactive map Atlas of
Hatred, were subjected to Strategic Lawsuits
Against Public Participation (SLAPPs).2
In January, during court proceedings
brought by one activist who had been
arbitrarily detained for 24 hours after the socalled Rainbow Night protest in 2020, the
police officer who arrested him admitted:
“We were instructed to stop all persons
displaying the colours of LGBT, regardless of
how they behaved.”
In March, the District Court in Gdańsk ruled
in favour of the NGO Tolerado in a private
criminal case challenging the use of vehicles
known as “homophobuses”, which were
driven around Polish cities carrying
homophobic slogans and banners.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In February, a rapid relief effort was
organized at the border and through the
generosity of civil society and willingness of
the authorities, Poland received over 7 million
people fleeing Ukraine after Russia’s attack.
In July, the UN Special Rapporteur on the
human rights of migrants praised the
response and recommended that the Polish
authorities ensure the sustainability of the
support provided to Ukrainian refugees, given
the strain of such a sudden and large influx

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

of people needing access to housing,
healthcare and education. At the end of the
year some 1 to 2 million were still residing in
Poland and there were concerns about
access to education for Ukrainian children,
given language challenges, among other
issues.
Such treatment contrasted starkly with the
treatment of refugees and migrants reaching
the country via the Belarusian border since
July 2021, who continued to face official
hostility. Border guards used violence and
unlawful force to compel people to leave
Polish territory back into the hands of
Belarusian officials who subjected them to
further serious abuses.
Most of those seeking asylum were detained
by the Polish authorities in overcrowded and
inadequate facilities, without access to fair
asylum proceedings, and subjected to
abusive treatment by guards. Many were
forcibly returned to their countries of origin;
some were sedated by officials in order to
compel them to travel.3 In March five activists
were arrested and charged with “assisting
illegal entry” for providing humanitarian
assistance to a group of people, including
children, stranded in a forest on the Polish/
Belarusian border; they were struggling to
survive with no water, food, shelter or access
to medical assistance.
State financial support for those hosting
refugees also lasted only 120 days. The
Assistance Law for refugees from Ukraine
which facilitates, among other things, access
to the labour market and healthcare, was not
applied equally to all those fleeing the
conflict. The UN Special Rapporteur noted a
“double standards approach” to third country
nationals not covered by this framework.
Specific concerns were also expressed by
NGOs about the discriminatory treatment by
officials of Roma refugees from Ukraine.4
Racism and attacks on non-Ukrainian
citizens also occurred.5

staff of the largest opposition party during
parliamentary elections, as well as against
several other members of the opposition and
their staff.6 The authorities refused to initiate
any additional investigations until September,
when a court ordered an investigation into
the use of spyware against a prosecutor.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
In August, the Ministry of Justice proposed
further law reforms regarding protection
orders for survivors of domestic violence,
moving towards compliance with
requirements under the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence Against Women and Domestic
Violence (Istanbul Convention). However, no
reforms were made to define rape on the
basis of an absence of consent or to
recognize economic violence, in line with
obligations under the Convention.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In October, it was revealed that the
Prosecutor’s Office had discontinued the
investigation against the former director of
the secret service, Zbigniew Siemiątkowski,
regarding the secret CIA prison facility in
Stare Kiejkuty. The decision had been taken
in 2020 but not previously been made public.
1. “Poland: Charges against activist accused of aiding an abortion
must be dropped”, 7 April
2. Poland: “They Treated Us Like Criminals”: From Shrinking Space to
Harassment of LGBTI Activists, 20 July
3. “Poland: Cruelty not compassion, at Europe’s other borders”, 11 April
4. “Poland: ‘We came here, they didn't want to let us in’: Roma from
Ukraine treated as unwanted refugees”, 27 September (Polish only)
5. “Poland: Authorities must act to protect people fleeing Ukraine from
further suffering”, 22 March
6. “Poland: The use of the Pegasus software to spy on politicians is a
threat to civil society”, 7 January (Polish only)

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
Amnesty International revealed that Pegasus
spyware from the surveillance company NSO
Group had been used against the chief of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

301

PORTUGAL
Portuguese Republic
Head of state: Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa
Head of government: António Costa
Concerns about police brutality and
accountability for police misconduct
persisted. The safeguards against genderbased violence remained inadequate.
Thousands of people continued to live in
inadequate housing conditions. Migrant
workers in the agricultural sector suffered
from exploitative conditions of employment.
Over 1,000 people died of causes related to
extreme heatwaves.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of excessive use of force and other
ill-treatment by police officers persisted.
Between May and June, the Council of
Europe (CoE) Committee for the Prevention of
Torture (CPT) visited numerous prisons and
places of detention to examine detainees’
treatment and conditions. The visit aimed to
follow up on the extensive list of
recommendations made by the CPT in its
report following a 2019 visit, including
assessing the effectiveness of investigations
into allegations of ill-treatment by law
enforcement officials.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
AND DISCRIMINATION
In July, following its periodic review of
Portugal, the CEDAW Committee criticized
the inadequacy of the legislative and
institutional framework and the insufficiency
of services to address gender-based violence
against women. It also expressed concern
about school dropout rates among Roma girls
due to child and/or forced marriage and early
pregnancy and noted that these issues were
often ignored by the authorities.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The government took insufficient measures to
improve housing conditions and guarantee
sufficient affordable housing despite data

302

released at the end of 2021 showing that
over 38,000 people were in housing need.
Reports of forced evictions leaving people in
worse housing situations – including, in some
cases, homelessness – persisted, a situation
which disproportionately affected people of
Roma and African descent.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In January, investigative media reports
exposed exploitative labour conditions and
inadequate housing affecting migrant
workers, mostly from south Asian countries,
employed in the agricultural sector in the
southern region of Odemira.
In June, the CoE Group of Experts on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings
(GRETA), which had visited the country in
2021, noted that labour exploitation
remained the most common type of
exploitation, affecting especially the
agricultural and catering sectors.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In September, following a visit, the UN
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and
the Environment concluded that the
authorities needed to increase the pace of
action to address, in particular, air pollution
and waste management, and to prevent
wildfires. According to data from the
Directorate-General of Health, as of July,
there had been more than 1,000 deaths
related to extreme heatwaves in 2022. As of
August, according to the Portuguese Institute
for Sea and Atmosphere, 60.4% of Portugal
was experiencing severe drought and 39.6%
extreme drought.

PUERTO RICO
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
Head of state: Joseph Biden
Head of government: Pedro Rafael Pierluisi Urrutia
Killings by police disproportionately
affected low-income racially mixed
communities. Activists protested

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

environmental degradation. A total of five
bills seeking to restrict access to abortion
were defeated.

Aguadilla on the grounds that the
construction breached environmental laws.

BACKGROUND

On various occasions during the year, the
authorities responded to protests over
development plans in areas of environmental
importance by deploying a disproportionate
number of police.
In August, hundreds of people protested
against the island’s electricity company over
electricity outages and the rising cost of
energy bills. There were reports of excessive
use of force by the police and of violence by
protesters.

In September, Hurricane Fiona resulted in
widespread flooding, leaving 1.5 million
people temporarily without electricity,
according to news reports. At least 39 people
died following the hurricane, either as a
direct result of the hurricane or due to health
issues aggravated by electricity outages.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
In March, the NGO Kilómetro 0 published a
report highlighting ongoing concerns around
killings by the police on the island. The report
found that law enforcement officials killed at
least 71 people between 2014 and 2020, an
average of 10 people each year, and that a
significant number of those shot were not
carrying a firearm.
The report also found that people living in
low-income racially mixed communities were
twice as likely to be killed by the police as
those living in mostly white low-income
communities.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In February, according to news reports, a
court blocked the construction of a
recreational area in a condominium close to
the beach in the town of Rincón on several
grounds, including that part of the land was
protected as it is important habitat for
endangered species such as sea turtles and
part of it was at high risk of flooding. The
government had given permission for the
development despite environmental
concerns.
In April, also according to media reports,
the civil society organization Surfrider Puerto
Rico Foundation criticized the development
of housing in the seaside town of Aguadilla,
arguing that it would destroy environmentally
important land and vegetation.
In May, the Department of Natural and
Environmental Resources stopped some
other works that were being carried out in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Between January and November, according
to Puerto Rico’s Observatory on Gender
Equity, there were 70 gender-based killings of
women, compared with 58 for the same
period in 2021. The number of femicides in
2022 was the highest for four years.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In Puerto Rico, abortion is permitted at any
stage of a pregnancy when carried out by a
doctor to conserve the life or health,
including the mental health, of the pregnant
person.1
In June, the US Supreme Court overturned
the decision in Roe vs Wade, which protected
the right to abortion at the federal level,
leaving decisions about access to abortion to
individual US states.
By November, a total of five bills seeking to
restrict access to abortion were before the
House of Representatives. However, feminist
organizations, including the Coalición por un
Aborto Libre, Seguro y Accesible and Inter
Mujeres, raised concerns that restrictions on
abortion access would disproportionately
affect women on low incomes and women
experiencing gender-based violence. These
bills were subsequently defeated in an
internal vote in the House of Representatives
of Puerto Rico.
The Department of Education announced
that it would implement a new curriculum on
equality and respect in 2023. This

303

curriculum was selected instead of another
curriculum with a gender perspective that
had been developed by human rights
organizations and feminist groups in
response to the declaration of a state of
emergency regarding gender-based violence.

FIFA and Qatar to compensate migrant
workers and expand the Workers’ Support
and Insurance Fund to include all deaths and
other abuses of human rights related to the
preparations for the World Cup.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

Despite the government’s ongoing efforts to
reform its labour system, thousands of
migrant workers continued to face labour
abuses.1
In August, the government said that over
300,000 migrant workers had been allowed
to change jobs without the permission of their
employers since October 2020, when a
reform was introduced. However, some
migrant workers who applied to change jobs
continued to face barriers or retaliatory
measures by their employers, including
charges filed against them for “absconding”
or having their residence permits cancelled.
Migrant workers still commonly faced wage
theft by employers, despite government
attempts to address non-payment of wages,
including by strengthening the monitoring
system, setting up labour committees and
operating a fund to expedite payment. In
August, hundreds of workers protested in the
capital Doha against their employers who
owed them up to six months’ wages. They
were arrested the same month en masse
after which hundreds were finally paid their
arrears and then deported to their home
countries. After years of patchy
operationalization, the state-run
compensation fund is said to have paid out
over USD 320 million for unpaid wages and
benefits between October 2020 and
September 2022. However, many workers
entitled to payments were left out or received
capped compensation.
The authorities continued to fail to
investigate properly the deaths of migrant
workers and hold employers or authorities
accountable, precluding any assessment of
whether the deaths were work-related and
depriving families of the opportunity to
receive compensation from the employer or
authorities.

In May, Puerto Rico’s Commission on Human
Rights and Labour Affairs dropped proposals
for a bill of rights for LGBTI people.
In July, the Department of Health ended the
requirement for health professionals to
receive continuous education about LGBTI
issues. However, following public pressure, it
reinstated the requirement, originally
included in Executive Order 398 of 2018.
The General Prosecutor’s Office failed to
make progress in bringing to justice those
responsible for the killing of Alexa, a
transgender woman, in 2020.
1. “Puerto Rico: Protect access to abortion”, 18 April

QATAR
State of Qatar
Head of state: Tamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani
Head of government: Khalid bin Khalifa bin Abdulaziz
Al Thani
Migrant workers including domestic workers
continued to face a range of abuses,
including wage theft, forced labour,
exploitation and abuse despite reforms.
Authorities repressed freedom of expression
to silence critical voices. Women continued
to face discrimination in law and practice
and needed the permission of a male
guardian to study, travel or marry. Laws
continued to discriminate against LGBTI
people, putting them at risk of arrest and
torture.

BACKGROUND
Qatar hosted the 2022 FIFA World Cup
between 20 November and 18 December.
In November, the European Parliament
urged football’s international governing body

304

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Domestic workers, most of whom are
women, continued to face some of the
harshest working conditions and abuses,
including verbal, physical and sexual assault.
The authorities failed to implement measures
introduced in 2017 to protect them from
labour abuses. Women domestic workers
who managed to flee abusive employers
lacked access to safe shelter. In October, the
government reopened the Qatari House for
Human Care shelter for victims of human
trafficking, which had been closed since the
onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. While the
shelter could offer abused women muchneeded refuge on a referral basis, it appeared
not to be accessible on a walk-in basis.
The authorities continued to ban migrant
workers from forming and joining trade
unions, a right afforded to Qatari nationals.
Many migrant workers faced discrimination
on the basis of race, nationality and
language. For instance, security guards
interviewed by Amnesty International said
that management from their companies treat
employees differently depending on their
nationality, race and language, including in
terms of their rate of pay and working
conditions and locations.
FORCED LABOUR AND OTHER ABUSES
Forced labour and other abuses continued to
be rampant, particularly in domestic work
and the private security sector.
Amnesty International documented the
working conditions of migrant workers across
Qatar’s private security sector, including
guards deployed at World Cup stadiums and
various sporting tournaments.2 Guards
interviewed spoke about the wide range of
abuses they faced, including excessive
working hours, lack of rest days, and arbitrary
or disproportionate financial penalties, as well
as underpayment of overtime work –
conditions that amounted to forced labour.
Many also highlighted their dangerous
working conditions when deployed for long
periods outside in searing heat, after which
they returned to substandard living
conditions and often insanitary, companyprovided accommodation, frequently sleeping
on bunk beds in overcrowded rooms. All

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

workers described the impact of such
treatment, including physical and
psychological exhaustion, suffering and
anguish. In August, Qatar’s Government
Communication Office told Amnesty
International that it had detected 230
“excessive working hours violations” between
October 2021 and August 2022.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Authorities continued to curtail freedom of
expression, using abusive laws to stifle critical
voices.
On 10 May, the Criminal Court of First
Instance sentenced brothers Hazza and
Rashed bin Ali Abu Shurayda al-Marri, both
lawyers, to life in prison for offences that
included contesting laws ratified by the Emir,
“threatening” the Emir on social media,
compromising the independence of the state,
organizing unauthorized public meetings,
and “violating” social values online. Two other
men were convicted in their absence of the
same offences; one was sentenced to life
imprisonment, the other to 15 years in
prison.3
Authorities continued to repress press
freedom by imposing restrictions on
broadcasters, including banning them from
filming in certain locations such as
government buildings, hospitals, universities,
migrant workers’ accommodation sites and
private homes.
During the World Cup, football fans who
showed their support for the popular
uprising in Iran were harassed by security
forces, including by having flags and
banners confiscated.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
Women continued to face discrimination in
law and practice. Under the guardianship
system, women still needed the permission of
a male guardian, usually their husband,
father, brother, grandfather or uncle, to
marry, study abroad on government
scholarships, work in many government jobs,
travel abroad if aged under 25 and access
reproductive healthcare.

305

Family law discriminated against women,
including by making it much more difficult for
women than men to seek a divorce, and
placing women at a severe economic
disadvantage if they sought a divorce or if
their husband left them.
While the country’s Family Law provides that
women have the right to not be physically
harmed by their husbands, women remained
inadequately protected against domestic
violence by others in the absence of a
domestic violence law.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Qatari laws continued to discriminate against
LGBTI people. The Penal Code criminalizes a
range of same-sex consensual sexual acts.
Article 296(3) punishes with imprisonment
anyone who “leads or induces or tempts a
male, by any means, into committing an act
of sodomy or debauchery”. Article 296(4)
punishes with imprisonment anyone who
“induces or tempts a male or female, by any
means, into committing acts contrary to
morals or that are unlawful”.
Activists reported that six people were
arbitrarily arrested by security officials and
tortured and otherwise ill-treated for their
sexual orientation.
Despite vague reassurances given by the
World Cup organizers that everyone would be
welcome in Qatar, players were threatened
with on-field sanctions if they wore pro-LGBTI
rights armbands. Fans had rainbow items
confiscated, and a few journalists were
harassed for showing their support of LGBTI
people.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government had still not announced a
new NDC to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
1. Qatar: Unfinished Business: What Qatar Must Do to Fulfil Promises on
Migrant Workers’ Rights, 20 October
2. Qatar: ‘They Think That We’re Machines’: Forced Labour and Other
Abuse of Migrant Workers in Qatar’s Private Security Sector, 7 April
3. “Qatar: Further information: Two Qatari lawyers handed life
sentences: Hazza and Rashed bin Ali Abu Shurayda al-Marri”, 16 May

306

ROMANIA
Romania
Head of state: Klaus Iohannis
Head of government: Nicolae Ciucă
Concerns over excessive use of force by
police remained prevalent. The European
Court of Human Rights ruled against
disproportionate restrictions to spontaneous
protests. Roma and LGBTI people
continued to face systemic discrimination.
Protesters demanded action to combat
sexual and gender-based violence.

BACKGROUND
In June, the Senate approved proposals to
set the age of consent to sexual relations at
15; more than 180 NGOs called for the
proposed age to be raised to 16.
In its July Rule of Law report, the European
Commission (EC) highlighted the need for
Romania to reinforce judicial independence
and address challenges around anticorruption institutions. The report raised
concerns over frequent changes in
legislation, regular use of emergency orders
and limited public consultation, as well as
risks to media freedom. The EC also called
for the establishment of a national human
rights institution.
In October, the UN General Assembly
elected Romania as a member of the UN
Human Rights Council for 2023-2025.
Romania’s record on implementing
judgments by the European Court of Human
Rights (ECtHR) was among the poorest in the
EU, according to the European
Implementation Network and Democracy
Reporting International.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
A survey of 1,000 detainees in 28 prisons
carried out by the NGO APADOR-Helsinki
Committee highlighted concerns over
excessive use of force by police, as well as
failure to respect the right of inmates to
effective legal defence and a low rate of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

complaints about alleged abuse, partly due to
fear of repercussions.
In August, the ECtHR found there had been
a violation of the right to life through unlawful
use of deadly force by police in 2009 during
a poorly planned operation to apprehend a
suspect and lack of effective investigation by
the Prosecutor’s Office. As similar findings
emerged in another three cases, the ECtHR
considered that “general measures” were
required to ensure the enforcement of the
judgment and to prevent such violations in
future.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
In May, the ECtHR ruled that Romania
violated the rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly in relation to a fine
given for a spontaneous protest against a
mining project. It found that, by applying the
three days’ notification requirement for
assemblies to a small group protest lasting
only a few minutes, authorities
disproportionately restricted the protesters’
rights and created a potentially chilling effect
on public discourse.
In December, a new Law “on the protection
of whistleblowers in the public interest” was
adopted. The law would replace the 2004
legislation and represented Romania’s
transposition of the European Union’s 2019
Whistleblowing Directive.

DISCRIMINATION
ROMA RIGHTS
In June, a survey of 10 countries published
by the EU Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA)
showed a decrease in hate-motivated
harassment and physical violence against
Roma in most of the countries surveyed,
including Romania, as compared to the
FRA’s findings in 2016. However, Romanian
Roma continued to face widespread poverty,
social exclusion and discrimination, including
in education, health, housing and
employment.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Same-sex marriage and partnership
remained unrecognized. Romania continued

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

to fail to comply with the 2018 European
Court of Justice decision on the need to
harmonize national legislation to guarantee
freedom of movement and residence for
same-sex couples.
NGOs expressed strong objections to three
anti-LGBTI legislative proposals claiming to
“promote and protect” children’s rights. The
proposals were introduced for discussion in
parliament but remained pending at the end
of the year.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The number of reported incidents of violence
against women, including femicides,
remained high.
A 2022 to 2027 national strategy for the
promotion of equal opportunities between
women and men and the prevention and
combating of domestic violence, which had
been under public consultation since March
2021, was adopted in December.
In October, protests were held across the
country demanding action to combat violence
against women, including sexual and
domestic violence, and denouncing state
failure to ensure protection for victims.
In August, the ECtHR found that Romania
violated the right to private life when
authorities failed to adequately investigate
and ensure justice in the case of a woman
applicant who, in 2017, filed a criminal
complaint of sexual harassment against her
boss. This was the first case in the history of
the ECtHR to conclude that an inadequate
response to alleged sexual harassment
constituted a violation of the right to private
life. As such, it represented an important
milestone.

RUSSIA
Russian Federation
Head of state: Vladimir Putin
Head of government: Mikhail Mishustin
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
was accompanied by escalating repression
against dissent within Russia. Peaceful

307

anti-war protests were dispersed, often
forcibly, and those speaking out against the
war faced prosecution. New legislation was
introduced restricting protests and the
activities of NGOs and civil society activists.
Prosecutions of Jehovah’s Witnesses
continued. Torture and other ill-treatment
remained endemic in places of detention.
Abductions and enforced disappearances
continued to be reported in Chechnya. Fair
trial standards were repeatedly violated.
Conscientious objectors were refused
alternative civilian service. New legislation
further stigmatized and discriminated
against LGBTI people.

BACKGROUND
Russia launched a full-scale military invasion
of Ukraine on 24 February. It occupied large
areas of the country and announced the
annexation of four Ukrainian regions in
September. Thousands of civilians in Ukraine
were killed and Russian forces committed
war crimes and other crimes under
international law (see Ukraine entry).
Ukrainian forces apparently attacked military
bases, communications and fuel depots on
Russian territory; Russian media reported at
least 21 civilians killed and 39 injured.
Hundreds of thousands of Russians left the
country, particularly after a “partial
mobilization” began in September and
resulted in scores of men being sent to the
front line without adequate training or
provisions. Thousands of prisoners were
reportedly recruited by a private military
company and deployed to Ukraine. This
practice was legalized retroactively under a
law passed in November.
Russia faced growing isolation
internationally and economic sanctions were
introduced by the EU, USA and other
countries in response to the invasion of
Ukraine. A mass exodus of international
companies followed. The proportion of people
living in poverty increased.
Russia withdrew from the Council of Europe
on 15 March and in June adopted a law
allowing Russian authorities to ignore
judgments of the European Court of Human

308

Rights (ECtHR), including those envisaging
compensation payments, retroactive to 15
March.
In April, the UN General Assembly voted to
suspend Russia from the UN Human Rights
Council. In October, the Council created a
new Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Russian Federation.
In November, a Dutch court found that
Russia had had overall control of the
separatist-held region in eastern Ukraine
from where a civilian aircraft was shot down
in July 2014, killing the 298 people on board.
The court convicted three men in their
absence – two Russian and one Ukrainian –
in connection with the attack and sentenced
them to life imprisonment.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities introduced further severe
restrictions on freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly in an ongoing clampdown
on dissent. Police dispersed peaceful
protests against the war and the military
draft, often with excessive use of force. More
than 19,400 people, including journalists
covering the protests, were arrested. Most
faced heavy fines or administrative
detention.1
In March, new legislation was adopted
penalizing “discreditation” of and
“disseminating deliberately false information”
about the Russian armed forces. As of
December, there were over 100 and 180
criminal cases, respectively, under these
charges and at least 5,518 administrative
prosecutions for “discreditation”. More than
200 further criminal cases were initiated for
anti-war activities under other criminal
charges.
In April, artist Aleksandra Skochilenko was
arrested and remanded on charges of
“disseminating deliberately false information”
about the armed forces. She faced up to 10
years’ imprisonment for replacing price tags
with anti-war messages in a supermarket in
Saint Petersburg. She was denied medical
care while in detention. Her trial began in
December.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In July, municipal councillor Aleksei Gorinov
was sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment
for criticizing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine at
a council session.2 In December, opposition
politician Ilya Yashin was sentenced to eightand-a-half years’ imprisonment for speaking
on YouTube about mass killings of civilians by
Russian forces in the Ukrainian town of
Bucha.
Dozens of independent media outlets were
closed and thousands of websites blocked. In
March, the Echo Moskvy radio station closed
down and its website was blocked. Also in
March, social media platforms Twitter,
Facebook and Instagram were blocked by the
media regulator. Meta, which owns Facebook
and Instagram, was subsequently declared
an “extremist organization”.
In September, a Moscow court stripped the
independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta of its
licence. From November, the Dagestanbased independent newspaper Chernovik
went digital-only after printing houses
stopped printing it, under pressure from the
authorities.
Such pressure also led to the cancellation of
concerts, exhibitions and other events by
cultural figures who expressed dissenting
views. Some, including rock musician Yuri
Shevchuk and rapper Oxxxymiron, were fined
for “discreditation” of the armed forces.
Others, including rock musician Andrey
Makarevich and writer Dmitry Bykov, were
declared “foreign agents”. In April, the chief
editor of Khakassia-based media website
Novyi Focus, Mikhail Afanasyev, was
detained pending trial for “disseminating
deliberately false information” about the
armed forces. In Yekaterinburg, media outlet
Vechernie Vedomosti, its publisher and its
editor were fined a total of RUB 450,000
(USD 7,828) in June and July for
“discreditation” of the armed forces.
In July, vaguely defined amendments to the
Criminal Code were introduced prohibiting
any “confidential cooperation” with
international or foreign organizations and
foreign states, punishable by up to eight
years’ imprisonment. By December, the first
two arrests under this amendment had been

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

reported, although the specific grounds for
the charges were not disclosed.
In December, amendments to the law
regulating public assemblies extended the list
of places where protests were banned to
include administrative buildings, schools,
universities, hospitals, airports and train and
bus stations. Regional authorities were also
permitted to introduce further restrictions.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The clampdown on civil society groups and
opposition movements escalated.
The Ministry of Justice listed 166 more
“foreign agents” and 23 “undesirable
organizations”. In June, the ECtHR found
Russia’s “foreign agents” law to be in
violation of the right to freedom of
association. A new "foreign agents" law came
into force in December. It extended the list of
who could be designated a “foreign agent”
and introduced broader grounds for so
designating a person or organization, as well
as tougher penalties and further
discriminatory measures limiting their
participation in public life.
In December, opposition politician and
activist Yulia Galyamina was informed that
her contract with a Moscow university would
be terminated on the grounds of her “foreign
agent” status.
In May, the authorities blocked the website
of the unregistered youth movement Vesna
and initiated prosecutions against some of its
members in apparent retaliation for Vesna’s
anti-war activism. In September, a court
suspended Vesna’s activities altogether and,
in October, Vesna and two of its members
were declared “foreign agents”. In
December, the movement was designated
“extremist”.
The authorities continued their reprisals
against activists from the disbanded Open
Russia movement and supporters of
imprisoned opposition politician and prisoner
of conscience Aleksei Navalny. In February, a
court in Novosibirsk ordered the blogger
Timur Khanov and local parliamentarian
Anton Kartavin to pay between them RUB
3,024,877 (USD 47,000) towards the cost of

309

policing a peaceful protest against the
prosecution of Aleksei Navalny in January
2021. The judgment was upheld in
November. Similar rulings were issued in
other parts of Russia.
In July, former Open Russia leader and
prisoner of conscience Andrey Pivovarov was
sentenced to four years’ imprisonment for
alleged violations of the “undesirable
organizations” law. The sentence was upheld
on appeal in November.3

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Alongside the “foreign agents” and
“undesirable organizations” legislation, the
authorities used diverse mechanisms to put
pressure on human rights defenders.
In February, longstanding Memorial
member Bakhrom Khamroev was remanded
under spurious charges of “public
justification of terrorism”. In October, charges
of “organizing the activities of a terrorist
organization” were added to his case.
In October, a court in the Moscow region
ruled that Arshak Makichyan, an exiled
climate activist and organizer of Fridays for
Future actions in Russia, be stripped of his
Russian citizenship. The activist, who as a
result became a stateless person, believed
that the ruling was in retaliation for his
peaceful activism.
In November, President Putin removed
several prominent human rights defenders
from the Presidential Council for Human
Rights and replaced them with candidates
widely perceived to be supportive of the
government.

FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND BELIEF
In June, the ECtHR ruled that Russia had
violated several articles of the European
Convention on Human Rights in relation to
the ban on and prosecution of Jehovah’s
Witnesses for practising their faith. The Court
held that Russia must stop all pending
criminal proceedings and release Jehovah’s
Witnesses who were already imprisoned.
Despite this and two other ECtHR judgments
which had been issued in February,
harassment and prosecution of Jehovah’s

310

Witnesses continued, with sentences ranging
from heavy fines to seven years’
imprisonment.
In May, Danish citizen and prisoner of
conscience Dennis Christensen, the first
Jehovah’s Witness to be imprisoned since the
organization was banned in 2017, was
released from a penal colony after serving his
six-year sentence.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment in places of
detention remained endemic and
prosecutions of perpetrators were rare.
Provision of medical care to detainees
remained inadequate. Prohibition of contact
with the outside world and the arbitrary
placing of prisoners in punishment cells were
widely used to exert pressure on prisoners,
especially dissidents.
Opposition politician Aleksei Navalny was
placed in a punishment cell (SHIZO) 10
times during the year, spending over 90 days
in inhuman and degrading conditions for
“violations” of prison rules such as “wearing
the wrong clothes”. In November, the
authorities placed him in a confinement cell
(PKT) and denied him any contact with his
family, including correspondence.
Ukrainian citizen Aleksandr Marchenko
continued serving a 10-year sentence for
espionage, based on a confession he
maintains was extracted under torture. He
was regularly denied urgent medical care,
intermittently placed in punishment or
confinement cells on spurious grounds and
denied contact with his family.
Police continued to use torture to put
pressure on dissidents. In March, some
protesters detained at anti-war rallies
complained of torture and other ill-treatment
in police stations. In September, poet Artyom
Kamardin was beaten and allegedly
subjected to sexual violence by the police
during a raid on his home in connection with
his recital of a poem in support of Ukraine.
He and two other people were arrested under
“incitement of hatred” charges and placed in
pretrial detention. His allegations of torture

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

had not been investigated by the end of the
year.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
Enforced disappearances continued in
Chechnya.
The 2020 enforced disappearance of
Salman Tepsurkaev, a moderator of the
1ADAT Telegram channel, was not
investigated. In August, his associates from
1ADAT reported that he had been
extrajudicially executed in September 2020.
1ADAT reported the abduction, including
cases of enforced disappearance, of at least
964 individuals, including some whom the
authorities had pressured to fight in Ukraine
under threat of criminal prosecution.
Following Russia’s invasion, many Ukrainian
civilians were forcibly disappeared by
Russian forces or their proxies during socalled “filtration” and allegedly unlawfully
transferred from certain parts of occupied
Ukraine to Russia and held incommunicado.
Among the several hundred individuals,
mostly prisoners of war, returned to Ukraine
during the year as part of “prisoner swap”,
some were civilians who confirmed such
allegations and reported being held without
charge, and subjected to torture and other illtreatment in Russian penitentiary
institutions.4

UNFAIR TRIALS
The authorities continued to violate fair trial
standards.
In February, the Achkhoi-Martan court in
Chechnya sentenced Salekh Magamadov
and his sibling, Ismail Isaev, to eight and six
years’ imprisonment, respectively, on
fabricated charges of “aiding and abetting
participation in an illegal armed group”.
Openly critical of the Chechen authorities,
they had been abducted from a safe house in
Nizhnii Novgorod, central Russia, by security
officials in 2021 and taken to Chechnya.5
The trial of Zarema Musaeva on fabricated
charges of fraud and violence against a
police officer began in Grozny’s Leninsky
District court in August. Zarema Musaeva,
the mother of Chechen activists Abubakar

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

and Ibraghim Yangulbaev, had been
arbitrarily arrested by the Chechen police at
her apartment in Nizhnii Novgorod and
driven to Chechnya, allegedly as a witness in
another case. There were serious concerns
about her health and well-being.
In September, the Moscow City Court
sentenced former journalist Ivan Safronov to
22 years’ imprisonment on fabricated
charges of “high treason” in a politically
motivated trial. The sentence was upheld on
appeal in December.

IMPUNITY
Victims of human rights violations were
deprived of access to the ECtHR after Russia
withdrew from the Council of Europe in
March.
In December, in the first of three required
readings, the Duma (lower house of
parliament) passed a new bill according to
which “an action will not be regarded as
criminal nor penalized” if committed before
30 September 2022 “in defence of the
interests of Russia” in the illegally annexed
Ukrainian territories.

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS’ RIGHTS
Despite constitutional guarantees regarding
alternative service, requests to perform such
service by individuals drafted for deployment
in Ukraine were routinely refused by military
commissariats and courts. The authorities
claimed that in the absence of specific
legislative provisions for alternative service at
times of “partial mobilization”, these
guarantees did not apply. Legislation
introduced in November stipulated that those
deployed on alternative civilian service during
mobilization could be sent to serve as civilian
personnel in the armed forces.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, feminist artist and LGBTI activist
Yulia Tsvetkova was declared a “mediaforeign agent” by the Ministry of Justice. In
July, she was acquitted of charges of
“disseminating pornographic materials”. The
acquittal was upheld on appeal in
November.6

311

In December, legislation was adopted
extending the prohibition of “propaganda of
non-traditional sexual relations, paedophilia
and gender reassignment” from that aimed at
minors to all age groups. Its provisions
included blocking websites, banning the sale
of material containing information prohibited
under the law and fines of up to RUB
5,000,000 (USD 80,000) for the vaguely
defined administrative offence of
“propaganda”, “demonstration of nontraditional sexual relations or preferences” or
providing information that could “create an
urge to change sex”.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, over 2.8 million displaced persons
from Ukraine crossed into Russia. Although
many fled to Russia voluntarily, many others
who found themselves in Russian-occupied
territories and were denied passage to
Ukrainian government-controlled parts of the
country were subject to unlawful involuntary
transfer and deportation from Ukraine by
Russian authorities. Volunteers claimed to
have helped at least 9,000 Ukrainians to
relocate from Russia to third countries.
Russian authorities transported Ukrainians to
temporary accommodation centres in at least
54 regions, including in Siberia and the Far
East, which made their relocation to third
countries or return to Ukraine more
complicated and costly. The Russian
authorities encouraged and sometimes
pressured Ukrainian refugees to take Russian
citizenship; children without parental care
and people with disabilities faced a particular
risk of involuntary absorption into Russian
society.
1. Russia: “You Will Be Arrested Anyway”: Reprisals Against Monitors
and Media Workers Reporting from Protests, 24 November
2. “Russia: Municipal councillor sentenced to seven years in jail for
opposing the Ukraine war”, 8 July
3. “Russia: Opposition activist sentenced to four years in prison under
repressive ‘undesirable organization’ law”, 15 July
4. Ukraine: “Like a Prison Convoy”: Russia’s Unlawful Transfer and
Abuse of Civilians in Ukraine During ‘Filtration’, 10 November

312

5. “Russia: Court upholds lengthy prison sentences for Chechen LGBTI
siblings”, 25 October
6. “Russia: Feminist activist acquitted of absurd ‘pornography’
charges”, 15 July

RWANDA
Republic of Rwanda
Head of state: Paul Kagame
Head of government: Édouard Ngirente
Rwanda signed an agreement with the UK
for the relocation of asylum seekers. Paul
Rusesabagina continued to be denied a fair
trial. Draft legislation to give access to
contraceptives for people over 15 was
rejected. Women’s dress and right to privacy
were policed. Teachers’ salaries were
increased but students’ living allowances
were not. Bloggers and journalists
continued to be harassed, intimidated,
persecuted and unlawfully detained by the
authorities. No information was provided on
Innocent Bahati’s fate and whereabouts.
Two people were killed in an armed attack
on a bus. Trials against alleged perpetrators
of the 1994 genocide continued.

BACKGROUND
The UN Group of Experts reported that
Rwanda provided support to the rebel group
March 23 Movement when it launched
attacks against UN and Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC) forces in June. The
report further alleged that Rwanda had
conducted military operations in the DRC
since November 2021. Rwanda denied these
allegations.
Relations with Burundi continued to
improve, with increased diplomatic
engagement at the highest levels. After three
years of closure, Rwanda reopened its land
border with Uganda in January.
Rwanda co-authored with Peru a global
framework on plastic waste reduction. In
September, a resolution to end plastic
pollution was adopted during the UN
Environmental Assembly.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In June, BioNTech started construction of a
Covid-19 mRNA vaccine plant in Rwanda as
part of an EU project to address vaccine
inequality.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
On 14 April, Rwanda signed a memorandum
of understanding with the UK to implement a
scheme to relocate asylum seekers from the
UK to Rwanda (see UK entry). In June, the
first flight scheduled to transport asylum
seekers was stopped by the European Court
of Human Rights. UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, concluded that the agreement was
unlawful. It had previously raised concerns
about Rwanda’s asylum process, citing
arbitrary denial of access to the asylum
procedure, risk of detention and deportation,
discrimination against LGBTIQ+ asylum
seekers and inadequate legal representation.
On 19 December, the UK High Court deemed
the agreement lawful in principle.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
In April, the Court of Appeal rejected the
prosecution’s appeal against Paul
Rusesabagina’s 25-year prison sentence on
terrorism-related charges. The court failed to
address numerous violations of his right to a
fair trial, including the unlawful
circumstances of his arrest and transfer from
Dubai to Kigali, the capital, and his enforced
disappearance for several days, followed by
his incommunicado detention, among other
irregularities before and during his trial.
Earlier, in March, the UN Working Group on
Arbitrary Detention had concluded that the
process of his transfer from Dubai to Rwanda
constituted an abduction, that his detention
was arbitrary, and therefore his trial should
not have taken place.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In October, parliament rejected a bill to lower
the age at which people can enjoy access to
contraceptives from 18 to 15 years.
Meanwhile religious leaders continued to
oppose access to contraception.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In August, Lilliane Mugabekazi was arrested
and charged with public indecency for
wearing a “shameful dress” to a concert in
Kigali. She was released after 12 days in
detention. Her arrest sparked public debate
on the policing of women’s clothing and the
right to privacy.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
In January, taxi motorcycle riders (boda
boda) staged a peaceful protest in Kigali to
denounce high meter charges and insurance
premiums.
A survey by the Institute of Policy Analysis
and Research – Rwanda highlighted an
increase in the cost of living in Rwandan
cities, with women-led households most
affected. In April, university students called
for an increase in living allowances to enable
them to afford essentials such as rent, food
and transport. The government recognized
the need to address the students’ grievances
but had not taken action by the end of the
year. In August, the prime minister
announced an 88% increase in teachers’
salaries.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Journalist Theoneste Nsengimana remained
in unlawful detention following his arrest in
October 2021 for “spreading rumours to
cause unrest among the population”.
In June, the Commonwealth Secretariat
denied accreditations to journalists Benedict
Moran and Anjan Sundaram. They had
published criticism of President Kagame and
his government. The secretariat denied their
decision was influenced by the host
government and indicated that accreditation
was denied because the two were not
working for “recognized media outlets”.
In the same month, Brazilian journalist
Vinicius Assis was not granted accreditation
by the Rwandan authorities after spending a
month in Kigali, despite paying the USD 100
fee.
Sports journalist Prudence Nsengumukiza
revealed in June that he fled Rwanda in 2021

313

fearing reprisals for his work and was seeking
asylum in Belgium. Before leaving, he had
wanted to document abuses linked to the
sacking of the military-owned Rwanda
Patriotic Army Football Club’s players.
The authorities continued to prosecute
YouTube bloggers like Yvonne Idamange,
who continued to serve a 15-year sentence
received in 2021 after she accused the
president of dictatorship and exploiting the
genocide against the Tutsi.
In March, the Court of Appeal upheld the
seven-year prison sentence against
Dieudonné Niyonsenga, owner of the
YouTube channel Ishema TV. He was
arrested in 2020 while reporting on the
impact of the Covid-19 lockdown measures.
He spent 11 months in pretrial detention
before being acquitted in March 2021 by the
Gasabo Intermediary Court. However, the
prosecution appealed against this decision,
and in November 2021 the High Court found
him guilty of “forgery, impersonation, and
criminal obstruction of security officials and
humiliating state officials.” Aimable Karasira,
a former lecturer, said during his court
appearance in May that he was beaten in
detention and the authorities intercepted
communications between him and his
lawyers. He was being tried in connection
with videos he posted on YouTube. In
November, the Nyarugenge Intermediate
Court referred his case to the High Court
Chamber for International and Cross Border
Crimes.
In October, the High Court in Kigali
acquitted and ordered the release of
journalists Damascene Mutuyimana,
Shadrack Niyonsenga, and Jean Baptiste
Nshimiyimana of the YouTube channel,
Iwacu TV. They had been arrested in 2018
and charged with “spreading false
information with the intention of creating a
hostile international opinion of Rwanda”,
among other things.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
The whereabouts and fate of poet and writer
Innocent Bahati remained unknown and no
update on the investigation into his

314

disappearance in February 2021 was made
available. In February 2022, more than 100
writers called on the president to intervene in
finding him, expressing concerns that his
disappearance was linked to his criticism of
the government.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
The authorities accused the National
Liberation Front of orchestrating a bus attack
in southern Rwanda in June that killed two
people.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In February, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
ordered Niger to send eight Rwandans tried
in connection with the 1994 genocide back
to Tanzania. Four had been acquitted and
four had served their sentences. Tanzania
rejected the request and they remained
under house arrest pending their expulsion
from Niger, in contradiction with the
agreement signed between Niger and the
court.
In May, the Dutch authorities arrested a
former army officer on an extradition request
from Rwanda. The officer, identified by a progovernment newspaper in Rwanda as Major
Pierre-Claver Karangwa, was suspected of
involvement in massacres of the Tutsi in
Mugina during the 1994 genocide.
Also in May, genocide fugitives Protais
Mpiranya and Pheneas Munyarugarama,
wanted by the IRMCT, were confirmed to
have died in 2006 and 2002, respectively.
Protais Mpiranya, former head of the
presidential guard, was accused of ordering
the killing of then prime minister Agathe
Uwilingiyimana, and 10 Belgian
peacekeepers. Pheneas Munyarugarama was
accused of mass killings, attacks and sexual
violence against Tutsi civilians.
In July, the Paris Criminal Court sentenced
Laurent Bucyibaruta to 20 years in prison for
“complicity in genocide and crimes against
humanity”.
In September, the trial against Félicien
Kabuga, allegedly the chief financier of the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

1994 genocide against the Tutsi, began in the
Hague before the IRMCT.

SAUDI ARABIA
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Head of state: Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud (also
head of government until September)
Head of government: Mohammed bin Salman bin
Abdulaziz Al Saud (appointed in September)
The authorities targeted individuals for
peacefully exercising their rights to freedom
of expression and association. The
Specialized Criminal Court tried and
sentenced to lengthy prison terms
individuals following grossly unfair trials for
their peaceful expression or association, or
for forming community organizations.
Human rights defenders were harassed in
prison and faced arbitrary travel bans
following their conditional release from
prison. Courts resorted to the death penalty
following grossly unfair trials, including in
cases of individuals who were children at
the time of the alleged crime, and people
were executed for a wide range of crimes.
Thousands of residents were subjected to
forced evictions in the coastal city of
Jeddah. Migrant workers continued to be
abused and exploited under the sponsorship
system and thousands were arbitrarily
detained in inhumane conditions, tortured
and otherwise ill-treated, and involuntarily
returned to their home country as part of a
nationwide crackdown on undocumented
migrants. The country’s first Personal
Status Law came into effect, codifying male
guardianship and discrimination against
women.

BACKGROUND
On 27 September, King Salman appointed
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman as
prime minister, a position previously held by
the king, in an exception to the Basic Law of
Governance.
In March, leading members of the European
Parliament issued a statement on the human

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

rights situation in Saudi Arabia, condemning
a mass execution on 12 March and urging
the country to establish an immediate
moratorium on executions.
In July, US President Joe Biden visited
Saudi Arabia. Later that month, Saudi Arabia
published the Jeddah Communique outlining
the strategic partnership between the two
countries, which failed to include any human
rights commitments.
On 6 November in the capital Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia and the EU had their second human
rights dialogue. The EU raised concerns
regarding the steep increase in executions as
well as issues related to freedom of assembly
and association and the use of travel bans.
The Saudi Arabia-led coalition in the longrunning armed conflict in Yemen continued
to be implicated in war crimes and other
serious violations of international law (see
Yemen entry).

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION
The Specialized Criminal Court (SCC)
convicted and sentenced at least 15
individuals, both citizens and foreign
nationals, to between 15 and 45 years in
prison after grossly unfair trials for their
peaceful expression or association, including
peaceful online speech on Twitter. The SCC
sentenced at least two women’s rights
activists to unprecedentedly lengthy prison
sentences.
The SCC and other courts also continued to
impose restrictive conditions on individuals
released during the year after serving their
sentences, which included travel bans and
the closure of their social media accounts.
On 9 August, at an appeal hearing, the SCC
sentenced Salma al-Shehab, a PhD student
and activist, to 34 years in prison to be
followed by a 34-year travel ban for her
writing and peaceful Twitter activity in support
of women’s rights in Saudi Arabia. The
prosecution demanded a harsher
punishment after she was initially sentenced
to six years in prison. The harsher sentence
was based on the discretion of the judge to
punish her for “disrupting public order and

315

destabilizing the security and stability of the
state” through publishing tweets, citing
Articles 34, 38, 43 and 44 of the counterterrorism law and Article 6 of the anti-cyber
crime law.1
After a grossly unfair trial, on 11 October the
SCC sentenced 10 Egyptian Nubian men to
between 10 and 18 years in prison for
organizing a peaceful remembrance event.2
The men had spent over two years in
arbitrary pre-trial detention.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Human rights organizations remained
banned under the Law on Associations.
Human rights defenders and activists
continued to be arbitrarily detained, harassed
in detention or subjected to arbitrary travel
bans that restrict their freedom of movement.
Dozens continued to serve prison terms for
their human rights work.
In March, Raif Badawi, a blogger and
activist, was conditionally released after
serving a 10-year prison sentence for
creating an online forum for public debate for
which he was accused of insulting Islam. A
10-year travel ban began on his release, as
part of his sentence.3
Mohammad al-Qahtani, a human rights
defender and founding member of the Saudi
Civil and Political Rights Association, was
denied family contact from October until the
end of the year. In May, he was assaulted by
another prisoner held with him in the same
ward who had mental health problems.

DEATH PENALTY
The authorities sentenced to death and
executed individuals convicted of murder,
robbery, rape, drug smuggling and terrorismrelated crimes following grossly unfair trials.
In February, the Saudi Human Rights
Commission told Amnesty International that
the country no longer executed individuals
“for crimes committed by minors” and had
commuted all such outstanding sentences.
However, between June and October, the
SCC and another criminal court upheld the
death sentences of three young men who

316

were under the age of 18 at the time of the
capital crimes.4
In the single largest mass execution in
recent decades, 81 men – citizens and
foreign nationals – were executed on 12
March. According to the Ministry of Interior,
those executed were convicted of a range of
offences, including terrorism-related crimes,
murder, armed robbery and arms smuggling.
Some of those executed were also convicted
of “disrupting the social fabric and national
cohesion” and “participating in and inciting
sit-ins and protests”, which describe acts that
are protected by the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association. Of those executed, 41 were from
Saudi Arabia’s Shi’a minority.5
In November, the authorities executed 20
people for drug-related crimes, the first such
executions since the Saudi Human Rights
Commission announced a moratorium on the
use of the death penalty for drug-related
crimes in January 2021.
UNFAIR TRIALS
In April, the Supreme Court upheld the death
sentences against two Bahraini Shi’a men for
“terrorism” and protest-related charges. They
were arrested on 8 May 2015 and held
incommunicado and in solitary confinement
for three-and-a-half months. In October
2021, the SCC had sentenced them to death
after a grossly unfair trial. In the event that
the king ratifies their sentences, they would
face the risk of imminent execution.6
In March, Abdullah al-Huwaiti, who was
arrested when he was 14, was re-sentenced
to death by the criminal court in Tabuk city,
after the Supreme Court overturned in
November 2021 a previous death sentence
against him that was handed down in
October 2019. In June, an appeals court in
Tabuk upheld the death sentence. During his
time in detention, Abdullah al-Huwaiti was
held in solitary confinement, denied access
to a lawyer and forced to “confess” under
duress. He was tried on charges that
included armed robbery and the murder of a
security officer.7

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FORCED EVICTIONS
From January to October, the authorities
subjected thousands of residents, including
foreign nationals, to forced evictions in
Jeddah as part of a mass demolition and
eviction plan to develop the city. A statealigned media outlet announced on 31
January a compensation scheme for citizens
that excluded foreign nationals, who made up
47% of those evicted. Residents were given
notice of between one day and six weeks.
The project plans had been finalized almost
three years earlier, but the authorities failed
to engage in genuine consultation with
residents, provide adequate notice,
announce the amount of compensation or
provide it to residents prior to the
demolitions.8

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, in a limited reform of the kafala
sponsorship system, the Ministry of Human
Resources and Social Development
announced two new conditions under which
domestic workers are allowed to change
employers without the permission of their
current employer: if the employee terminates
the labour contract during the probation
period; and if there is proof that the services
of the employee had already been transferred
to another employer without the knowledge or
consent of the previous employer. However,
the new conditions do not protect migrant
domestic workers from other abuses that they
continued to face, including verbal and
physical abuse, passport confiscation and
irregular or non-payment of wages.
Domestic migrant workers continued to be
excluded from protections under the
country’s labour law.
The authorities continued their crackdown
on individuals accused of violating residency,
border and labour regulations through
arbitrary arrests, and forcibly returned tens of
thousands of Ethiopian migrants solely based
on their irregular immigration status (see
Torture and other ill-treatment heading
below).
According to the Ministry of Interior,
between January and November, at least

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

479,000 foreign nationals were returned to
their home country out of 678,000 arrested
for “violating labour, residency and border
security” regulations. During that same
period, 14,511 foreign nationals, most of
them Ethiopians and Yemenis, were arrested
for crossing the border irregularly from
Yemen into Saudi Arabia.
TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Saudi Arabian authorities arbitrarily detained
Ethiopian men, women and children for up to
18 months in inhumane conditions and
tortured and otherwise ill-treated them before
forcibly returning them to Ethiopia, most of
them between April and May, solely for their
irregular immigration status. They were held
in overcrowded cells with inadequate access
to food, water, sanitation and healthcare in
two detention centres prior to their
deportation. At least 12 men died.9

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In March, the Council of Ministers passed a
new Personal Status Law, which came into
effect in June. The new law, which was not
previously codified, enables discrimination
against women, including through male
guardianship. Only men can be legal
guardians under this law, and women must
have a male guardian’s permission to marry
and are then obliged to obey their husband.
Moreover, the law does not give women and
men equal rights over matters relating to their
children in the event of separation. While the
mother is automatically granted custody, the
father is designated as the child’s legal
guardian without due consideration of the
best interests of the child.10

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government had still not announced a
new NDC.
1. “Saudi Arabia: Quash 34-year prison sentence for student Salma alShehab”, 18 August
2. “Saudi Arabia: Quash sentences for Egyptian Nubians who organized
peaceful remembrance event”, 11 October
3. “Saudi Arabia: New campaign highlights use of punitive travel bans
targeting activists and their families”, 9 May

317

4. “Saudi Arabia: Young men face imminent execution despite
assurances on re-sentencing juveniles to prison terms”, 10 October
5. “Saudi Arabia: Mass execution of 81 men shows urgent need to
abolish the death penalty”, 15 March
6. “Saudi Arabia: Halt imminent execution of Bahraini men sentenced
after flawed trial”, 24 May
7. “Saudi Arabia: Arrested at 14, tortured, now faces execution:
Abdullah al-Huwaiti”, 20 June
8. “Saudi Arabia: Mass demolitions and forced evictions marred by
violations and discrimination”, 22 June
9. “Saudi Arabia: ‘It’s like we are not human’: Forced returns, abhorrent
detention conditions of Ethiopian migrants in Saudi Arabia”, 16
December
10. “Saudi Arabia codifies male guardianship and gender
discrimination”, 9 December

SENEGAL
Republic of Senegal
Head of state: Macky Sall
Head of government: Amadou Ba (from September)
Freedom of assembly and expression were
restricted. Forced begging by children
continued. Fires broke out in health
facilities due to poor maintenance. The
authorities expressed commitment to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and
climate change continued to cause coastal
erosion, affecting people’s livelihoods.

BACKGROUND
The opposition gained several municipalities
during the January local elections and the
ruling coalition kept their majority in the July
parliamentary elections.
In March, the Senegalese army launched
operation “Nord Bignona” to dismantle the
Movement of Democratic Forces of
Casamance (MFDC) rebel bases next to the
Gambian border and to combat illegal logging
and wood trafficking. According to the
Gambia National Disaster Management
Agency, these operations forced 691
Senegalese people to seek refuge in Gambia.
More than 5,600 Gambian villagers living
near the border were also displaced from
their villages. In August, Senegal signed a
preliminary peace agreement with a faction of

318

the MFDC, committing them to disarm and
allowing refugees to return home.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 31 March, the ECOWAS Court of Justice
stated that Ministerial Order no. 7580 of 20
July 2011, which prohibits “demonstrations
of a political nature” in the centre of the
capital, Dakar, violates the rights to freedom
of expression and peaceful assembly and
asked the Senegalese authorities to repeal it.1
As of December, the authorities had refused
to implement the judgment.
In June, during a period of pre-electoral
tension, Senegalese authorities prohibited
several demonstrations by the opposition. On
17 June, security forces arrested at least
three opposition leaders and prevented
others from leaving their homes, with the aim
of preventing a banned protest in Dakar the
same day. Dethié Fall, the national
representative of the opposition parliamentary
list, was given a six-month suspended
sentence for “participating in an
unauthorized protest”. Ahmed Aidara, mayor
of Guediawaye, was given a one-month
suspended sentence for “participating in an
unarmed gathering”.2
In Ziguinchor, opposition leader Guy Marius
Sagna was arrested by the police on 18 June
with two others on his way to visit
33 protesters arrested the day before. They
were all tried for “participating in a prohibited
protest” and “disturbing public order”.
Guy Marius Sagna and two other activists,
Cheikh Sourate Sagna and Amadou Tom
Mbodj, were given a one-month suspended
sentence and a XOF 50,000 (around USD
76) fine. The others were acquitted.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 10 June, opposition leader Cheikh Abdou
Mbacké Bara Dolly was arrested and charged
with “defamation, diffusion of false news, and
offence against the head of state”, after a
speech he made during an opposition
protest. He was provisionally released in July.
On 3 August, Pape Ibra Gueye, an activist
also known as “Papito Kara” was arrested
and detained for “disseminating false news

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

and for deletion, modification, fabrication and
use of computer data to subvert newspaper
headlines”. Five days later another activist,
Outhmane Diagne, was arrested and
detained on the same charges. They were
accused of creating satirical false news
headlines in daily newspapers.
On 6 November, Pape Alé Niang was
arrested by the police, three days after the
release of a live Facebook video in which he
commented on the hearing of opposition
leader Ousmane Sonko and published an
internal investigation report by the
gendarmerie. He was accused of
“concealment and publication of
unauthorized military documents that could
harm national defense, calling for rebellion
and propagating false news”.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
On 17 June, in Ziguinchor and Bignona,
security forces fired at protesters during a
protest, killing two men, taxi driver Idrissa
Goudiaby and Albert “Abdoulaye” Diatta. The
initial autopsy for Idrissa Goudiaby identified
“violent death by hemorrhagic shock
following a penetrating neck wound caused
by a blunt and sharp-edged weapon such as
an axe or a sword”. A second autopsy
requested by the family and conducted by
three independent medical examiners
identified death from bullet wounds,
corroborating witness testimonies.
There was no further information on the
investigations into the deaths of 14 people –
12 of from bullet wounds – during protests in
cities across Senegal in March 2021.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
During the June protests, security forces
arrested 11 people on 16-17 June, accusing
them of planning to “threaten state security”,
among other charges. One of those arrested,
former soldier François Mancabou, was taken
from his police cell on 29 June and brought
to Dakar’s Hôpital Principal with serious
injuries. He fell into a coma and died on 13
July. The family accused the police of
causing François Mancabou’s death by
torturing him in detention. The police denied

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

the accusations and claimed the wounds
were self-inflicted while in detention. No
investigation was opened to ascertain the
causes of his fatal injuries acquired during
detention.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
Despite the government’s adoption of a draft
law modernizing Qur’anic education, it had
not been submitted to a parliamentary vote.
The law would help to prevent forced begging
by children and protect children’s rights in
the educational system.3 The draft children’s
code bill had still not been considered by the
government.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In January, the National Assembly rejected a
proposed bill that was intended to criminalize
LGBTI orientation. Senegal’s Criminal Code
already criminalizes same-sex relations. This
followed a month-long anti-LGBTI campaign
by a coalition of groups that accused the
authorities of weakening social mores. LGBTI
people continued to face various
discriminatory practices, harassment and
public intimidation.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Serious incidents occurred due to poor
maintenance in certain health facilities. In
May, 11 newborn babies died after a fire
caused by poor maintenance broke out in the
maternity ward of the Tivaouane hospital. In
August, the maternity ward of the Mbour
hospital caught fire due to poor maintenance.
The babies were rescued and there were no
fatalities.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Climate change continued to cause drought,
flooding during the rainy season, and water
scarcity. The rise in sea level continued to
cause erosion in fishing villages and
neighbourhoods, including Guet-Ndar in
Saint-Louis, threatening livelihoods and
forcing some communities to further move
inland. Construction of a coastal protection
dyke on part of the Langue de Barbarie
peninsula was ongoing.4

319

1. “Senegal. ECOWAS Court of Justice orders repeal of decree banning
political demonstrations in the centre of Dakar”, 13 May (French only)
2. “Senegal: Prohibitions, violence, arbitrary arrests: the right to protest
is under threat”, 29 June
3. “Senegal: The State must move from commitment to strong action to
protect talibé children”, 12 December
4. Any Tidal Wave Could Drown Us – Stories from the Climate Crisis, 3
November

SERBIA
Republic of Serbia
Head of state: Aleksandar Vučić
Head of government: Ana Brnabić
Threats against independent journalists and
media outlets and malicious civil
prosecutions jeopardized media freedom.
Similar prosecutions affected environmental
activists, who also faced excessive use of
force by police when protesting. The new
social assistance law discriminated against
minority communities. An increasing
number of refugees and migrants reached
Serbia.

BACKGROUND
President Vučić was re-elected in April; the
new parliament did not sit until September.
Serbia juggled EU membership aspirations
with investment-based relationships with
China and Russia.
In August, EU-sponsored talks concluded a
Serbia-Kosovo agreement, enabling equal
terms for cross-border freedom of movement.
By November, Kosovo Serbs had resigned
from Kosovo institutions in protest over
licence plates. Tensions increased in
December as Kosovo Serbs erected
barricades, far-right groups marched in
support in Belgrade and President Vučić
called for the return to the border of the
Serbian Army. Following international
pressure, Kosovo Serbs dismantled
barricades on 29 December, but political
tension remained.

320

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Serbia continued to honour and promote
convicted war criminals, while failing to
prosecute high-ranking military officials or
address 1,731 pre-investigative cases. War
crimes trials progressed slowly at the
Belgrade District Court. In July, a former
Serbian paramilitary testified against 11
members of the 177th Yugoslav Army Unit
indicted for killing 118 Kosovo Albanians in
Zahac/Zahaq, Ćuška /Qyshk, Pavlan/
Plavljane and Ljubenić/Lubeniq in May 1999.
He subsequently requested protected witness
status.
In October in the first trial in Serbia of a
Bosnian-Serb commanding officer, Milenko
Živanović, former commander of the
Republika Srpska Army’s Drina Corps, denied
that he had issued orders for the forced
expulsion of Bosniak civilians from
Srebrenica in July 1995.
In July, after urging the government to
officially commemorate the 1995 Srebrenica
genocide, NGO Women in Black’s Belgrade
office was daubed with red paint.
As of August, 1,621 disappeared and
missing persons from Kosovo remained
unaccounted for.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In April, the OSCE highlighted an increase in
violent threats and verbal attacks against
media workers, including death threats and
accusations of being foreign mercenaries or
traitors. At year’s end, the independent
journalists’ association NUNS reported 107
attacks, threats or attempts to pressurize
journalists.
In June, 14 television companies applied to
the Regulatory Body for Electronic Media for
broadcast licences; all four were awarded to
pro-government channels.
Independent journalists and media critical
of the government continued to be sued for
“reputational harm” by politicians and
businesses in Strategic Lawsuits against
Public Participation (SLAPPs), creating a
chilling effect on media freedom. In
November, the judgment in a suit against the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Crime and Corruption Reporting Network
brought by security service director Bratislav
Gašić threatened journalists’ right to report on
court proceedings.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence Against Women and Domestic
Violence (Istanbul Convention), ratified by
Serbia in 2013, including the adoption of its
consent-based definition of rape.

Environmental activists continued protests
against extractive industries across Serbia,
facing over-zealous policing and the threat of
SLAPPs from affected companies.
In July, during demonstrations opposing
Novi Sad’s plan to construct a residential and
business complex along the river Danube,
police arrested two environmental activists. A
video showed private security guards forcing
a protester to the ground and restraining him.
Protests continued in October, when police –
without visible identification – again used
excessive force.
In September, two protesters against mining
developments near Majdanpek were seriously
injured after being held overnight at Negotin
police station without access to a lawyer.
In December, under significant civil society
pressure, the government withdrew the draft
Law on Internal Affairs, which sought to
introduce intrusive biometric surveillance and
limit the right to peaceful assembly.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

In March, the European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture reported on its 2021
visit to police stations and prisons,
highlighting continued ill-treatment,
sometimes amounting to torture, and the lack
of effective action to implement its previous
recommendations.

In September, the number of people reaching
already overcrowded asylum and refugee
centres almost doubled, stretching
inadequate capacity and posing health risks,
while the number of unofficial camps and
squats increased. The number of single
women, families and unaccompanied minors
increased.
Police violently raided unofficial camps in
October, led by then interior minister
Aleksandar Vulin, who called migrants
“scum” and “bandits”, encouraging antimigrant rhetoric and harassment. Hungary
pushed back thousands of people into
Serbia, while Serbia extended its fence
bordering North Macedonia. By October,
84,512 people had reached government
centres: while 3,371 expressed an interest in
seeking asylum, only 270 applied. By 31

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
After four women were killed, three by family
members, between 21 March and 1 April, 61
women’s NGOs urged the authorities to
consistently implement existing measures to
prevent and protect women from violence. At
least 21 women were killed by family
members during the year. In October, while
President Vučić proposed higher sentences
for rape and domestic violence, the
Autonomous Women’s Centre urged
implementation of the Council of Europe

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Belgrade hosted EuroPride 2022 in
September. The Interior Ministry initially
banned the parade, citing security concerns,
but later permitted a short, heavily policed
march. Some participants, four press crews
and several police officers were attacked by
anti-LGBTI counter-protesters; 64 individuals
were reportedly arrested.1

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The Law on Social Cards entered into force in
May, introducing an algorithm to determine a
person’s eligibility for social assistance. NGOs
challenged the law before the Constitutional
Court, arguing that decision-making by
algorithm posed human rights risks,
including collection of excessive personal
data, weak privacy protection and outcomes
that potentially discriminated against minority
groups, in particular Roma.2

321

December, 27 individuals were awarded
some form of international protection.
Ecevit Piroğlu, a Kurdish political activist
detained in Serbia since June 2021,
remained at risk of extradition to Türkiye.
International rights groups urged Serbia to
grant him asylum because he would be at
risk of serious human rights violations upon
return, including torture and arbitrary
detention.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING
In January, the UN Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons expressed grave
concerns about 402 Vietnamese migrant
workers trafficked to Serbia to build the
Shandong Linglong tyre factory at Zrenjanin.
NGOs had documented cases of forced
labour including bonded labour, and unsafe
and unhealthy living and working conditions.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Although in January the government said it
had revoked permits for Rio Tinto’s
development of a lithium mine after
nationwide protests in 2021, local
organizations reported continued activities in
the Jadar valley.
Serbia’s weak regulatory system was widely
criticized for enabling predominantly Chinese
and Russian mining and processing
companies to bypass inadequate
environmental protections, potentially leading
to irreversible environmental damage.
1. “Serbia: Authorities must repeal ‘shameful’ ban on Euro Pride walk”,
16 September
2. “Serbia: Social Card law could harm marginalized members of
society – legal opinion”, 28 November

SIERRA LEONE
Republic of Sierra Leone
Head of state and government: Julius Maada Bio
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
continued to be restricted and the use of
excessive force by law enforcement officers
was under investigation. The right to

322

freedom of expression for government
critics and opponents was repressed.
Several laws were adopted to advance
women’s rights. While efforts were made to
decongest prisons, there were allegations of
torture in one detention centre. Levels of
food insecurity worsened. Legal regulation
of the mining sector was strengthened.

BACKGROUND
The constitutional review and voter
registration processes in preparation for the
2023 presidential elections were ongoing.
OHCHR, the UN human rights office,
reassessed the Human Rights Commission of
Sierra Leone (HRCSL) and gave it a Grade A
status.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The right to peaceful assembly continued to
be restricted. The Public Order Act 1965
(under Part III, section 17) criminalized
spontaneous assemblies. In July, police
arrested over 50 protesters during a peaceful
protest against the high costs of living and
fuel, which the authorities had not
authorized. The protesters were cautioned
and released a few days later.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
The HRCSL launched a public inquiry into
the conduct of law enforcement officers in
connection with human rights violations
carried out between 2015 and 2021,
including the excessive use of force and
sexual misconduct. It held public hearings
into the allegations but had not published its
findings by the end of the year.
On 10 August, protests against high living
costs turned violent in Freetown, the capital,
and in the north, during which 27 protesters
and six police officers died according to
media reports. The president appointed a 15person committee to investigate the incident
but its report was not available by the end of
the year.
The review of the Independent Police
Complaints Board regulations of 2013 was
still pending at the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and the Office of the Attorney General at the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

end of the year. The review was considering
recommendations as the basis of a proposed
act which would strengthen the board with a
view to regulating police violence.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In February, the deputy spokesperson for the
opposition All Peoples’ Congress party was
arrested for incitement and detained for two
days, after he said on the radio that Sierra
Leoneans should ensure the ruling party was
voted out of power in 2023.
In May, the Sierra Leone Association of
Journalists accused the government of using
the offence of incitement to suppress
freedom of expression.
In July, two political opponents were
arrested for inciting an unlawful protest, after
participating in a demonstration against the
high cost of living. They were released
without charge after four nights in detention.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
According to the latest available statistics
from UNICEF, 83% of girls and women (aged
15-49 years) had undergone female genital
mutilation (FGM) and 30% of women (aged
20-24 years) had been married before the
age of 18. In June, the minister of gender
and children’s affairs stated that the
government would amend the Child Rights
Act to outlaw early forced marriage and FGM
against minors. In July, an FGM practitioner
was charged with manslaughter in Moriba
town after a 21-year-old woman died a day
after the practitioner performed FGM on her.
In August, the Customary Land Rights Act,
which gives women an equal right to own and
use family land, was enacted. In the same
month, the National Land Commission Act
was introduced, which established a
commission that will take a gender-sensitive
approach to land administration.
In September, the president signed the
Public Election Bill 2022 into law, which
stipulated that one in three parliamentary
candidates be women.
In November, the Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment bill was passed by
parliament. It included a provision stipulating

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

that 30% of all positions in government, and
in companies with at least 25 employees, be
reserved for women.
During the year, 800 children were
reintegrated into schools nationwide,
including pregnant girls, girls who had
dropped out of school because of pregnancy,
children with special needs, children living in
remote areas and those from poor families.

DETAINEES’ RIGHTS
In an effort to decongest prisons, the
judiciary held a national Judicial Week,
following which, by 4 February, 374
detainees were granted bail and 234 were
discharged across the country.
In June, the HRCSL requested a visit to
“Benghazi” detention centre in Freetown
where detainees who had criticized the
president were allegedly subjected to torture
and other ill-treatment, but by the end of the
year the request had not been approved.

RIGHT TO FOOD
In August, a food security analysis conducted
by the Ministry of Agriculture with the World
Food Programme revealed that food
insecurity had worsened and over 1 million
people faced severe hunger.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
In March, the Ministry of Mines and Mineral
Resources wrote to the Meya Mining
company, seeking a response to Amnesty
International’s conclusions regarding the
human rights impact of its operations in the
Kono district.1
In August, the government enacted the
Mines and Minerals Development Act 2022,
which sought to improve the socio-economic
benefits of mining projects for the country
and increase transparency in the
management of the sector.
1. “Sierra Leone: No diamond is worth the life of a community”, 15
December

323

SINGAPORE
Republic of Singapore
Head of state: Halimah Yacob
Head of government: Lee Hsien Loong
The use of repressive laws to silence dissent
intensified. The government decriminalized
consensual sexual relations between men
but moved to block same-sex marriage.
Executions resumed.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
Judicial harassment of independent media
workers and government critics continued. In
April, Terry Xu and Daniel de Costa,
respectively editor and writer with the media
outlet The Online Citizen, were sentenced to
three weeks’ imprisonment. They were
convicted in 2021 of defaming cabinet
members. Daniel de Costa was also
sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for
contravening the Computer Crimes Act.
In January, human rights defender Jolovan
Wham was found guilty of holding an illegal
public assembly in relation to a 2018 protest
against an earlier trial of Terry Xu and Daniel
de Costa. He served 15 days in jail after
losing his appeal and refusing to pay a fine.
In June, police interrogated Kirsten Han and
Rocky Howe under the Public Order Act after
they participated in a peaceful protest against
the death penalty.1 In October, police
informed Kirsten Han that she had been
found in contempt of court, apparently for a
Facebook post critical of the authorities’
harassment of lawyers representing death
row inmates. She received a conditional
warning to refrain from “criminal conduct” for
12 months. Her legal challenge against the
case was still pending at year’s end.
In November, a police investigation was
launched against a woman after she held a
protest outside the Chinese embassy in
solidarity with victims of human rights
violations there.

324

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In November, parliament voted to repeal
Section 377a of the Penal Code which
criminalized consensual sex between men.
However, it also amended the Constitution to
effectively block same-sex marriage.

MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In April, the government lifted most Covid-19
restrictions except for migrant workers, who
continued to face restrictions on movement
beyond their crowded dormitories,
workplaces and designated recreation
centres.

DEATH PENALTY
Executions, halted since November 2019,
resumed. There was public outcry after
Nagaenthran Dharmalingam, a Malaysian
national assessed with an intellectual
disability, was executed in April for drugrelated offences.2
The courts imposed punitive costs orders
for late-stage appeals against death
sentences and lawyers were investigated for
making public statements about their clients.
M Ravi, a prominent human rights lawyer
known for his defence of death row inmates,
faced multiple disciplinary inquiries,
contempt of court proceedings and criminal
defamation investigations in relation to his
work.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government submitted a new NDC in
November which included a revised and
increased target to reduce its absolute
emissions to 60 metric tonnes of CO2
equivalent in 2030. However, this fell
significantly short of the figure needed to
keep the rise in global temperatures to 1.5˚C.
1. “Singapore: Drop investigations and cease harassment against
human rights defenders”, 28 June
2. “Singapore: Abhorrent hangings must end as man with intellectual
disability executed”, 27 April

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

SLOVAKIA
Slovak Republic
Head of state: Zuzana Čaputová
Head of government: Eduard Heger
Discrimination against Roma persisted.
Parliamentarians attempted to adopt
amendments that would restrict access to
abortion. Human rights violations were
committed against Ukrainians. Access to
healthcare for transgender people was
limited.

BACKGROUND
The term of the Public Defender of Rights,
Mária Patakyová, expired in March and the
National Council failed to elect her successor
until 1 December, when Róbert Dobrovodský
was appointed. In the meantime, the backlog
of complaints from the public about human
rights violations increased month by month.

DISCRIMINATION
The authorities subjected Roma to
widespread discrimination.
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
Slovakia continued to face legal proceedings
by the European Commission regarding its
systematic discrimination against Roma
children in education, including segregation.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
The government made no effort to improve
the living conditions of thousands of Roma
people living in informal settlements and
segregated neighbourhoods across Slovakia.
In July, Younous Omarjee, a member of the
European Parliament, visited a Roma
settlement in the village of Petrovce nad
Laborcom and said: “It is a shame for
Slovakia and a shame for Europe that some
Roma live in medieval conditions.”
EXCESSIVE AND UNNECESSARY USE OF FORCE
In June, the Slovak government apologized
for a police raid on Roma communities in the
town of Moldava nad Bodvou in 2013 and
committed to paying financial compensation
for “injustice and suffering, to the victims and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

their families for their long-term search for
the truth.”

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Despite an official apology by the government
in 2021 for the illegal sterilization of
thousands of Roma women between 1966
and 2004, no effective compensation
mechanism was in place by the end of 2022.
Three different amendments were
introduced in April by parliamentarians to
ban abortion, with the stated aim of targeting
so-called “abortion tourism” despite reports
of widespread sexual violence against
Ukrainian girls and women during the war in
Ukraine. However, none of these
amendments became law. This was the 20th
legislative initiative in the past two years to
limit access to safe and legal abortion.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
By the end of the year, Slovakia had made no
progress towards ratifying the Council of
Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention).

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Since the beginning of the war in Ukraine on
24 February, Slovakia received and provided
immediate care for more than 1,068,000
Ukrainians, and more than 104,000
registered for temporary protection in the
country. This contrasted with a hostile
immigration policy and lack of support for
refugees from other countries coming to
Europe since 2015, as well as antiimmigration rhetoric and policies of the
Slovak authorities and top political leaders.
Following the invasion, several human rights
organizations as well as the Public Defender
of Rights drew attention to insufficient
protection of the rights of vulnerable groups
from Ukraine, especially third country
nationals, unaccompanied minors, Roma
people and transgender people. Human
rights violations against the latter included
verbal abuse by the armed forces of both
Ukraine and Slovakia at the UkrainianSlovakian border.

325

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Same-sex marriage and registered civil
partnership were not yet legally recognized.
On 12 October, two people died and one
was injured in a shooting in the Tepláreň gay
bar in the capital, Bratislava. After a brief
manhunt, the police identified the
perpetrator, a 19-year-old man who had
posted an anti-LGBTI and antisemitic
manifesto on Twitter just before the attack.
He was later found dead from a self-inflicted
gunshot wound, according to police.
RIGHT TO HEALTH
The arrival of transgender people from
Ukraine highlighted the poor quality of
healthcare services provided for them in
Slovakia. Organizations dedicated to support
and counselling for people fleeing Ukraine
recommended that transgender refugees
leave Slovakia for countries with existing
adequate healthcare for transgender people.
In April, the Ministry of Health issued
guidelines on standardization of healthcare
procedures for gender reassignment; these
do not include sterilization and/or castration
as a mandatory requirement for obtaining
medical approval for medical transition. The
release of these guidelines was followed by a
backlash, and discriminatory statements by
some parliamentarians. On 18 May the
guidelines were suspended.
In December 2022, a group of medical
professionals and psychologists signed a
“Statement of psychiatrists, psychologists
and other experts on transsexualism”,
condemning the proposed guidelines on
standardizing healthcare procedures for
gender affirmative healthcare.

SLOVENIA
Republic of Slovenia
Head of state: Nataša Pirc Musar(replaced Borut Pahor
in December)
Head of government: Robert Golob(replaced Janez
Janša in June)
Protesters received fines for violating the
ban on protests. Political interference

326

further eroded media freedom. The
president apologized for the
unconstitutional erasure of over 25,000
people from the citizens’ registry 30 years
ago. Parliament legalized same-sex
marriage and adoption. Ukrainian refugees
faced numerous problems in accessing
services.

BACKGROUND
After several years of anti-government
protests, the Freedom Movement party led by
Robert Golob won the parliamentary elections
in April. The new government promised to
reverse some of the “harmful” laws and
policies passed by its predecessors and
tackle the effects of rising energy and food
prices.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The authorities imposed severe fines on
protesters who defied the blanket ban on
peaceful protests imposed during the
Covid-19 pandemic. Activist and theatre
director Jaša Jenull was ordered to pay
€40,000 to reimburse the authorities for the
cost of policing protests he attended in 2020
and 2021.1 The Council of Europe
Commissioner for Human Rights called on
the authorities to immediately stop “the
financial and administrative harassment of
civil society activists.” In October, the new
government dropped all charges against Jaša
Jenull and committed to resolving other
outstanding fines imposed on protesters by
its predecessor.
In March, the Coalition against Strategic
Lawsuits against Public Participation
(SLAPPs) in Europe stated that Slovenia was
one of the worst offenders in the EU for using
lawsuits to silence journalists and activists.
Radio-Television Slovenia (RTV SLO)
suffered persistent political interference,
affecting its ability to deliver impartial
programming. In July, the new government
amended the law on RTV SLO in an attempt
to protect its independence, but in
December, the outlet’s outgoing leadership
challenged the law before the Constitutional

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Court, delaying a quick resolution of the
crisis.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The authorities passed a series of measures
to alleviate the effects of the soaring cost of
living caused by rising energy prices,
introducing special allowances for
economically vulnerable people, additional
temporary child benefits, one-off energy
supplements and increased aid for local food
producers to prevent further price hikes.
In July, the new government postponed until
January 2024 the implementation of the Act
on Long-Term Care for older people, which
was adopted in 2021. The law, which was
meant to address insufficient care services
for the growing elderly population, had been
due to enter into force in January 2023.

DISCRIMINATION
THE “ERASED”
President Pahor issued a formal apology to
over 25,000 people who were
unconstitutionally removed from the official
registry of permanent residents 30 years ago,
effectively leaving them without Slovenian
citizenship. Despite this apology, more than
half of the so-called “erased” did not have
their status restored or receive compensation
from the state.
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In October, parliament amended legislation to
legalize same-sex marriage and adoption,
following the Constitutional Court’s July ruling
that declared as unconstitutional the law
allowing only heterosexual partners to marry
and adopt children.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The number of refugees and migrants
entering Slovenia via the so-called Balkans
route increased significantly compared to
2021. The authorities recorded over 27,000
irregular entries.
In June, the new government announced
that it would remove a 155km fence on its
border with Croatia, which was built in 2015
to deter irregular crossings, saying it had “not

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

fulfilled its declared purpose.” It also issued
binding guidelines to ensure that border
police fully respected people’s right to access
asylum.
According to the authorities, tens of
thousands of people fleeing conflict in
Ukraine had entered Slovenia since February,
the majority travelling onwards to other EU
countries. Around 7,500 out of over 8,200
who applied for temporary protection were
granted this status, guaranteeing them
access to education, urgent healthcare and
the labour market. However, local
organizations reported many integration
problems, including restricted access to
healthcare; lack of integration activities such
as language services; and difficulties for
Ukrainian children attending lessons in
Slovenian.
1. “Slovenia: Stop making people pay for policing of protests”, 17 March

SOMALIA
Federal Republic of Somalia
Head of state: Hassan Sheikh Mohamud (replaced
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed (Farmaajo) in May)
Head of government: Hamza Abdi Barre (replaced
Mohamed Hussein Roble in June)
All parties to Somalia’s conflict continued
to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian law with impunity. AlShabaab increased its unlawful attacks
against civilians. Conflict along with severe
drought caused by lack of rain led to the
displacement of over 1.8 million people and
a new wave of humanitarian crisis.
Internally displaced people faced
significant human rights violations; women
and girls were particularly exposed to
gender-based violence. The government
increased the health budget but healthcare
provision remained poor and access to
water, sanitation and food was severely
inadequate. Freedom of expression was
restricted, and journalists were attacked,
beaten and arbitrarily arrested and
prosecuted. Media houses were suspended.

327

In Somaliland, authorities severely
restricted the rights to freedom of
expression, peaceful assembly and
association.

BACKGROUND
In May, after a protracted electoral process,
Somali parliamentarians elected Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud as president who, in June,
nominated Hamza Abdi Barre as his prime
minister. A new cabinet was formed in
August.
In April, after a 15-year stint, the African
Union Mission to Somalia was replaced by
the African Union Transitional Mission in
Somalia through a UN Security Council
resolution. The resolution set out strategies to
transfer security responsibilities to Somalia's
army and police force by the end of 2024.
The effects of the war in Ukraine, which
restricted food imports, the climate crisis and
Covid-19’s economic fallout, coupled with
four consecutive failed rainy seasons, created
dire humanitarian conditions.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
Civilians continued to bear the brunt of the
ongoing conflict between the government and
its international allies on the one hand and
Al-Shabaab on the other. Hundreds of
civilians were killed or injured throughout the
year. There was no justice and accountability
for violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law.
According to the UN, there were 428
civilian casualties (167 killed and 261
injured) between February and May, 76% of
which were the result of unlawful attacks by
Al-Shabaab, with the rest attributed to state
security forces, clan militias, and
international and regional forces.
On 23 March, six people, including five
foreign nationals, were killed when AlShabaab attacked the SafeLane Global
compound within the Aden Adde
International Airport in the capital,
Mogadishu. On the same day, the group
carried out two deadly attacks in the town of
Beledweyne, around 300km north of
Mogadishu. The UN said the attacks resulted

328

in at least 156 casualties – 48 killed,
including Amina Mohamed Abdi, a
prominent female MP, and 108 injured.
In May, the new government stated it would
prioritize security, and fighting Al-Shabaab.
The armed group responded with increased
indiscriminate and targeted attacks, including
assassinations.
On 19 August, Al-Shabaab carried out a
complex attack on the Hotel Hayat in
Mogadishu, killing at least 30 people and
injuring more than 50 others. After gaining
access to the popular hotel using bombs and
gunfire, the attackers laid siege to the
building for more than 30 hours. The prime
minister promised accountability saying “…
anyone who neglected their responsibility will
be held accountable…”, but no judicial
investigations had been opened by the end of
the year. On 29 October, Al-Shabaab carried
out two car bomb attacks targeting the
Ministry of Education building and a busy
market intersection in Mogadishu. The attack
killed more than 100 people and injured over
300 others.1

RIGHT TO FOOD
The failure of four consecutive rainy seasons,
combined with the impact of war in Ukraine
on food imports, created a dire humanitarian
crisis in the country. According to the UN,
7.8 million people – half the population –
needed humanitarian assistance to survive.
More than 3 million livestock, which
pastoralist families rely on for their
livelihoods, perished largely due to drought.
According to the ICRC, Somalia depended on
Russia and Ukraine for more than 90% of its
wheat supplies but the war between the two
countries interrupted supplies, while rising
fuel costs, another consequence of the war,
caused a considerable spike in food prices
which disproportionally affected those most
vulnerable to discrimination, such as
internally displaced people, subsistence
farmers and people in conflict-affected areas.
Catastrophic levels of food insecurity were
confirmed in parts of the country, with more
than 213,000 people in famine-like
conditions. More than 1.5 million children,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

including infants, faced acute malnutrition,
with 386,400 children likely to be severely
malnourished. By September, 730 children
had died in nutrition centres nationwide.
Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab restricted
humanitarian access in areas under their
control, compounding the crisis.
In response, the federal government created
the Ministry of Environment and Climate
Change and appointed a special presidential
envoy for drought response to address the
situation. The envoy coordinated local and
international efforts, seeking assistance and
solidarity for those most affected.
International humanitarian actors also
increased food, medical and other forms of
aid assistance to the affected communities.
However, funding fell far short of what was
needed to mitigate the crisis.

INTERNALLY DISPLACED PEOPLE’S
RIGHTS
Internally displaced people continued to face
significant human rights violations and
abuses. More than 1.8 million people were
displaced due to the drought and conflict.
Between January and August, 188,186
individuals were forcibly evicted across the
country, the majority of whom were internally
displaced people.
Most of those displaced were older people,
children and women, including pregnant
women and lactating mothers. The lack of
adequate shelter and privacy in overcrowded
internally displaced people’s settlements
increased women and children’s vulnerability
to violations such as gender-based violence
including rape and physical assaults.
In July, Al-Shabaab also carried out largescale military attacks along the border with
Ethiopia, leading to displacement of local
people.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Sexual violence against women and girls
continued. Some attacks were conflict-related
and between February and May, the UN
reported four such incidents affecting three
women and a 15-year-old girl, including an
internally displaced woman and a pregnant

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

woman who were raped and killed by their
alleged perpetrators.
The ongoing drought increased the
vulnerability of internally displaced people to
gender-based violence. Women and girls
were at heightened risk of sexual violence
and abuse when travelling long distances to
fetch water for their families.
The federal parliament failed to pass the
Sexual Offences and the Female Genital
Mutilation bills.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Access to basic healthcare remained poor.
The severe drought which affected half the
population led to a surge in cases of
malnutrition and disease outbreaks; and
more people faced difficulties accessing safe
water and sanitation, and adequate food.
According to the WHO, the number of
suspected cholera and measles cases
increased sharply compared with previous
years. Covid-19 continued to be a major
challenge – by September, there were 27,020
confirmed cases and 1,361 related deaths
since the outbreak began. Only around 14%
of the population had been fully vaccinated
by 28 August, with over 4.5 million Covid-19
vaccine doses administered. The government
increased the health sector’s budget to USD
58.5 million, from USD 33.6 million in 2021,
constituting 6% of the total 2022 budget
which was an increase from the average 2%
allocated to health in the past five years.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression was restricted.
Journalists were occasionally attacked by
security forces and were subjected to threats,
harassment, intimidation, beatings, arbitrary
arrests, and prosecution. Nine journalists
were injured and two media houses
temporarily suspended by the South West
State authorities. Authorities in south central
Somalia and Puntland restricted journalists’
access to election-related information.
Security forces, including National
Intelligence and Security Agency officials,
prevented journalists from covering

329

opposition campaign events and allegations
of widespread election malpractice.
On 16 February, police officers in
Mogadishu’s Kahda district attacked
journalists Ismail Mohamed Muse and
Mohamed Hassan Yusuf of Somali Cable TV;
and Aweys Mohamud Jila’ow and Mohamud
Bari of Five Somali TV. The four journalists
were reporting on Al-Shabaab attacks in
various locations in the city the previous
night. Photographs on social media showed
them blindfolded and lying on the ground
face down with their hands and legs tied
behind their backs. They were all released
later that day without charge.
On 27 April, police officers blocked a group
of journalists from accessing the Afisyoni
hangar in Mogadishu where the
parliamentary speaker election was taking
place.
On 15 July, intelligence officers from the
South West State arbitrarily arrested journalist
Hassan Ali Da’ud of Arlaadi Media Network
and detained him in an unknown location.
He was arrested after he had reported on the
alleged ill-treatment of some South West
State lawmakers by security personnel in
Baidoa. He was released after 19 days
without charge.
On 21 August, a police officer from the
Haramacad Unit shot M24 TV journalist
Ahmed Omar Nur at close range hitting him
in the cheek while he was covering the Hotel
Hayat attack (see above, Unlawful attacks).
According to the Somali Journalists Syndicate
(SJS), a trade union and local media
advocacy group, two Haramacad officers
were arrested following the incident but were
later released on their commander’s orders.
On 8 October, the Ministry of Information
issued a directive prohibiting the
“dissemination of extremist ideologies from
both traditional media broadcasts and social
media”. Several media freedom advocates,
including the SJS’s secretary general, Abdalle
Ahmed Mumin, publicly expressed their
concerns about its impact on media freedom
and the safety of journalists. Abdalle Mumin
was subsequently arrested at Aden Adde
International Airport and prevented from

330

travelling to Nairobi. He was charged with
several offences under the penal code
including bringing the nation or the state into
contempt and instigating to disobey laws. He
was released on bail on 22 October but was
banned from travelling abroad until the court
concludes his case.

SOMALILAND
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND ASSOCIATION
Authorities in Somaliland escalated their
clampdown on the right to freedom of
expression. Journalists were arbitrarily
arrested and prosecuted. At least four media
houses were suspended and the internet was
shut down to muzzle reporting on protests
against delayed presidential elections.
On 13 April, Somaliland police arrested at
least 15 journalists who were reporting on a
shooting incident at the Hargeisa Central
Prison that day. Twelve of them were freed on
19 April but the authorities continued to hold
Mohamed Abdi Ilig, MM Somali TV director;
Abdijabar Mohamed Hussein, Horn Cable TV
reporter; and Abdirahman Ali Khalif of
Gobonimo TV. On 23 May, the Marodi Jeeh
Regional Court in Hargeisa sentenced
Mohamed Abdi Ilig and Abdijabar Mohamed
Hussein to one year and four months in
prison for “the publication of false news”.
The court acquitted Abdirahman Ali Khalif.
On 2 July, the two sentenced journalists were
released under a presidential pardon.
On 23 May, the Marodi Jeeh Regional Court
of Appeal sentenced journalist and social
activist Abdimalik Muse Oldon, who had
been detained since August 2021, to two
years in prison and a fine of 3 million
Somaliland shillings (USD 372). He was
charged with “spreading false information
and anti-national propaganda”, and “criminal
defamation.” He was released on 22
December after completing his jail term.
On 11 August, ahead of planned protests
organized by opposition politicians across
Somaliland, authorities allegedly ordered
telecom service providers to shut down the
internet. The shutdown lasted nine hours and
affected the ability of journalists and others to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

freely communicate and report on the
protests.
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
On 11 August, security forces used excessive
force against protesters challenging delayed
presidential elections in the cities of
Hargeisa, Burao and Erigavo. According to
the Human Rights Centre, a local
organization, security forces killed at least five
people and injured scores of others while
police arrested more than 200 protesters,
including journalists and opposition
politicians. In September, the findings of an
investigation into the 11 August events by the
Standing and Ethics Committee of
Somaliland’s House of Representatives were
released. The committee concluded that
security forces had used excessive force
against protesters but no one had been
arrested or brought before a court in relation
to unlawful acts against protesters at the end
of the year.
1. “Somalia: Al-Shabaab must urgently stop carrying out attacks
against civilians”, 31 October

SOUTH AFRICA
Republic of South Africa
Head of state and government: Matamela Cyril
Ramaphosa
Incidents of gender-based violence and
early pregnancy continued to increase.
Climate change and state mismanagement
of infrastructure exacerbated the impacts of
two floods in KwaZulu-Natal province.
People displaced by floods were unable to
access medicine and healthcare while water
supplies were disrupted. Sanitation
conditions in public schools were poor. The
number of households living in informal
settlements increased. Operation Dudula,
an anti-migrant movement, launched in
three additional provinces. Xenophobic
violence resulted in injury and loss of life.
Police continued to use excessive force in
attempts to quell protests; the right to life
and security of the person was violated. The

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

authorities failed to ensure that the mining
industry complied with standards to prevent
human rights violations. There was an
absence of legislation to hold government
and corporate companies accountable to
climate commitments.

BACKGROUND
There remained little to no accountability 10
years after the Marikana massacre in which
34 people were killed when police opened
fire on protesting mineworkers.
The Commission of Enquiry into State
Capture report was released. It highlighted
allegations of corruption and other abuses
known as “state capture”. An independent
panel was established to assess whether
there were grounds to impeach President
Ramaphosa on allegations that he covered
up a multi-million-rand robbery (at least USD
580,000) at his Phala Phala farm. In
December, Cyril Ramaphosa was re-elected
president of the ruling African National
Congress party.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Official quarterly crime statistics published in
November showed an increase in all forms of
gender-based violence, compared to the
same quarter in 2021. Murders of women
increased by 10.3%, with 989 women killed
between July and September. Sexual
offences increased by 11%, and rape by
10.8%.
Despite the adoption of the National
Strategic Plan on Gender-Based Violence and
Femicide in 2019, a national council,
intended to ensure that the plan was
implemented, was yet to be established. A
review of the first year since the plan’s
adoption showed that 55% of targets had not
been met. The DNA backlog, crucial for
prosecuting gender-based violence cases,
remained at 64,911 as of 1 December. There
was a 24% increase (representing 99 cases)
in “rapes by a police officer” reported to the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate
(IPID), as reflected in its 2021/22 annual
report. Only 64 cases were recommended for

331

prosecution, leading to concerns of
weakened police accountability.
In July, the gang rape and robbery of eight
women in Krugersdorp, Gauteng Province,
shone a spotlight on the increase in sexual
offences and violence against women.
Fourteen men were initially linked to and
charged in connection with the rapes, but
charges were dropped in October due to
insufficient evidence.

South Africa continued to see an alarming
number of early pregnancies. Between April
2021 and March 2022, 90,037 girls between
10 and 19 years gave birth. Limited access to
sexual and reproductive health services,
stock-outs of contraceptives, lack of
comprehensive sexuality education, poverty
and gender-based violence contributed to
early pregnancy.

pandemic and withdrawn in April. The
proposed regulations risk undermining
human rights with regard to their potential
permanent nature; the criminalization of
those not complying with the rules; the
imposition of mandatory medical
examinations and prophylaxis, including
isolation and quarantine; and the opportunity
they present in emboldening the unnecessary
or excessive use of force by law enforcement
agencies under the guise of law enforcement,
as seen during the Covid-19 lockdowns.2
Following a public outcry, the deadline for
submissions was extended to 31 July but no
public updates were provided by the
department after April.
Displacement caused by the floods in
KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) province in April and
May meant that some people had no access
to necessary medication or healthcare
services for up to nine days (see below).

RIGHT TO EDUCATION

RIGHT TO WATER AND SANITATION

The public education system continued to be
characterized by decaying and dangerous
infrastructure. The Department of Basic
Education’s (DBE) 2021/22 annual report
showed that 2,982 schools still used pit
latrines that violate the rights to health,
dignity, safety and life. The DBE missed
several deadlines to eradicate and replace
them but in January promised to do so by
2023. In June, however, proposed
amendments to regulations relating to the
Minimum Uniform Norms and Standards for
Public School Infrastructure were introduced.
The draft legislation removed all deadlines,
allowing the department to evade
accountability and putting learners’ health
and safety at risk.1

In April, KZN and Eastern Cape provinces
experienced extreme rainfall and flooding.
Damage to water infrastructure resulted in
widespread disruptions to water supplies
throughout the provinces, leaving
communities with no or interrupted supplies
for months. The government made no
systematic efforts to ensure that people had
access to the water they needed during this
period. This, alongside the damage caused to
houses, fuelled a sanitation crisis as the
floods destroyed some communal toilets,
forcing some people to relieve themselves in
the bushes. Several health facilities in KZN
had insufficient water supplies. While the
intensity of rainfall was, according to
scientists, exacerbated by climate change,
poor spatial planning and maintenance of
infrastructure by local government worsened
the situation.
There were also severe water shortages in
the Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan
Municipality in Eastern Cape province, which
had faced drought since 2016. The latest
water crisis was compounded by the local
authorities’ failure to fix leaks and the city lost
an estimated 29% of its water supply.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, the Department of Health proposed
amendments to the Regulations Relating to
the Surveillance and the Control of Notifiable
Medical Conditions (NMCs), to prevent the
spread of Covid-19 and other NMCs. The
amendments fell outside provisions imposed
under the National State of Disaster, which
was introduced in response to the Covid-19

332

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO HOUSING
The floods in KZN province destroyed at least
8,584 houses, and damaged 13,536.
According to the European Civil Protection
and Humanitarian Aid Operations, 40,000
people were displaced and without homes.
The homes of residents of the Isipingo transit
camp in KZN were once again flooded, a
regular occurrence when it rains. The
residents had been moved from informal
settlements around Durban city into the
camp in a flood prone area of Isipingo in
2009, ahead of the 2010 FIFA World Cup.
Promises that they would receive permanent
housing within six months remained
unrealized.
According to a governmental body, Statistics
South Africa, the percentage of households
living in informal settlements increased to
11.7% from 11.4% the previous year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Sporadic xenophobic attacks continued
throughout the year and led to the killing of a
Zimbabwean national, Elvis Nyathi, in April.
He was burned to death in Diepsloot, a
township north of Johannesburg, after he
failed to present proof of his identity to
vigilante groups who demanded it. Seven
men were arrested in connection with his
death and granted bail. The case continued
to be postponed. Migrants in the area
reported living in constant fear. An antimigrant movement, Operation Dudula, which
emerged inGauteng province in 2021, was
launched in other provinces including
Western Cape, KZN and North West.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
South African police continued to use
excessive force resulting in deaths and
injuries. The IPID’s 2021/22 annual report
noted 5,295 new cases which included
3,407 cases of assault, 744 of discharge of
an official firearm, and 223 reported deaths
in police custody. There were 410 reported
deaths as a result of police action, an
increase from 353 the previous year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
In August, four people were killed during a
protest about the authorities’ failure to deliver
services in Tembisa, a township in the
Gauteng province. The IPID’s investigation
into two of the killings, for which the police
were alleged to be responsible, continued at
the end of the year.
In July, four police officers were acquitted in
connection with the death in 2021 of
Mthokozisi Ntumba, killed while passing a
student-led protest in Braamfontein in
Johannesburg.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
Crime statistics for July to September,
released in November, showed an increase in
murders of 13.6%, compared to the same
quarter in 2021. There was an increase of
9.8% in child murders. Cases of abduction
increased by more than 100%, with 4,028
reported cases. Most of these cases related
to hijacking, robbery and rape.
There was a nationwide spate of mass
shootings. In June it was revealed at the
Khayelitsha Crisis Response Summit that 26
people had been killed in mass shootings in
Khayelitsha, a township in Cape Town, since
March. In July, more than 20 people were
killed in two tavern shootings in Soweto (in
Johannesburg) and in Pietermaritzburg
(KZN).
Abahlali baseMjondolo, the largest postapartheid movement in the country
advocating for basic services for poor
communities, lost four activists to unlawful
killings in KZN, allegedly in connection with
their work. Three arrests were made for only
one of the killings.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
Mining companies’ activities had an adverse
human rights impact specifically in relation to
the rights to health, education, water and
livelihoods in the Sekhukhune region. The
Department of Mineral Resources and Energy
continued to fail to hold mining companies
accountable to their Social and Labour Plans,
a legally binding mechanism, which if

333

adhered to would go some way to ensuring
that the negative socio-economic
ramifications of mining are remedied, and
human rights violations against local
communities prevented.3

3. Unearthing the Truth: How the Mines Failed Communities in the
Sekhukhune Region of South Africa, 22 February

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

Republic of Korea
Head of state and government: Yoon Suk-yeol (replaced
Moon Jae-in in May)

South Africa continued to lack legislation to
hold both government and businesses
accountable to climate commitments. In
February, the Climate Change Bill was tabled
in parliament. It aimed to enable the
development of an effective climate change
response and a long-term just transition to a
low-carbon and climate-resilient economy
and society in the context of sustainable
development. There were concerns that the
bill, in its current form, did not go far enough
to address the severity, urgency and crosscutting imperatives of the climate crisis. It
remained under consideration at the National
Assembly at the end of the year.
South Africa adopted a revised NDC in
2021 and updated its 2030 target for
emission reductions, with a 12-32% lower
and upper target range reduction. This fell
short of the figure needed to keep the rise of
global temperatures below 1.5°C.
Meanwhile, scientists determined that
climate change doubled the probability of
flooding events as seen in KZN in April and
May, where 461 people died.
At COP27, President Ramaphosa presented
the Just Energy Transition Investment Plan, a
five-year plan to bring in USD 8.5 billion as
part of the partnership established with
France, Germany, the UK, the USA and the
EU at COP26. Consultation on the plan
started in late 2022, with mining-affected
communities in the Mpumalanga province
already rejecting the plan due to lack of
consultation.
1. “South Africa: Submission on the amendments to the regulations
relating to Minimum Uniform Norms and Standards for Public School
Infrastructure”, 5 July
2. “South Africa: Submission on the Regulations Relating to the
Surveillance and the Control of Notifiable Medical Conditions”, 14
April

334

SOUTH KOREA
South Korea presented no credible plan to
phase out the use of coal by 2030 and
reliance on fossil fuels continued. Small
positive steps to protect LGBTI rights were
progressed by the judiciary. Online violence
against women and girls remained
pervasive, but the new government reduced
resources to respond to the issue. Media
freedom was threatened.

BACKGROUND
Women’s rights regressed following Yoon
Suk-yeol’s election as president. The Ministry
of Education announced a plan to remove
content related to sexual orientation and
gender identity from school curricula.
Following the deaths of more than 150
people in a crowd crush during Halloween
celebrations in Itaewon, concerns were raised
about the effectiveness of disaster response
and crowd control.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The government’s plan to phase out coal
remained ambiguous. In August, the Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Energy announced its
latest electricity plan, which still envisaged
drawing more than 20% of electricity from
coal in 2030. To be compatible with the
1.5°C goal set at COP27, coal must be
phased out entirely by 2030. The state power
utility, KEPCO, increased coal power in 2022
in response to higher gas prices. In June, a
petition was filed with the Constitutional Court
by 62 children aged 10 and under to contest
the constitutionality of the government’s
Carbon Neutrality Act, which fell well short of
necessary targets for reducing greenhouse
gas emissions.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

DISCRIMINATION
RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
Disability rights groups carried out a series of
demonstrations on the subway from
December 2021 to demand a disabilityinclusive budget and promote mobility rights.
The Minister of Economy and Finance
ignored the demands of the campaign
groups, stating that a budget for people with
disabilities was incompatible with the
purpose of the supplementary budget. The
public transport system was still not fully
wheelchair accessible 20 years after the
publication of the first plan to guarantee
mobility rights for people with disabilities.
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION LEGISLATION
Two activists from the South Korean Coalition
for Anti-discrimination Legislation
participated in a 46-day hunger strike calling
for enactment of a comprehensive antidiscrimination act. Despite four proposed
bills being added to the agenda at a
Legislation and Judiciary Committee meeting
in May, there was no traction on passing any
legislation.

LGBTI PEOPLE'S RIGHTS
On 7 January the Seoul Administrative Court
dismissed a lawsuit filed by So Seong-wook
and his partner Kim Yong-min against the
National Health Insurance Service (NHIS) for
denying insurance coverage by not
recognizing partners within a same-sex
relationship as dependents. The NHIS first
recognized Kim Yong-min as So Seongwook's dependent in 2021, but cancelled this
status eight months later. They have
appealed the ruling.
In April, for the first time, the Supreme
Court of Korea reversed lower court
convictions of two soldiers under Article 92-6
of the country’s Military Criminal Act,
reversing its own precedent. The Court
reasoned that if same-sex sexual acts took
place off base, while the soldiers were off
duty and by mutual consent, the Act does not
apply.1
In November, the Supreme Court decided
that having children of minor age should not
immediately be a reason to refuse to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

recognize the legal gender of transgender
people. In coming to this decision – and
partially overturning its previous decision
from 2011 – the Supreme Court affirmed the
rights of transgender individuals to dignity,
happiness and family life.2

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
On 22 August the criminal trial of a Jehovah’s
Witness conscientious objector objecting to
the punitive nature of “alternative service”
began. Hye-min Kim, whose religious beliefs
preclude him from doing military service, is
the first person known to have refused
“alternative service” since it was introduced
in 2020.3
On 15 September, the Constitutional Court
held a public hearing on the constitutionality
of Articles 2 and 7 of the National Security
Act related to a case involving 11 petitions
filed by individuals and lower courts, some of
which have been pending since 2017.
According to the petitioners, the lack of a
clear definition of “anti-government
organization” under the Act inhibits the work
of civil society and provides up to seven
years’ imprisonment for those who “praise,
incite or propagate the activities of an antigovernment organization”.
In September, the ruling People's Power
Party filed a complaint against public
broadcaster Munhwa Broadcasting
Corporation on charges of violating the
Promotion of Information and
Communication Network Use and
Information Protection (Defamation) Act. The
media outlet was accused of misreporting
President Yoon Suk-yeol’s remarks during a
trip to New York, USA. The Seoul
metropolitan police launched an
investigation.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Violations of the rights of foreign nationals
continued at detention centres. Officials at
the Hwaseong detention centre allegedly tied
Moroccan detainee inmate A’s arms and legs
behind his back in the so-called “hog-tying
position”. In February, the Ministry of Justice

335

issued a temporary release from detention for
inmate A, an undocumented migrant,
following acknowledgement by the Ministry of
Justice and the National Human Rights
Commission of Korea that human rights
violations had occurred when he suffered
torture or other ill-treatment at a detention
centre in June 2021. In May, however, the
Ministry of Justice announced a revision to
the Immigration Control Act to introduce
equipment and chairs that can bind upper
and lower body limbs simultaneously.

Labour and the Ministry of Health and
Welfare. More than 800 organizations
expressed opposition to the plan.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS

1. “South Korea: Landmark judgment on same-sex sexual acts in
military a huge victory for LGBTI rights”, 21 April

The Expert Committee of the Digital Sex
Crimes Task Force, established by the
Ministry of Justice in the wake of the “Nth
Room” incident, a sexual blackmail ring that
operated on the application Telegram and
targeted dozens of women, was officially
disbanded on 15 June, with two months
remaining in its mandate, after 17 members
of the task force resigned. They were under
pressure from the newly inaugurated
president’s administration, which stated that
the task force had already fulfilled its
intended purpose, despite widespread
concerns about continuing online genderbased violence.4
Media reported on a new case involving the
online exploitation of minors by a suspect
known as “L” who had forced survivors to
produce exploitative material and was
arrested by police in Australia on 23
November. It revealed that the alleged
perpetrator had increased the production and
distribution of exploitative material. The case
highlighted ongoing concerns about the
extent of digital sex crimes in South Korea
and also exposed fundamental problems
such as a lack of dedicated personnel and
budget for police investigations into genderbased violence.5
The new government announced plans to
abolish the Ministry of Gender Equality and
Family as part of a reorganization plan. The
Ministry had served as a control tower for all
ministries of gender equality policies, but the
reorganization would place its functions
under the Ministry of Employment and

336

DEATH PENALTY
In July, the Constitutional Court held a public
hearing on a challenge to the constitutionality
of the death penalty that has been pending
since 2019. South Korea is abolitionist in
practice and the last execution was carried
out in 1997.

2. “South Korea: Supreme Court ruling on legal gender recognition an
important step forward for transgender rights”, 24 November
3. “South Korea: Drop charges against first conscientious objector to
refuse alternative service”, 22 August
4. “Yoon Suk-yeol needs to change the way South Korea treats women”,
10 May
5. “South Korea: Online sexual abuse content proliferates as survivors
blame Google failings”, 8 December

SOUTH SUDAN
Republic of South Sudan
Head of state and government: Salva Kiir Mayardit
Government security forces and armed
groups perpetrated serious human rights
abuses, including killings, acts of sexual
violence, abductions, detention, torture and
other ill-treatment, the recruitment and use
of children, and destruction of civilian
property. At least 24 people were
extrajudicially executed, including a child,
by government forces. The use of conflictrelated sexual violence was widespread and
systematic, and prosecutions of suspects
for this and other crimes under
international law were rare. Humanitarian
access was restricted and millions of people
faced acute food insecurity. The
government failed to respect, protect,
promote and fulfil the right to health.
Rights to freedom of expression, association
and peaceful assembly were violated. Death
sentences were imposed, and executions
carried out. There were concerns that a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

project to divert water would adversely
affect local communities and wildlife.

BACKGROUND
In March, the UN Human Rights Council
renewed the mandate of the Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan (CHRSS). In
May, the UN Security Council renewed the
arms embargo.1 In July, the Human Rights
Council adopted South Sudan’s third UPR.2
On 2 August, the parties to the 2018 peace
deal signed a roadmap extending the
transitional period by 24 months. In
November, the peace process mediated by
the Sant’Egidio community between the
government and armed opposition groups
that had not signed the 2018 peace deal
broke down. Violence continued across the
country between parties to the conflict, their
allied militias, armed groups and vigilante
groups.
A fourth year of heavy flooding affected over
1.1 million people, destroying houses,
schools, health facilities, water sources and
food productivity. Over 2 million people were
internally displaced and 2.27 million were
living as refugees. In October, the Sentry, an
investigative and policy organization, reported
that nearly USD 1 billion had disappeared in
a bank credit scam, benefiting South Sudan’s
leaders and their families and depriving
hundreds of thousands of people in need of
government health and food services.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Between February and May, government
security forces and affiliated militias clashed
with the Sudan People’s Liberation Army-In
Opposition (SPLA-IO) in the southern part of
Unity State. According to the UN,
government forces and allied militias
perpetrated unlawful attacks including those
that targeted civilians. At least 173 civilians
were killed and over 130 women and girls
were raped or gang raped. The violence also
led to the pillaging of homes and public
buildings, cattle raiding and the displacement
of at least 44,000 civilians.
From August onwards, large scale fighting
took place between Agwelek forces (a

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

government affiliated ethnic militia); the
SPLA-IO; a breakaway faction of the SPLA-IO;
and elements of the White Army (ethnic
community defence forces). According to the
UN, parties to the fighting attacked sites
for internally displaced people, killing
civilians, abducting civilians, destroying
civilian properties and perpetrating genderbased violence. The fighting displaced at
least 20,000 people and exacerbated an
already dire humanitarian situation. Those
unable to flee far, including older people,
were reported to be hiding in bushes and
swamps.
According to the UN, fighting between
government and opposition forces and a nonstate armed group, the National Salvation
Front (NAS), continued for the fifth year in
the south, resulting in abductions, arbitrary
arrests and beatings of civilians by NAS and
government forces. In other areas, between
December 2021 and 30 November 2022,
government security forces, the SPLA-IO, and
community-based militias were responsible
for at least 665 incidents involving human
rights violations, including arbitrary killings,
extrajudicial executions, sexual violence,
abductions, detention, torture and other illtreatment, and looting and destruction of
civilian properties.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Between 25 February and 30 November, the
UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
documented 52 incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence (CRSV) by government
security forces, an unknown armed group
and community-based militias, affecting 103
people. The actual numbers are likely to be
higher. According to the CHRSS, CRSV
remained widespread and systematic,
exacerbated by a lack of accountability and
attributed to a patriarchal society. The
implementation of the 2021 Action Plan for
the Armed Forces on Addressing CRSV was
insufficient. Copies of the action plan were
not easily accessible and awareness about it
was close to non-existent among survivors
and most civil society members.3 Despite the
need, availability and accessibility of mental

337

health and psychosocial support services for
CRSV survivors remained extremely limited.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Between 1 December 2021 and 30
November 2022, 589 incidents related to
constraints on humanitarian access were
reported, according to the UN. Of those, 280
involved violence against humanitarian
personnel and assets. Nine attacks on
convoys took place. At least 10 humanitarian
workers were killed and fighting between
armed actors necessitated the relocation of
233 humanitarian staff.

IMPUNITY
Prosecutions of suspects of crimes under
international law, including CRSV, remained
the exception and impunity the norm. A
handful of sexual violence cases committed
by state security actors against civilians were
tried in military and civilian courts, but these
did not match the high number of cases. By
the end of the year, no case had been
prosecuted as a war crime or torture.
South Sudan’s legal framework continued to
fail to address CRSV and other crimes under
international law effectively. The 2008 Penal
Code remained unamended and did not
include war crimes or crimes against
humanity, continued to define rape in a
limited manner, and did not contain
command responsibility as a mode of
criminal liability.
In September, a military tribunal in Yei
convicted eight soldiers of rape, according to
national court monitors. Several male family
members of CRSV survivors were given
partial compensation for incidents that were
adjudicated by a military tribunal in Yei in
2020.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
On 5 April, the president launched public
consultations to inform the legislation that is
to establish the Commission for Truth,
Reconciliation and Healing. A technical
committee commenced the consultations in
May. By the end of the year, the committee

338

concluded the consultations and presented a
report to the minister of justice and
constitutional affairs.
No progress was made to establish the
Compensation and Reparation Authority and
the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. President
Kiir continued to argue that reconciliation was
preferable to accountability.4

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
According to UNMISS, senior government
officials ordered the extrajudicial execution of
three civilians in Warrap State and one police
officer in Unity State. In June, Human Rights
Watch documented the extrajudicial killing of
three civilians, including a child, by the army
in Central Equatoria State. In August,
according to media reports and the UN Panel
of Experts, government security forces
executed three unarmed rebel soldiers by
firing squad in Unity State and burned
another to death. UNMISS documented an
additional 13 extrajudicial executions.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
The UN said that the army, the SPLA-IO, the
South Sudan Opposition Alliance, non-state
armed groups and unknown armed persons
committed grave violations and abuses
against 243 children – 138 boys, 102 girls
and three for whom the sex is unknown. The
actual numbers were likely to be higher.
Violations included abduction, killing,
maiming, rape, and forced recruitment and
use of children in combat and support roles
such as porters, cooks and spies.
According to UNICEF’s latest data, 2.8
million children were out of school and one
third of schools had been damaged or
destroyed. More than 7,000 children needed
family tracing and reunification services and
1.4 million children suffered from acute
malnutrition.

RIGHT TO FOOD
Over six-and-a-half million people were
acutely food insecure. The latest integrated
food security phase classification assessment
projected that an estimated 7.76 million
people, well over half the population, will face

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

severe acute food insecurity during the lean
season in April to July 2023. Throughout the
year, food production was severely reduced
by the conflict, economic decline, flooding
and climatic shocks.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
The government continued to fail in its
obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the
right to health. There were high numbers of
deaths from preventable diseases and other
conditions due to inadequate healthcare
facilities, exacerbated by attacks on
healthcare facilities and medical practitioners
by government forces, armed opposition
groups, vigilante groups and militias. Only an
estimated 44% of the population had access
to primary healthcare services. Despite
widespread post-traumatic stress disorder
among the population, the availability and
accessibility of mental health and
psychosocial support services remained
extremely limited.5

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly continued
to be violated. On 18 January, authorities
allowed the Number One Citizen newspaper
to resume operations after having suspended
it on 9 December 2021 on the grounds that
its editor-in-chief was not registered as a
journalist. According to reports, authorities
were displeased that the newspaper had
protected its sources.
On 15 March, according to the UN, the
National Security Service (NSS) censored the
publication of articles by a media house and
made resumption of operations conditional
on a public apology for misquoting the
minister of information. According to media
reports, NSS officials briefly arrested nine
journalists covering a SPLM-IO press
conference in June, confiscating their
equipment and deleting their audio
recordings and photos.
In February, the media reported that civil
servants in Jonglei State, protesting the local
government’s decision to cut the payment of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

their salary arrears, clashed with the
governor’s bodyguards, which resulted in
several injuries. In June, according to media
reports, dozens of teachers in Warrap State
were arrested by state authorities following a
protest to demand their salaries. Most of
them were released but six were transferred
to Rumbek Central Prison where they
remained until August when a court
dismissed all charges against them.
On 7 August, police and NSS agents
arrested and detained for eight days seven
people in Juba who were protesting the rising
cost of living. Police arrested a female
journalist, who was interviewing protesters,
on the grounds that she was not carrying
identification. She was detained unlawfully for
eight days.
In September, the government announced
the establishment of a special court to
adjudicate cybercrime and computer misuse.
A December 2021 provisional order intends
to prevent and provide protection from any
crimes committed through computers or the
internet, including espionage and the
publication of false information. The order’s
definitions of crimes are broad and
ambiguous, raising concerns that the
government could use them to target
opponents, dissidents and critics, including
human rights defenders and activists.
The 2014 NSS Act was still not amended
despite obligations under the 2015 and 2018
peace agreements to do so. It grants NSS
officers police-like powers of arrest and
detention, in violation of the NSS’s
constitutional mandate to gather intelligence,
and in breach of international human rights
standards.

DEATH PENALTY
Death sentences continued to be imposed
and executions were carried out. On 22
March, the High Court in Eastern Equatoria
State released Magai Matiop Ngong. He was
15 when he was sentenced to death by
hanging in 2017, after being convicted of
murder, which he claims was an accident.6

339

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In April, the government announced its
intention to revive the Jonglei Canal project to
divert water from the Sudd to the Nile in
Sudan and Egypt. Senior government officials
argued that the project would help prevent
flooding in Jonglei and Unity states and in
May, Egypt sent machines to help with
dredging. However, academics,
environmentalists and activists argued that
the plans would adversely affect communities
and wildlife which depend on the water, and
could lead to a lack of rain resulting from
reduced water evaporation. In July, according
to media reports, President Kiir ordered the
suspension of all dredging-related activities in
South Sudan, including the Sudd wetlands
and Naam river – a tributary of the Nile –
pending completion of assessments on the
impact on surrounding communities and the
ecosystems. According to the Associated
Press, the president established a committee
on the Sudd region and the White Nile river
to discuss options for flood and water
management; its findings would inform a
decision on the proposed projects.

torture and unlawful expulsions. Spyware
was used to target Catalan politicians and
members of civil society. Violence against
women persisted. A bill to remove some
barriers to abortion came before parliament.
A problematic bill that criminalizes aspects
of sex work was tabled. The government
approved a landmark bill on gender selfdetermination. The authorities did not
protect adequately the rights to health and
housing. Concerns continued about the use
of electroshock equipment by police.
Vaguely formulated offences were misused
to curb freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly. New legislation was a positive
step in fighting impunity for violations
perpetrated during the Civil War and
dictatorship. Measures to tackle the climate
crisis remained inadequate.

BACKGROUND

2. “South Sudan: Fulfil past Universal Periodic Review commitment to
develop a human rights agenda and action plan”, 4 July

A police officer was sentenced to 12 months’
imprisonment for providing false evidence
against certain Catalan politicians. The
conviction was connected to ongoing,
broader criminal investigations into the
activities of a secret network, called the
“patriotic police”, suspected of fabricating
evidence to undermine the political group
Podemos and leaders of the Catalan proindependence movement.

3. South Sudan: “If You Don’t Cooperate, I’ll Gun You Down”: ConflictRelated Sexual Violence and Impunity in South Sudan, 18 May

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS

1. “South Sudan: Renewal of UN arms embargo positive step to help
curb conflict-related sexual violence”, 26 May

4. South Sudan: African Union’s Abandoned Commitment to Justice in
Africa: The Case of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, 23 November
5. South Sudan: Human Rights Priorities for the Government of South
Sudan, 3 February
6. “South Sudan: High Court releases man who was sentenced to death
when he was a child”, 24 March

SPAIN
Kingdom of Spain
Head of state: Felipe VI
Head of government: Pedro Sánchez
The authorities’ violent response to people’s
attempts to cross the border between
Melilla and Morocco resulted in deaths,

340

The authorities gravely violated refugees’ and
migrants’ rights at borders.
On 24 June, the Spanish and Moroccan
authorities used unlawful force and acts
which may amount to torture and other illtreatment to repress an attempt by a large
group of people, all Black men from SubSaharan Africa, to enter and seek protection
in Melilla, a Spanish enclave in northern
Morocco. At least 37 people died and over
470 were illegally expelled. In October, UN
experts condemned the continuing lack of
accountability for the deaths and the
dehumanization of African migrants at
Europe’s borders.1
In March, the authorities forcibly returned
an Algerian national to Algeria without

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

assessing the risks to his safety there.
Mohamed Benhalina, a former military official
and whistle-blower, was imprisoned upon
arrival in Algeria and informed that he had
been sentenced to death in his absence.
Spanish authorities had rejected his asylum
application because of his alleged
involvement in activities “contrary to national
security or which may be harmful for Spain’s
relationship with other countries”.
The authorities granted temporary
protection, under the EU Temporary
Protection Directive, to 156,000 Ukrainian
refugees. The government set up dedicated
reception centres in Madrid, Barcelona,
Alicante and Malaga to ensure a coordinated
and rapid response to the refugees’ needs.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
There was concern about the use in Spain of
the NSO Group’s Pegasus spyware, which
was used to target the mobile phones of
prominent Catalan politicians, journalists,
lawyers and their families. In May, the
Director General of the National Intelligence
Centre admitted that several proindependence Catalan politicians had been
spied on. The government also confirmed
that the official phones of the President, the
Minister of the Interior and the Minister of
Defence were infected with Pegasus spyware;
in May the High Court began an investigation.
Unrelated investigations by Catalan courts
into the targeting of Catalan politicians and
members of civil society remained stalled.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Violence against women persisted, with 49
women killed by their partners or ex-partners
during the year. Since 2013, when records
began, 48 children had been killed in the
context of gender-based violence against
their mothers, including two in 2022.
In a positive development, the Ministry of
Equality began collecting data about violence
against women perpetrated by individuals
other than their partners and ex-partners.
The Law on Comprehensive Protection of
Sexual Freedom, which amended the
Criminal Code redefining the offence of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

sexual violence based on lack of consent,
came into force in October.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In December, Congress passed a bill to
amend the law on sexual and reproductive
rights to remove the requirement of parental
consent for 16- and 17-year-olds to have an
abortion, together with other barriers to
accessing a timely abortion, such as
mandatory counselling and reflection periods.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
A bill to amend the Criminal Code to
criminalize aspects of sex work, including
clients and third parties, that would impact
sex workers’ rights and their safety was
pending in parliament at the end of the year.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, the government approved a
landmark bill that recognizes people's right to
gender self-determination, allowing
transgender people to obtain legal recognition
of their gender and change their gender
markers on identity documents without the
need for hormonal treatment or a medical
report; this includes children aged 12 and
over. In December, Congress passed the bill,
with the Senate expected to approve it in
early 2023.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
National and regional governments allocated
insufficient resources to protect the right to
health. The national budget for primary
healthcare was 14% of the total public
healthcare budget, far from the WHO
recommended level of at least 25%. The
Autonomous Communities’ total healthcare
budget was only 4.5% higher than in 2021,
less than half of the increase in healthcare
spending between 2019 and 2020. Aragón
and Castilla La Mancha actually reduced
their healthcare budgets compared with
2021.
The new Mental Health National Strategy
2022-2026, approved in December 2021
after a 15-year long hiatus, started to be
implemented.

341

OLDER PEOPLE
The authorities did not investigate adequately
the deaths of older people in care homes
during the Covid-19 pandemic. About 90% of
prosecutors’ investigations were closed,
despite the General Public Prosecutor
acknowledging that there had been human
rights violations in care homes.
The majority of regional truth commissions
tasked with looking into the treatment of older
people in care homes were closed down
without clear explanation and the authorities
failed to establish a national truth
commission to hold those responsible for the
care home deaths to account.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Thousands of families were denied their right
to adequate housing. Between January and
September there were 29,285 evictions. In
June, the government renewed the
suspension of evictions of economically
vulnerable people until 31 December. While
welcome, the measure was insufficient to
protect from homelessness thousands of
people not in this category.
The rising cost of energy affected thousands
of families, with 14.3% of the population
unable to afford to keep their homes at an
adequate temperature, compared to 10.9%
in 2020. In the neighbourhood of Cañada
Real, in Madrid, 4,500 people, including
1,800 children, continued to live without
access to electricity after being disconnected
in 2020, despite the Ombudsman
recommending that the connection be reestablished.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Concerns remained over the adequacy of
training and protocols for the use of “less
lethal" weapons by various police forces in
the country. The Ministry of the Interior
extended the inclusion of electroshock
equipment as standard equipment for the
National Security Police and Civil Guard and
also for the regional police forces in the
Basque Country and Catalonia.
By the end of the year, no suspects had
been charged in relation to the death, in

342

November 2021, of a man in Barcelona who
was electroshocked by regional police several
times, including after he had been restrained.
People seriously injured by foam bullets
fired by police during demonstrations risked
being denied justice as prosecutors planned
to close criminal investigations due to a lack
of cooperation by police.
At the end of the year, criminal
investigations into the unlawful use of force
by police in the context of the protests of
October 2017 in Catalonia were still ongoing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to misuse the
Public Security Act to limit the freedom of
expression of demonstrators and journalists.
Data on enforcement of the law showed an
increase in the number of fines imposed for
vaguely defined administrative offences, such
as “showing disrespect towards a law
enforcement official” or “disobedience or
resistance to the authorities or their agents”.
Parliament began amending the Criminal
Code to repeal the crimes of “insults to the
Crown” and “insults to the institution”, also
misused to limit freedom of expression.

IMPUNITY
In October, the Democratic Memory Act
entered into force, replacing the 2007
Historical Memory Law. Under the new law
the search for victims of enforced
disappearance during the Civil War and
dictatorship is the responsibility of the state
and judgments passed by military, civil and
special courts on political grounds are
annulled. However, the act does not allow for
crimes under international law committed
during the same period to be pursued.
The 1968 Law on Classified Secrets, passed
during the dictatorship, remained an obstacle
to access to justice.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The Carlos III Health Institute estimated that
between January and October there were
5,829 deaths attributable to high
temperatures. In the same period, fires

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

destroyed 259,491.42 hectares of land, three
times more than in the same period in 2021.
The Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventory
estimated a gross emission of 288.6 million
tonnes of carbon dioxide in 2021, which
constituted a 5.1% increase over the
previous year.
1. Morocco: “They beat him in the head, to check if he was dead”:
Evidence of Crimes Under International Law by Morocco and Spain at
the Melilla border, 13 December

SRI LANKA
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
Head of state and government: Ranil Wickremesinghe
(replaced Gotabaya Rajapaksa in July)
The government intensified its crackdown
on dissent as thousands of people protested
against the dire economic situation. The
rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly came under fierce attack
by law enforcement agencies, which at
times used unlawful force leading to deaths
and injuries. Protesters were arbitrarily
arrested, detained using draconian
counterterrorism legislation, and ill-treated
in custody. Serious human rights violations
committed during the internal armed
conflict remained unaddressed. Families of
people forcibly disappeared continued to
seek truth and justice. Amendments to the
Prevention of Terrorism Act failed to
address key human rights concerns, and
Muslims and Tamils continued to be
targeted under the Act.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Sri Lanka’s economic crisis had a devastating
impact on human rights, with inflation rising
to 73.7% in September, and 85.8% for food.
Access to food, healthcare and education
were gravely impacted, and existing social
security programmes were inadequate to
address growing needs. Fuel shortages
prompted power outages for up to 13 hours a
day. People with precarious jobs who relied

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

on daily wages were particularly affected by
the economic situation.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The state’s crackdown on dissent worsened
rapidly when people took to the streets to
protest against the economic crisis. From late
March, hundreds of protesters gathered
outside government buildings and residences
of the political elite. Despite the protests
being largely peaceful, the authorities used
various means to restrict freedom of
expression, association and peaceful
assembly.
States of emergency were declared on at
least three occasions in April, May and July;
the last one lapsed in mid-August.
Emergency regulations published alongside
the states of emergency gave sweeping
powers to the authorities to arrest and detain
people without due process or judicial
oversight. On 9 May, the peaceful protest site
outside the Presidential Secretariat was
attacked by pro-government supporters. In
response, anti-government groups launched
retaliatory attacks. According to authorities,
nine people died in the ensuing violence,
including an MP, and more than 220 people
were injured.
Law enforcement authorities regularly
sought pre-emptive court orders against
protests without reasonable basis, or refused
to grant permission for planned
demonstrations, violating the right to freedom
of peaceful assembly.
The government remained in discussions to
amend the Voluntary Social Services
Organizations Act. The proposed
amendments would restrict the right to
freedom of association, potentially hampering
the operations of NGOs, for example through
lengthy registration processes, imposing fines
and imprisonment for non-registration, and
giving powers to authorities to suspend, ban
and dissolve NGOs.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On numerous occasions, law enforcement
authorities arbitrarily arrested protesters

343

without following due process, sometimes in
abduction-style arrests conducted by plainclothed officers without warrants. Reasons for
arrest and information on the location of
detention were frequently not provided.
These abduction-style arrests violated the
right to liberty and security of the person and
the right to a fair trial, placing detainees
outside the protection of the law and at risk of
torture and other ill-treatment.
Authorities used the states of emergency
and criminal laws, including the Prevention of
Terrorism Act and the Public Properties Act,
to quash protests and punish those taking
part. Protesters including human rights
defenders, trade unionists and students were
charged with participating in “unlawful
assemblies”. Some were also given travel
bans or selectively charged with offences
relating to acts of civil disobedience.
The use of the Prevention of Terrorism Act
(PTA), Sri Lanka’s draconian counterterrorism
legislation, against protesters was excessive
and disproportionate. In August, President
Ranil Wickremesinghe approved the
detention of three student protest leaders
under the PTA. Charges against Hashan
Jeewantha were dropped in October.
Siridhamma Thero was released on bail in
November. Wasantha Mudalige remained in
detention at the end of the year.

in July, journalists covering a protest in front
of the president’s residence were assaulted
by security forces on live television.
On 21 July the military, police and special
forces conducted a joint night-time operation
without warning to forcefully remove
protesters sleeping in tents outside the
Presidential Secretariat and a handful of
protesters who had occupied the Secretariat.
Protesters, along with journalists covering the
incident, were beaten. The area was closed
off, preventing further access by the media,
lawyers and activists. More than 50 people
were reportedly injured and nine people were
arrested. Some of those arrested alleged that
they were tortured or otherwise ill-treated in
custody.
In July, a man was killed at the Kandakadu
Rehabilitation Centre, a facility in North
Central Province mainly used to detain drug
addicts. A post-mortem revealed that his
death was caused by injuries inflicted all over
his body by a blunt weapon. Members of the
armed forces were arrested over the incident.
In September, the government introduced a
draft law, the Bureau of Rehabilitation Bill,
which would authorize the compulsory
detention of “drug dependent persons”
involuntarily in military-run “rehabilitation”
centres.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE

The PTA, which had been used in previous
years to facilitate torture, enforced
disappearances and prolonged detention
without trial, remained in use despite
government assurances of a moratorium.
Amendments to the PTA in 2022 failed to
bring it in line with international law and
standards, as it continued to facilitate the
prolonged detention of suspects without
charge, among other concerns.
The authorities made no progress in
bringing to justice in fair trials before ordinary
civilian courts all those suspected of criminal
responsibility concerning allegations of
violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the three decadeslong conflict. Emblematic cases made no
notable progress. In light of Sri Lanka’s

There were multiple instances of excessive
and unnecessary force being used against
people queuing for fuel. In May, the Ministry
of Defence authorized the armed forces to
open fire on looters or “anyone causing harm
to others”. The army was mobilized to police
civilian protests on multiple occasions.
The misuse of tear gas and water cannon
became commonplace in response to
demonstrations, affecting protesters,
including children, and bystanders. Such
tactics caused at least one death at a protest
in July. Live ammunition was fired at
protesters on multiple occasions, leaving one
person dead and over 20 injured in April in
Rambukkana, and several others critically
injured in the capital, Colombo, in July. Also

344

IMPUNITY

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

failures to provide redress to victims of
crimes under international law and grave
human rights violations, the UN Human
Rights Council passed a resolution in October
extending the mandate and capacity of
OHCHR’s Sri Lanka Accountability project to
collect, consolidate, analyse and preserve
information and evidence for future
accountability processes.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Domestic transitional justice bodies,
including the Office on Missing Persons and
the Office on Reparations, lost the confidence
of victims’ families further after being
undermined by the appointment of members
not deemed independent. Families
complained of being surveilled, intimidated,
and restricted from holding peaceful protests
and memorialization initiatives, while being
pressured to accept financial compensation
and death certificates in lieu of certificates of
absence until the fate of those forcibly
disappeared could be ascertained.
The government showed renewed interest in
setting up a truth and reconciliation
commission to address the grievances of
those affected by the war. However, such a
process had yet to be set up in line with the
findings of public consultations on
reconciliation mechanisms by the end of the
year.
Domestic redress mechanisms including
the National Human Rights Commission
remained politicized. In October, the
legislature passed an amendment to the
Constitution, ostensibly to make
appointments to key commissions more
independent. However, the council that
makes such appointments required
nomination by a majority of government
members, bringing the independence of their
appointments into question. The Global
Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions recommended that the National
Human Rights Commission be downgraded
due to its lack of independence, amongst
other concerns

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

DISCRIMINATION
LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In a landmark decision, in March the CEDAW
Committee found that the criminalization of
consensual same-sex sexual conduct
between women under Section 365A of Sri
Lanka’s Penal Code (1883) violates their right
to non-discrimination. The CEDAW
Committee called on the Sri Lankan
authorities to decriminalize consensual samesex sexual conduct between women. A
Private Member’s Bill seeking to amend the
Penal Code provisions that criminalize samesex conduct was handed to the president in
August, but did not receive government
support by the end of the year.
MINORITY RIGHTS
Muslim and Tamil minorities remained
disproportionately affected by the use of the
PTA. Even in cases where suspects were
released on bail, who included Hejaaz
Hizbullah, Ahnaf Jazeem, Davaniya
Mukunthan and Mohamed Imran, their
livelihoods remained affected by bail
conditions which included the freezing of
their assets and restrictions on livelihoodgenerating activity.

SUDAN
Republic of Sudan
Head of state and government: Abdel Fattah al-Burhan
Security forces continued to use excessive
force against protesters, killing dozens and
injuring thousands of others. Protesters,
including women and children, were
unlawfully detained and ill-treated; and
some were forcibly disappeared. Hundreds
of civilians were killed and injured by
militia groups in the West Darfur region. Ali
Mohammed Ali went on trial at the ICC on
charges of war crimes and crimes against
humanity carried out in West Darfur.
Freedom of expression was severely
restricted, and the internet was shut down
ahead of mass protests. Women protesters
faced sexual assault and harassment. Large
numbers of people faced acute hunger due

345

to food insecurity. Refugees from Ethiopia,
Eritrea and South Sudan continued to arrive
and faced ration cuts due to funding
shortfalls.

BACKGROUND
Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, who was
reinstated in November 2021 following the
October 2021 military coup, resigned in
January, leaving the military in full control of
government. Protests against the military
takeover continued throughout the year.
The state of emergency imposed by the
military in October 2021 was lifted in May
2022, following which 171 detainees were
released nationwide. However, measures
adopted under it, such as those expanding
the law enforcement powers of the Sudan
Joint Security Forces, remained in place.
Domestic and international attempts to
facilitate a political solution and enable a
credible civilian-led democratic transition
were ongoing since the military coup. On 5
December, a coalition of civilian and military
leaders signed an agreement to create a new
two-year civilian transitional authority led by a
prime minister who would be selected by
civilian leaders.
The armed conflict continued in the Darfur
and Blue Nile regions.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Sudanese security forces continued to use
excessive force against peaceful protesters.
According to the UN, by August, 117 people,
including 20 children and one woman had
been killed during demonstrations since 25
October 2021. An estimated 7,700 protesters
including thousands of children were
seriously injured. The Central Committee of
Sudan Doctors (CCSD) said there were 21
deaths and 1,850 injuries between 6 May
and 20 August 2022 alone. Promises made
by the authorities to investigate such crimes
remained unfulfilled.
On 5 May, the CCSD reported that 23-yearold Mujtaba Abdel Salam Osman was killed
when a vehicle belonging to security agents
ran over protesters. According to the Sudan
Human Rights Monitor, 73 injuries were

346

reported that day, including 30 from tear gas
inhalation and 11 who had been run over by
a police vehicle.
On 30 June, large demonstrations took
place nationwide, to protest against the 2021
military takeover. The protests were organized
to coincide with the anniversary of the 1989
military coup, which overthrew the
democratically elected government and put
the now deposed president, Omar al-Bashir,
in power. The protests also marked the first
“million-person” march since the killing of
over 100 protesters by security forces who
violently dispersed a peaceful demonstration
on 3 June 2019. On 30 June, security forces
again used excessive force to disperse the
demonstrators, resulting in the deaths of nine
protesters, eight of whom were allegedly
killed by live ammunition fired by security
forces, and injuries to more than 600 others.
Several sit-ins were organized in the capital,
Khartoum, in the aftermath of the violence to
denounce the use of excessive force by the
security forces.

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTION
As part of its broader clampdown on
opposition to the 2021 military coup, Sudan’s
security forces unlawfully detained hundreds
of protesters and forcibly disappeared many
others who were still missing at the end of the
year. Between October 2021 and April 2022,
the UN Designated Expert on the situation of
human rights in Sudan and the UN Joint
Human Rights Office in Sudan documented
the arbitrary arrest and detention of 1,293
people in connection with the coup or with
protests against the coup. They included 143
women and 157 children, including two girls.
Many others were held for short periods and
released without charge.
The arrests were carried out by security
forces including anti-riot police, Central
Reserve Police and military units from the
Sudan Armed Forces, along with unidentified
plain-clothes agents. Their ill-treatment of
protesters included stripping child detainees
naked and threatening sexual violence
against women.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Sudanese security forces failed to protect
civilians against continued indiscriminate
armed attacks. According to the UN,
hundreds of civilians were killed and injured
in the West Darfur region by militia groups. In
October, at least 220 people were killed in
two days of intercommunal fighting in
Sudan's southern Blue Nile province.
According to the UN, intercommunal clashes
in Blue Nile erupted several times from July
onwards and caused at least 359 deaths and
469 injuries among those participating in the
fighting as well as civilians. The clashes also
displaced more than 97,000 civilians. The
provincial government declared a 30-day
state of emergency and banned gatherings.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
In April, the ICC started the trial of Ali
Mohammed Ali, also known as Ali Kosheib,
who is believed to have been the principal
leader of the Janjaweed militia in West Darfur.
Ali Mohammed Ali faces 31 counts of war
crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in 2003 and 2004 in West Darfur.
In August, ICC Prosecutor Karim Khan
visited Sudan including camps for internally
displaced people in Darfur. He called on the
UN Security Council to ensure that his visit
and the trial of Ali Mohammed Ali would be
the “beginning of true accountability and not
a false dawn”.
Three other people, including Omar alBashir faced ICC charges, but the Sudanese
authorities have yet to hand them over to the
ICC for trial.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The right to freedom of expression and media
freedom were severely restricted. Journalists
and other media workers were assaulted,
threatened and harassed.
On 13 January, security forces raided
Alaraby television station in Khartoum. They
assaulted and arrested four staff members
who were filming a demonstration from the
station’s roof top and destroyed their
cameras. On 19 January, in Southern

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Kordofan, police arrested a woman in
connection with a social media post about
child recruitment to the Sudan Armed
Forces. She was released after being charged
with multiple offences under the Cybercrimes
Act, including publishing false information,
attacking the integrity of the Sudan Armed
Forces, and undermining and threatening
national security.
Several groups monitoring internet access
across the world, including NetBlocks,
confirmed internet disruption on multiple
service providers across Sudan ahead of the
mass protests scheduled for 30 June (see
above, Excessive use of force). Normal
internet service was restored after 20 hours.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Women protesters continued to face sexual
assault. Gender-based violence including
conflict-related sexual violence against
women and girls continued in West Darfur.
According to the UN Designated Expert,
members of the Sudan Joint Security Forces
and other armed men in civilian clothes
committed numerous human rights
violations, including sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls who have
been at the forefront of protests against the
coup. The UN Designated Expert verified 13
incidents of rape, gang rape, attempted rape
and other forms of sexual and gender-based
violence that had been perpetrated in
Khartoum in the context of protests against
the coup between October 2021 and April
2022. They involved 14 victims (10 women,
one girl, one man and two boys).
In Darfur, the UN Designated Expert
reported eight incidents of rape involving 15
women and five girls in the context of
intercommunal violence or attacks against
internally displaced women and girls. The
perpetrators were armed men, most of them
in military uniforms. All eight cases were
reported to the police but only one arrest was
made, for the rape of a 12-year-old-girl in
North Darfur.

347

RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the UN, Sudan faced a steady
increase in food insecurity levels. Almost one
quarter of the population was estimated to
have faced acute hunger between June and
September. The North, West and Central
Darfur, Khartoum, Kassala and White Nile
regions accounted for the highest number of
people affected by acute hunger. Up to 11.7
million people were facing acute food
insecurity. Of those, 3.1 million were
classified as being in an “emergency”
situation. According to the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization, the armed conflict
in Ukraine further exacerbated food
insecurity because of Sudan’s reliance on
wheat imports from Russia and Ukraine over
recent years.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Sudan continued to receive new refugees
from neighbouring countries, mainly South
Sudan, Ethiopia and Eritrea. During the year,
20,000 refugees from South Sudan arrived,
mainly in White Nile state, East Darfur, West
Kordofan and South Kordofan. Ethiopian
refugees also continued to arrive in eastern
Sudan and the Blue Nile region. According to
the UN, as of 31 July, about 59,800 people
had crossed into Sudan since the crisis in
northern Ethiopia began in November 2020.
Owing to severe international funding
shortfalls, the World Food Programme was
forced to cut rations for refugees across the
country. It assisted more than 550,000
refugees in Sudan. From July, refugees
received only half a standard food basket, or
its equivalent in cash.

SWEDEN
Kingdom of Sweden
Head of state: Carl XVI Gustaf
Head of government: Ulf Kristersson (replaced
Magdalena Andersson in October)
Sweden failed to take adequate action to
decarbonize its economy. Civil disobedience
activists were convicted of a serious crime.

348

Inequalities in the housing market further
deepened. Sámi reindeer herding lands
were threatened by mining. A draft law on
gender recognition fell short of human
rights standards. A UN panel of experts
expressed concerns over racial justice in the
context of law enforcement. Two oil
company representatives stood trial for
alleged complicity in war crimes.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Sweden not only failed to take adequate
action to decarbonize its economy but
actually went backwards on addressing the
climate crisis. During the year, the
government introduced tax cuts on gasoline
and diesel, reduced funds for environmental
protection and slashed environmental
budgets and funds for climate-related
international cooperation

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In October, the District Court of Solna
convicted 12 climate activists, who had
carried out an act of civil disobedience, of
sabotage. This harsh charge raised concerns
regarding the proportionality of restrictions on
the right to freedom of assembly as similar
earlier acts had been met with less serious
charges.
In August, police detained and deported six
Finnish climate activists travelling to Sweden
to participate in a demonstration. One was
detained for four days and banned from
entering Sweden for two years. The ban was
lifted on appeal.

RIGHT TO HOUSING
In March, a government-appointed inquiry
highlighted inequality in the housing market,
with increasing numbers of people
condemned to live in inadequate
and overcrowded housing or made homeless.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In March, a new law on the right to
consultation for the Sámi Indigenous people
entered into force. It did not, however,
adequately incorporate the right to free, prior
and informed consent before the adoption of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

or implementation of legislative or
administrative measures that may affect
them.
In March, the government granted
concessions to an iron ore mine in Gállok/
Kallak in Norrbotten on Sámi reindeer
herding land, despite massive opposition
from affected Sámi villages, the Sámi
parliament, the Swedish environmental
agency and two UN special rapporteurs. In
July, the government appointed the Swedish
National Council for Crime Prevention to
conduct a study on hate and threats against
Sámi people.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In July, the government proposed reforming
the law on legal gender recognition. In
contrast to that presented the year before,
the new draft falls short of human rights
standards since it requires a medical
examination and the decision of a national
board and is not based on self-identification.

DISCRIMINATION
In November, the UN International
Independent Expert Mechanism to Advance
Racial Justice in the Context of Law
Enforcement expressed concerns that
security challenges were addressed through
a response which focused on over-policing,
surveillance and arbitrary stops and
searches.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
In February, the trial began by the Stockholm
District Court of two representatives of Lundin
Energy (formerly Lundin Oil AB) for
complicity in war crimes in South Sudan.
However, the trial was subsequently
suspended, as a defendant appealed against
the application of universal jurisdiction. In
November, the appeal was rejected and the
trial was set to resume.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

SWITZERLAND
Swiss Confederation
Head of state and government: Ignazio Cassis
The European Court of Human Rights found
a violation of freedom of peaceful assembly.
A landmark UN report exposed systemic
racism in Switzerland. New legislation on
rape was considered but not yet adopted.
Several proposals to reform the law on
abortion were ongoing. Parliament took a
significant but insufficient step towards
strengthening climate action. The war in
Ukraine highlighted flaws in the current
asylum system. A new draft law proposed
extensive surveillance powers for the
National Intelligence Service.

BACKGROUND
Efforts to create a new national human rights
institution in 2023 were ongoing.
In September, Switzerland ratified an
amendment to Article 8 of the Rome Statute
of the ICC, declaring that the intentional
starvation of civilians would be considered a
war crime during civil wars as well as in
international armed conflicts.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
In March, the European Court of Human
Rights found in Communauté genevoise
d’action syndicale v. Switzerland a violation of
the right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
The case was referred to the Grand Chamber.

DISCRIMINATION
RACISM
The UN Working Group of Experts on People
of African Descent found racism to be
systemic in Switzerland. It recommended an
explicit prohibition of racial profiling, and the
creation of civilian, independent complaint
mechanisms with oversight and disciplinary
authority over the police in every canton.
In October, the Swiss government sent a
draft law to parliament to ban face coverings
following a referendum supported by 51.2%
of voters in 2021.

349

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In June, the parliament gave the Federal
Council a binding mandate to draw up a
national action plan to better support and
protect people from anti-LGBTI hate crimes.
On 1 July, the new regulations to legalize
civil marriage and the right to adopt children
for same-sex couples became effective.
RIGHTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
In March, the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities found that
Switzerland had violated the rights of around
1.8 million people with disabilities, most
notably due to the lack of a comprehensive
strategy for implementing the Convention.
The Committee recommended ratifying the
optional protocol on individual complaints.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Parliament did not conclude its deliberations
regarding a new criminal provision on rape.
While the Council of States in June opted for
the so-called “No means No” model, the
National Council approved the “Only Yes
means Yes” model, which would be in line
with the CEDAW Committee's concluding
observation that the definition of rape should
be based on the absence of consent. The
draft law was due to go back to the Council of
States in March 2023.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In May, a member of the Green party
launched a parliamentary initiative to reframe
abortion as a public health issue. Two
separate initiatives started in December 2021
by members of the Swiss People’s Party
seeking to restrict access to abortion were
ongoing.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In April, the case of Verein KlimaSeniorinnen
Schweiz and Others v. Switzerland, in which
a group of elderly women alleged that their
health was adversely affected by
Switzerland’s failure to address climate
change, was fast-tracked to the Grand
Chamber of the European Court of Human
Rights.

350

In September, parliament adopted a
proposal which would enshrine in law a target
of net-zero emissions by 2050 and define
new measures for different industries and
sectors. It was due to enter into force in 2023
pending a referendum.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine,
Switzerland implemented a temporary
protection regime similar to that of the EU
Directive. The rapid support for people
fleeing Ukraine was in stark contrast to flaws
in the regulations applied to asylum seekers
from other nationalities admitted under
provisional admission status.
Due to the arrival of Ukrainian refugees,
several projects aimed at improving the living
conditions in federal asylum centres were
postponed.
The National Commission for the Prevention
of Torture criticized the use of partial restraint
during forced returns, the failure to
adequately consider children’s rights, and
compulsory Covid-19 tests for people to be
returned.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
The Senate’s legal affairs committee decided
to begin work to explicitly include the
prohibition of forced labour in the existing
due diligence legislation.

RIGHT TO PRIVACY
The draft amendments of the Federal Act on
the Intelligence Service were heavily criticized
for expanding the already broad powers of
the intelligence services at the expense of
fundamental rights.
In September, the city parliament of St
Gallen voted to ban biometric surveillance in
public places.

SYRIA
Syrian Arab Republic
Head of state: Bashar al-Assad
Head of government: Hussein Arnous

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The conflict in Syria continued although
hostilities decreased, while economic and
social conditions deteriorated. Parties to the
conflict continued to commit with impunity
gross human rights abuses, serious
violations of international humanitarian law
and crimes under international law,
including war crimes. Government forces
and armed opposition groups and their
allies carried out unlawful attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including water stations and displacement
camps, through aerial bombing and artillery
shelling in northern Syria. Government
authorities, the Syrian National Army (SNA)
and the Autonomous Administration of
North and East Syria (Autonomous
Administration) subjected civilians to
arbitrary detention, abduction and enforced
disappearance. President al-Assad enacted
Syria’s first anti-torture law, which failed to
address impunity or provide redress to
victims and families, and ratified a new
cybercrime law that criminalizes online
criticism of the authorities or constitution.
The armed opposition group Hay’at Tahrir
al-Sham and the Autonomous
Administration continued to restrict
freedom of expression and assembly. The
government continued to prevent residents
and internally displaced people in northwest Syria from enjoying their economic
and social rights, including by obstructing
aid to displaced people in al-Rukban near
the border with Jordan.

BACKGROUND
In February, hundreds of people in Sweida, a
Druze-majority city in south-west Syria,
protested against the continued deterioration
of living conditions. Throughout the year,
teachers in north-west Syria, an area
controlled by Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham,
protested against low wages and demanded
salaries for long-standing volunteers.
In February, the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
reported that there “were reasonable
grounds” to believe that the Syrian
government had conducted a chlorine attack

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

on Kafer Zita, a town in Hama governorate, in
2016. On 30 March, Russia vetoed a USsponsored resolution at the UN Security
Council that would have allowed OPCW
inspectors to determine who was responsible
for chemical weapons attacks in Syria.
In April, the World Food Programme
estimated that 55% of the Syrian population
was food insecure. Economic and social
conditions deteriorated across the country
with 14.1 million people identified as in need
of humanitarian assistance for food, water
and sanitation, health, education and
housing.
On 10 May, the EU and other international
donors pledged only USD 6.7 billion of the
USD 10.5 billion needed to support all of the
14.1 million people in need of aid.
On 27 July, the Autonomous Administration
said that it found a mass grave containing at
least 29 bodies of people who may have been
killed by the Islamic State when the armed
group controlled the area.
On 10 September, the Ministry of Health
declared a cholera outbreak in six
governorates including Aleppo and Deir ezZor.
In October, an Associated Press
investigation revealed allegations of
mismanagement and corruption against the
representative of the WHO in Syria. Based on
the obtained evidence, the representative
“engaged in abusive behaviour, pressured
WHO staff to sign contracts with high-ranking
Syrian government politicians and
consistently misspent WHO and donor
funds.” The WHO said an internal
investigation was ongoing.
Israel continued air attacks targeting Syrian
government, Iranian and Hizbullah forces in
Syria. Its occupation of the Golan Heights
reached 55 years in June.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS
Warring parties and their allies continued to
conduct unlawful ground and aerial attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure in
northern Syria, killing and injuring scores of
civilians.

351

SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AND ITS ALLY RUSSIA
The Syrian government, supported by
Russian government forces, launched
indiscriminate attacks and direct attacks on
water stations, displacement camps, poultry
farms and residential areas in north-west
Syria. On 6 November, they launched a
series of artillery attacks and air strikes on a
forest next to displacement camps in Kafr
Jallis in the north-west, killing four internally
displaced people, including three children
and a woman, and injuring more than 70
civilians.
According to the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic (UN Commission of Inquiry), the
Syrian government and Russia launched
multiple air strikes and ground attacks on
civilians and civilian objects in the north-east.
On 2 January, an air strike attack on Arashani
water station that serves Idlib city injured one
civilian and temporarily cut the water supply
to at least 300,000 people. On 3 January and
12 May, air strikes on two poultry farms in
Idlib governorate injured a woman and her
eight-year-old son, and a man, respectively.
The report added that there were “reasonable
grounds” to believe that pro-government
forces had “intentionally targeted objects
indispensable to the survival of the
population”.
SYRIAN ARMED OPPOSITION GROUPS AND THEIR ALLY
TÜRKIYE
Syrian armed opposition groups and their ally
Türkiye carried out indiscriminate attacks,
including drone strikes and ground attacks,
that struck residential areas, a school and a
displacement camp in northern Syria.
On 24 February, a Turkish government
drone strike targeting a military objective
landed near a civilian bus on the AmudaQamishli road in north-east Syria. At least
four civilians – three women and one man –
were injured in the attack.
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
heavy machine guns were likely used within
areas occupied by Türkiye and controlled by
the SNA in an attack against a school in a
village close to Afrin, a town in northern Syria,
which injured 11 children aged 6 to 12.

352

ARBITRARY DETENTION AND ENFORCED
DISAPPEARANCES
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
The government continued to subject tens of
thousands of people, including journalists,
human rights defenders, lawyers and political
activists, to enforced disappearance, many
for more than 10 years.
In February and April, the authorities
partially revealed the fate of around 1,056
individuals forcibly disappeared since the
start of the conflict by updating civil registry
documents and issuing death certificates.
These provided the date of death but did not
disclose the circumstances in which the
individuals died. The authorities failed to
return the bodies of the deceased to their
families.
On 30 April, President al-Assad issued
Legislative Decree No.7 granting a general
amnesty for “terrorism” crimes except for
those that led to deaths. The authorities failed
to announce the number of detainees
released as a result, but local organizations
estimated at least 150 releases.
AUTONOMOUS ADMINISTRATION
The Autonomous Administration continued to
unlawfully hold around 17,000 women and
37,000 children of Syrian, Iraqi and other
nationalities, in al-Hol and al-Roj camps in
the north-east in squalid conditions and
without access to due process. On 7
February, the Asayish, the Autonomous
Administration’s police force, opened fire in
al-Hol camp, killing at least one child and
injuring three women and three children.1
On 20 January, hundreds of children held in
Ghwairan prison, an adult detention centre in
Hassake, were trapped with limited access to
food and medical aid for 10 days during an
exchange of fire between the Autonomous
Administration’s military force, the Syrian
Democratic Forces (SDF), and the Islamic
State. Children continued to be held in
detention facilities in dire conditions in
violation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
TÜRKIYE-BACKED SYRIAN NATIONAL ARMY
In July, Hevdesti-Synergy, an association for
victims in northern Syria, reported the arrest

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

of 79 people by the SNA and affiliated armed
groups in Afrin, Ras al-Ayn and Tall Abyad –
areas occupied by Türkiye – for their alleged
affiliation with the Autonomous
Administration, attempting to cross to Türkiye
irregularly, extortion or being Kurdish.
Thirteen were released while the fate and
whereabouts of the others remained
unknown.
In August, Syrians for Truth and Justice, a
Syrian organization, recorded the arrest of
311 people in Afrin, a predominantly Kurdish
town in northern Syria, during the first six
months of the year on account of their
ethnicity or to extort a ransom. Of these, 282
were released.
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
the SNA held detainees incommunicado for
between three months and three years,
prohibited contact with a lawyer, and
threatened or arrested family members for
inquiring about their fate or whereabouts or
only allowed them to have contact if they paid
bribes.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
On 30 March, President al-Assad enacted
Syria’s first ever law criminalizing torture (Law
No. 16/2022), which failed to address
impunity granted to military and security
agents, offer redress to past victims of
torture, include any protection measures for
witnesses or survivors of torture, or state
whether torture survivors or, in the event of
their death, their families, would receive
compensation.2
According to the UN Commission of Inquiry,
the Syrian government authorities continued
to torture and otherwise ill-treat detainees,
including with “electric shocks, the burning
of body parts, being folded into car tyres
(dulab) and suspended by one or two limbs
for prolonged periods (shabeh), often
combined with severe beating with various
tools, including sticks or cables.”

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSEMBLY
AND ASSOCIATION
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
In April, following increasing criticism of the
government’s socio-economic policies, a new
cybercrime law was passed that imposed
harsh sentences and fines against anyone
who criticized the authorities or constitution
online. Articles 24 and 25 criminalize
“electronic slander” defined as the sharing
between two people, including in private
communications, of slandering or humiliating
information about other individuals, with
harsher fines and a prison term if the
individual is a public employee. Articles 27,
28 and 29 impose sentences of between
three and 15 years in prison for publishing
online content that “aims or calls to change
the constitution illegally”, “undermines the
prestige of the state”, and “undermines the
financial position of the state.”
In June, the minister of interior said that 11
individuals had been arrested under the
cybercrime law for spreading “false
information” on Facebook.
HAY’AT TAHRIR AL-SHAM
Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham continued to repress
freedom of expression by subjecting
journalists, activists or anyone who criticized
their rule to arbitrary detention without
access to a lawyer or family members.
Local organizations told Amnesty
International that the group restricted some
of the activities of humanitarian organizations
or forced them to coordinate with the armed
group, which led donors to temporarily
withdraw or halt funding.
AUTONOMOUS ADMINISTRATION
In January, the SDF opened live fire at people
protesting against the deteriorating economic
conditions and lack of access to essential
services in Raqqa governorate. At least 50
people were injured.
On 5 February, the Autonomous
Administration suspended the licence of
Rudaw Media Network, a media outlet based
in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, in north-east
Syria, accusing it of spreading misinformation
and inciting hatred.

353

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
European countries investigated and
prosecuted individuals suspected of
committing crimes under international law in
Syria through their national courts under the
principle of universal jurisdiction.
On 13 January, the Higher Regional Court in
Koblenz, Germany, sentenced a former
Syrian intelligence officer to life in prison for
crimes against humanity.
On 19 January, the trial of a doctor accused
of committing crimes against humanity,
including 18 counts of torture and killing of
detainees in military hospitals in the
capital, Damascus and Homs between 2011
and 2012, began in Frankfurt, Germany,
under the principle of universal jurisdiction.
German police had arrested him in June
2020.
On 4 April, the Paris Court of Appeal in
France ruled in favour of prosecuting Islam
Alloush, a former leader of an armed
opposition group in Damascus Countryside,
for committing war crimes, including torture.
He was detained in Paris in 2020.

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RIGHTS
The number of internally displaced people in
Syria increased to 6.9 million. Of around 4
million people living in north-west Syria, a
region under the control of armed opposition
groups, 2.8 million were internally displaced.
The government continued to deny and
obstruct their access to essential services.3
As a result, people in the region fully
depended on UN-coordinated humanitarian
assistance provided through the cross-border
aid mechanism, which the UN Security
Council renewed in July for six months after
Russia vetoed a 12-month extension.
Out of the total displaced population in
north-west Syria, around 1.7 million lived in
camps, 58% of whom were children and
22% were women. The overwhelming
majority lived in tents that offered minimal
privacy or protection from extreme heat, cold
or rain, and had limited or no access to
water, sanitation and healthcare. Only 40% of

354

camp residents had access to functioning
latrines.
Domestic water needs for drinking, cooking
and maintaining personal hygiene were
unmet, with camp residents relying fully on
humanitarian organizations to fill water tanks.
More than 8,000 displaced Syrians in alRukban camp, located in an isolated and
desert border area with Jordan known as “the
berm”, suffered dire living conditions as the
Syrian government prevented entry of
essential aid such as food, water and medical
supplies for another year.

OCCUPIED GOLAN HEIGHTS
The Golan Heights remained under Israel’s
occupation and illegal annexation. The
number of Jewish Israeli settlers living in 35
illegal settlements in the Golan Heights
surpassed the total number of its Syrian
inhabitants, reaching 29,000 compared to
28,000, according to Al-Marsad, a Syrian
human rights NGO based in the Golan
Heights. In July, Israel’s National Planning
and Building Council approved two new
settlements, each including 2,000 housing
units, as part of a USD 293 million
government plan announced in December
2021 to double the number of Jewish settlers
in the Golan Heights. Meanwhile, Syrian
residents faced discrimination in housing and
distribution of natural resources such as
water.

REFUGEES’ RIGHTS
By the end of 2022, 5.6 million Syrians had
sought refuge outside the country since the
conflict began in 2011.
In neighbouring Lebanon, the worsening
economic conditions and restrictive policies
imposed by the authorities continued to drive
refugees back to Syria, where some faced
detention, torture and other ill-treatment, and
enforced disappearance (see Lebanon entry).
Between February and July, the Turkish
authorities arbitrarily arrested, detained and
unlawfully returned hundreds of Syrian
refugee men and boys (see Türkiye entry).

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS

The government failed to establish an NDC.
There was no publicly available information
on any progress made since the
government’s commitment in 2018 to
increase the proportion of renewable energy
to 10% of power production by 2030 if
international donors provided support.

2. “Syria: New anti-torture law ‘whitewashes’ decades of human rights
violations”, 31 March

In July, the Taipei High Administrative Court
issued a judgment on transnational same-sex
marriage that gave a Taiwanese-Japanese
same-sex couple the right to register as a
married couple. Despite being the fourth
court ruling supporting the registration of
transnational same-sex marriage in Taiwan, it
remained permissible only where the spouse
was from a country where same-sex unions
had been legalized. At least two other cases
challenging this restriction were pending at
year’s end.2

3. Syria: ‘Unbearable Living Conditions’: Inadequate Access to Economic
and Social Rights in Displacement Camps in North-West Syria, 5 July

RIGHT TO PRIVACY

1. “Syria: Fatal shooting of a child in al-Hol camp must be a call to
international action”, 8 February

TAIWAN
Taiwan
Head of state: Tsai Ing-wen
Head of government: Su Tseng-chang
Despite another court ruling permitting the
marriage of transnational same-sex
partners, limitations on same-sex marriage
remained in place. A Constitutional Court
ruling required the government to
strengthen privacy safeguards. The
government published a strategy to reach
net zero greenhouse gas emissions by
2050.

BACKGROUND
The government launched its first National
Human Rights Action Plan (2022-2024)
setting out goals in eight priority areas
including digital human rights, equality and
non-discrimination. The third review of the
implementation of the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
under Taiwan’s national reporting system
criticized the retention of the death penalty,
lack of safeguards governing the use of facial
recognition technology, and long-standing
failures to protect the rights of Indigenous
peoples, refugees and asylum seekers.1

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In August, Taiwan’s Constitutional Court ruled
that Article 6 of the Personal Data Protection
Act, which permits government agencies and
research institutions wide-ranging access to
data in the National Health Insurance
Database, was constitutional. The ruling
nevertheless required the government to
strengthen legal protections for privacy rights
including on the storage and processing of
data in the National Health Insurance
Database and providing the right to opt out of
it. It additionally required the government to
establish an independent data oversight
mechanism.3

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In May, the government launched an Action
Plan for Fisheries and Human Rights which
set out measures to improve the working and
living conditions of foreign crew working on
Taiwan-registered fishing vessels. The plan
also included measures aimed at developing
coordinated government responses to
preventing human trafficking.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Emissions reduction targets remained
inadequate. A proposal to raise the current
target of reducing emissions by 50% from
2005 levels by 2050, as set in the 2015
Greenhouse Gas Reduction and
Management Act, remained under review by
Parliament. In March, the government
published a “Pathway to Net-Zero Emissions
by 2050” which set out plans to reduce

355

greenhouse emissions in key areas including
energy production and use, industrial
operations and transportation in order to
meet the net zero target. In December, the
government announced a new goal to reduce
emissions by 23 to 25% by 2030, which still
falls short of Taiwan’s obligations.
1. “Taiwan: Amnesty International has taken part in the full review
process on the implementation of the ICCPR and ICESCR in Taiwan”,
13 May (Chinese only)
2. “Taiwan: The fourth win of transnational same-sex marriage! The
Taipei High Administrative Court granted the first Taiwan-Japan
same-sex couple the right to register as a married couple”, 22 July
(Chinese only)
3. “Taiwan: Statement about 111 Year Hsien-Pan-Tzi No. 13 Judgment
(Case of National Health Insurance Database)”, 16 August (Chinese
only)

TAJIKISTAN
Republic of Tajikistan
Head of state: Emomali Rahmon
Head of government: Kokhir Rasulzoda
Tens of ethnic Pamiri protesters were killed
by security forces as demonstrations were
violently suppressed and an “anti-terrorist
operation” was launched in the east of the
country. Activists, local leaders, journalists
and bloggers were arrested and sentenced
in unfair trials. Many reported being
tortured. Access to information, including
through the media and internet, remained
heavily restricted. Domestic violence
remained widespread with victims rarely
securing justice or support. Afghan refugees
continued to be detained and deported.

BACKGROUND
Tajikistan’s economic and political life
continued to be tightly controlled by the
president, in the 30th year of his rule, and his
family.
Over 100 people, including dozens of
civilians, were killed and homes, schools and
markets destroyed during cross border
clashes between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan in
September.

356

In May, following months of targeted
repression by the central government,
longstanding tensions in the eastern GornoBadakhshan Autonomous Oblast (GBAO)
between these authorities and the Pamiris, a
small, unrecognized ethnic minority
belonging to the Shia Islam Ismaili
community, flared into new protests. These
were brutally suppressed by the authorities,
who launched an “anti-terrorist operation” on
18 May during which tens of Pamiris were
killed over several weeks. Over 200 people
were arrested.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
The official government figure in May for
those killed in the “anti-terrorist operation” in
the GBAO was originally 21, although
unofficial sources reported more than double
that number. The circumstances of many
deaths, in the absence of independent
reporting from Tajikistan, prompted
allegations of extrajudicial executions.
Prominent activists, informal local leaders,
poets, religious leaders and journalists were
arbitrarily targeted for arrest.
Several prominent members of the Pamiri
diaspora in Russia were abducted before
resurfacing in custody in Tajikistan. By the
end of the year, most of those arrested had
been sentenced to long prison terms in unfair
trials, typically for purported membership of a
criminal organization and seeking to
overthrow the constitutional order. The fate
and whereabouts of some of those arrested
remained unknown, prompting fears that
they had been forcibly disappeared.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
The crackdown on prominent Pamiri
influencers, local leaders and activists was
accompanied by a broader assault on the
cultural heritage of Pamiris. Following the
May-June unrest, the authorities shut down
and confiscated the property of multiple local
organizations linked to the Aga Khan
Development Network working in the fields of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

education, economic development and
religious instruction.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Freedom of expression remained severely
curtailed. The few remaining independent
media outlets, human rights defenders and
bloggers were heavily targeted in the
crackdown that followed the GBAO protests.
On 17 May, Mullorajab Yusufi and
Anushervon Aripov, journalists working for
Radio Free Europe’s Tajik service and
regional news outlet Current Time, were
severely beaten by unknown assailants in the
capital, Dushanbe, shortly after interviewing
the well-known Pamiri journalist and human
rights activist Ulfatkhonim Mamadshoeva
about events in the GBAO.
The next day Ulfatkhonim Mamadshoeva
was herself arrested and accused of “publicly
calling for the overthrow of the constitutional
order”. In December, she was sentenced to
21 years’ imprisonment following a closed,
unfair trial. Following her arrest, the
authorities ordered Asia-Plus, the privately
owned news agency for which she reported,
to cease covering events in the GBAO. Other
outlets reported similar coercion.
On 19 May, Pamiri blogger and journalist
Khushruz Jumayev (known online as Khush
Gulyam) was arrested. He was sentenced to
eight years’ imprisonment in December on
opaque charges relating to the May events in
the GBAO.
Other activists who faced unfair trials during
the year included around a dozen members
of Commission 44, an independent group of
lawyers and human rights defenders
established to investigate the November
2021 killing of an activist that sparked
protests in the GBAO. Shaftolu Bekdavlatov
and Khujamri Pirmamadov were sentenced
to 18 years’ imprisonment each on charges
of organizing a criminal group and receiving
financial assistance from abroad. The head of
the Pamiri Lawyers’ Association, Manuchehr
Kholiknazarov, was sentenced to 15 years’
imprisonment on 9 December.
Journalists and bloggers also faced
prosecutions for critical reporting unrelated to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

the GBAO. On 15 June, two journalists and
collaborators who reported widely on
economic and social rights violations, Daler
Imomali and Avazmad Gurbatov (also known
as Abdullo Gurbati), were arrested shortly
after reporting on the demolition of homes in
Dushanbe.
Avazmad Gurbatov was sentenced on 4
October to seven-and-a-half years’
imprisonment in a closed trial on trumped-up
charges of assaulting a police officer and
membership of the arbitrarily banned political
organization Group 24. In a separate trial two
weeks later, Daler Imomali was sentenced to
10 years’ imprisonment, on equally farfetched charges of tax evasion, disseminating
false information and purported membership
of Group 24.
The internet was completely shut down for
the first few months of the year in the GBAO
and only intermittently and partially restored
during the rest of the year. Tight restrictions
remained in place throughout the country.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Torture and other ill-treatment remained
widespread both as a means of intimidation
and extracting confessions. Prisoners
continued to report abuse and neglect,
including beatings, lack of access to food and
water and cold and wet conditions within the
cells.
While in pretrial detention following his
arrest in July, Abdusattor
Pirmuhammadzoda, a blogger who had been
fired from a state radio broadcaster for
criticizing the government in 2020, managed
to smuggle out a letter in which he described
being subjected to severe beatings, electric
shocks and psychological torture, including
threats against his family, in order to secure a
confession. He was sentenced to seven
years’ imprisonment in November.
In June, while trying to attend a concert in a
public park in Dushanbe, Elobat Oghalykova
was arrested for wearing a black dress in
mourning for the death of one of her sons – a
traditional practice that was banned in 2017.
She was beaten at Spitamen District Police
station and required hospitalization. When

357

she filed a complaint, she was threatened
with 15 days’ detention for disobeying a
police officer.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
According to multiple indicators published
during the year, including the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap
Report, Tajikistan’s gender gap was the
highest of all Central Asian countries and one
of the highest globally.
According to a survey published by the EUUN Spotlight Initiative in June, 77.3% of
respondents considered violence against
women to be prevalent in Tajikistan and 34%
of respondents (across both genders)
believed it was justifiable to beat a partner
who refused to obey. The accompanying
report highlighted many longstanding
problems: the weak legal framework; the
limited range and inadequate funding of
protection services; and stereotypical
attitudes among public service providers,
including law enforcement agencies. A draft
criminal code criminalizing domestic
violence, put before parliament in 2021, had
not been passed by the end of the year.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In August, UNHCR, the UN refugee agency,
raised grave concerns about the continued
detention and deportation of Afghan
refugees. The agency documented dozens of
cases in August and September alone.
Members of the nearly 14,000-strong Afghan
refugee community reported that the forced
expulsions were taking place without any
procedure or obvious justification.

TANZANIA
United Republic of Tanzania
Head of state and government: Samia Suluhu Hassan
The government maintained its blanket ban,
introduced by the late president in 2016,
on political parties organizing rallies and
other political activities. The state
continued to target online media outlets,

358

using repressive regulations despite earlier
promises to reform media laws. Security
forces used excessive force in Loliondo
division, in the northern Arusha region,
during forced evictions of the Indigenous
Maasai community while intimidating
human rights defenders and journalists. The
pledge to lift the discriminatory ban on
pregnant girls and young mothers from
attending school was not implemented.
Plans to construct the East African Crude
Oil Pipeline continued despite its potential
threat to the environment and the
livelihoods and health of local people.
Individuals and organizations failed by the
national legal system were blocked from
seeking justice directly at the African Court
on Human and Peoples’ Rights.

BACKGROUND
In her first year as president, Samia Suluhu
Hassan made at least 21 regional and other
international trips to improve international
relations and to mobilize funds for
development. This was in stark contrast to
her predecessor, President Magufuli, who
discouraged foreign travel and isolated
Tanzania from its neighbours and the
international community.
In March, Tanzania engaged with the UPR
and accepted 187 of 252 recommendations
made by 92 states, including the
implementation of the national human rights
framework. It noted recommendations on
ending the intimidation and harassment of
human rights defenders, activists, civil
society actors and journalists.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
On 10 February, authorities restored the
licences of the Tanzania Daima, Mawio,
Mwanahalisi and Mseto newspapers, which
had been banned from publishing between
2016 and 2017, and the Raia Mwema
newspaper which was suspended for three
months in 2017, and for another month in
2021.
Despite this positive step and promises in
earlier years to reform media laws, the
authorities continued to use the repressive

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

2016 Media Services Act to restrict media
freedom, and cyberspace laws such as the
Electronic and Postal Communications
(Online Content) Regulations 2020, to
suppress expression online.
On 1 July, the Tanzania Communications
Regulatory Authority (TCRA) temporarily
suspended DarMpya, an online media outlet,
following what it regarded as “complaints…
against DarMpya’s content”. The content
related to demonstrations by Indigenous
Maasai people against Kenya’s role in the
government’s plans to evict them from their
land. However, on 14 July, it dropped the
charges related to the post and said it would
allow the outlet to continue operating once it
had renewed its expired licence. By the end
of the year, it had not responded to
DarMpya’s renewal applications.
On 9 September, the TCRA ordered
ZamaMpya TV Online to pay a TZS 2 million
fine (about USD 855) for publishing the views
of popular musician Seleman Msindi who
had criticized taxation regulations and the
way government leaders spent tax revenue.
Pastor Julius Kuyioni, a Kenyan journalist,
was arrested on 7 July on his way to Loliondo
and charged with illegal entry. His arrest
coincided with the authorities’ attempts to
stop journalists covering the Maasai
community’s protests in Loliondo (see below,
Forced evictions). The police released him on
5 August and escorted him to Namanga town
on the Kenyan border.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
On 4 March, the authorities released
Freeman Mbowe, opposition leader of the
Party for Democracy and Progress,
commonly known as Chadema, after more
than seven months in detention. The
Corruption and Economic Crimes Division of
the High Court ordered his release and the
release of three of his co-accused, Halfan
Bwire Hassan, Adam Hassan Kasekwa and
Mohammed Abdillahi Ling’wenya, after the
Director of Public Prosecution (DPP) dropped
terrorism charges against them. Freeman
Mbowe was arrested in 2021 in Mwanza

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

town, ahead of a public rally to demand
constitutional reforms.1
The authorities continued to violate the right
to freedom of association by prohibiting
political parties from organizing rallies and
other activities until the 2025 elections. The
ban, put in place by the former president in
2016, was used along with public assembly
laws by the police to restrict opposition
gatherings.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 7 June, multi-agency state security
forces, including the Tanzania People’s
Defence Force, the Tanzania Police Force
and the Ngorongoro Conservation Area
Authority, arrived in the Loliondo division,
Arusha region, to implement plans to forcibly
evict Maasai community members. The
authorities had not carried out genuine
consultations with the community, nor given
them adequate notice or provided them with
adequate compensation in advance of their
plans to seize 1,500km2 of ancestral land
belonging to over 70,000 Maasai people to
make way for a tourist operation.
On 9 June, Maasai community members
from the villages of Ololosokwan, Oloirien,
Kirtalo and Arash in Loliondo, bordering
Serengeti National Park, gathered to protest
the demarcation exercise. They removed the
beacons placed by the security forces to
mark the boundaries of the land that the
Maasai lay claim to. Security forces used tear
gas and firearms against the protesters,
during which a police officer was killed by an
arrow and at least 32 community members
were injured by gunshot.2 In the days and
weeks following the forced evictions, security
forces also seized livestock, including
hundreds of cows and sheep belonging to the
community. The Maasai people were
reportedly asked to pay between TZS
100,000 (about USD 43) and TZS 25,000
(about USD 11) for the return of their
animals.
On 30 September, the East African Court of
Justice (EACJ) ruled on a case filed by the
Maasai in 2017 in which the latter argued
that they were the legally registered owners of

359

the land and that the government had used
violence while forcibly evicting them in
August 2017. The court ruled that the
applicants provided insufficient evidence to
demonstrate that the state evicted them from
village land and not from the Serengeti
National Park. Maasai community members
and NGOs felt that the court decision
reinforced the use of state violence and
forced evictions.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
On 16 June, the authorities arrested and
charged 20 members of the Loliondo Maasai
community with the murder of a police officer
who died during violent forced evictions (see
above). Nine of them were community
leaders who had been arrested a day before
the police officer was killed. On 22 June, the
prosecution amended the charge sheet
adding five more accused people and an
additional charge of “conspiracy to murder”.
Later, two more people were also added to
the charge sheet. On 28 July, three of the 27
detainees were released by the DPP on
humanitarian grounds. The rest remained in
Kisongo prison in Arusha until 22 November
when the Resident Magistrates’ Court of
Arusha unconditionally discharged them, and
they were all released.3

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The authorities continued to ban pregnant
girls and girls with children from attending
regular schools, despite the government’s
2021 announcement that it had lifted the
ban. However, about 3,333 pregnant girls
and girls with children were allowed to
continue their education through informal
education programmes such as the Institute
for Adult Education and the Secondary
Education Quality Improvement Program.
Since 2017, the authorities had
implemented the ban under the Education
Regulations Act 2002 which states that
students can be expelled if they “commit an
offence against morality”. The World Bank
estimated that nearly 8,000 girls had been
forced to drop out of school each year. The

360

government had yet to reflect the lifting of the
ban in policy.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Tanzania continued to participate in plans to
construct the 1,443 km East African Crude
Oil Pipeline (EACOP) to transport crude oil
from the Lake Albert oilfields in western
Uganda to Tanga Port on Tanzania’s northern
coast for export. On 1 February, EACOP
shareholders, including TotalEnergies, the
Uganda National Oil Company, Tanzania
Petroleum Development Corporation and
China National Offshore Oil Corporation,
announced the final investment decision and
the launch of the pipeline project. The project
represented a total investment of
approximately TZS 23.4 trillion (about USD
10 billion) (see Uganda entry).
The Ugandan and Tanzanian governments
defended the project as being necessary for
the development of both countries, despite
several challenges from domestic and
international climate justice activists and civil
society groups who alleged that the pipeline
would be environmentally unsafe and would
harm the livelihoods, food security and public
health of affected communities, including
Indigenous people. They also claimed that it
would disproportionately affect women, and
displace residents as it would pass through
human settlements, wildlife reserves,
agricultural land, water sources and
groundwater tables.
In 2017, the World Wide Fund for Nature
conducted a preliminary environmental and
socio-economic threat analysis of the
project’s potential impacts. It concluded that
it “pose[d] a significant and sometime severe
threat to environmental assets and
subsequently to people in the region.” A
lawsuit filed by Kenyan, Ugandan and
Tanzanian civil society groups at the EACJ,
seeking a temporary injunction with a view to
preventing the pipeline, remained pending
after two years.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
The government’s pledge to revisit its 2019
decision to withdraw from the declaration
under Article 34(6) of the Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights on the Establishment of an African
Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights
remained unrealized. This prevents NGOs
and individuals, failed by the national legal
system, from having direct access to the
court.
1. “Tanzania: President Hassan should do more to guarantee human
rights after Mbowe’s release”, 7 March
2. “Tanzania: Stop violent forced eviction of the Maasai”, 13 July
3. “Tanzania: Prosecutors drop murder charges against 24 members of
the Maasai”, 23 November

THAILAND
Kingdom of Thailand
Head of state: Maha Vajiralongkorn
Head of government: Prayut Chan-O-Cha
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly came
under renewed attack. New legislation to
prevent torture and other ill-treatment and
enforced disappearance did not go far
enough to effectively protect against these
crimes. Refugees fleeing Myanmar
continued to face arrest, detention and
extortion by Thai authorities at the
Thailand-Myanmar border. Malay Muslims
in the southern border area remained
subject to mass and discriminatory DNA
collection.

BACKGROUND
In January the government resumed its
official dialogue with the Barisan Revolusi
Nasional (BRN), the most active separatist
armed group in Thailand’s restive southern
border region. These two parties reached an
agreement to reduce armed activities during
Ramadan from 2 April to 1 May. There was
limited involvement of civil society groups,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

including human rights organizations, in the
dialogue.
On 1 October the government mostly lifted
the nationwide state of emergency which had
been imposed in March 2020 during the
Covid-19 pandemic and continually
extended. The sweeping powers granted to
the authorities under the Emergency Decree
on Public Administration in Emergency
Situations were used to crack down on
peaceful dissent, both offline and online.
Some border areas remained under a state of
emergency and martial law at the end of the
year.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
Overwhelmingly peaceful protests continued
to take place amid restrictions imposed by
the government as part of its pandemic
response. From January to August there were
at least 585 small- and medium-scale
protests across the country. Protesters’
demands covered numerous issues,
including among others the release of
individuals detained for their peaceful
political expression, the economic impacts of
Covid-19, and respect for the rights of
workers and Indigenous peoples.
Since May 2020, at least 1,468 individuals
including 241 children faced criminal
charges for alleged violations of the state of
emergency for their involvement in these
protests. Human rights defender Sitanun
Satsaksit was charged following her
participation in a protest in the capital,
Bangkok, on 5 September 2021. She had
previously presented a petition to the UN
regarding the abduction of her younger
brother in Cambodia.1 Despite the
government’s revocation of the state of
emergency, the cases against more than
1,000 protesters remained pending
investigation or trial.
A government inquiry into the use of live
ammunition during a protest in August 2021
which killed 15-year-old protester Warit
Somnoi encountered significant delays
resulting from the police’s repeated failures to
provide evidence to the public prosecutor.

361

Riot police used rubber bullets and beat
protesters to disperse a demonstration
against the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) summit in Bangkok on
18 November. Nine protesters, four reporters
and five police officers were injured.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The authorities continued to bring criminal
charges against individuals who expressed
opinions critical of the government. Activists,
journalists and political opponents were
charged for various violations under lèsemajesté (defaming, insulting or threatening
the monarch) and other defamation laws,
sedition, and the Computer Crimes Act. Local
NGO Thai Lawyers for Human Rights
reported that, from mid-2020 to September
2022, at least 1,860 individuals, including
283 children, faced criminal proceedings for
expressing views critical of the government.
Between January and June, more than 200
individuals were charged with lèse-majesté,
the highest number in Thailand’s history.
Nine activists remained in pretrial detention
at the end of the year, including three
charged with lèse-majesté. Many others were
released but with restrictive conditions on
their movement or freedom of expression and
assembly.
From January to September, the authorities
blocked 4,735 web pages, including 1,816
deemed to be in violation of the lèse-majesté
law. In February, the Minister of Digital
Economy and Society revealed that the
government was considering creating a single
internet gateway to tighten official control
over internet usage. In the same month, the
cabinet approved the creation of “anti-fake
news centres” to crack down on “false
information on social media”, granting
authorities at ministerial and provincial levels
the power to monitor and prosecute those
alleged to be spreading fake news.
In July, an international digital forensic
investigation verified by Amnesty
International revealed that the devices of 35
Thai human rights defenders, activists and
academics were infected with Pegasus
spyware. Amnesty International reiterated its

362

call for a global moratorium on the sale of
spyware in the context of Thailand.2

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In January the cabinet approved the draft Act
on the Operations of Not-for-Profit
Organizations. In August, the cabinet further
approved the 2022-2027 draft national AntiMoney Laundering/Countering the Financing
of Terrorism strategy. Both measures would
place vague and broad limitations on civil
society activities, for example by prohibiting
activities causing “division within society” or
affecting “national security”, “public order or
morals” or “public interests” that constitute
excessive restrictions on the right to freedom
of association under international law.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
AND ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES
In May, a court in Songkhla province ruled
that there was insufficient evidence to
conclude that the death of Abdullah Isomuso,
a Malay Muslim detainee, was caused by
military officials. Abdullah Isomuso was found
unconscious in military custody and later
died in hospital in August 2019.
In June, a court convicted seven police
officers for the murder of Jiraphong Thanapat
who was tortured and died during
interrogation at Muang Nakhon Sawan police
station on 5 August 2021. Six officers were
sentenced to life imprisonment and one
received a shorter sentence as the court
found he was not directly involved with the
murder.
In October, Thailand adopted the Prevention
and Suppression of Torture and Enforced
Disappearance Act; an important step to
prevent and provide redress for these crimes.
The law will come into effect in February
2023. Human rights groups, which had
campaigned for years for the law to be
passed, noted that it still had significant
deficiencies such as the absence of the
“exclusionary rule” (which prevents evidence
gathered through torture, other ill-treatment
or enforced disappearance being used at
trial) and the prohibition of the use of
amnesty laws for perpetrators of these acts.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Human rights groups also expressed concern
over the composition, structure and mandate
of the domestic Committee on the Prevention
and Suppression of Torture and Enforced
Disappearance, which was to be established
under the new law, due to the Committee’s
lack of power to inspect places of detention.3

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
In August, the Office of the Attorney-General
indicted the former Chief of Kaeng Krachan
National Park and three other park officials
accused of murdering Porlajee
Rakchongcharoen, an Indigenous Karen
human rights defender who disappeared
while in the custody of the authorities in
2014. The charges included illegal detention,
extortion, murder and concealing the victim’s
body.
In the same month, police summoned
human rights lawyer Waraporn Utairangsee
to acknowledge the charge of giving false
information on a criminal offence. The former
Chief of Kaeng Krachan National Park had
filed a criminal complaint against her in July
2021, after she filed a case against park
officials for forcefully evicting Indigenous
Karen villagers residing in the national park
area and burning 98 of their houses.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In June and September, the authorities found
at least 110 Rohingya refugees from
Myanmar floating on boats off the shore of
Satun province in southern Thailand after
they were abandoned by smugglers. All were
detained in an immigration detention centre.
Human Rights Watch reported that Thai
authorities continued to hold indefinitely at
least 470 Rohingyas in immigration detention
centres. In September, immigration police
refused the entry of Han Lay, a Myanmar
national who publicly criticized human rights
violations by the military in Myanmar after the
2021 coup. She later received asylum in
Canada. Refugees from Myanmar continued
to face arrest, detention and extortion by Thai
authorities at the Thailand-Myanmar border.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

DISCRIMINATION
In February the CERD Committee
recommended that Thailand end the mass
and discriminatory collection and use of DNA
samples and other forms of racial profiling.
This recommendation went unheeded as
authorities continued to practise DNA
collection, especially in the country’s Malay
Muslim-majority southern border area,
including for the purposes of determining
citizenship of stateless persons and fighting
local insurgency groups.
1. Thailand: Sister of abducted activist charged for campaigning –
Sitanun Satsaksit, 4 July
2. “Thailand: Pegasus spyware found on phones of dissidents involved
in mass protests,” 18 July
3. Thailand: Adoption of law to address torture and enforced
disappearance is a step forward, but significant shortcomings
remain, 31 August

TOGO
Togolese Republic
Head of state: Faure Gnassingbé
Head of government: Victoire Tomegah Dogbé
Armed groups and security forces killed
villagers at the border with Burkina Faso.
The rights to freedom of association and
peaceful assembly were restricted on the
pretext of containing the spread of
Covid-19, and security. The right to freedom
of expression was threatened. Arbitrary
arrests and detention were documented.
The president promulgated a law to protect
students from sexual violence.

BACKGROUND
Togo was reviewed under the UPR process
on 24 January.
Armed groups continued to attack villages
and members of the defence and security
forces in the Savanes region bordering
Burkina Faso, where the state of emergency
imposed on 13 June for 90 days was
extended for six months on 6 September.

363

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

On 14 July, the army publicly acknowledged
that overnight from 9 to 10 July, “an aircraft
on night patrol had mistakenly targeted a
group of people it mistook for a column of
moving jihadists” in Margba village in the
prefecture of Tone near the border with
Burkina Faso in the Savanes region. Seven
children were killed in the air strike,
according to non-government media.
In a statement on 16 July, the Ministry of
Defence stated that overnight from 14 to 15
July “unidentified armed individuals carried
out coordinated and complex attacks in
several villages” in the Savanes region, with a
toll of “several deaths and some injuries”.
Non-governmental media reported that more
than 10 people were killed by the armed
group.

In June, the website belonging to the
NGO Togo Debout was inaccessible for a
week, after it published a report on impunity
in Togo.
On 11 July, the High Authority of
Audiovisual and Communication summoned
the director-in-chief of the daily newspaper
Liberté following a front page article alleging
that the deaths of seven children in Margba
village could have resulted from an army
“blunder” (see above, Unlawful killings).

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
ASSOCIATION
The authorities used the pretext of national
security to ban several assemblies organized
by opposition political parties, while ruling
party events were authorized. On 22 June,
the Ministry of Security and Civil Protection
banned a scheduled assembly of a coalition
of opposition parties stating that “holding
such a protest, in the current worrying subregional and national security context,
marked in particular by volatility and
unpredictability, is likely to compromise
ongoing efforts to preserve public order and
national security”. On 29 June, the prefect of
Agoe-Nyieve used the ministry’s rationale to
ban a scheduled gathering of the National
Alliance for Change, an opposition party.
The government continued to impose the
ban on gatherings of more than 15 people,
introduced to fight the spread of Covid-19. It
was maintained despite the government’s
announcement on 22 February that places of
worship would be reopened, and all sporting
activities resumed for those who could
provide proof of vaccination, given the drop
in infection rates since 1 February. On 8
March it welcomed there being “no Covid-19
patients in treatment centres”.

364

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
On 24 February, the government responded
to a letter from three UN Special Rapporteurs
regarding allegations about Abdoul Aziz
Goma’s “arbitrary and prolonged detention”.
The authorities refuted the arbitrary nature of
his detention and maintained their
accusations against Abdoul Aziz Goma, an
Irish citizen of Togolese origin, that he was
part of a “group of people who were planning
armed operations to destabilize the
institutions” in Togo. He had been charged
along with others of “undermining the
internal security of the State”. He denied the
accusations and said he had simply been
covering accommodation costs for young
people who wanted to visit Lomé to
participate in peaceful protests. The Special
Rapporteurs considered him to be a human
right defender. He remained in detention at
the end of the year.
Several teachers and students were arrested
and detained in connection with strikes for
improved working conditions. Three leaders
of the Togo Teachers’ Union were arrested in
April accused of inciting students to revolt.
They were provisionally released on 5
October after several civil society
organizations mobilized in their support. Also
in April, five students were arrested during
demonstrations in the Savanes region, and
were charged with “destruction of public and
private property” and “disturbance of public
order”. They were provisionally released on
17 October.
On 16 May, in the context of attacks by
armed groups, dozens of members of the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Fulani ethnic group were arbitrarily arrested
in Timbou town in the Savanes region. They
were detained by the Timbou, Dapaong,
Biankouri and Cinkassè military forces
without access to a lawyer, photographed and
released on 20 and 21 May without charge.

SEXUAL AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
On 2 December, the president promulgated a
law to protect students from sexual violence.
Provisions included penalties for perpetrators
of sexual harassment, cyber sexual
harassment and rape. It allowed pregnant
students to attend school, and granted free
legal aid and forensic examinations for rape
survivors.

TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
Head of state: Paula-Mae Weekes
Head of government : Keith Christopher Rowley
Authorities continued to push back people
seeking asylum, in violation of international
human rights law. Venezuelan women
continued to be at risk of gender-based
violence.

BACKGROUND
In April, a task force, appointed by the
Cabinet in 2021, tabled a 307-page report
detailing abuse in children’s homes, reigniting long-standing concerns about the
treatment of children in state care.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
Trinidad and Tobago remained one of the few
countries in the Americas to have no national
legislation on asylum, despite being party to
the UN Refugee Convention and its Protocol.
Despite this, UNHCR, the UN refugee
agency, continued to process asylum claims
in the country and by July had registered
22,500 asylum seekers and refugees, 87% of
whom were from Venezuela. Civil society
organizations, with support from UNHCR,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

continued to provide them with food
assistance, mental health and psychosocial
services, as well as healthcare services.
In February, several UN Special
Rapporteurs, including the Special
Rapporteur on the Human Rights of
Migrants, raised concerns about the “ongoing
practice of pushbacks of migrants by the
Coast Guard of Trinidad and Tobago.” They
also highlighted the interception of a boat of
39 Venezuelans, including 10 children,
which reportedly resulted in the death of a
baby and injury to the mother. The UN
Rapporteurs also expressed concern about
the subsequent deportation of 35 of the 39
asylum seekers on the vessel, reportedly
while an investigation into the death of the
baby was ongoing.
In October, before a hearing at the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights,
local NGO the Caribbean Centre for Human
Rights expressed concern about reports of
ongoing detention in inhumane conditions of
Venezuelans and deportations without
individualized assessments of protection
needs and risk upon return.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Women fleeing the ongoing human rights and
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela continued to
be at heightened risk of trafficking into the
sex sector, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, labour exploitation and debt
bondage.
In September, according to media reports,
the authorities launched a new programme,
Heal Empower Rise – Counter Trafficking in
Persons, with support from the US
government and the International
Organization for Migration.

DEATH PENALTY
The mandatory death penalty continued to be
imposed for murder, including following
virtual trials before one judge. In May, the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the
UK, Trinidad and Tobago’s highest court,
upheld the constitutionality of the mandatory
death penalty.

365

TUNISIA
Republic of Tunisia
Head of state: Kaïs Saïed
Head of government : Najla Bouden
President Kaïs Saïed continued efforts to
concentrate power in his hands following
his power grab in 2021. He also issued
decree-laws to dismantle key institutional
safeguards for human rights, notably
attacking judicial independence and the
right to freedom of expression. Authorities
used unlawful force to disperse protesters,
and targeted high-profile critics and
perceived enemies of the president with
prosecutions and arbitrary detentions. The
right to freedom of association was
threatened. A decree-law to amend the
electoral law undid legislative measures to
promote women’s participation in
parliament. Tunisia continued to penalize
consensual same-sex relations between
adults.

BACKGROUND
On 18 February, President Saïed renewed the
state of emergency until the end of the year,
and on 30 December, renewed it again until
30 January 2023. He also granted himself
new powers by overseeing the adoption of a
new constitution on 17 August that
concentrated authority in the executive
branch.
On 30 March, President Saïed dissolved the
then-suspended parliament after around 120
of the 217 members held an online plenary
session as a gesture of defiance against him.
Authorities imposed arbitrary travel bans on
at least three people, including members of
the recently dissolved parliament from parties
that had publicly opposed President Saïed.
The economic crisis worsened, with
unemployment reaching 15.3% and inflation
10.1%. There were shortages of staple foods
and officials said they planned to cut longstanding energy and food subsidies. In
October, the authorities reached a staff-level
agreement with the International Monetary

366

Fund (IMF) to try to secure USD 1.9 billion in
financial support. The IMF executive board
postponed discussion of the loan scheduled
for 19 December without immediately setting
a new date.
Experts assessed the country to be
extremely vulnerable to climate change and
food insecurity given its limited water
resources and the expectation that drought
and high temperatures will become more
frequent.

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY
President Saïed passed two new decree-laws
that, with provisions in the new constitution,
granted him powers to intervene in judicial
careers, dismiss judges summarily and
approve judicial appointments, thereby
undermining judicial independence.1
On 1 June, President Saïed summarily
dismissed 57 judges who he accused of
misconduct, including obstructing
investigations, corruption and adultery. The
Administrative Tribunal overturned 49 of the
dismissals, but the Ministry of Justice refused
to reinstate the judges.2
As in previous years, the authorities failed to
create a long-overdue constitutional court.
While the new constitution includes
provisions to create such a court, they grant
the president final word on appointing its
members.
Military courts continued to prosecute
civilians, but less often than in 2021. Trials
before military courts opened against at least
two men in connection with their public
remarks, one about the police, the other
about President Saïed and the army.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
President Saïed undermined freedom of
expression by issuing two decree-laws
mandating prison terms for maliciously
spreading “fake news” or defamatory
statements. Decree-Law 2022-14, which took
effect on 21 March, mandates prison terms
from 10 years to life for people “engaged in
economic activity” who wilfully spread “false
or incorrect news or information” about

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

supplies of goods.3 Decree-Law 2022-54, a
new cybercrime law issued on 13 September,
mandates prison terms of up to 10 years for
wilful misuse of telecommunications
networks to produce, send or spread “fake
news” or other false or defamatory content,
and allows authorities to dissolve entities
found to have violated it. It also threatens the
right to privacy by granting authorities
sweeping powers to monitor how people use
the internet, intercept private
communications and share personal data
with foreign governments.
Judicial authorities investigated or
prosecuted at least 32 high-profile critics and
perceived opponents of the president for
exercising their right to freedom of
expression. Among them were members of
the now-dissolved parliament as well as
lawyers and journalists.
In May, a military court convicted lawyer
Abderrazak Kilani of insulting a public official
and sentenced him to a suspended onemonth prison term. A military prosecutor had
charged him in January after he had a verbal
confrontation with police officers who barred
him from visiting a client. The military
appeals court later overturned the conviction,
but a military prosecutor lodged an appeal.
In early April, judicial authorities opened
investigations into at least 20 MPs who joined
an online plenary session held to protest
against President Saïed’s decision to dissolve
parliament, summoning at least 10 for
questioning.4 At the end of the year, the
investigations had not progressed.
On 12 May, judicial authorities opened a
criminal investigation against Ghazi
Chaouachi, head of the opposition
Democratic Current party, for defaming a
public official and spreading false information
in relation to a radio interview in which he
criticized the authorities and said that Prime
Minister Najla Bouden had resigned but
President Saïed had refused to accept the
resignation.
On 11 June, police arrested journalist Salah
Attia in connection with a TV interview in
which he said that the army had refused a
request from President Saïed to close the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

office of Tunisia’s main trade union and place
political leaders under house arrest. On 16
August, a military court jailed Salah Attia for
three months beginning from the time of his
arrest for defaming the president and
insulting the army. He was released on 16
September, having served his sentence.5
Prosecutors opened investigations under
the Decree-Law 2022-54 against at least five
people, including Nizar Bahloul, editor of
Business News, for an article criticizing
Prime Minister Najla Bouden, and lawyer
Mehdi Zagrouba for a Facebook post
criticizing justice minister Leila Jeffal. The
justice minister initiated an investigation
under the decree-law against political leader
Ghazi Chaouachi for remarks made to media.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In February, a draft law on associations was
leaked that would grant authorities powers to
regulate the establishment, activities and
overseas funding of civil society groups, and
dissolve them either for inactivity or, under
ambiguous provisions, at will. On 24
February, President Saïed said that he
intended to ban all foreign funding for civil
society groups.6 In a written report and
spoken remarks in November for Tunisia’s
fourth UPR, authorities cited plans to amend
Tunisia’s law on associations without giving
clear details.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY AND
EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Demonstrations were held in the capital,
Tunis, both for and against President Saïed
during the year. Authorities allowed most to
proceed, but used unlawful force to disperse
at least three gatherings critical of the
president.
On 14 January, police in Tunis violently
dispersed anti-president protesters who had
assembled in defiance of a two-week ban on
public gatherings imposed two days earlier
on grounds of combating Covid-19. Police
beat protesters with batons, used water
cannons against them, and arrested at least
31 people. A judge acquitted 14 of them but
fined 15 for breaking health regulations.

367

On 4 June, police used metal barricades
and chemical irritant spray to prevent antipresident protesters from gathering outside
the electoral commission office.
On 22 July, police violently dispersed antipresident protesters in Tunis after several
protesters tried to remove crowd-control
barriers. Police used chemical irritant spray,
beat some protesters with batons, and
arrested at least 11. Four of those arrested
told Amnesty International that police beat
them after taking them into custody.

IMPUNITY
Authorities largely failed to hold to account
members of security forces credibly accused
of human rights violations.
Courts did not issue verdicts or other rulings
in any of the 10 trials, which opened in 2018
after the Truth and Dignity Commission
referred them to specialized tribunals, of
security force members accused of abuses
during Tunisia’s December 2010 to January
2011 revolution.7
On 13 January, the trial opened of 14
policemen accused of causing the death of
Omar Laabidi, a young man who witnesses
said drowned after police pushed him into a
canal despite his pleas that he could not
swim. On 3 November, the court sentenced
12 of them to two years in prison for
manslaughter, and acquitted two.
Authorities did not effectively investigate
complaints filed by the families of
Noureddine Bhiri, a former justice minister,
and Fathi Beldi, a security official, for their
arbitrary detention that began on 31
December 2021. Authorities held both men
for 67 days without access to lawyers before
releasing them without charge.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
Decree-Law 2022-55, issued on 15
September, amended Tunisia’s electoral law
to remove provisions intended partly to
promote women’s representation in
parliament. Previously, the law required that
lists of candidates for parliamentary elections
comprise an equal number of men and
women. Under the amended law, Tunisians

368

will elect members of parliament individually,
with no provisions to guarantee gender parity
among candidates.
Tunisian law continued to discriminate
against women in matters of inheritance.
Under the Personal Status Law, brothers are
entitled to inherit twice what their sisters
inherit in cases where wealth passes to both
male and female heirs.
Although Tunisia adopted a groundbreaking law on violence against women in
2017, known as Law 58, authorities
continued to be slow in providing police
adequate resources and training to
investigate reports of abuse and provide
protection to women at risk.
Women continued to face domestic abuse
and other forms of gender-based violence,
according to Tunisian women’s rights groups,
who reported a lack of up-to-date official
statistics on reported killings and other
violence against women.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Tunisia continued to penalize consensual
sexual activity between adults under Article
230 of the Penal Code, which mandates
three years in prison for same-sex sexual
relations. According to Damj, a Tunisian
rights group that defends LGBTI rights,
courts tried people under Article 230 in at
least 47 separate cases.
1. Tunisia: A Year of Human Rights Regression Since President’s PowerGrab, 21 July
2. “Tunisia: Reinstate revoked judges and prosecutors”, 16 September
3. “Tunisia: New anti-speculation law threatens freedom of expression”,
25 March
4. “Tunisia: Drop politically motivated investigation against opposition
MPs”, 8 April
5. “Tunisia: Drop all charges against journalist Salah Attia”, 15 August
6. “Tunisia: Looming curbs on civil society must be stopped”, 11 March
7. “Tunisia: Struggle for justice and reparation continues for victims 10
years after the revolution”, 14 January

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

TÜRKIYE
Republic of Türkiye
Head of state and government: Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
Baseless investigations, prosecutions and
convictions of human rights defenders,
journalists, opposition politicians and others
persisted. Parliament introduced draconian
amendments to existing laws that further
restricted freedom of expression online.
Police used unlawful force to detain
hundreds of participants in banned Pride
marches in several provinces, and the right
to peaceful assembly remained severely
curtailed. The Council of State declined to
overturn a 2021 decision to withdraw from
the Istanbul Convention. The country
continued to host the world’s largest
number of refugees, but violent summary
returns of Afghans and others resulted in
deaths and other serious injuries, against a
backdrop of rising anti-refugee racist
rhetoric by politicians and in the media.
There were serious and credible allegations
of torture and other ill-treatment.

BACKGROUND
In March, the European Committee on Social
Rights concluded that there was “no
adequate overall and coordinated approach
in place to combat poverty and social
exclusion” in Türkiye. At year’s end the
official rate of inflation reached 64.27%,
deepening the cost of living crisis for millions
of inhabitants.
On 13 November, a bombing in Istanbul
killed six people and injured over 80. The
authorities blamed the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) and the Syria-based People’s
Protection Units. On 20 November, Türkiye
launched air strikes into Syria and northern
Iraq, claiming the action to be in retaliation
for the bombing.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In May, a Council of State ruling to suspend
the directive banning journalists and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

members of the public from recording public
demonstrations became final.
Sixteen journalists from three media outlets
and the co-chair of the Dicle Fırat Journalists
Association were remanded in pretrial
detention in Diyarbakır in June, accused of
“membership of a terrorist organization”. An
indictment had yet to be issued at year’s end.
Pop singer Gülşen was remanded in prison
in August for allegedly “inciting the public to
hatred and enmity” in relation to a video
circulated on social media depicting a
humorous exchange between her and a band
member in April. After three days she was
moved to house arrest which was lifted after
two weeks, but her prosecution was
continuing at year’s end.
In September, the Ankara Regional Appeals
Court overturned the 2019 convictions of 11
members of the national board of the Turkish
Medical Association on charges of terrorist
propaganda and inciting hatred. In October,
the prosecutor appealed against the decision
at the Court of Cassation which was pending
at year’s end.
In October, parliament introduced
amendments to several laws in a package
dubbed the “censorship law”. The measures
included the introduction of a new criminal
offence of “publicly spreading
disinformation”, increasing the powers of the
Information and Communication
Technologies Authority to force social media
companies to take down content, provide
user data or face fines and severe reduction
of the bandwidth; and expanding existing
stringent requirements on social media
companies by adding criminal, administrative
and financial liability.1 In December, Bitlisbased journalist Sinan Aygül was the first
person to be remanded in pretrial detention
under the new criminal offence, for a tweet in
which he had shared unconfirmed sexual
abuse allegations. He was released after 12
days, on 22 December
In a politically motivated trial, a court
convicted the Istanbul mayor Ekrem
Imamoğlu in December of “insulting a public
official” and banned him from politics. The
prosecution was brought after he called

369

members of Türkiye’s supreme election
council “fools” in comments to the media in
2019. The verdict is subject to appeal.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The authorities continued to deprive a group
dubbed the Saturday Mothers/People of their
right to freedom of peaceful assembly in
Galatasaray Square, where they had been
gathering regularly to protest against the
enforced disappearances of the 1980s and
1990s. In June, riot police prevented the
group’s 900th peaceful vigil, detaining
human rights lawyers Öztürk Türkdoğan and
Eren Keskin, and several relatives of victims
of enforced disappearances.2 In August,
police prevented a peaceful protest by the
Saturday Mothers/People to mark the
International Day of the Victims of Enforced
Disappearances at the Altınşehir cemetery
and detained 14 people. The baseless
prosecution of 46 people for taking part in
the 700th gathering in August 2018
continued. In September, police prevented
the group from making a statement to the
press in front of the Çağlayan Courthouse
before their fifth hearing and detained 16
people, including three lawyers.
Unlawful restrictions on Pride marches
continued. LGBTI rights organizations
documented 10 Pride events banned across
the country and over 530 people detained
during the Pride season, more than the total
number of detentions since Istanbul Pride
was first banned in 2015. On 10 June, police
prevented the student Pride at the Middle
East Technical University in Ankara, and
detained 38 students, after the university
rector’s office “categorically banned” the
Pride event via email to all students three
days before.3
In June, the authorities arbitrarily banned all
Pride Week events in Istanbul. On 26 June,
police dispersed LGBTI activists gathered on
Istiklal Avenue in defiance of the ban, by
using tear gas and plastic bullets, and
arbitrarily detained at least 370 participants.
In October, the prosecutor requested the
conviction of four of the eight Boğaziçi
University students prosecuted for

370

“damaging public property” during a protest
in January 2021, despite having not provided
evidence of a criminal act; the offence carries
a prison sentence of up to four years. In
November, all 70 Boğaziçi University
students detained during the campus-based
Pride march in May were indicted for
“refusing to disperse despite warning”.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
Türkiye remained on the “grey list” of the
intergovernmental Financial Action Task
Force, while using its recommendations on
combating money laundering and financing
terrorism as a smokescreen to facilitate
harassment of NGOs. The authorities also
intensified the use of intrusive NGO audits
under the Law on the Prevention of the
Financing of the Proliferation of Weapons of
Mass Destruction.
The 2021 lawsuit to close the second
biggest opposition party, the Peoples’
Democratic Party, and a five-year political
ban on 451 of its executives and members
was still pending at year’s end. In November,
the European Court of Human Rights
(ECtHR) ruled that Türkiye had violated the
rights of the party’s former co-chair Figen
Yüksekdağ and 13 other former members of
parliament, including under Article 18, which
limits states’ ability to restrict human rights.
In April, closure proceedings began at the
Istanbul Civil Court of First Instance No. 13
alleging that the NGO We Will Stop Femicides
Platform had engaged in “illegal and immoral
activities… damaging the Turkish family
structure under the guise of defending
women’s rights”.
A lawsuit which began in May, seeking the
closure of the Tarlabaşı Community Centre in
Istanbul for allegedly “attempting to influence
children’s sexual orientation by normalizing
the sexuality of individuals known as LGBTI
people in society”, was ongoing at year’s end.
A separate court decision in February to halt
the Centre’s activities was lifted in April.

IMPUNITY
In April, a court in Istanbul suspended the
prosecution in their absence of 26 Saudi

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

nationals charged with the 2018 murder of
journalist Jamal Khashoggi and ruled that the
case could be transferred to Saudi Arabia.
Subsequently, bilateral relations between the
two countries improved.
The prosecution of three police officers and
an alleged PKK member accused of killing
human rights lawyer Tahir Elçi in 2015
continued for the second year.
The trial of 13 police officers who were
indicted in 2020 for causing the death of
Metin Lokumcu during a protest in the town
of Hopa in 2011 also continued.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
The co-chair of the IHD Öztürk Türkdoğan
faced three separate prosecutions during the
year for “membership of a terrorist
organization”, “insulting a public official” and
“denigrating the Turkish nation”.4 Appeals
against his acquittals in the first two
prosecutions were pending at the Ankara
Regional Appeals Court. The third
prosecution continued at the end of the year.
The courts failed to implement ECtHR
judgments in the cases of Osman Kavala and
Selahattin Demirtaş, while the president and
other high-ranking members of the
government falsely claimed that such
decisions were not binding on Türkiye. The
failure to release Osman Kavala from prison
in line with the 2019 judgment prompted the
Council of Europe in February to launch
infringement proceedings against Türkiye, the
second time the procedure had ever been
invoked against a member state.
In April, Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 13
found Osman Kavala and seven others guilty
in the Gezi Park retrial, despite the absence
of any evidence. Osman Kavala was
convicted for “attempting to overthrow the
government” and sentenced to life
imprisonment without the possibility of
parole. His co-defendants Mücella Yapıcı,
Tayfun Kahraman, Can Atalay, Mine Özerden,
Çiğdem Mater, Hakan Altınay and Yiğit
Ekmekçi were each sentenced to 18 years in
prison for allegedly aiding Osman Kavala.
Appeals against the convictions of all the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

defendants were pending at the Regional
Appeals Court at year’s end.
Also in April, the Istanbul Regional Appeals
Court upheld the conviction and sentence on
human rights lawyer Eren Keskin for
“membership of a terrorist organization” in
the main trial linked to Özgür Gündem, a
Kurdish newspaper shut down in the
aftermath of the 2016 failed coup. At the end
of the year, Eren Keskin’s sentences totalled
26 years and nine months following
prosecutions relating to her role as a
symbolic editor-in-chief of Özgür Gündem.
Appeals were pending at the Court of
Cassation.
In May, the ECtHR found that Taner Kılıç’s
pretrial detention in 2017 and 2018 violated
his rights to liberty, security and freedom of
expression, concluding that his “detention
occurred in the absence of plausible reasons
to suspect him of having committed the
alleged crimes”. In November, the Court of
Cassation overturned Taner Kılıç’s unjust
conviction for “membership of a terrorist
organization” on grounds of “incomplete
investigation”, and the convictions of the
three other human rights defenders for
“aiding a terrorist organization” because of
“lack of evidence” in the long-standing
Büyükada prosecution.
In September, 23 people, including at least
15 members, staff and board members of the
Migration Monitoring Association were
indicted, accused of “membership of a
terrorist organization”. The prosecution
alleged that three reports published by the
association aimed at “making propaganda for
a terrorist organization” and that funds
received from various foreign sources were
funnelled to an armed group. The first
hearing in the trial was held on 13 December.
In October, Professor Şebnem Korur
Fincancı, head of the Turkish Medical
Association, was remanded in prison for
“making propaganda for a terrorist
organization”.5 She had called publicly for an
independent investigation into allegations that
chemical weapons had been used in the
Kurdistan region of Iraq against the PKK.
Istanbul Heavy Penal Court No. 24 accepted

371

the indictment on the same charge in
December. The first hearing in her
prosecution was held on 23 December.

DISCRIMINATION
WOMEN’S RIGHTS
In May, a law entered into force aiming to
protect women and medical workers from
violence. The law defines persistent stalking
against women as a separate crime, limits
courts’ discretion to reduce perpetrators’
sentences and increases custodial
sentences, with aggravated sentences if
committed against a child or a separated/
divorced spouse.
Men killed at least 225 women in acts of
femicide in the first 10 months of the year
according to official government statistics,
although some reports recorded far higher
numbers. For example, the We Will Stop
Femicides Platform reported that 393 women
had been killed.
In March, three leading women from the
Diyarbakır-based Rosa Women’s Association
were taken into police custody and faced
baseless prosecution for “membership of a
terrorist organization”. Prosecutors alleged
that the association’s activities for
International Women’s Day and the
International Day against Violence Against
Women had been undertaken under the
instructions of an armed group.
In July, Türkiye’s highest administrative
court, the Council of State, rejected the
applications by dozens of women’s
organizations, bar associations and others to
annul the 2021 presidential decision to
withdraw from the Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence Against Women and Domestic
Violence (the Istanbul Convention). The
Court’s decision effectively rubber-stamped
the unilateral withdrawal by the executive
from this treaty. An appeal against the
Council decision to reject the applications
was pending, while several separate
applications by women’s rights organizations
had still not been heard by the end of the
year.

372

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Politicians, including government officials,
regularly used hate speech and smear
campaigns, amplified by certain media,
against the LGBTI community.
Discrimination, intimidation and violence
were particularly visible during Pride season
when police violently attempted to disperse
peaceful marches and detained participants.
In September, the state broadcasting body
RTÜK endorsed an advertisement in which
LGBTI people were referred to as a “virus”
and accused of causing the “destruction of
families”. The advertisement promoted an
anti-LGBTI rights demonstration in Istanbul.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Turkish authorities used unlawful force
including firing live ammunition to summarily
return to Iran thousands of Afghans seeking
protection.6 This included unlawful use of
firearms against Afghans trying to cross,
sometimes resulting in deaths or injuries.
Under the guise of “voluntary returns”, some
people were unlawfully deported via flights to
Afghanistan.
In July, the ECtHR ruled in Akkad v. Türkiye
that the forcible return to Syria of a Syrian
man legally residing in Türkiye through the
abuse of a “voluntary return” order was a
violation of the prohibition of refoulement, the
right to a remedy, the right to liberty and
security, and a violation of the prohibition of
degrading treatment due to the conditions of
the applicant’s transfer in the context of the
return operation. Human rights organizations
documented that between February and July,
the Turkish authorities arbitrarily arrested,
detained and unlawfully returned hundreds
of Syrian refugees.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Eyewitnesses reported that in April a large
group of guards at Istanbul’s Marmara
(formerly known as Silivri) prison had beaten
inmates and urged the prisoners to kill
themselves. One inmate, Ferhan Yılmaz, died
in hospital in April after allegedly being
subjected to torture and other ill-treatment at
the hands of prison guards. Ten other

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

prisoners were allegedly transferred to
different prisons around the country after
they too alleged that prison guards had
beaten them. The Chief Public Prosecutor’s
office of the district of Silivri announced an
investigation into the allegations but the
outcome was not known at the end of the
year.
1. “Türkiye’s disinformation law tightens government control and
curtails freedom of expression”, 24 October
2. ”Türkiye: Police detain human rights defenders and relatives of
disappeared people on Saturday Mothers/People 900th vigil”, 25 June
3. “Türkiye: Further information: Pride march dispersed with excessive
force”, 23 June
4. “Türkiye: Baseless prosecution of Öztürk Türkdoğan an ‘attack on all
those who speak out for human rights’”, 21 February
5. “Türkiye: “Free Prof Şebnem Korur Fincancı”, 27 October
6. Afghanistan: “They Don’t Treat Us Like Humans”: Unlawful Returns of
Afghans From Turkey and Iran, 31 August

TURKMENISTAN
Turkmenistan
Head of state and government: Serdar
Berdymukhamedov (replaced Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov in March)
Serious human rights violations continued
unabated across the board, including
arbitrary detentions and politically
motivated convictions of anyone daring to
criticize or challenge official policy. The
authorities continued to exercise strict
control over the flow of information and all
media. Turkmenistan failed to take
meaningful action to address climate
change. Women and girls saw their rights
and freedoms, including bodily autonomy,
restricted further. Abortion was effectively
banned. Consensual sex between men
remained a criminal offence.

BACKGROUND
In March, Serdar Berdymukhamedov
succeeded his father Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov as president following
elections that were deemed neither fair nor
free by international monitors. He failed to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

introduce any meaningful measures to
address the deteriorating socio-economic,
public health and climate change crisis.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The authorities continued their relentless
campaign to stifle all forms of peaceful
dissent and public criticism.
In May, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary
Detention concluded that the real reason for
lawyer Pygamberdy Allaberdyev’s 2020
detention and subsequent six-year prison
sentence for hooliganism was solely his
peaceful exercise of the rights to freedom of
expression and association. Pygamberdy
Allaberdyev had been organizing a peaceful
demonstration when he was detained by
police for allegedly assaulting a customer in a
bakery. His secret trial had lasted just two
hours and he had been held incommunicado
until his release in December under a
presidential pardon.
The authorities also persisted in attempting
to stop the peaceful protest of activists and
citizens living abroad. In August, staff at the
consulate of Turkmenistan in Istanbul,
Türkiye, verbally and physically attacked five
exiled Turkmenistani activists, their Turkish
lawyer, and a Turkish human rights activist
while they were trying to deliver a letter
expressing their concern at the human rights
situation in Turkmenistan. Atamurat Saparov,
who sustained head injuries and needed first
aid, and Dursoltan Taganova, were briefly
detained by Turkish police.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
The state controlled the flow of information,
censoring any reporting on negative
developments, such as economic hardship,
shortages of essential food items, the impact
of climate change, and Covid-19. Access to
the internet was strictly limited to prevent
people from receiving alternative information
from abroad. Fergana Media reported in
October that the authorities had blocked 1.2
billion IP addresses. Security services closely
monitored the use of virtual private networks
(VPNs) and proxy servers to clamp down on
those who tried to circumvent state controls.

373

They risked fines, detention and possible
criminal prosecution.
Independent journalist Soltan Achilova, who
previously worked with Radio Free Europe/
Radio Liberty, reported that security services
were monitoring her closely and warning
people she had interviewed about economic
and social problems that she was working
with organizations trying to undermine the
state.
On 14 July, Members of the European
Parliament, human rights defenders and
independent journalists marked the first
anniversary of the detention of medical
doctor Khursanai Ismatullaeva, who had
publicly protested her unfair dismissal, with a
joint statement calling for her immediate
release. Khursanai Ismatullaeva had been
sentenced to nine years’ imprisonment on
fabricated charges of fraud in 2021 following
a blatantly unfair trial. She was punished
after seeking the help of human rights
defenders and independent journalists to
expose her unfair dismissal. Khursanai
Ismatullaeva was released under an amnesty
in December.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
Despite a much-vaunted National Strategy on
Climate Change introduced in 2012,
Turkmenistan failed to implement laws and
policies to phase out fossil fuels in a timely
and effective manner, and only signed off on
new NDCs in May. Turkmenistan continued
to be one of the highest methane gas
emitters in the world and continued to do
little to fix leaks or address poor practices in
oil and gas extraction. Data gathered
on the International Space Station from July
to October showed that Turkmenistan
continued to be a “super-emitter”.
No substantive mitigation and human
rights-approved adaptation measures were
introduced to specifically address the impact
of the climate change crisis on vulnerable
groups, although Turkmenistan remained one
of the countries in the world worst affected by
rising temperatures and the resulting
desertification of scarce arable land. In
November, the UN Development Programme

374

singled out women in rural areas of
Turkmenistan as among those most at risk of
being disproportionately impacted by climate
change.

DISCRIMINATION
The authorities continued to discriminate
against women and girls and LGBTI people,
arbitrarily restricting their rights, freedoms
and bodily autonomy in the name of cultural
traditions and Turkmeniçilik (Turkmen
national identity).
WOMEN AND GIRLS
In April, police started enforcing new rules
preventing women from sitting in the front
passenger seat of a car; they also raided
beauty salons following internal government
guidance banning women and girls from
having certain treatments, such as eyelash
and nail extensions and Botox injections.
These instructions lacked legal clarity,
discriminated on grounds of gender and were
implemented arbitrarily by police.
LGBTI PEOPLE
Consensual sexual relations between men
continued to be a criminal offence under
Article 133 (previously Article 135) of the
Criminal Code, punishable by up to two years
in prison. No progress was noted on a
commitment to review the article with a view
to decriminalization, made by Turkmenistan
in its Third Period Report to the UN Human
Rights Committee in 2020.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In April, the authorities published a law, first
passed in 2015 but never previously made
public, restricting access to abortion to the
first five weeks of pregnancy, down from 12
weeks. This effectively banned abortions
since pregnancies are rarely discovered at
such an early stage. Reproductive health
campaigners expressed fears that women
and girls would be forced into unwanted
pregnancies or illegal, unsafe terminations. A
2021 study by the UN Population Fund on
reproductive rights in Turkmenistan found
that 60% of women could not make
autonomous decisions on contraception and
pregnancy. National media continued to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

strengthen gender-based stereotypes,
extolling the role of women as wives and
mothers, subordinate to their husbands.

UGANDA
Republic of Uganda
Head of state and government: Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni
Ugandan authorities continued to
criminalize protest without legal basis. The
state used preventive detention and
criminal charges to deter criticism and the
authorities ordered the closure of an LGBTI
umbrella rights group. The president gave
district security committees greater powers
to authorize evictions, increasing the risk of
forced evictions. Plans to construct the East
African Crude Oil Pipeline threatened to
harm the environment and adversely impact
communities’ livelihoods and health. The
country hosted almost 1.5 million refugees,
with 100,000 arriving in 2022.

BACKGROUND
On 1 July, Uganda engaged with the UPR
and accepted 139 of its 273
recommendations, including implementing
the national human rights action plan and
advancing the rights to health and education
for girls. It failed to support key
recommendations aimed at protecting
human rights.1
On 20 September, the Ministry of Health
declared an Ebola virus disease outbreak
after a case of the Sudan ebolavirus was
confirmed in Mubende district, central
Uganda. There were 142 confirmed cases of
infection, 56 confirmed deaths while 96
people had recovered by the end of the year.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The government did not accept UPR
recommendations to end the intimidation and
harassment of human rights defenders, civil
society actors, bloggers and journalists.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Between 12 and 23 May, police placed
opposition leader Kizza Besigye under house
arrest after he attempted a protest walk in the
capital, Kampala, against the high cost of
living. On 23 May, the police arrested and
detained him for several hours after he left
home to resume his protests in Kampala.
They said they were preventing him from
carrying out an offence. As head of the
Forum for Democratic Change and the
People’s Front for Transition (a political
pressure group), he had been speaking at
one of a series of protests against inflation
and the cost of living when arrested. On 6
June, he was released on bail. On 14 June,
police re-arrested him for protesting against
the economic situation in downtown
Kampala. He was released on 1 July on cash
bail of UGX 2.5 million (about USD 650) after
spending two weeks in pretrial detention on
charges of inciting violence.
On 30 May, police arrested MP Anna Adeke
and deputy mayor of Kampala Doreen
Nyanjura, alongside four women activists
Wokuri Mudanda, Susan Nanyojo, Mariam
Kizito and Alice Amony, in Kampala, for
protesting against Kizza Besigye’s
detention and the rising cost of living. They
were charged with inciting violence and
holding an illegal protest, and remanded at
Kampala’s Luzira Maximum Security Prison
before being released on bail on 7 June.2 The
court at the Law Development Centre,
Kampala, adjourned their cases at least four
times before dropping all charges against
them on 5 December.
On 13 October, President Museveni signed
into law the Computer Misuse (Amendment)
Bill 2022. It contains restrictive provisions
relating to unauthorized access, interception,
recording or sharing information or data, and
imposes severe penalties such as fines of
UGX 15 million (about USD 3,900) and/or
imprisonment of up to 10 years. Leaders or
holders of public office can also be dismissed
or forced to vacate office upon conviction.3

RIGHT TO A FAIR TRIAL
On 6 June, the High Court of Uganda in
Kampala ruled that Kizza Besigye’s bail

375

conditions, set by Buganda Road Chief
Magistrate’s Court, were harsh and excessive,
reducing his bail from almost UGX 30 million
(about USD 7,820) to UGX 3 million (about
USD 782) (see above, Freedom of
expression, association and assembly).

ARBITRARY ARRESTS AND DETENTIONS
Police ignored a court order made on 4
January to release activist and author
Kakwenza Rukirabashaija. The week before,
Special Forces Command officers had
arrested him at his home in Kampala without
an arrest warrant and threatened him with
violence. He was detained in Kitalya prison in
Kampala in connection with Twitter posts
which the police claimed were intended to
disturb the peace of Lieutenant General
Muhoozi Kainerugaba, the president’s son.4
On 11 January, 13 days after Kakwenza
Rukirabashaija's arrest, police arraigned him
to a closed session before the Buganda Road
Chief Magistrate’s Court, where he said he
had been tortured while in incommunicado
detention. The police released him on 26
January, after the court granted him bail on
medical grounds. In February, he fled
Uganda.
On 10 March, security forces raided Digitalk
TV offices in Kampala and arrested novelist
Norman Tumuhimbise, journalist Farida
Bikobere and seven other staff members in
connection with Norman Tumuhimbise’s
social media post about the launch of his two
novels. They were held in incommunicado
detention and on 16 March seven of them
were released unconditionally. On the same
day, Norman Tumuhimbise and Farida
Bikobere were charged in court with offensive
communication and cyberstalking President
Museveni, contrary to sections 25 and 26 of
the Computer Misuse Act 2011, respectively.
They were also accused of using their online
platform “to disturb the peace and quiet of
the President”. They were remanded in
Luzira Maximum Security Prison and
released on 21 March on UGX 500,000
(about USD 130) cash bail each. They said
they and their seven colleagues were tortured

376

in detention. Their case was ongoing at the
end of the year.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In July, during the adoption of the final
outcome of Uganda’s UPR, the government
did not accept recommendations to protect
LGBTI people’s rights.
On 3 August, the National Bureau for NonGovernmental Organizations (NGO Bureau),
an official body, ordered the closure of Sexual
Minorities Uganda (SMUG), an umbrella
organization that operates to protect LGBTI
people’s rights. The authorities claimed that
SMUG had not registered with the NGO
Bureau in line with the NGO Act 2016. In
2018, SMUG had challenged a decision by
the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to
refuse to register the organization under
Section 18 of the Companies Act of 2012,
citing its “undesirable and unregistrable”
name. On 27 June 2018, the high court
upheld the Bureau’s decision.5
The move against SMUG took place amid
the continued shrinking of civic space and
increased attacks against the LGBTI
community. On 19 May, police had arrested
and detained two staff members of SMUG for
“promoting homosexuality” when they went
to Ntinda Police Station in Kampala to report
malicious damage to property at SMUG’s
office. They were charged with assaulting the
person they were reporting and transferred to
Kira Road Police Station. They were released
on police bond on 23 May, re-arrested on 7
June and presented at court on 8 June,
where they were granted free bail. They were
repeatedly summoned to court before their
hearing was set for January 2023.
On 8 October, President Museveni said that
homosexuals are still considered social
deviants in Ugandan society.

FORCED EVICTIONS
On 28 February, President Museveni banned
all land evictions carried out without the
district security committees’ consent, giving
the committees greater powers to authorize
evictions and thereby increasing the risk of
forced evictions. Indigenous peoples are

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

among those affected by the directive since it
allows security organs increased powers to
determine land disputes and may undermine
the judiciary’s independence.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Uganda continued to participate in plans to
construct the 1,443km East African Crude Oil
Pipeline (EACOP) which would pass through
human settlements and wildlife areas,
agricultural land and water sources (see
Tanzania entry).
On 1 February, EACOP shareholders
including TotalEnergies, the Uganda National
Oil Company, Tanzania Petroleum
Development Corporation and China National
Offshore Oil Corporation, announced the final
investment decision and the launch of the
major crude oil pipeline project. It
represented a total investment of
approximately USD 10 billion (over UGX 38
trillion).
The Ugandan and Tanzanian governments
defended the project as necessary for the
development of both countries, despite
several challenges from domestic and
international climate justice activists and civil
society groups. These alleged that the
pipeline would harm the environment,
displace local people, and adversely impact
livelihoods, food security and the public
health of communities, including Indigenous
peoples. The findings of an environmental
and social impact assessment conducted by
the Netherlands Commission for
Environmental Assessment and the
Norwegian Oil for Development programme
in partnership with the Ugandan National
Environment Management Authority, between
2010 and 2013, were consistent with the
climate justice activists’ contentions. A
lawsuit filed by Kenyan, Ugandan and
Tanzanian civil society groups at the East
African Court of Justice, seeking a temporary
injunction with a view to preventing the
pipeline, remained pending after two years.
If constructed, the pipeline would be the
largest heated pipeline in the world,
transporting an average of 10.9 million
tonnes of crude oil a year from Lake Albert

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

oilfields in western Uganda to Tanga Port on
the northern coast of Tanzania for export.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
According to the government and UNHCR,
the UN refugee agency, Uganda hosted
1,495,688 refugees; almost 100,000 arrived
in 2022 alone. With only 45% of its funding
requirements having been met as of
November 2022, according to UNHCR, the
authorities were not equipped to respond
adequately to the situation by, for example,
promoting refugees’ socio-economic
integration or addressing the urgent need for
healthcare and medicine, water, sanitation
and hygiene services, and education. In
September, UNHCR warned that it might be
unable to continue paying teachers who
worked with refugee children. Substandard,
unsanitary and crowded living conditions
exposed refugees to risks, including disease
and gender-based violence.
1. “Uganda: Oral statement item 6: Consideration of UPR reports:
Uganda. UN Human Rights Council 50th session, 13 June – 8 July
2022”, 1 July
2. “Uganda: Authorities must stop criminalizing activists for protesting
high cost of living”, 6 June
3. “Uganda: Scrap draconian law aimed at suppressing freedom of
expression online”, 14 October
4. “Uganda: Further information: Activist author redetained and
tortured: Kakwenza Rukirabashaija”, 19 January
5. “Uganda: Enable Sexual Minorities Uganda to operate and protect
LGBTI rights”, 29 August

UKRAINE
Ukraine
Head of state: Volodymyr Zelensky
Head of government: Denys Shmyhal
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in
February was a violation of the UN Charter
and an act of aggression, a crime under
international law. Russian forces conducted
indiscriminate attacks resulting in
thousands of civilian casualties, amid
mounting evidence of other crimes
including torture, sexual violence and

377

unlawful killings. Attacks on civilian
infrastructure also led to violations of the
rights to housing, health and education. A
new law on the media granted excessive
powers for the Ukrainian state media
regulator. Promised new legislation on civil
partnerships appeared to include same-sex
relationships. The war exacerbated existing
inequalities for women, amid a reported
increase in gender-based violence. The
crackdown on dissent and human rights
defenders in Russian-occupied Crimea
continued.

BACKGROUND
On 24 February, Russia launched a full-scale
military invasion of Ukraine, including from
neighbouring Belarus. Russian forces
reached the outskirts of the capital, Kyiv, and
made gains in the east and south of the
country before being pushed back amidst
fierce fighting. By the end of the year,
Russian forces had retreated from much of
the newly-captured territories but retained
control of substantial territory in the east,
south-east and south of Ukraine, including
Crimea.
The war had an immense impact on
Ukraine’s civilian population. The UN
recorded close to 18,000 civilian casualties in
2022 including at least 6,884 deaths, mostly
caused by the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects. Actual figures were likely to
be significantly higher.
Almost 8 million Ukrainians, mostly women,
children and older people, left the country,
creating the largest refugee population in
Europe since the Second World War. Almost
7 million were estimated to be displaced
within the country.
In September, Russia announced the illegal
annexation of four partially occupied regions
of Ukraine.
Ukraine’s public, political and civilian life
was dominated by the war. Martial law was
declared on 24 February and remained in
place at the end of the year. The Ukrainian
authorities took several steps to reduce
Russia’s media, cultural and political
influence within the country, including

378

blocking various Russian online resources. At
least 11 political parties were banned for their
alleged seditious activities and ties to the
Russian authorities.
One of the two principal Orthodox churches,
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC),
which, unlike the Orthodox Church of
Ukraine, had retained formal subordination to
the Moscow Patriarchy, amended its statutory
documents in May to remove all respective
subordination clauses, although its
relationship with Moscow remained
ambiguous. Nonetheless, in December, the
authorities committed to banning its activities
in Ukraine, and opened an investigation into
its allegedly subversive activities, carrying out
raids on churches and monasteries across
the country.
The World Bank predicted that the
Ukrainian economy would contract by around
45% and reported a tenfold rise in the
country’s poverty rate, as nearly half a million
children were pushed into poverty. In
December, a World Bank official cited latest
estimates of the cost of reconstruction as
EUR 500 – 600 billion. The unemployment
rate exceeded 30% at the end of the year.

VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN LAW
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine triggered an
extensive human rights, humanitarian and
displacement crisis. Russian forces
conducted indiscriminate attacks, using
weapons with wide-area effects which
resulted in thousands of civilian casualties.
On 30 September, a Russian missile strike on
a humanitarian convoy in Zaporizhzhia killed
at least 25 civilians.1 Russian forces also
occupied large swathes of territory, and
denied civilians access to humanitarian aid.
As Ukraine retook control of some territories,
mounting evidence emerged of unlawful
deprivation of liberty, torture, sexual violence,
unlawful killings and other crimes by Russian
forces.
In Russian-occupied territories, Russian
authorities disabled or disrupted Ukrainian
communication channels, including by
replacing mobile networks with their own,

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

and persecuted local residents who reported
on attacks in the occupied territories,
including through abduction, unlawful
imprisonment and torture. There were reports
of extrajudicial executions of civilians. In
Bucha, for example, Amnesty International
investigated five apparent extrajudicial
executions carried out during the Russian
occupation in March.2
Due to the restrictions on communication,
and lack of access for independent media
and monitors into Russian-occupied
territories, reports of military strikes attributed
to Ukrainian forces, including those resulting
in casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure, were difficult to verify.3
Russian officials and state-controlled media
made regular allegations about unlawful
Ukrainian strikes, some of which were shown
to be false. The Russian authorities blamed
Ukrainian forces for the destruction of the
theatre in Mariupol on 16 March, despite
compelling evidence that this building, which
was sheltering hundreds of civilians, was
deliberately targeted by the Russian air
force.4
PRISONERS OF WAR
Prisoners of war were subjected to illtreatment and possible extrajudicial
execution. Russian forces and their proxies
mostly denied humanitarian access to
prisoners they held. In August, the UN
announced a fact-finding mission into the
July attack in Olenivka that killed dozens of
Ukrainian prisoners of war held by Russian
proxy forces, but the mission was unable to
deploy to the site. Ukraine denied carrying
out the attack, and claimed it was a
deliberate killing of prisoners by their captors.
Photos and videos circulating on social
media depicted torture and other ill-treatment
of prisoners, and possible extrajudicial
executions, which would constitute a war
crime. Videos emerged in July showing a
Russian soldier castrating a Ukrainian captive
before killing him. Reportedly, Russian
security services questioned the suspected
perpetrator and dismissed the video as fake,
although it was independently verified by
open-source investigators.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Ukraine faced calls to investigate the abuse
and killing of prisoners. In November, videos
and photos were published on social media
of a possible extrajudicial execution, in which
at least 10 surrendered Russian soldiers
appeared in one video to be alive and being
held face down on the ground, while a later
aerial video showed them dead. Ukraine
opened an investigation but did not report its
findings before the year’s end.
UNFAIR TRIALS
In violation of international humanitarian law,
in June, a separatist “court” in Russianoccupied Donetsk “convicted” three
members of the Ukrainian regular forces (one
Moroccan and two British) of being foreign
mercenaries and taking part in hostilities and
“sentenced” them to death.5 In July, Russian
authorities claimed they had already charged
92 Ukrainian prisoners of war with “crimes
against peace and humanity”, and planned
to try them at an “international tribunal” in
occupied Mariupol, thereby depriving
prisoners of war of their fair trial rights.6
FORCED DISPLACEMENT
In Mariupol and elsewhere, Russian
authorities forcibly transferred and deported
civilians from occupied areas of Ukraine in
what amounted to war crimes and likely
crimes against humanity.7 This was
accompanied by a screening process, known
as “filtration”, during which some civilians
were subjected to torture and other illtreatment, including being beaten,
electroshocked and threatened with
execution. Others were denied food and
water, and held in dangerous and
overcrowded conditions. In some cases,
children were separated from their parents.
After being forcibly transferred or deported,
older people, people with disabilities, and
unaccompanied, separated or orphaned
children often lacked the financial means,
necessary support or the legal right to leave
Russia or Russian-occupied areas.
RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND REPARATION
On 2 March, the ICC Prosecutor announced
an investigation into the situation in Ukraine,
which still had not ratified the Rome Statute,
after receiving referrals from 39 ICC states

379

parties. The investigation was ongoing at the
year’s end. On 4 March, the UN Human
Rights Council voted to establish an
independent international commission of
inquiry.
On 17 November, a Dutch court convicted
in their absence two Russian and one
Ukrainian nationals affiliated with so-called
“Donetsk People’s Republic” of murdering all
298 passengers and crew of the Malaysian
Airlines MH17 flight that was shot down over
eastern Ukraine in July 2014.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Russia’s war of aggression imposed
immense, deliberate hardship on the
Ukrainian people, resulting in a dramatic
deterioration in their standards of living,
housing, health and education.
In the second half of the year, Russia
increased its attacks on essential civilian
infrastructure, including power and water
installations, adding significantly and
intentionally to the economic hardship. As
colder months approached, missile and
drone strikes seriously damaged at least 40%
of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, regularly
causing massive blackouts. These regularly
and simultaneously deprived several million
Ukrainians of electricity, disrupted critical
services, including healthcare as well as
education, and impacted the heating and
water supply in freezing temperatures. At
times, 80% of the residents of Kyiv were
deprived of running water.
According to the Kyiv School of Economics,
over 126,700 houses and 16,800 apartment
buildings around the country had been
destroyed or severely damaged by the end of
October. According to the Ukrainian Ministry
of Health in December, 1,100 healthcare
facilities had been damaged and 144
destroyed.

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
In July, two laws were adopted that
undermined labour rights and were estimated
to affect around 70% of the Ukrainian work
force. They were presented by the Ukrainian

380

authorities as necessary war-time measures.
Various similar provisions had been proposed
in 2020-21 but withdrawn in the face of trade
union opposition and criticism from the ILO.
The first law legalized zero-hours contracts
for up to 10% of a company’s employees,
subject to a minimum guaranteed 32
paid hours a month. The second exempted
companies with no more than 250 workers
from various protections set out in the Labour
Code, including collective agreements
previously negotiated by unions. Many
provisions were to remain in force for as long
as the country was under martial law.

OLDER PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Older people were disproportionately
impacted by war-related death and injury,
with people over 60 accounting for 34% of
deaths among civilians whose age was
known. Older people, particularly those with
disabilities or health conditions, were often
unable to access private or communal shelter
facilities or evacuate from conflict-affected
areas. In occupied areas, where Russian
forces prevented the transport of
humanitarian aid, older people did not have
access to medications or other health
services. Older people also struggled to
access accommodation in displacement,
where temporary shelters were largely
physically inaccessible, and poverty-level
pensions locked them out of the private
housing market. After February, at least
4,000 older people were placed in
overstretched state institutions such as care
homes, in inferior conditions, while others
continued living in damaged homes without
electricity, heating or water.8

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
National TV channels with substantive news
and analytical content were merged in March
by presidential decree into a United News
platform broadcasting pooled round-theclock news content. Compulsory at first, this
arrangement was relaxed later in the year.
On 13 December, a law on the media was
adopted which extended excessive powers
for the official media regulator, the National

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Council of Television and Radio Broadcasting,
to warn, fine, delicense and suspend any
media outlet, and temporarily extrajudicially
block access to non-media online resources.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The pressures of war prompted greater
solidarity with some previously marginalized
groups. In stark contrast to 2014, when the
fighting in eastern Ukraine began and the
presence of LGBTI people in the Ukrainian
forces was discouraged, openly gay, lesbian
and transgender volunteers and conscripts
reported being welcomed and respected
within the ranks.
In July, a petition calling for the legalization
of same-sex marriage received over 25,000
signatures, obliging a presidential response.
In August, President Zelensky indicated that
he supported the move but noted it required
constitutional change, which was not possible
during martial law. Instead, he promised new
legislation on registration of civil partnerships,
implying it would extend to same-sex
couples.
Transgender people with identity documents
bearing incorrect gender markers reported
being stopped, and sometimes harassed, as
they sought to leave the country, on account
of the martial law prohibition on the
departure of men between the ages of 18
and 60.

WOMEN’S RIGHTS
While women increasingly took on roles
previously dominated by men, particularly
within the armed forces, they remained
under-represented in political and decisionmaking structures.
Some existing inequalities were
exacerbated. According to UN Women, more
than a third of female-headed households in
conflict affected areas struggled to secure
sufficient food.
The conflict also had a significant impact on
maternal health. Russian strikes on
healthcare facilities and power networks and
the shortage of trained staff greatly reduced
the services available, and the incidence of
babies born pre-term increased markedly.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Many of those working with victims of
domestic violence reported an increase in
gender-based violence and a reduction in the
services available.
War crimes of rape and sexual assault in
Russian-occupied areas were reported.
However, their documentation presented a
challenge for the authorities and NGOs, for
multiple reasons including mistrust by
survivors and the associated social stigma.
In July, Ukraine ratified the Council of
Europe Convention on Preventing and
Combating Violence Against Women and
Domestic Violence (Istanbul Convention) and
became a full member on 1 November.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
The war had a devastating impact on the
environment, using huge quantities of fossil
fuels, destroying habitats and causing forest
fires, and polluting Ukraine’s air, water and
soil with toxic substances.
Russia’s conduct of hostilities raised the risk
of a nuclear incident. After seizing control of
the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant on 4
March, Russian troops and military hardware
were stationed within the site. Mortar or other
explosions were repeatedly reported in its
immediate vicinity, for which both sides
blamed each other, and some infrastructure
was damaged. By September, all six reactors
were shut down. Negotiations on the
establishment of a demilitarized zone around
the plant led by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) were ongoing at the
end of the year.
In November, Russian strikes on Ukraine’s
wider power network prompted the
emergency shutdown of all of Ukraine’s
nuclear reactors. The dangers inherent in
repeatedly shutting down and restarting
nuclear reactors prompted the IAEA to
describe the situation as "precarious,
challenging and potentially dangerous.”

CRIMEA
Unlike other Russian-occupied territories,
Crimea, which had been illegally annexed in
2014, was less immediately affected by the
war, although it suffered occasional Ukrainian

381

strikes against targets ranging from sea
vessels to airports, and an explosion that
partly damaged the bridge connecting the
peninsula with Russia.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, ASSOCIATION AND
ASSEMBLY
The crackdown by the de facto authorities on
the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association continued, with
prominent members and activists of the
Crimean Tatar community, individuals with
pro-Ukrainian views, and members of
minority faith-based groups, facing ongoing
reprisals. Displays of Ukrainian culture and
music were effectively criminalized, and
several people were given administrative
detention or heavy fines for playing Ukrainian
songs during private functions.
Local lawyers who represented victims of
politically motivated prosecutions were
targeted with unlawful searches, arbitrary
arrests, hefty fines and administrative
detention. On 15 July, lawyers Lilya
Gemedzhi, Rustem Kyamilev and Nazim
Sheikhmambetov were disbarred in apparent
retaliation for defending Crimean Tatar
activists.9
Prisoner of conscience Nariman Dzhelyal,
the most prominent remaining former
member of the arbitrarily banned Mejlis
(representative body) of the Crimean Tatar
People, was convicted under false charges of
sabotage in September and sentenced to 17
years’ imprisonment. His co-defendants also
received long prison sentences.
1. “Ukraine: Missile attack on humanitarian convoy in Zaporizhzhia
further proof of Russia’s ‘utter disregard for civilian lives’”, 30
September
2. Ukraine: “He’s not coming back”. War Crimes in Northwest Areas of
Kyiv Oblast, 6 May
3. “Ukraine: Russia’s military activities at nuclear plant risk safety in
region”, 6 September
4. Ukraine: “Children”: The Attack on the Donetsk Regional Academic
Drama Theatre in Mariupol, 30 June
5. “Ukraine/Russia: ‘Death sentences’ against three foreign members of
Ukrainian forces by separatists’ ‘courts’ a blatant violation of
international law”, 9 June
6. “Russia: Charging 92 members of Ukraine’s military with ‘crimes
against humanity’ brazenly undermines fair trial rights”, 25 July

382

7. Ukraine: “Like a Prison Convoy”: Russia’s Unlawful Transfer of
Civilians in Ukraine and Abuses During ‘Filtration’, 10 November
8. Ukraine: “I used to have a home”: Older People’s Experience of War,
Displacement, and Access to Housing in Ukraine, 6 December
9. “Russia: Crimean human rights lawyers disbarred: Lilya Gemedzhi,
Rustem Kyamilev and Nazim Sheikhmambetov”, 22 August

UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES
United Arab Emirates
Head of state: Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan
(replaced Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan in May)
Head of government: Mohammed bin Rashid Al
Maktoum
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) put into
effect new laws that significantly curtail
freedom of expression and assembly. The
authorities extended the arbitrary detention
of tens of mass trial victims past the end of
their prison terms, and subjected one
human rights defender and one dissident to
extended ill-treatment. The government
renewed its stance against recognizing the
rights of refugees.

BACKGROUND
In May, Mohamed bin Zayed became
president after his brother, President Khalifa
bin Zayed, died and the Federal Supreme
Council, consisting of the rulers of the
country’s seven emirates, appointed
Mohamed to replace him.
The UAE continued to participate in the
military coalition committing frequent and
serious violations of international law in
Yemen (see Yemen entry).

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The government exercised control over
expression, at times censoring content in the
media or cinema deemed to be immoral. At
least 26 Emirati prisoners remained behind
bars because of their peaceful political
criticism.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

In January, the Office of Public Prosecution
announced that it had summoned “a
number” of people who had posted videos
online simply reporting rocket attacks on the
UAE by Yemen’s Huthi militia, warning that
any reporting of such incidents on social
media violates the country’s laws.
In June, the Media Regulatory Office
banned Lightyear, a US-produced film
because it depicted a same-sex kiss.
Also in June, the newspaper Al Roeya,
which is published by a company owned by
Deputy Prime Minister Mansour bin Zayed Al
Nahyan, fired almost all its journalists and
editors because the paper had reported on
how Emiratis were reacting to the rising price
of energy. The print newspaper then ceased
publication, with the website kept online by a
skeleton staff and publishing only business
news.
In August, the Media Regulatory Office and
Telecommunications and Digital Government
Regulatory Authority instructed Netflix to
remove same-sex content from its services in
the UAE or face prosecution.
The new Code of Crimes and Punishments,
which went into effect on 2 January, brought
in some reduction of sentences but retained
overly broad provisions that criminalize free
expression and assembly, and added a new
clause punishing unauthorized transmission
of governmental information. Article 178, a
new provision, forbids transferring “without a
licence” any official “information” to any
“organization”, which taken literally
criminalizes most transmission of
governmental information. Article 184
decreased the punishment for “anyone who
mocks, insults, or damages the reputation,
prestige or standing of the state” or “its
founding leaders” from 10-25 years to a
maximum of five years. Article 210
decreased the punishment for participating in
any public gathering “tending to damage
public security” from up to 15 years to a
maximum of three years.
Article 26 of the new Law on Combating
Rumours and Cybercrimes, which also went
into effect on 2 January, imposes up to three
years’ imprisonment on anyone who uses the

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

internet to encourage a demonstration
without prior permission from the
government.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
The UAE was responsible for dozens of new
and ongoing arbitrary detentions. The
authorities refused to release at least 41
prisoners who completed their sentences
during the year, bringing the total number,
including those from previous years, to 48.
All 41 were part of the “UAE-94” mass trial of
2012-2013. The government characterized
such detentions as ongoing “counselling” for
those who have “adopted extremist thought,”
a procedure authorized under Article 40 of
the 2014 counter-terrorism law. The law
requires the Office of Public Prosecution to
obtain a court order for such detentions, but
does not give the detainee the right to
challenge their continued detention.1

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
In July, in its first review of the UAE, the UN
Committee against Torture stated its “concern
that reports received detail a pattern of
torture and ill-treatment against human rights
defenders and persons accused of offences
against state security.”
Authorities held human rights defender
Ahmed Mansoor in solitary confinement for
the entire year and deprived him of glasses,
books, a bed, mattress and pillows, and
personal hygiene items.2 Such prolonged
solitary confinement, especially in
combination with the degrading and inhuman
treatment, rises to the level of torture.
In one case, authorities denied Mohamed
al-Siddiq, imprisoned since 2012 for
exercising his right to freedom of expression,
all phone calls with his nuclear family who
live abroad.

DISCRIMINATION
The authorities continued to deny members
of the UAE’s native-born stateless population,
who have ancestral origins in East Africa,
South Asia and the Arabian Peninsula, the
state-paid healthcare and education provided
to nationals. Stateless Emiratis must pay to

383

receive education and healthcare through the
private market. Stateless people also had to
find “sponsors” to obtain temporary
residence permits, without which they are
considered “illegal residents”, and are
ineligible to work in the higher-paid
government sector.3

UNITED KINGDOM
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Head of state: Charles III (replaced Elizabeth II in
September)
Head of government: Rishi Sunak (replaced Liz Truss in
October, who replaced Boris Johnson in September)

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
In September, the government directed
schools across the UAE to ensure that
teachers “refrain... from discussing gender
identity, homosexuality or any other
behaviour deemed unacceptable to UAE
society” in classrooms. UAE law criminalizes
consensual same-sex relations between
adults.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The UAE raised oil production, contrary to
the UN conclusion that countries must begin
reducing production to meet their obligations
under the Paris Agreement on climate
change, to which the UAE is a party.
According to World Bank data, the UAE has
one of the world’s top five highest levels of
per capita carbon dioxide emissions.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
In July, the CEDAW Committee, in its
concluding observations, found that UAE law
discriminates against women in the
transmission of nationality to children, and
that the government maintains reservations to
the CEDAW that are incompatible with the
purpose of the treaty.

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In July, cabinet regulations revising
immigration laws once again did not
recognize the right of refugees to claim
asylum.
1. “UAE: Dissidents who served sentences still behind bars”, 30 May
2. United Arab Emirates: Dissidents Imprisoned and Migrants Racially
Targeted, 25 October
3. United Arab Emirates: Dissidents Imprisoned and Migrants Racially
Targeted, 25 October

384

Legislation was passed or tabled that
seriously undermined human rights,
including replacing the UK’s primary human
rights protection instrument and attacks on
the rights to freedom of assembly and
expression and to asylum. Further proposals
were launched that would provide impunity
for grave human rights violations. Effective
access to sexual and reproductive support
remained inconsistent across the UK.

BACKGROUND
In June the government launched a bill to
repeal the Human Rights Act, the country’s
primary legal protection for human rights,
and replace it with a “bill of rights”. This bill
of rights was widely criticized as being deeply
regressive from a human rights standpoint,
including for attacking positive obligations to
protect rights; being flawed in its drafting;
and being likely to lead to breaches of the
Belfast/Good Friday Agreement in Northern
Ireland.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
In September, the government updated
its NDC under the Paris Agreement. In its
2020 NDC, the UK committed to reducing
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 68% by
2030 and only made a net-zero target for
2050. The 2022 update did not revise these
figures. The Scottish government set a netzero target for 2045 and a higher 2030
emissions reduction target of 75%.

CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY
The British mining giant Anglo-American was
subject to an ongoing class action lawsuit in
the South Gauteng High Court, South Africa.
The case was brought by a large number of
Zambian children and women who reported

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

suffering injury from lead exposure as a result
of the company’s century-long mining
operations in the District of Kabwe. Residents
have some of the highest lead levels in the
world and health studies in Kabwe have
recorded alarmingly high levels of lead in the
blood of children aged five and under (see
Zambia entry).

WORKERS’ RIGHTS
Workers’ rights to speak out and bargain
collectively through a trade union of their
choice were not always respected. In
September, a settlement was reached with a
trade union organizer who had lodged a
claim for unfair dismissal with an
independent employment tribunal. He had
been dismissed in 2021 after trying to
improve the working conditions of cleaners at
Meta’s London offices.1

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
In April, parliament passed legislation
attempting to avoid the UK’s international
obligations stemming from the UN Refugee
Convention, including refusing to recognize
fully the Convention’s definition of refugee
and the prohibitions on the penalization of
asylum seekers for irregular entry,
discrimination and refoulement, and its
demand that states share responsibility for
hosting refugees.
The government also adopted a policy to
expel people seeking asylum from the UK to
Rwanda under a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Rwandan
government. Legal action halted the
expulsions. The policy remained under
challenge in the higher courts at the end of
the year.
The government’s commitment to resettle
Afghan refugees remained effectively
unfulfilled. Over many months, visa schemes
for Ukrainian refugees were undermined by
delays and inadequate arrangements. By
mid-December, however, more than 152,000
Ukraine Scheme visa-holders had finally
arrived in the UK.
Government hostility persisted towards
people crossing the Channel by boat to seek

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

asylum. Backlogs in the asylum system grew
further. People remained in wholly
inadequate accommodation. Harmful
consequences included an outbreak of
diphtheria from October onwards and more
than 200 unaccompanied children going
missing.
Wider immigration policy continued to
exacerbate the homelessness, destitution and
exploitation facing migrants, particularly
people without regular status. Expulsion
powers were used as an additional
punishment for criminal offending, including
against people who had lived all or most of
their lives in the UK.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts
Act 2022 increased police and ministerial
powers to restrict further the right to freedom
of peaceful assembly, including new policing
powers to implement restrictions on the
grounds of noise and nuisance, which risk
being disproportionate.
The Public Order Bill was pending approval
at the end of the year. This criminalizes a
wide range of peaceful protest activities,
expands police stop-and-search powers and
removes the rights to peaceful assembly for
individuals subjected to specific protest
banning orders.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Official guidance on the appropriate
thresholds and circumstances for Taser use
by police remained weak. In August, two
police officers used a Taser, baton and
incapacitant spray against a 93-year-old
disabled man with dementia at a care home;
he later died. The officers were handed gross
misconduct notices and were under
investigation for manslaughter at the end of
the year.
In June, police used a Taser against a Black
man believed to be experiencing a mental
health crisis on Chelsea Bridge, London,
resulting in him falling into the River Thames;
he died two days later. Home Office statistics
showed that Black people were eight times

385

more likely than white people to have a Taser
drawn or discharged against them.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
The UK finally ratified the Convention on
Preventing and Combating Violence Against
Women and Domestic Violence (Istanbul
Convention), which entered into force on 1
November. The government maintained a
reservation against Article 59 of the
Convention, which sets out state obligations
to provide protection to migrant women.

IRRESPONSIBLE ARMS TRANSFERS
Arms exports continued to be allowed,
following a December 2021 change to the
UK's export licensing criteria, in cases where
the government believed the wider benefits of
the transfer outweighed the risks of the
equipment contributing to further conflict and
instability.
A legal challenge continued throughout the
year over the lawfulness of UK arms exports
to Saudi Arabia in relation to UK-sold arms
being used to commit violations of
international humanitarian law in Yemen.

DISCRIMINATION
RACISM
A series of scandals about institutional racism
and misogyny in the Metropolitan Police
occurred throughout the year, some of which
contributed to the forced resignation in
February of the Metropolitan Police
Commissioner. In March reports emerged of
an incident in 2020 when a 15-year-old
Black girl was strip searched by two police
officers while at school. Subsequent
investigations revealed that, over a two-year
period, 650 children had been strip searched
by the Metropolitan Police, 58% of them
Black.
The Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts
Act was passed in April and further
entrenched racist policing. It included an
expansion of stop-and-search powers and the
targeting of the Roma and Traveller
communities via new measures to curb
unauthorized encampments and trespass.

386

In February, it was reported that instances
of antisemitic hate speech and attacks had
reached a record high. The Community
Security Trust, which monitors antisemitism
in the UK, recorded a 34% increase in such
incidents from one year to the next.
NATIONALITY LAW
British nationality law was amended to enable
some people long excluded by discrimination
in that law to acquire British nationality. This
included many descendants of inhabitants of
the Chagos Islands whose exile from their
homeland had also deprived them of British
nationality. Their exile continued.
GENDER
In December, the Scottish Parliament passed
liberalizing reforms to the gender recognition
certification process.

ARBITRARY DEPRIVATION OF
NATIONALITY
The government continued to use powers to
strip British citizens of their citizenship,
particularly people who had left the UK to join
ISIS. This included people who left during
their childhood and, UK media reported, with
the encouragement of agents working for the
Canadian security services. Challenges in the
higher courts continued, including against
the government’s refusal to repatriate British
citizens from Syria.
The Nationality and Borders Act 2022,
passed on 28 April, included powers
permitting the government to strip an
individual of citizenship without informing
them.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Despite a commitment from the Northern
Irish government in November 2021, an
independent public inquiry was not
established into “mother and baby homes”,
“Magdalene laundries” and “work houses”,
which operated between 1922 and 1990.
Many women and girls who became pregnant
outside marriage at that time were sent to
these institutions and suffered arbitrary
detention, forced labour, ill-treatment and the
forced adoption of their babies.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS

Despite the decriminalization of abortion in
Northern Ireland, there was an ongoing
failure to deliver fully commissioned and
funded abortion services. In October, the
secretary of state for Northern Ireland
announced that he would commission the
services directly from health trusts, given the
failure of the Northern Ireland minister for
health to do so. Northern Ireland is currently
the only part of the UK without telemedicine
provision.
There was still no provision for late-term
abortions in Scotland, resulting in women
having to travel to England.
In March, the independent inquiry into
maternity practices at Shrewsbury and
Telford Hospital NHS Trust was published.
The inquiry found that, over the course of 20
years, 201 babies and nine mothers who
died in or following childbirth could or would
have survived if the trust had provided better
care. A police investigation was launched.

In April, the Mental Welfare Commission for
Scotland raised serious concerns about
inconsistent and inadequate access to
mental health support for Scotland’s prison
population, including the use of segregation
for prisoners with mental disorders and
delayed hospital transfers for acutely unwell
prisoners to specialist hospital care.

IMPUNITY
In May, the government introduced the
Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and
Reconciliation) Bill. The bill included an end
to all criminal, civil and coronial judicial
activity for all conflict-related incidents,
amounting to a de facto amnesty for human
rights violations during the conflict, which
took place from 1966 to 1998.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Threats of violence by armed groups
continued against named journalists in
Northern Ireland, particularly those
investigating illegal paramilitary and criminal
activity. In June, a reporter for the Sunday
World newspaper was warned by police that
“criminal elements” had been monitoring
their movements with a view to “some form of
violent attack” in which firearms could be
used.
Legal academic Professor Colin Harvey, who
participated in debates on the constitutional
future of Northern Ireland, was the target of a
years-long campaign designed to intimidate
him and undermine his academic standing.2

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO HOUSING
Hundreds of thousands of people in England
remained homeless, many because of
bureaucratic, policy and legal barriers in the
country’s housing and homelessness
prevention systems. These included
measures associated with immigration
control, qualifying criteria for the status of
“priority need”, and determinations of
intentionality where a person was regarded as
having made themselves homeless.3
The state of housing for both social housing
and private tenants was in many instances
dangerously poor. In November a coroner
found that the death of an infant in 2020 was
caused by prolonged exposure to mould in
his family home. No new legislation to
address this was passed during the year.
1. “United Kingdom: Meta, workers’ rights matter!”, 1 September
2. “Northern Ireland: Authorities must protect Professor Colin Harvey
and academic freedom”, 26 January
3. UK: An Obstacle Course: Homelessness assistance and the right to
housing in England, 7 June

UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
United States of America
Head of state and government: Joseph Biden
The USA re-engaged with international
human rights institutions when it was
reviewed by the UN CERD Committee for
the first time since 2014. In its concluding
observations, the Committee commented
upon the lack of progress by the USA on

387

several issues, including the prevalence of
hate crimes, gun violence, excessive use of
force by law enforcement and violence
against women. Courts limited human rights
protections by striking down abortion rights
and gun regulations and preventing the
administration from ending exclusions of
asylum seekers at the US-Mexico border.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In June, the US Supreme Court ended
federal protections for abortion rights by
overturning Roe v. Wade, reversing nearly 50
years of jurisprudence. Many states
immediately moved to implement standing or
new laws to ban entirely or severely curtail
access to abortion. At least one state
subsequently arrested and prosecuted a
woman who aided a self-managed abortion.
Several state legislatures passed laws to
protect the right to abortion and increase
access to abortion. President Biden signed
executive orders in July and August that
further promote access to medical abortion
and support those travelling between states
to access abortion services, among other
mechanisms to promote reproductive rights.
In August, in the first popular vote on
abortion since the US Supreme Court
decision, Kansas voters overwhelmingly
rejected a state amendment to restrict
abortion. During the November elections,
voters in California, Michigan and Vermont
passed ballot initiatives providing abortion
protection, while voters in Kentucky and
Montana rejected further abortion
restrictions.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Indigenous women continued to experience
disproportionately high levels of rape and
sexual violence and lacked access to basic
post-rape care, while also experiencing high
rates of disappearances and killings. The
exact number of Indigenous women victims
of violence or who went missing remained
unknown as the US government did not
collect data or adequately coordinate with
tribal governments.

388

Congress passed, and President Biden
signed into law, the previously lapsed
Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), the
main funding mechanism for preventing and
responding to violence against women. VAWA
includes new provisions that restore limited
criminal jurisdiction in certain circumstances
over non-Native perpetrators of sexual
violence against Native women. Even though
96% of Indigenous survivors of sexual
violence have experienced sexual violence by
at least one non-Indigenous partner, current
US law continues to restrict local tribal
governments from prosecuting such cases,
effectively creating a system in which nonIndigenous perpetrators of sexual violence
are never tried.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The Biden administration directed
government agencies to protect LGBTI
families and children from attacks on their
healthcare, address impacts of state laws that
target LGBTI students and lead an initiative to
reduce the risk of exposure to so-called
“conversion therapy”. Additionally, the
Department of State announced that US
passport holders could apply to self-select
their gender without providing medical
documentation. Applicants may now choose
“X” as their gender marker. The Respect for
Marriage Act was enacted in December,
providing some federal protection for samesex marriages.
Individual states continued to introduce
anti-LGBTI bills at record levels. Notably,
Florida passed a bill prohibiting any
instruction or discussion of sexual orientation
or gender identity for students between
kindergarten and third grade, where students
are predominantly under 10 years old.
Additionally, states introduced dozens of bills
focused on restricting gender-affirming
healthcare access for trans youth. Arizona
passed a bill that prohibits gender-affirming
surgery before the age of 18. The Texas
Supreme Court allowed the state to
investigate gender-affirming care for trans
youth as child abuse.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
The Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP) and
Title 42 of the US Code continued to
drastically limit access to asylum at the USMexico border. The Biden administration
attempted to terminate both programmes,
but federal courts ordered them to continue
throughout 2022. These programmes
resulted in irreparable harm to tens of
thousands of asylum seekers by expelling
them to danger in Mexico or to their countries
of origin. Under Title 42, there was no access
to asylum or screenings for risk. Under the
MPP, asylum seekers were forced to navigate
the asylum system while remaining in
Mexico.
US authorities subjected Haitian asylum
seekers to arbitrary detention and
discriminatory and humiliating ill-treatment
that amounted to race- and migration-related
torture, rooted in systemic anti-Black
discrimination.1
The US administration designated
Temporary Protected Status for Cameroonian,
Ethiopian, South Sudanese, Sudanese and
Ukrainian nationals, providing protection
from removal from the USA. The US
administration implemented a pilot private
sponsorship programme, enabling
communities to directly resettle refugees
through the US Refugee Admissions
Program.
Congress failed to pass the Afghan
Adjustment Act, leaving Afghan evacuees in
a precarious situation, as they were admitted
under only a temporary status conferred by
humanitarian parole.
Authorities continued a system of arbitrary,
mass immigration detention, with funding to
detain 34,000 people daily in 2022. The
multi-billion dollar industry of using private
prisons to detain people seeking safety
continued, while the use of surveillancebased alternatives to detention, such as
electronic monitoring, were utilized on nearly
285,000 families and individuals.

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY
More than 75 protesters were arrested in
connection with protests following the death

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

in June of Jayland Walker, a Black man who
was fatally shot by police 46 times in Akron,
Ohio. Local community organizers and
activists organized protests and held events
demanding police accountability. Local
authorities issued a curfew in Downtown
Akron that remained in effect for two weeks
following Jayland Walker’s death.
Lawmakers in Congress and at least 11
states introduced at least 16 bills limiting
freedom of assembly, with two states
enacting such bills into law in 2022.
Proposed legal restrictions on freedom of
assembly included creating a new federal
offence for blocking an interstate highway
during a protest and, at state level,
introducing increased penalties for acts of
civil disobedience relating to infrastructure
projects such as pipelines, obstructing roads,
and defacing monuments or public property.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
At least 1,093 people were killed by police
using firearms in 2022. The limited public
data available suggested that Black people
were disproportionately impacted by police
use of lethal force.
The US Department of Justice failed to
accurately document the number of people
who died in custody, as required by the 2013
Death in Custody Reporting Act, announcing
that it had undercounted the number of
deaths in prisons, jails and during arrests by
990 people in fiscal year 2021.
The US Senate failed to introduce the
George Floyd Justice in Policing Act which
was passed by the House in 2021. The bill
would address a wide range of policies and
issues regarding policing practices and law
enforcement accountability, which were
demanded during widespread protests in
2020.
Following its review of the USA, the
CERD Committee expressed concern over the
use of excessive or deadly force by law
enforcement officials against racial and
ethnic minorities, and the continued impunity
for abuses by police officers.
It recommended a review of federal and state
laws regulating the use of lethal force to

389

ensure alignment with international law and
standards and to create or strengthen
independent oversight bodies to ensure
accountability.

DEATH PENALTY
While abolition bills were introduced in
multiple states and at the federal level during
the 2021-2022 legislative session, no bill was
passed in any of these jurisdictions. However,
the Governor of California signed the Racial
Justice for All Act which applies the 2020
Racial Justice Act retroactively. The 2020 law
allows for a person charged or convicted of a
crime to challenge racial bias in their case. It
could offer relief to some of the 682 people
on California’s death row in 2022.
In July, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal
Appeals set execution dates for 25 of the
state’s 43 people on death row, scheduling
nearly an execution a month from August
2022 through to December 2024. If carried
out, Oklahoma would execute 58% of those
on the state’s death row. Alabama and South
Carolina continued to attempt to restore
methods of executing people that would be
cruel under international standards, such as
gas chambers or firing squads, respectively.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Thirty-five Muslim men remained arbitrarily
and indefinitely detained in the detention
facility at the US naval base in Guantánamo
Bay, Cuba, in violation of international law.
The Biden administration made little progress
in closing the facility, despite its intention to
do so.
In 2022, nine detainees held in
Guantánamo Bay were approved for transfer
by the Periodic Review Board, bringing to 20
the number of detainees remaining at the
facility without charge after being cleared for
transfer, some for over a decade. Another
detainee who had pleaded guilty to the
charges against him and served his sentence
also remained detained. Three detainees
were transferred from the facility in 2022.
The remaining detainees did not have access
to adequate medical treatment, and survivors
of torture and other ill-treatment by US

390

agents were not given adequate rehabilitative
services.
Ten detainees continued to face charges in
the military commission system, in breach of
international law and standards relating to fair
trials, and could face the death penalty if
convicted. The use of capital punishment in
these cases, after proceedings that did not
meet international standards, would
constitute arbitrary deprivation of life.
The trials of those accused of crimes related
to the 11 September 2001 attacks remained
stalled, after repeated suspensions in recent
years. Military commission prosecutors
attempted to negotiate guilty plea agreements
with some of those charged.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
More than a decade after dozens of
detainees were held in a CIA-operated secret
detention system – authorized from 2001 to
2009 – no one had been brought to justice
for the crimes under international law and
systematic human rights violations committed
under that programme, including enforced
disappearance, torture and other illtreatment. The Senate Intelligence
Committee’s report on CIA torture remained
classified, years after the limited
investigations conducted into those crimes
were closed without charges being brought
against anyone.

RIGHT TO LIFE AND SECURITY OF THE
PERSON
Gun violence remained widespread
throughout the country and authorities
released figures showing that nearly 49,000
people were killed in 2021, based on early
official estimates, continuing a sharp increase
in firearm-related deaths during the Covid-19
pandemic. Gun violence became the leading
cause of death among children and
teenagers for the first time in the 40 years
that such data has been collected.
Increased unregulated gun acquisition and
possession combined with rising political
extremism, xenophobia and racism led to a
number of mass killings. In May, an 18-yearold targeted a Black neighbourhood grocery

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

store in Buffalo, New York, killing 10 people.
Weeks later, another 18-year-old killed 21
people at an elementary school in Uvalde,
Texas; 19 of the victims were children. In
July, a 21-year-old man opened fire on a
crowd celebrating Independence Day in
Highland Park, Illinois, killing seven people.
In June, the US Supreme Court issued an
opinion on its first case regarding gun rights
in over a decade. It ruled New York’s 100year-old law requiring a licence to carry
concealed weapons in public, as well as
similar laws in seven other large population
states, unconstitutional.
Congress passed the first law regulating
elements of firearm acquisition, possession
and use in nearly 30 years. The Bipartisan
Safer Communities Act includes provisions
for funding for state crisis intervention
protection orders and community-based gun
violence intervention programmes,
protections for victims of domestic violence
and an enhanced review process for gun
purchasers under 21 years old. It also
establishes straw purchasing (acquiring a
firearm on behalf of someone who cannot
legally do so or for someone who does not
want their name associated with the
purchase) and gun trafficking as federal
criminal offences. The law represented
progress but failed to enhance basic critical
firearm safeguards like universal background
checks on all gun purchases or bans on
assault weapons and large-capacity
magazines, among others.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
The US government continued to use lethal
force in countries around the world, including
with armed drones. The government
continued to withhold information regarding
the legal and policy standards and criteria
applied by US forces when using lethal force.
Authorities also failed to provide justice, truth
and reparation for past civilian killings.
The Biden administration commenced a
review of lethal force policies and, in
September, released a new Civilian Harm
Mitigation Response and Action Plan, which
set forth a plan for the Department of

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Defense to develop practices and procedures
to better protect civilians and improve
investigations of civilian harm in the future.
However, the details of the new policy
remained to be developed and it will not
apply to lethal strikes conducted by the CIA.
The USA did not address many past cases
of civilian harm and continued to deny welldocumented cases of civilian deaths, injuries
and other harm, despite strong evidence
presented by NGOs.
In order to improve US civilian protection
policies, in November in Dublin, Ireland, the
USA endorsed the international Declaration
on the Protection of Civilians from the Use of
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
In 2022, Congress only approved USD 1
billion for international climate finance, far
short of the country’s level of capacity and
responsibility as well as President Biden’s
2021 pledge to provide USD 11.4 billion a
year by 2024.
The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 was
enacted in August with a simultaneous focus
on green energy and the fossil fuel industry,
the first package of climate change legislation
in US history. While the law implemented the
pledge to meet the USA’s NDC goals in
reducing emissions by 2030, those goals fail
to meet requirements for keeping
temperature increases to 1.5 degrees and the
USA’s level of responsibility for the climate
crisis and capacity to tackle it. It also
reinstated old auctions of oil and gas leases
on federal land and the Gulf of Mexico that
the Biden administration had tried to cancel,
and forced the administration to hold several
new auctions, which began in September.
Non-stop rain in July caused flash flooding
throughout eastern Kentucky, a region where
strip mining and mountaintop removal mining
is prevalent, killing at least 44 people and
leaving thousands homeless. The country
experienced its most active wildfire season in
more than 10 years, predominantly in
western states, fuelled by extreme heat and
persistent drought caused by climate change.

391

In September, Hurricane Ian caused
immense damage in south-west Florida, a
flood-prone region which was developed
through the removal of mangroves and the
filling of swamps, leaving at least 144 people
dead in Florida alone.

RIGHT TO WATER AND SANITATION
In August, Jackson, Mississippi, a
predominantly Black city, experienced
flooding that damaged the city’s water
treatment facility, leaving nearly 150,000
residents without drinkable water or adequate
water for sanitation. Historically, the city had
not received sufficient funding from the state
to address its decades-long issues with
delivering clean water to its residents.
1. USA: “They Did Not Treat Us Like People”: Race and MigrationRelated Torture and Other Ill-Treatment of Haitians Seeking Safety in
the USA, 22 September

URUGUAY
Eastern Republic of Uruguay
Head of state and government: Luis Alberto Lacalle
Pou
The social and economic consequences of
the Covid-19 pandemic continued to impact
groups in vulnerable situations. There were
several attacks on journalists and the
media, threatening freedom of expression.
Record rates of imprisonment resulted in
inhumane prison conditions. Deaths in
prison remained a concern. Violence against
women and girls continued to escalate, with
a rise in the number of reported femicides
and child killings. Although some military
personnel were prosecuted for ordinary
offences amounting to crimes against
humanity committed during the civilmilitary regime (1973-1985), no
substantive progress was made in clarifying
the fate of those forcibly disappeared under
that regime.

392

BACKGROUND
Socio-economic inequalities deepened as a
consequence of the Covid-19 pandemic.
According to the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization, 7.3% of the population was
severely food insecure. In October, the
University of the Republic Faculty of Social
Sciences presented a report indicating that,
although the number of food banks
decreased compared to 2021, the monthly
food portions served remained the same, with
little variation.
Following the indictment of the president's
security chief for passport forgery, alleged
acts of espionage against two opposition
senators, illegal surveillance of civilians, as
well as alleged acts of police corruption,
came to light, indicating worrying signs of an
institutional crisis.
The election of a new National Human
Rights Institution (NHRI) board in August did
not follow the required legal procedures and
was marred by interference from political
parties. According to local organizations and
OHCHR, the UN’s human rights office, this
weakened the NHRI. Some prosecutors
publicly criticized interference and
investigations by the Executive Branch in the
Public Prosecutor’s Office.
Uruguay’s review by the UN Committees on
Torture, Human Rights and Enforced
Disappearances found a weakening of the
National Mechanism for Reporting and
Follow up and a lack of dialogue with civil
society.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Uruguay fell 26 places in Reporters Without
Borders’ ranking on freedom of expression,
dropping from 18th to 44th on its list of
countries.
A report issued in 2022 stated that 51 cases
of threats to journalists were reported during
2021 and at least two journalists and media
outlets faced legal actions for the content of
their research. Public officials, ministers and
senators continued to use stigmatizing
language in relation to journalists and media.
In July, the UN Human Rights Committee
expressed its concern about the increase in

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

criminal prosecutions, threats and restrictions
on freedom of expression.
In September, the Police Union requested
that the Ministry of the Interior carry out an
urgent investigation as they had received
information that many police officers had had
their mobile phones tapped. In December,
journalists from the newspaper El Observador
had to disseminate information of high public
interest through channels outside the
institution where they worked, affecting their
right to freedom of press. The information
that came to light related to the possible
irresponsible and dangerous use of the state
security system for illegal surveillance and
espionage.
The National Administration of Public
Education banned students from
demonstrating inside secondary schools in
Montevideo to demand better school funding.
Authorities threatened to use the police to
evict protesting students.
ACCESS TO PUBLIC INFORMATION
According to a number of NGOs, several
public information requests received no or
unsatisfactory responses. A bill to amend Law
No. 18.381 on access to public information
remained before parliament at the end of the
year. If approved, this would create further
obstacles to transparency.
In September, the president's security chief
was charged with forging documents. During
the arraignment the judge did not allow the
press to be admitted and declared it a closed
hearing, in breach of Code of Criminal
Procedure provisions on public hearings.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Already harsh prison conditions deteriorated
during the year. The penitentiary system
experienced severe overcrowding with the
number of inmates reaching 120% of
intended capacity. According to the
Parliamentary Commissioner for the
Penitentiary System, the prison population
increased steadily, reaching 14,497 by the
end of the year. During the year, 42 inmates
died in custody.
In 2022 Uruguay had the highest rate of
incarceration per capita in South America

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

(411 per 100,000 inhabitants), according to
the Office of the Parliamentary
Commissioner. In the context of intense
overcrowding and insanitary conditions, 13
people died in prison from non-violent causes
during the year. The number of women
deprived of their liberty continued to
increase, reaching 1,034.

IMPUNITY
Fourteen current or retired members of the
military and police were convicted of torture,
kidnappings and killings under the civilmilitary regime in the 1970s and 1980s.
Authorities made no substantive progress in
the search for victims of enforced
disappearances during that time as no new
evidence was found at the excavation sites
and those suspected of criminal responsibility
did not provide any new information.
Legislators presented a bill proposing that
detainees over 65 be placed under house
arrest. If approved, this could benefit as
many as 200 people, including more than 20
people serving prison sentences for crimes
against humanity. There were concerns that
the bill would act as a pardon for those
convicted of crimes under international law
during the military regime.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
According to the Ministry of Health, in the
first half of 2022 there was a 25% increase in
the suicide rate compared to the same period
in 2021. Five years after the mental health
law (No. 19.529) was passed, the law had yet
to be properly implemented, negatively
impacting access to mental health services.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
According to the Observatory on GenderBased Violence and Access to Justice, the
number of femicides increased in 2022; 24
femicides were recorded and at least eight
children were killed in incidents related to
gender-based violence, most of them
femicides. There were also obstacles to the
implementation of the law on gender-based
violence (Law No. 19.580) because of the
failure to allocate the resources needed to

393

establish multipurpose courts able to deal
with all matters related to gender-based
violence.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Public policy regarding pregnancy among
children under 15 did not make significant
progress. According to the State Health
Services Administration, 108 girls and
adolescents under 15 were pregnant in
2021, of whom 50 gave birth and 58 had
abortions. Violence and sexual abuse were
factors in most of these pregnancies.
Comprehensive sexuality education
programmes were not implemented on a
mandatory basis and there was no plan to
change the curriculums in primary or
secondary public, private, religious or secular
schools.

UZBEKISTAN
Republic of Uzbekistan
Head of state: Shavkat Mirziyoyev
Head of government: Abdulla Aripov
Security forces used unlawful force to
suppress predominantly peaceful protests in
the Republic of Karakalpakstan and 22
alleged organizers of the protests faced an
unfair trial on politically motivated charges.
Legislative reforms encouraged greater
participation by civil society in public policy
discussions, although the rights to freedom
of expression, association and peaceful
assembly remained tightly controlled.
Discriminatory gender stereotypes impeded
access to protection against violence and
justice for women, girls and LGBTI people.
Consensual sexual relations between men
remained criminalized.

BACKGROUND
Constitutional amendments proposed in June
included one which would strip
Karakalpakstan of its autonomy within
Uzbekistan. This provoked unprecedented
mass public protests throughout
Karakalpakstan, culminating in tens of

394

thousands of people peacefully gathering in
the centre of the region’s capital, Nukus, on 1
July. At least 21 people were killed, including
four law enforcement officers, and hundreds
injured when security forces dispersed the
protesters. The amendment was
subsequently withdrawn. The trial of 22
alleged organizers of the protests on
politically motivated charges began in the city
of Bukhara, outside Karakalpakstan, on 28
November.

EXCESSIVE USE OF FORCE
Research published by Human Rights Watch
in November supported claims by activists
and human rights defenders that security
forces had used excessive force and
“unjustifiably lethal force” to disperse
overwhelmingly peaceful protesters in Nukus
and other localities in Karakalpakstan. Their
evidence pointed to “the use of small arms
and various types of grenades, weapons that
can cause severe injuries and death when
used recklessly”. Video footage verified by
independent experts showed protesters with
severe injuries, such as skin lacerations and
gaping flesh wounds, consistent with trauma
caused by explosives including grenades.
Hundreds of protesters were also arbitrarily
detained and scores were held
incommunicado and faced torture and other
ill-treatment.
Following an information request by a
parliamentary committee of investigation
established in July, the Prosecutor General
confirmed in December that a separate
investigation had been opened into the
reports of excessive use of force.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Legislative reforms provided for enhanced
public consultations on legislative, political
and social reform and greater engagement
between government and civil society
organizations. Restrictions on the right to
freedom of expression remained, however,
with a draft Information Code proposing to
regulate information which is “insulting” or
“disrespecting society and the state”. Critical
voices, typically bloggers, continued to face

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

prosecution, fines and imprisonment. Media
outlets continued to exercise self-censorship.
In the wake of the mass protests in
Karakalpakstan, the authorities effectively
controlled access to information and targeted
Karakalpak bloggers and journalists who had
criticized the constitutional amendments on
their media platforms or participated in the
protests.
Lolagul Kallykhanova, an independent
Karakalpak journalist, was detained in the
capital, Tashkent, in July and held
incommunicado until the start of the group
trial of the alleged protest organizers in
Bukhara in November. Supporters claimed
that she had been tortured to confess to a
charge of planning the violent overthrow of
the constitutional order.
The authorities accused Dauletmurat
Tazhimuratov, a lawyer and former
newspaper editor, of being the leader of a
Karakalpak “separatist group” and of having
organized the protests in collusion with
foreign based “agents” in order to seize
power. Video footage recorded in Nukus on 1
July showed him urging the crowds not to
resort to violence. He was detained on 2 July
and held incommunicado in pretrial
detention in the north-western region of
Khorezm. He told the court that he had been
tortured in detention.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
In November a coalition of NGOs and civil
society activists called on the government to
repeal a decree forcing NGOs to have
government appointed “national partners” to
coordinate projects and implement foreign
grants. NGOs expressed concern that the
decree, introduced in June without prior
public consultation, imposed additional and
excessive bureaucratic requirements to the
already burdensome foreign grant approval
process.

DISCRIMINATION
Gender stereotypes and an emphasis on
discriminatory traditional family values and
cultural norms continued to significantly

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

hinder progress in the realization of the rights
of women, girls and LGBTI people.
In August, the Ministry of Internal Affairs
proposed a new law that would give police
the authority to conduct mandatory testing,
for sexually transmitted infections, of sex
workers, men who have sex with men and
people who use drugs, all of whom were
labelled “dangerous groups of people”.
On 11 November, a court in Tashkent
imposed five days’ administrative detention
on blogger Sevinch Sadullayeva after she
posted videos and photos that allegedly
showed her flouting social and cultural norms
of behaviour and dress for women. She was
released a day early after promising to delete
all the material.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
The authorities admitted that violence against
women, including domestic violence,
remained pervasive, but insisted that
improving women’s access to justice and
protection services were policy priorities.
A presidential decree on accelerating
“systemic support of family and women”,
which purported to provide for the
“protection of rights and legitimate interests
of women”, instead prioritized family
mediation and reconciliation over prosecution
in cases of gender-based violence. This was
despite a recommendation to the contrary by
the CEDAW Committee in March.1
In March the UN Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR)
recommended that the authorities accelerate
adoption of the draft Bill on Domestic
Violence, but no progress had been made by
December.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs reported that,
as of October, it had issued protection orders
to 32,783 women and girls subjected to
violence. Women’s rights activists noted that
this represented a fraction of the actual
number of incidents as shame and the fear of
retaliation stopped many women from
reporting abuse.

395

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
Some 30 men remained imprisoned for
consensual sexual relations between men.
The CESCR urged the authorities to
decriminalize such relations and remained
deeply concerned at “the prevalence of
intimidation, harassment, violence and
stigma against LGBTI people”. In December
the authorities proposed a ban on the
promotion of “unnatural same-sex relations”.

FAILURE TO TACKLE CLIMATE CRISIS
The dramatic shrinking of the Aral Sea
continued to have severe environmental,
social, economic and health consequences
for millions of people. The authorities sought
to mitigate the effects of climate change by
large scale environmental projects, but
conditioned climate action on economic
growth. In March the CESCR noted that
Uzbekistan had taken “insufficient adaptation
measures... to address the impact of climate
change on the population.” Activists
remained concerned at a lack of meaningful
consultation with stakeholders most impacted
by climate change.
1. Violence Against Women in Eastern Europe and Central Asia: Protect
Women from Violence During Crisis and Beyond, 14 December

VENEZUELA
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Head of state and government: Nicolás Maduro Moros
Lack of access to economic and social
rights remained a serious concern, with the
majority of the population experiencing
severe food insecurity and unable to access
adequate healthcare. The security forces
responded with excessive force and other
repressive measures to protests, involving
various sectors of the population, to
demand economic and social rights,
including the right to water. Impunity for
ongoing extrajudicial executions by the
security forces persisted. Intelligence
services and other security forces, with the
acquiescence of the judicial system,

396

continued to arbitrarily detain, torture and
otherwise ill-treat those perceived to be
opponents of the government of Nicolás
Maduro. A report by the UN Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) on Venezuela exposed
patterns of crimes against humanity and
called for investigations into several named
government officials. Prison conditions
remained a major concern, especially
regarding overcrowding and the use of
illegal detention centres, as well as access
to basic rights such as water and food.
Despite the adoption of legal reforms
regarding the administration of justice,
access to the right to truth and reparations
for victims of human rights violations
remained a challenge. Between 240 and
310 people remained arbitrarily detained on
political grounds. The state’s repressive
policies targeted journalists, independent
media and human rights defenders. Illegal
mining and violence threatened Indigenous
peoples’ rights in the Orinoco Mining Arc.
Abortion was still criminalized in almost all
circumstances. Violence against women
persisted, despite the existing legal
framework. There was no progress in
ensuring the rights of LGBTI people. By the
end of the year more than 7.1 million
Venezuelans had fled the country.

BACKGROUND
Judicial reform implemented in 2021 and
2022 did not result in improvements in the
administration of justice.
Hyperinflation and the alarming lack of
purchasing power to buy essential goods
resulted in most of the population,
particularly those living outside the capital,
Caracas, experiencing a profound
humanitarian crisis.
Authorities continued to impose arbitrary
inspections and administrative sanctions on
business and commerce in an attempt to
control the private sector.
Negotiations between the government and
opposition regarding future elections
continued but failed to reach agreement
during the year.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Venezuela resumed diplomatic relations
with Colombia and the two countries
announced a progressive opening of the
Venezuela-Colombia border.
The mandate of the UN Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) was renewed for a period of
two years and the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICC requested the Court’s authorization to
resume the investigation into crimes against
humanity in Venezuela.

REPRESSION OF DISSENT
The policy of repression continued. Political
opponents, real and perceived, were
constantly under attack and at risk of
arbitrary detention, torture and other human
rights violations. Several thousand people
continued to be subject to restrictions on
their freedom because of current or past
politically motivated judicial procedures.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSEMBLY
The number of mass demonstrations
demanding civil and political rights fell
compared to previous years. In response, the
authorities adopted more targeted, but
nevertheless systematic, repressive tactics.
These included using the judicial system to
silence dissent and criminalize human rights
defenders.
According to the Venezuelan Observatory on
Social Conflict, there were 7,032 protests, of
which 77% were demanding economic and
social rights. Authorities often responded to
these demonstrations with excessive force
and arbitrary detentions. For example, six
activists were arbitrarily detained in Caracas
in June at a vigil in memory of Neomar
Lander, a teenager killed during a protest in
2017.
As of August, the local organization Public
Space had registered 228 attacks on freedom
of expression in the form of censorship,
verbal attacks and intimidation targeting
journalists. By December, the National
Telecommunications Commission had closed
down 78 radio stations; police and military
officers were involved in implementing the
closures.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

The telecommunications company
Telefónica admitted having received and
complied with government requests to block
access to several websites and to tap phone
lines without judicial warrants.
According to Public Space, the Director of
the community radio station Frontera 92.5
FM, José Urbina, was killed, allegedly by
armed groups, in the state of Apure, which
borders Colombia. He had reported receiving
death threats following his work highlighting
alleged human rights violations by the
Bolivarian National Guard in the area.

EXTRAJUDICIAL EXECUTIONS
In September, the FFM issued a report
expressing concern at continuing
extrajudicial executions, consistent with
previously documented patterns, in the
context of security operations in low-income,
urban neighbourhoods.
According to the human rights organization
COFAVIC, as of September, security forces
had carried out 488 alleged extrajudicial
executions in various parts of the country.
Those responsible remained unpunished.
The OHCHR, the UN’s human rights office,
reported in June that authorities had
dissolved the Bolivarian National Police’s
Special Actions Forces (FAES); the FAES had
been implicated in several hundred alleged
extrajudicial executions. However, the
government did not make any public
statement on this and civil society
organizations continued to report that FAES
officials remained operational.

ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCES,
ARBITRARY DETENTIONS AND TORTURE
Arbitrary detentions remained widespread
and those held were often subjected to
torture or other ill-treatment. Authorities also
carried out short-term enforced
disappearances as part of this pattern of
violations.
Several local NGOs reported that, as of
November, between 240 and 310 people
were in arbitrary detention for political
reasons.

397

At the beginning of July, in a period of 72
hours, Néstor Astudillo, Reynaldo Cortés,
Alcides Bracho, Alonso Meléndez and Emilio
Negrín, all activists of the Bandera Roja, an
opposition party linked to the trade union
movement, and Gabriel Blanco, a grassroots
activist, were arbitrarily detained and
subjected to grave violations of their right to
due process. No judicial warrants were
issued for their arrests, a pattern consistent
with such violations documented by the FFM.
Also in July, Bolivarian National Intelligence
Service (SEBIN) officers arbitrarily detained
Ángel Castillo, a member of the Venezuelan
Communist Party, which is not aligned with
government policies, while he was
participating in a protest in support of labour
rights. He was released later the same day.
According to the human rights NGO Foro
Penal, by July authorities had carried out 23
arbitrary detentions.
In August, Emirlendris Benítez, arbitrarily
detained for political reasons since 2018 and
suffering from several health conditions, was
sentenced to 30 years in prison. The
judgment was not made public, preventing
her lawyer from lodging an appeal. The UN
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had
called for her immediate release.
In September, the FFM reported that the
structures of the General Directorate for
Military Counterintelligence (DGCIM) and
SEBIN remained in place and that previously
documented patterns of violations, including
torture and other ill-treatment, by these
agencies persisted. It also identified a group
of individuals in these intelligence agencies
that carried out arbitrary detentions, torture
and other ill-treatment and a chain of
command linking them directly to Nicolás
Maduro, and called for them to be
investigated for crimes against humanity.

INHUMANE DETENTION CONDITIONS
Conditions in detention centres continued to
deteriorate. Detention centres were
overcrowded and did not provide adequate
food or water, leaving detainees reliant on
relatives to obtain the basic essentials for
survival.

398

Prolonged detention in police stations and
other illegal detention centres remained a
concern.
Women’s detention conditions were a
particular concern due to the lack of facilities
and conditions with a gender perspective.

IMPUNITY
Human rights violations went unpunished.
Reports by the FFM highlighted the
manipulation of the judicial system to shield
police and military officers responsible for
violations from justice.
Venezuela requested that the ICC Office of
the Prosecutor defer its investigation on
grounds that the Venezuelan authorities were
already investigating domestically human
rights violations and crimes under
international law. However, the Office of the
Prosecutor submitted a request to resume its
investigation on the grounds that Venezuela
had not provided any additional information
on how internal procedures in the country
satisfied the standards of the Rome Statute of
the ICC and questioning the genuineness of
the procedures it had been notified of by
Venezuela. A decision by the ICC’s Pre-trial
Chamber on whether or not the investigation
should continue was pending at the end of
the year, although it called victims to submit
their views into Venezuela's allegations of
investigative measures by March.

UNFAIR TRIALS
The FFM reiterated its concern about the use
of the justice system to facilitate human
rights violations, such as arbitrary detention,
and crimes under international law, such as
persecution.
The Prosecutor’s Office informally accused
a number of people through social media,
compromising their human rights, such as
the right to a fair trial and the presumption of
innocence. Among those accused were
children and adolescents.

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
At the end of the year, UN special
rapporteurs and treaty bodies were still
waiting for official invitations to visit the
country.
The FFM’s mandate was renewed, although
Venezuelan authorities had not granted the
FFM access to the country by the end of the
year.
Despite the judicial reform announced in
2021, the main problems around access to
justice remained. These included lack of
judicial independence, the political use of
judicial procedures against those perceived
to be opponents of the government, and
obstacles hindering victims’ access to justice
such as denying people access to case files,
arbitrarily denying people the right to
designate their own legal representatives and
unjustified delays.

INDIGENOUS PEOPLES’ RIGHTS
Illegal mining in the Orinoco Mining Arc area
seriously affected human rights in Bolívar
State, in particular impacting Indigenous
peoples’ rights to self-determination and a
healthy environment. In its report, published
in September, the FFM documented grave
human rights violations and abuses in the
Mining Arc, indicating the collusion of some
state authorities with criminal groups
operating, and at times exerting control, in
mining areas and the failure to investigate
and punish those responsible.
In March, in the locality of Parima B on the
southern border of Amazonas State, an
incident involving members of the military
and Yanomami Indigenous people resulted in
the deaths of four Indigenous people and the
wounding of two members of the military and
at least two Indigenous people who were
believed to be witnesses to the killings, who
were then taken to an unidentified place.
Although later the witnesses appeared and
were given medical treatment, there were
concerns over how authorities transferred
them to Caracas without legal
accompaniment and the lack of measures to

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

avoid revictimization and ensure cultural
appropriateness.1
In June, Virgilio Trujillo, an Indigenous
leader and defender of the territory, land and
environment, was shot dead in the city of
Puerto Ayacucho, the Amazonas State
capital. No progress was known to have been
made in the investigation into his death
during the year.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Crackdowns on civil society increased and
intensified. According to the Centre for the
Defenders and Justice, there were 396
attacks on human rights defenders, including
intimidation, stigmatization and threats.
Javier Tarazona, a prisoner of conscience
and human rights defender from the
organization Fundaredes, remained arbitrarily
detained and faced terrorism-related
charges.
Human rights defenders Marino Alvarado
and Alfredo Infante received notification of a
defamation lawsuit filed against them by the
Governor of Carabobo State, Rafael Lacava.
The lawsuit was in response to a report
published in March by the NGOs PROVEA
and Centro Gumilla, of which the two men
are members, respectively, exposing possible
extrajudicial executions in Carabobo State
and calling for full accountability.2

REFUGEES’ AND MIGRANTS’ RIGHTS
By the end of the year, more than 7.1 million
people had left the country. Venezuelan
refugee women faced heightened barriers to
accessing international protection in host
countries, including Colombia, Ecuador, Peru
and Trinidad and Tobago.3 This lack of
protection exposed them to a high risk of
multiple forms of gender-based violence,
including sexual violence and human
trafficking for sexual and labour exploitation.

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
Lack of access to food, water and healthcare
remained a serious concern.

399

RIGHT TO HEALTH
Access to medical treatment and health
services for those with chronic diseases
remained a critical challenge. Solidarity
Action, a local organization providing
humanitarian aid, reported that 33% of
people aged over 60 with a chronic condition
were not receiving any treatment.
During the year, several organizations
defending children’s rights highlighted the
deaths of children in the J.M. de Los Ríos
Hospital due to the suspension of the organ
transplant programme, despite the
precautionary measures granted by the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights
concerning patients at this healthcare centre.
RIGHT TO FOOD
According to the Centre for Documentation
and Analysis for Workers, by November, the
cost of the basic monthly basket of food was
equivalent to about USD 386, while the
monthly minimum wage, set in March, was
just USD 13, leaving the majority of the
population facing food insecurity. In
December, the situation was further
exacerbated by a drastic devaluation of the
national currency.
According to the World Bank, by August,
Venezuela had the third highest inflation rate
for food prices in the world.
RIGHT TO WATER
Negligence and lack of maintenance
continued to reduce access to water for the
population, despite official announcements
that promised 95% coverage throughout the
country by the end of the year. This situation
resulted in repeated and widespread
community protests regarding access to
water and sanitation.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
The impact of the ongoing humanitarian
emergency on sexual and reproductive health
services contributed to obstacles to access to
sexual and reproductive rights.
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights also reported that the lack of access to
sexual and reproductive services, such as
reproductive planning, was impacting
maternal mortality rates.

400

In September, a civil society initiative called
Ruta Verde marched to the National
Assembly to present a document demanding
the decriminalization of abortion, which is
permitted only when there is a risk to life and
for which medical protocols had yet to be
established. By the end of the year there had
not been any significant progress on the
issue.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
LGBTI people continued to face
discrimination. Several organizations called
on the authorities to include the right to nondiscrimination for LGBTI people in the legal
framework. At the end of the year, they were
still waiting for any progress to be made
regarding LGBTI rights.
A 2021 appeal to annul Article 565 of the
Organic Law of Military Justice, which
criminalizes intimate same-sex relationships
between adults in the military, was still
pending at the end of 2022.

VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND GIRLS
Early in the year, the National Assembly
approved an amendment to the Organic Law
on Women’s Right to Live Free of Violence.
Civil society organizations and the feminist
movement criticized this amendment on the
grounds that it fails to meet the state’s
obligation to prevent and punish violence
against women because public policies do
not include a gender perspective and state
officials are not trained to provide first-line
assistance to women survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence.
According to the local human rights
organization CEPAZ, 199 alleged femicides
were reported between January and
September. The authorities failed to gather
and publish official data on femicides,
hindering the implementation of informed
efforts to prevent these crimes.
1. “Venezuela: Whereabouts and wellbeing of Indigenous Yanomani
people must be clarified urgently and ensured”, 6 April (Spanish
only)
2. “Venezuela: Further Information: Lawsuit against defenders reaches
settlement”, 24 June

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

3. Americas: Unprotected: Gender-based Violence against Venezuelan
Refugee Women in Colombia and Peru, 12 July

VIET NAM
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
Head of state: Nguyễn Xuân Phúc
Head of government: Phạm Minh Chính
A crackdown on both online and offline
dissent raised concerns about a new wave
of repression against civil society.
Independent journalists, activists, religious
practitioners and other government critics
were arrested and charged under repressive
laws. Human rights defenders were
subjected to widespread harassment, digital
surveillance, arbitrary arrest and politically
motivated prosecution. Torture and other illtreatment continued to be reported at an
alarming rate.

BACKGROUND
The sixth meeting of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Viet Nam (CPV) in
October further cemented General Secretary
Nguyễn Phú Trọng’s grip on power, signalling
continued control and repression of civic
space. Viet Nam was elected to the UN
Human Rights Council despite a requirement
that elected members uphold the highest
human rights standards. The government
made several pledges on human rights but,
after declaring Viet Nam’s candidacy for the
Council, it detained, arrested or sentenced at
least 48 journalists, activists and NGO
leaders. Viet Nam updated its NDC to
tackling climate change in October with
higher emissions reduction targets but
arrested several leading climate observers
and activists, putting into question its
commitment to addressing the climate crisis.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Intolerance of dissent continued throughout
2022 with the right to freedom of expression
continually restricted. Articles 117 and 331 of
the 2015 Criminal Code continued to be used
to arbitrarily detain and prosecute human

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

rights defenders, journalists, religious
practitioners and others who criticized the
government or the CPV.1 Fears of further
imminent crackdowns were raised in August
with the publication of Decree 53 which,
among other provisions, ordered tech
companies to store users’ data and,
potentially, share it with investigating
authorities. It created a cyber security
taskforce to help ensure implementation of
these and other repressive measures enacted
in the 2019 Law on Cybersecurity.
Six practitioners of the Tịnh Thất Bồng Lai
temple were arrested under Article 331 of the
Criminal Code and charged with “abusing
democratic freedoms” for posting videos
deemed to have “published false
information” and “defamed the dignity” of
local police and a monk from a governmentcontrolled Buddhist Sangha. On 21 July, the
six received prison sentences ranging from
three to five years.
Husband and wife, Nguyễn Thái Hưng and
Vũ Thị Kim Hoàn, were also arrested under
Article 331 after criticizing the government on
a livestream video. They were sentenced in
November to four years’ and two and a half
years’ imprisonment respectively.
In July, prominent activist and independent
journalist Nguyễn Lân Thắng was arrested
under the vaguely defined Article 117 offence
of “making, storing or spreading” information
“against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam”.
Three more activists – Bùi Tuấn Lâm, Đặng
Đăng Phước and Phan Sơn Tùng – were
arrested in September on the same charge.
Facing up to 20 years’ imprisonment if
convicted, all four remained in pretrial
detention at year’s end.
In August, three people were each fined
VND 7.5 million (approximately USD 300) for
comments posted on Facebook – one for
commenting about police activities, the other
two for “sharing fake, untrue, slanderous,
information that offends the reputation of
agencies and organizations, honour and
personal dignity”. A total of 35 fines for
Facebook posts were reported by state media
over the course of the year.

401

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Prolonged sentences were used as a tactic to
silence the country’s most prominent
activists. An appeals court upheld journalist
Phạm Đoan Trang’s nine-year prison
sentence,2 as well as the sentences of four
land rights activists ranging from six to 10
years’ imprisonment and three to five years’
probation. The activists had spoken out about
a high-profile land dispute in Dong Tam
village near the capital, Hanoi, in which a
clash during a police raid in January 2020
resulted in the deaths of an 84-year-old
village leader and three police officers.
Two other activists – human rights defender
Đỗ Nam Trung and journalist Lê Văn Dũng –
convicted under Article 117 for reporting and
sharing information about human rights
abuses and corruption on social media, lost
appeals against their prison sentences of 10
and five years respectively and probation
periods of four and five years.
In April 2022, Nguyễn Thuý Hạnh, a
prominent human rights defender who
founded the 50K Fund to support families of
unlawfully detained people in Viet Nam, was
transferred from prison to a mental health
hospital for forced treatment a year after her
arrest under Article 117, while still awaiting
notice of a date for her trial.

FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
The arrest of the leaders of three key
environmental NGOs demonstrated active
undermining by the authorities of the right to
freedom of association.3 Legislation also
signalled the government’s intention to
further restrict or close down the activities of
NGOs.
On 31 August, the authorities introduced
Decree 58 to regulate foreign NGOs.
Regulations on the organization, operation
and management of domestic NGOs were
also drafted. Both sets of regulations would
allow for the termination of NGOs on vague
grounds, such as the protection of “national
interest” and “social order”, providing the
authorities with almost indefinite scope to
silence their critics and those engaging in
non-approved activities. Another decree was

402

drafted to prohibit “undermining” of the state
by local NGOs.

TORTURE AND OTHER ILL-TREATMENT
Reports of torture and other ill-treatment of
prisoners and detainees remained
widespread.
In September, land rights activist Trịnh Bá
Tư reported being beaten, placed in solitary
confinement and shackled for days while
serving part of an eight-year sentence for
spreading “propaganda against the state”.4
Despite calls by NGOs, no independent
investigation took place. Tư’s family visited
him in No 6 prison and reported that he was
recovering after having been on a hunger
strike for 22 days. Journalist Huỳnh Thục Vy
also reported being beaten and choked in
detention while serving a two years and nine
months’ sentence under Article 276 of the
Criminal Code for defacing a national flag.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
On 9 August, days after the death in
detention of journalist Đỗ Công Đương, who
was reportedly healthy before his conviction
for “disturbing public order”, family members
of 24 prisoners wrote an open letter to the
authorities raising concerns over prisoner
treatment. Despite recurring requests from
his family, Đương was denied timely access
to healthcare while in prison. His cause of
death remained unknown.
Nguyễn Tường Thuỵ, a 72-year-old
journalist sentenced in 2020 to 11 years’
imprisonment for “conducting propaganda
against the state”, was refused medical
treatment by prison authorities despite being
reportedly in poor health. Similarly, Lê Hữu
Minh Tuấn , a member of the Association of
Independent Journalists convicted of the
same charge, was reported to be in poor
health. His sister, who had been unable to
visit him in prison for more than two years
due to Covid-19 restrictions, reported in May
that Tuan had suffered hearing loss and was
malnourished. Activist Trần Văn Bang, who
had been detained under Article 117 since
March, awaiting trial, was denied healthcare

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

despite fears that he had developed a large
tumour.
1. Viet Nam: UN Human Rights Council candidacy demands progress on
human rights, 10 October
2. “Viet Nam: Immediately release journalist and human rights defender
Pham Doan Trang”, 24 August
3. Vietnam: Joint Letter to call on the Vietnamese government to release
the four environmental human rights defenders, 20 October
4. “Viet Nam: Imprisoned activist ‘beaten and shackled’”, 23 September

YEMEN
Republic of Yemen
Head of state: Rashad Mohammed al-Alimi (replaced
Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi in April)
Head of government: Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed
All parties to the long-standing conflict in
Yemen continued to commit violations of
international humanitarian and human
rights law with impunity. Despite a ceasefire
agreement, parties to the conflict continued
to carry out unlawful attacks that killed and
injured civilians, interfered with their
access to humanitarian aid and destroyed
civilian objects. The internationally
recognized government of Yemen and the
Huthi de facto authorities continued to
harass, arbitrarily detain, and prosecute
journalists and activists for peacefully
exercising their right to freedom of
expression or because of their political
affiliation. All parties perpetrated genderbased violence and discrimination. The
Huthi de facto authorities banned women
from travelling without a male guardian,
increasingly hindering Yemeni women from
working and giving or receiving
humanitarian aid. All parties continued to
target LGBTI people with arbitrary arrest;
torture, including rape and other forms of
sexual violence; threats; and harassment.
All parties to the conflict contributed to
environmental degradation.

BACKGROUND
On 2 April, parties to the conflict agreed to a
UN proposal for a two-month nationwide

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ceasefire, which was subsequently renewed
every two months until 2 October. The parties
agreed to halt offensive military operations
inside Yemen and across its borders, and
facilitated fuel shipments to enter Hodeidah
port and commercial flights to operate in and
out of the international airport in the capital,
Sana’a, to predetermined destinations.
However, during the ceasefire and after it
came to an end, parties to the conflict
sporadically carried out attacks on civilian
areas and frontlines in Ma’rib, Hodeidah,
Ta’iz and Dhale’ governorates.
On 7 April, President Abd Rabbu Mansour
Hadi ceded power to a new eight-member
presidential leadership council led by the
former interior minister, Rashad al-Alimi. The
council included representatives of a range of
key military and political figures opposing the
Huthi de facto authorities.
Yemenis’ access to food remained highly
restricted. This was aggravated by the
depreciation of the Yemeni riyal, high inflation
rates and soaring global food prices.
According to the World Food Programme,
food insecurity reached critically high levels
in 20 out of the 22 governorates.

UNLAWFUL ATTACKS AND KILLINGS
Before April, the Saudi Arabia-led coalition
and Huthi forces conducted indiscriminate
attacks that killed and injured civilians and
destroyed and damaged civilian objects,
including health and education facilities and
telecommunication infrastructure.
On 20 January, the Saudi-led coalition
launched air strikes on Hodeidah city, killing
at least three children, and destroyed a
telecommunication building causing a
nationwide internet blackout for four days. On
21 January, the Saudi-led coalition fired a
US-made precision-guided munition at a
detention centre in Sa’adah, north-western
Yemen, which killed at least 80 civilians and
injured over 200.1
On 4 May, four mortar shells were dropped
from a drone on the Ta’iz governorate police
administration building and the adjacent
street in al-Ardhi neighbourhood, Sala
district. The neighbourhood includes a

403

cancer centre, a playground, the College of
Arts and two football fields. The attack
injured six civilians.
On 23 July, an artillery shell killed a threeyear-old boy and injured 11 children in Zaid
al-Moshki residential neighbourhood, Ta’iz
governorate. The Huthis denied responsibility
for the attack.
On 21 October and 9 November, the Huthis
conducted two drone attacks on Al Dhabah
oil terminal port in Hadramout governorate
and Qana oil port in Shabwa governorate,
respectively, to disrupt oil exports.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
Parties to the conflict continued to harass,
threaten, arbitrarily detain and prosecute
individuals for peacefully exercising their right
to freedom of expression.
HUTHI DE FACTO AUTHORITIES
In January, the Huthi de facto authorities
raided at least six radio stations in Sana’a and
shut them down. The owner of Sawt alYemen radio station appealed against the
closure before the Journalism and Publishing
Court in Sana’a and obtained a court order in
July in favour of reopening the station. On 11
July, however, security forces raided and shut
down the station again and confiscated its
broadcasting devices.
The Huthi de facto authorities continued to
imprison at least eight journalists, four of
them on death row, following a grossly unfair
trial in 2020. From May onwards, the appeal
court in Sana’a repeatedly adjourned the
appeal hearing of the four journalists on
death row, Akram Al-Walidi, Abdelkhaleq
Amran, Hareth Hamid and Tawfiq AlMansouri.2 In July, Tawfiq al-Mansouri was
denied urgent medical treatment despite his
critical health condition.
On 22 February, the Sana’a-based
Specialized Criminal Court (SCC) – a court
traditionally reserved for security-related
crimes – sentenced journalist Nabil al-Sidawi
to eight years in prison following a grossly
unfair trial on trumped-up, serious charges
including spying. On 28 June, the Hodeidahbased SCC sentenced journalists Mohammed
al-Salahi and Mohammed al-Juniad each to

404

three years and eight months in prison
following secret proceedings in the absence
of their lawyer on trumped-up spying
charges.3
GOVERNMENT OF YEMEN
The internationally recognized government
harassed, summoned for investigation, or
arbitrarily detained at least seven journalists
and activists in areas under its control,
including in Ta’iz and Hadramout
governorates. Judicial authorities prosecuted
at least three journalists for publishing
content critical of officials and public
institutions. Charges included “insulting” a
public employee, which carries up to two
years in prison, “mocking” army officials, and
“offending a symbol of the state”.4
On 4 July, security forces in Ta’iz
governorate arbitrarily arrested a writer
because of a social media post in which he
criticized corruption in aid delivery to
internally displaced people in Ta’iz
governorate. Security forces held him at the
security department of Jabal Habashi district
for eight hours and only released him after
forcing him to sign a pledge stating that he
would refrain from posting any opinions on
social media.

DENIAL OF HUMANITARIAN ACCESS
Parties to the conflict continued to restrict
movement and aid delivery, including by
imposing bureaucratic constraints such as
travel permit denials or delays, cancellation of
humanitarian initiatives, and interference in
the project design and implementation of
humanitarian activities.
The Huthi de facto authorities continued to
close the main roads in and out of the city of
Ta’iz. The closures severely inhibited the
efficient movement of food, medicines and
other essential goods in and out of Ta’iz
governorate.5
Throughout 2022, there was an alarming
increase in attacks on aid workers and
violence against humanitarian personnel
assets and facilities by parties to the conflict.
In the first half of the year, according to the
UN Yemen office, one aid worker was killed,
two were injured, seven were kidnapped and

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

nine were detained. In the same period, there
were also 27 incidents of threats and
intimidation, and 28 incidents of carjacking,
leading to temporary suspensions of
movement and aid delivery in several
governorates.

RIGHT TO TRUTH, JUSTICE AND
REPARATION
Parties to the conflict failed to provide any
justice for victims of the widespread violations
and abuses of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the ongoing conflict
or to remedy the harms they inflicted on
civilians.6
On 2 June, Mwatana for Human Rights, the
European Center for Constitutional and
Human Rights and Sherpa, supported by
Amnesty International, submitted a criminal
complaint to the Paris Judiciary Tribunal
against French arms companies Dassault
Aviation, Thales and MBDA France. The
organizations called for a criminal
investigation into the companies for their
possible complicity in alleged war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Yemen, by
exporting arms to Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates.
On 7 October, the UN Human Rights
Council once again failed to establish a
credible independent and impartial
monitoring and accountability mechanism in
the resolution it adopted on Yemen.

WOMEN’S AND GIRLS’ RIGHTS
The Huthi de facto authorities continued to
impose their mahram (male guardian)
requirement, which bans women from
travelling without a male guardian or
evidence of their written approval, across
governorates under Huthi control or to other
areas of Yemen. From April, tightened Huthi
restrictions increasingly hindered Yemeni
women from working, especially those
required to travel for their job.7 This had a
direct impact on the access of Yemeni
women and girls to healthcare and
reproductive health rights as Yemeni women
humanitarian workers increasingly struggled
to conduct fieldwork in Huthi-controlled areas

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

and were forced to cancel field visits and aid
deliveries.
In March, the government’s Ministry of
Interior issued a circular to facilitate Yemeni
women’s access to a passport as per Yemeni
law. This followed a Yemeni women-led
campaign, “My passport without
guardianship”, which opposed the customary
practice that denies women the right to
acquire a passport without the permission of
their mahram.
The Huthi and government authorities
continued to arbitrarily detain women past
completion of their sentences when they did
not appear to have a male guardian to escort
them home from the prison.
The Huthi de facto authorities continued to
detain actress and model Intisar alHammadi, who was sentenced in 2021 to
five years in prison on charges of committing
an “indecent act”.

LGBTI PEOPLE’S RIGHTS
The security forces of the Southern
Transitional Council (STC), the Huthis and
the internationally recognized government
continued to target people with nonconforming sexual orientation, gender identity
or expression, or sex characteristics
(SOGIESC) with arbitrary arrest, torture,
including rape and other forms of sexual
violence, threats and harassment.
The STC and the Huthis arrested at least
five people and detained them on grounds of
their non-conforming “feminine” or
“masculine” appearance and/or behaviour in
public or on social media, or based on their
LGBTI-rights activism. Plain clothes Security
Belt forces arrested a third-gender person in
the street, took him to an official facility and
interrogated him on accusations of sodomy
and being an agent for Security Belt enemies.
The Security Belt forces then transferred the
person to another official facility where a
member of the Security Belt forces beat and
raped him.
A queer man was arrested in the street by
Huthi security forces for being a “sexual
deviant”. Huthi security forces detained him
for several hours in a military vehicle and only

405

released him on condition that he agree to
assist in their surveillance of people with nonconforming SOGIESC. They ordered him to
entrap men in sexual encounters and inform
on them to the Huthi authorities. After they
released him, he subsequently refused to do
this. In response, Huthi security forces
contacted him and his acquaintances,
threatened him and told him that he was
wanted for arrest.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
Parties to the conflict continued to fail to take
measures that protect the environment.
Severe fuel shortages made Yemenis
increasingly rely on firewood. This
environmentally damaging coping
mechanism contributed to deforestation and
biodiversity loss.
According to the UN Environment
Programme, ambient air quality did not meet
the WHO guideline levels for air pollutants
that adversely impact health.
The mismanagement of oil infrastructure in
Shabwa governorate continued to pollute alRawda district. In April, damage in the oil
supply pipeline polluted large areas of
agricultural land and groundwater sources in
Wadi Ghourayr and Ghail al Saidi areas,
according to Holm Akhdar, a local
environmental organization.
In July, a decaying oil tanker caused oil
spills in the port of Aden, in Southern Yemen,
further worsening the coastal and marine
pollution in the area.
In September, a UN crowdfunding
campaign raised the USD 75 million required
for the first phase of the emergency operation
concerning the FSO Safer, a decaying oil
tanker moored off Yemen’s port city of
Hodeidah in the Red Sea. The tanker posed
an increasing risk of spilling its cargo of 1.14
million barrels of oil, threatening an
environmental and humanitarian catastrophe
that would exacerbate the already severe
humanitarian crisis in Yemen.8
1. “Yemen: US-made weapon used in air strike that killed scores in
escalation of Saudi-led coalition attacks”, 26 January

406

2. “Yemen: Huthi authorities must release four journalists sentenced to
death”, 20 May
3. “Yemen: Huthis Must End the Prosecution of Journalists and
Crackdown on Media”, 20 December
4. “Yemen: Government must stop prosecution and harassment of
journalists”, 18 August
5. “Yemen: Houthis should urgently open Taizz roads”, 29 August
6. “Yemen: Joint NGO letter: International accountability critical to
achieving justice for victims and promoting lasting peace in Yemen”,
6 September
7. “Yemen: Huthis ‘suffocating’ women with requirement for male
guardians”, 1 September
8. “Yemen: Joint response to Yemen’s supertanker crisis: An open letter
to US, UK, EU member states, and other UN donor countries”, 18 July

ZAMBIA
Republic of Zambia
Head of state and government: Hakainde Hichilema
The government committed to repealing the
Defamation of the President law, amend the
Public Order Act and abolish the death
penalty. People with albinism suffered
violent attacks, and LGBTI people’s rights
were increasingly threatened. There was an
increase in gender-based violence which
disproportionately affected women and
girls. Children and women continued to
seek compensation for damage to their
health caused by lead mining. The
government fulfilled its promise to
introduce free education. The right to
housing was violated through forced
evictions.

BACKGROUND
Amnesty International’s Secretary General
visited Zambia in March to review the
government’s progress towards implementing
its electoral manifesto on human rights
protection, among other things.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
Positive developments were registered in the
safeguarding of rights to freedom of peaceful
expression, association and assembly. On 9
September, President Hichilema announced
that amendments to the Public Order Act

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

(POA) and the repeal of the Defamation of
the President law would be tabled at the next
parliamentary session in January 2023. The
POA has long been used to restrict the right
to freedom of peaceful assembly of
opposition parties and civil society
organizations. Section 5(4) of the Act
requires that anyone intending to assemble
or convene a public meeting, procession, or
demonstration, gives the police seven days’
notice, although formal approval from the
authorities is unnecessary. However, the
police interpreted this provision to mean that
permission is required before any public
assembly can proceed.
Historically, the Defamation of the President
law, provided for under section 69 of the
Penal Code Act, has been used to silence
any criticism of the president. It carries a
maximum three-year prison sentence for
anyone found guilty of publishing defamatory
or insulting materials, in writing, print, or by
word of mouth with the intent to incite hatred,
ridicule, or contempt of the president.
The police continued to use the law to arrest
government critics and opposition leaders,
further threatening the right to freedom of
expression. In January, Raphael Nakacinda
of the main opposition party, the Patriotic
Front, was arrested for defaming the
president. This followed his alleging, while on
the campaign trail in the Mapoloto area in
Chilenje (a residential township area in the
capital, Lusaka), that the president and his
“foreign friends” were planning to evict
Mapoloto residents to make way for a
shopping mall.
On 24 June, Justine Chimpinde and Danny
Kapambwe of Chienge district, Luapula
Province, were sentenced to 24 months’
imprisonment with hard labour for insulting
the president on TikTok. Before sentencing,
they were beaten in detention by armed
Zambian Army officers. On 1 September,
Sean Tembo, leader of the opposition Patriots
for Economic Progress party, was arrested for
criticizing the president’s monthly fuel
increases He spent six days in Woodlands
Police Station in Lusaka before being
charged and released on bond. The police

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

blamed him for his prolonged detention,
saying he did not want to be charged in the
absence of his lawyers.

DEATH PENALTY
On 24 May, President Hichilema committed
to working with the National Assembly to
abolish the death penalty and commuted the
sentences of 30 death row prisoners to life
imprisonment. He reiterated this commitment
on 9 September in his speech at the opening
of parliament’s second session.

DISCRIMINATION
PEOPLE WITH ALBINISM
People with albinism were subjected to
violent attacks and mutilation due to
superstitious misconceptions about albinism.
In January, a member of a local crime
prevention unit discovered the vandalized
grave of a 12-year-old boy whose hand had
been chopped off. Police who visited the
scene in Mungwalala Village Cemetery in
Chama district, Eastern Province, confirmed
that the grave and body had been tampered
with. The perpetrators had not been
identified at the end of the year.
On 25 June, three men severed a 10-yearold boy’s forefinger in Mkushi district, Central
Province, while his parents were at church.
Police launched a search for a suspect
identified only as “Kendrick” and believed to
be a local resident, and two other as yet
unidentified men, for grievous bodily harm.
LGBTI PEOPLE
LGBTI people’s rights were increasingly
threatened as government officials, leaders of
faith-based organizations, and other citizens
publicly condemned consensual same-sex
sexual relations in online and offline media.
Members of the homophobic
#BanNdevupaNdevu #BanHomosexuality
movement, established by Brian Sampa, held
a protest and used WhatsApp to call for
violence against and the killing of people
suspected of being gay. In May, President
Hichilema said that while his government
respects and upholds human rights it does
not support gay rights, justifying his stance
on the basis that Zambia is a Christian

407

nation. He said this after the Swedish and
Finnish embassies in Zambia reportedly flew
the rainbow flag along with their national flags
in solidarity with LGBTI people’s rights.
In September, Lusaka July, an annual
fashion and lifestyle event, sparked more
attacks against LGBTI people’s rights.
Homophobic commentary in the media and
on social media platforms identified the event
as a platform for the LGBTI agenda, and
implied it was a western-sponsored attack on
Zambian religious and cultural values. Calls
were made for anyone who “dressed,
behaved, and looked” like a gay or lesbian
person during the event to be arrested and
charged. Other commentary blamed LGBTI
people for an increase in reports of cases of
rape of boys and men. Lusaka’s Catholic
archbishop accused the president and law
enforcement agencies of ignoring what he
alleged was a rise in incidents relating to
consensual same-sex sexual relations.

GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Violence against women and children
remained widespread. Statistics released by
the Zambian Police Service for the first
quarter of 2022 revealed that there were
6,915 reports of gender-based violence,
compared to 4,254 in the first quarter of
2021. Of the 6,915 survivors, 58.7% were
women and 25.6% were children of which
72.6% were girls. Women and girls
represented 77.3% of all survivors. The
increase continued in the second quarter,
with 7,589 reported cases, an increase of
1,441 compared to the second quarter in the
previous year. Between January and August,
1,066 cases of child sexual abuse were
recorded.

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
On 9 May, Amnesty International and the
Southern Africa Litigation Centre applied to
intervene in an ongoing class action lawsuit
in South Africa, brought by Zambian children
and women against the global mining giant
Anglo American. The claimants sought
compensation for the widespread and long-

408

term effects of lead poisoning caused by
mining in Kabwe, Central Province.1

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RIGHTS
RIGHT TO EDUCATION
In January, the government fulfilled its
election pledge to introduce free primary and
secondary school education. In July, the
Ministry of Education announced the
recruitment of 30,496 teachers in a further
commitment towards improving the
education system and guaranteeing the right
to education.
RIGHT TO HOUSING
On 20 August, the Chingola municipal
council demolished over 300 houses built on
land belonging to the Civil Aviation Authority
and surrounding the Kasompe Airstrip
located in Chingola District on the
Copperbelt. The municipal council asserted
that it had not allocated the land and that the
structures were erected without local
authority planning permission. Affected
residents were not afforded an opportunity for
genuine consultation, as Chingola council
reportedly held a meeting on 19 August to
plan for the demolitions and carried them out
at 2am the following day. The state failed to
take appropriate measures to ensure the
availability of adequate alternative housing or
resettlement ahead of the forced evictions.
Nor did they provide residents with any form
of legal remedies, or legal aid for those who
needed it to seek redress from the courts.
While the demolitions were ongoing, the
local mayor’s house and lodge were set on
fire. Police arrested a 23-year-old man and a
15-year-old boy, believed to have been
among those responsible. Affected residents
accused the mayor of having illegally
allocated the plots to them.
1. “South Africa: Human rights groups intervene in historic class action
for lead poisoning launched by Zambian children”, 9 May

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

ZIMBABWE
Republic of Zimbabwe
Head of state and government: Emmerson Dambudzo
Mnangagwa
The right to freedom of expression was
threatened with the cybercrimes law used to
arrest journalists. Meanwhile the Private
Voluntary Organization Amendment Bill
would undermine the right to freedom of
association if adopted. Members and
supporters of the main opposition party
were violently attacked at political rallies,
leading to at least two deaths. Students
were arrested for protesting against high fee
increases and the government weaponized
the law to persecute political opposition
members. Two young men were unlawfully
killed by law enforcement officers in August
in separate incidents. The authorities took
measures to control the spread of a measles
outbreak that led to the deaths of hundreds
of children. Legislation outlawing early and
child marriage was introduced.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION,
ASSOCIATION AND ASSEMBLY
The rights to freedom of expression,
association and peaceful assembly were
increasingly threatened. Journalists were
arrested under the cybercrimes law; the
Private Voluntary Organization (PVO)
Amendment Bill was introduced to
parliament; and members and supporters of
the Citizens Coalition for Change (CCC), the
main opposition party, were intimidated,
harassed, attacked and assaulted during
parliamentary and local government byelections which took place in March.
Between August and September, three
journalists became the first people to be
arrested under the new Cyber and Data
Protection Act, which had been enacted in
December 2021. Wisdom Mdzungairi, the
editor-in-chief for Alpha Media Holdings and
editor of NewsDay newspaper, and Desmond
Chingarande, a senior reporter at NewsDay,
were summoned to Harare Central Police

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

Station. They were questioned in connection
with a story they had published on a private
business enterprise believed to be run by
individuals with connections to the
government. They were charged with
transmitting “false data intending to cause
harm” and released three hours later after
their lawyer assured officers that they would
be available for further questioning when
needed.
On 29 September, freelance sports
journalist Hope Chizuzu was arrested on the
same charges after board members of the
Dynamos Football Club filed a complaint
against him. Hope Chizuzu’s mobile phone
and iPad were confiscated and kept by the
police for “further investigations”. He was
released the same day after police issued
him with a warning and told him that he
would soon be summoned to appear in court.
In June, the minister of public service,
labour and social welfare introduced the PVO
amendment bill in parliament. Its provisions
threatened the right to freedom of association
and the very existence of civil society
organizations and their operations. Clause 2
gives the minister discretionary and overly
broad powers to designate organizations as
being at “high risk of, or vulnerable to misuse
by terrorist organizations”. However, PVOs
and their representatives would not have a
say in the assessment of their vulnerability to
risk. Clause 5 provides for the cancellation of
a PVO’s registration if it is found to be
engaged in political activities. This provision
would pose a particular threat to
organizations working in defence of human
rights.
The right to freedom of peaceful assembly
was continuously violated and undermined as
police and supporters of the ruling party,
Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic
Front (Zanu-PF), disrupted the CCC party’s
political rallies and attacked its members. On
27 February, a gang of Zanu-PF youths
allegedly armed with machetes, beer bottles,
iron bars, spears and bricks, disrupted a CCC
rally in Kwekwe and tried to stop people from
attending. Mboneni Ncube, a 30-year-old
CCC supporter, died after he was stabbed

409

and at least 17 others were seriously injured
in the attack. Speaking at a Zanu-PF rally in
Mbizo Stadium in Kwekwe the day before,
Zimbabwe’s vice-president, Constantino
Chiwenga, sent a chilling warning that ZanuPF would “crush the [CCC] party like lice”.
On 17 March, Godfrey Karembera, a CCC
supporter, was assaulted by members of the
Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) in the
capital, Harare, ahead of the parliamentary
by-elections. The ZRP justified the assault in
a statement that said he was “engaging in
unsanctioned political activities in the Harare
Central District”.
On 12 September, police arrested 14
students at the University of Zimbabwe after
they embarked on peaceful #FeesMustFall
demonstrations against the university’s steep
tuition fee increases. Twelve of them were
released late on 13 September after paying
fines equivalent to USD 3.31. The remaining
two appeared in court on 14 September and
were released on bail. Five more students
were arrested on 14 September, taken to
Avondale police station and charged with
“disorderly conduct”.

ARBITRARY DETENTION
Authorities weaponized the law to persecute
CCC members and supporters by subjecting
them to arbitrary arrest, unlawful detention
and unfair trials. On 6 February, police
arrested 10 party supporters in Mkoba,
Gweru, during a roadshow to canvass for
votes ahead of the by-elections. They were
released without charge two days later.
On 14 June, two CCC MPs Job Sikhala (also
the party chairman) and Godfrey Sithole (MP
for Chitungwiza North) were arrested and
charged with inciting violence at the wake of
Moreblessing Ali in Nyatsime, Chitungwiza.
Moreblessing Ali was a party activist who was
abducted in Nyatsime on 24 May, allegedly
by a Zanu-PF supporter. In June her body
was found dumped in a well. The police
accused Job Sikhala of inciting party
supporters to violence at the wake to avenge
her death, after he read out the family’s
statement about the circumstances of her
death. Fourteen other CCC members

410

attending the wake were also arrested. The
“Nyatsime 16”, as they became known, were
all denied bail when they appeared at the
magistrate’s court and subsequently denied
access to their lawyers while on remand.
After several appeals at the lower and higher
courts, Godfrey Sithole was granted bail
equivalent to USD 470 on 10 November by a
Harare magistrate; 14 others were also
granted bail equivalent to USD 78 each by
the High Court on 15 November after
spending more than 150 days in detention.
However, Job Sikhala remained in detention
and his trial was ongoing at the end of the
year.
Members of civil society groups were also
subjected to arbitrary arrests. On 8 February,
police arrested 10 members of the Zimbabwe
Election Support Network in Mbare, Harare.
They were detained at Mbare police station
for providing voter education without official
clearance and later released without charge.
On 8 July, Obert Masaraure, the president of
the Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of
Zimbabwe (ARTUZ), was arrested by ZRP
officers and charged with incitement to cause
public violence after publishing a tweet
demanding the release of his ARTUZ
colleague, Robson Chere. Robson Chere had
been arrested on 5 July and charged with the
murder of a fellow ARTUZ member in 2016,
a charge on which Obert Masaraure himself
had previously been arrested, and for which
charges against him remained outstanding.
In connection with the charges related to his
tweet, Obert Masaraure was released on bail
equivalent to USD 107 on 4 August by the
High Court in Harare after being denied bail
by a magistrate’s court.

UNLAWFUL KILLINGS
On 17 August, Tawanda Zvinowanda was
killed by ZRP officers in custody after being
arrested that morning on robbery allegations.
He was arrested at his home in Chitungwiza,
Mashonaland East province, by three plainclothes Criminal Investigation Department
police officers. According to his wife’s witness
account he was brutally beaten by the three
officers prior to his arrest; he was then

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

handcuffed and thrown into the boot of a
vehicle. The police officers did not inform
him or his family of the reasons for his arrest.
When his family looked for him at the local
police station in Makoni, officers said they
had no record of him. His family were
informed on the morning of 18 August that
he had died on 17 August at Unit L Cemetery
in Chitungwiza, where he had been taken by
police officers to reveal an alleged weapon
stash. Although he was handcuffed at the
time, the police claimed that at the cemetery
he had tried to strike an officer with a
machete, and that the officer shot him.
On 20 August, Levy Musendo, a mental
health patient, was killed by members of the
Presidential Guard (a military unit) after he
was accused of attempting to break into State
House, the president’s official residence, in
Harare. Levy Musendo left home in Mufakose
on 19 August and when he failed to return,
his family filed a missing person’s report. The
next morning, an unidentified police officer
contacted the family and told them that Levy
Musendo had been arrested and was at
Harare Central Police Station. However, when
they went to the police station that morning,
they were unable to locate him for several
hours. Eventually, officers informed them that
he had been taken to Parirenyatwa Hospital
“with severe injuries and was bleeding
profusely from the nose and mouth.” Nurses
at the hospital allegedly told his family that
Levy Musendo’s body was brought in by
uniformed military personnel who warned
them against disclosing that he was dead on
his arrival there. His parents accused the
police and Presidential Guard officers of
trying to cover up their son’s murder. On 25
August, the police announced that it was
investigating the death.

instituting the Social and Behaviour Change
Communication model within Apostolic
religious communities to promote
understanding of and improve access to
modern health services and treatments. The
authorities also initiated emergency measles
vaccination and re-vaccination programmes
for more than 2 million children under the
age of five.

CHILDREN’S RIGHTS
In March, the Marriage Amendment Act,
which outlaws early and child marriage, was
passed in parliament. According to Zimstat,
the national statistics agency, 33.7% of girls
under the age of 18 were married, while only
2% of boys were married before reaching 18.

RIGHT TO HEALTH
In April, the Ministry of Health and Child Care
declared a measles outbreak in Mutasa
District in Manicaland province. The virus
spread to other areas and killed more than
750 children under the age of five. The
government and its partners UNICEF and
WHO responded to the outbreak by

Amnesty International Report 2022/23

411

