P1004/E15,000/5.09 - Printed by Stilgrafica srl - Rome

Fighting Hunger Worldwide

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2010

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships
Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840

On a Monday in March 2010,
WFP pulled 130 mules and
horses into service to quickly
bring an aerial delivery of rice
into Haiti’s Moussambe
District.

Notes

Cover: WFP provides food for
the once-a-day hot meal
served in Pinchinat, Port-auPrince’s largest tent city.
Children line up first; this
young girl waited in her
Sunday best, then rejoined her
mother and brother at their
tent to eat. Pinchinat had been
the city’s soccer field before
the January 2010 earthquake.

Acronyms Used
DEV

development project

P4P

Purchase for Progress

EMOP

emergency operation

PSA

Programme Support and Administrative

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the

[budget]
United Nations
GESMAAP

General Establishment for Storing and Marketing
Agriculture and Animal Products

ICRC

International Committee of the Red Cross

IRA

Immediate Response Account

ITHACA

Information Technology for Humanitarian

PLB

Project Laser Beam

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

RUSF

ready-to-use supplementary food

SO

special operation

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

Assistance, Cooperation and Action
MINUSTAH

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

NGO

non-governmental organization

WHO

World Health Organization

General Notes
Monetary values are in United States dollars (US$), unless otherwise stated.
One billion equals 1,000 million.
Quantities of food are in metric tons (mt), unless otherwise specified.
Direct expenditures include food, external transport, landside transport, storage and handling (LTSH), direct support costs (DSC) and other direct
operational costs (ODOC) components, but exclude indirect support costs (ISC) and programme support and administrative (PSA) costs.
Totals reported in this document are rounded and so may not add up exactly.
The acronym LIFDC refers to low-income, food-deficit (net food-importing) countries with per capita income below the World Bank eligibility
threshold for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for 20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) terms and to countries included in the World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national income (GNI) for
2005, based on the World Bank Atlas method, is $1,675. In 2009, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
Three criteria, reviewed every three years, are used by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) to identify least developed
countries (LDCs): i) low income as measured by gross domestic product (GDP) per capita – under $745 for inclusion, above $900 for graduation;
ii) weak human resources as measured by the Augmented Physical Quality of Life Index (APQLI) – life expectancy at birth, per capita calorie
supply, combined primary and secondary school enrolment ratio and adult literacy rate; and iii) a low level of economic diversification as measured
by the Economic Diversification Index (EDI) – share of manufacturing in GDP, share of the labour force in industry, annual per capita commercial
energy consumption and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) merchandise export concentration index. In 2009,
49 countries were categorized as LDCs.
From 2007, WFP must meet the requirement of WFP’s Executive Board to allocate at least 90 percent of development multilateral funds to
concentration countries, which are: i) least developed or have equally low income;1 and ii) facing a problem of chronic malnutrition measured as
greater than 25 percent stunting among children under 5.2

1
2

Per capita GNI less than US$975
Statistics on nutrition in: UNICEF, 2009. The State of the World’s Children 2009. New York

Photo Credits

The World Food Programme’s 2010 Annual Report uses data, photos and stories from the prior year
to chronicle WFP’s operations during calendar year 2009.

Cover: Haiti, WFP/Jim Farrell; Table of contents: Haiti, WFP/Jim Farrell; Page 2, Philippines, WFP/Veejay Villafranca; Page 5, Philippines,
WFP/Veejay Villafranca; Page 6, Haiti, WFP/ Alejandro Chicheri; Page 7, Uganda, WFP/Griet Hendrickx; Page 8-9, Philippines, WFP/Veejay
Villafranca; Page 12, Bangladesh, WFP/Shehzad Noorani; Page 13, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 14, Nepal, WFP/Laura Melo;
Page 15, Guatemala, WFP/ Maxime Bessieres; Page 16, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 17. Haiti, WFP/ Marco Frattini; Page 18,
Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 19, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 21, Philippines, WFP/Barry Came; Page 22,
DR Congo, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 24, Ethiopia, WFP/Amir Ismail; Page 27, Burkina Faso, WFP/Vincent Quattara; Page 28, Italy,
WFP/Rein Skullerud; Page 29, Syria, WFP/John Wreford; Page 30, Uganda, WFP/Vanessa Vick; Page 31, Uganda, WFP/Vanessa Vick; Page 32,
Afghanistan, WFP/Susannah Nicol; Page 35, Somalia, WFP/Guled Mohamed; Page 36, Italy, WFP/Rein Skullerud; Page 39, Haiti, Bruno
Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 40-41, Haiti, WFP/ Alejandro Chicheri.

Annual Report 2010
Contents
2

Foreword by the
Executive Director

4

2009 in Review

10

WFP and the MDGs

12

Nutrition
The Right Foods
ReAch
Project Laser Beam
Private Sector Partnerships

17

Emergencies: Saving Lives
haiti
The Philippines

22

Logistics: Solving Problems
Teamwork: Logistics cluster
ethiopia: Bypassing Bottlenecks
Sri Lanka: Delivering Under Siege

26

New Tools to Fight Hunger
eyes in the Sky
Burkina Faso: cash/Vouchers
Vouchers for Plumpy’Doz
Syria: Telephone Vouchers

30

Purchase for Progress:
Building Capacity

33

Security and Safety
Pakistan
Afghanistan
Somalia

37

Ensuring Transparency: IPSAS

38

Reaching Out: wfp.org

40

Annexes

Executive Director Josette Sheeran
distributes high energy biscuits to
residents of typhoon-ravaged Candaba
in the Philippines in October 2009.

Foreword
by the executive Director
2009

proved to be another
challenging year for WFP.
Just as the number of hungry people
worldwide grew to more than 1 billion – the
highest number on record – we also faced
shrinking humanitarian safe space to reach
people, with unprecedented attacks on WFP
staff and other humanitarian workers.

and vulnerable people without the generous
support of nations, private donors and
individuals who gave $4 billion during a
time of economic hardship.
The explosion in hunger needs over the
past few years has made it clear that we are
living in a world where risk is the new
normal: The food, fuel and financial crises
show how vulnerable many nations are to
outside shocks that can cast millions of
people into dire hunger and put an entire
generation at risk of stunting. And stunting
– the failure to grow – leads to irreversible
developmental damage that affects
children’s health, cognitive ability and
future economic productivity.

Despite these challenges, WFP was able to
provide life-saving food and nutrition
assistance for 101.8 million people affected
by conflict, storms, droughts, displacement,
financial crises and other shocks that left
them without food; 84 million of these
beneficiaries were women and children.
WFP could not have reached these hungry
2

meals and 20 million people with food in
exchange for asset creation such as improved
community infrastructure and reclaimed
land, while also helping to meet household
food needs. WFP continues to focus on
getting better at providing “the right food to
the right people at the right time” so that we
generate maximum effectiveness nutritional
impact for those we serve.
There is growing support for comprehensive,
country-led food security strategies: the
African Union is working to promote African
investment in comprehensive food security
and adaptation programmes through the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development and the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme. In L’Aquila in the
summer of 2009, leaders of the G8 nations
pledged to support country-led food security
strategies, and we are seeing many new
regional and national initiatives. Moreover,
2009 saw unprecedented strategic
cooperation between the Rome-based food
agencies, including agreement on a joint
Secretariat to support the revitalized
Committee on Food Security.
Our response to this risk is to meet urgent
needs and to help nations build resilience.
In Pakistan, for example, we are providing
5.5 million people affected by high food prices
with assistance. When violence broke out last
year, within weeks we scaled up to reach an
additional 2.6 million people affected by the
conflict. In the Philippines, when a series of
devastating storms hit, we quickly scaled up
the provision of food in support of the peace
treaty in Mindanao from 1 million people to
an additional 1.1 million people affected by
flooding. This ability to quickly scale up to
reach vulnerable people is essential to
reaching people affected by disasters.

WFP’s Strategic Plan positions us to respond
to hunger shocks in ways that support
country-led food security strategies. WFP has
a trusted toolbox of proven hunger solutions
from the Purchase for Progress initiative that
connects smallholder farmers with markets to
the focus on nutrition.
This year’s report shows the impressive scope
and scale of WFP’s hunger solutions. The
continued support from donors reflects the
trust so many nations place in our ability to
reach hungry and vulnerable people.

We in WFP must continue our work with
nations to ensure that our emerging
interventions are deployed more effectively
and efficiently to support the recovery of
population and economies. In 2009, WFP
supported 21 million children with school

Josette Sheeran
Executive Director

3

2009 in Review
WFP

confronted a succession of
challenges in 2009, each one
demanding new approaches in the struggle
to bring a measure of relief to the world’s
hungry poor.

contributed in 2008. Mobilizing such
massive levels of funding, particularly
against the backdrop of an economic
downturn, proved to be one of WFP’s more
complex challenges during the year.

Chief among these was the changing face
of hunger itself, which continued to evolve
over the course of the year as the numbers
of hungry people in the world climbed to
record highs, exceeding one billion. Their
ranks were swelled by entirely new sectors
of society, including millions of unskilled
urban workers driven into poverty and
hunger by the twin afflictions of a global
economic crisis and persistently high
food prices.

If funding posed problems in 2009, other
difficulties arose as a result of the
deteriorating security climate for WFP staff
and installations around the world.
The agency, along with the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations, was
targeted during the year by various armed
groups and disenfranchised elements. The
situation was further exacerbated by
a disinformation campaign waged
by militants urging violence against
humanitarian organizations in general
and against UN agencies in particular.

For WFP, the sharp increase in the scale and
nature of worldwide hunger posed a doubleedged dilemma. Not only did it include
people beyond the agency’s traditional
beneficiaries among the rural poorest of the
poor, but it also occurred at a time when
international food supplies were available.
The message, in brief, was stark: Many
people were unable to feed themselves in
2009 not because they could not find food,
but rather because they could no longer
afford it.

More than 600 security incidents
involving WFP staff or installations were
reported during the year, including
intimidation, harassment, detention,
theft, abduction and violent death. The
most serious occurred in October, when
a suicide bomber killed himself and five
WFP staff at WFP’s office in Islamabad,
Pakistan. In all, 15 people lost their lives
while working for WFP in 2009, and
another 35 were injured.

WFP responded by delivering more food
with less money. The agency reached
101.8 million people — 84 million of them
women and children — in 75 countries in
2009. An unprecedented 4.6 million metric
tons were delivered, higher than the
3.9 million metric tons distributed in 2008,
when slightly more people — 102 million —
were reached.

For WFP, staff security remained
paramount, then and now. At the same
time, WFP also recognized its mandate
as a front-line humanitarian agency with
responsibility for the lives of millions of
victims of war and civil unrest. In response
to these two competing concerns, the
agency chose to adopt, as far as practicable,
a “how to stay” security culture to ensure
that WFP could continue to address the
critical hunger needs of affected
populations anywhere in the world.

But WFP managed to achieve this feat with
fewer resources. Donors were generous in
2009, contributing $4.2 billion, well above
WFP’s $3.7 billion target but below the
record sum of more than $5 billion
4

A resident of Santa Cruz in the
Philippines’ Laguna province wades
through floodwaters that displaced
more than half a million people.

5

While man-made disasters occupied WFP
in 2009, the agency also coped with the
effects of catastrophes provoked by nature.
The UN’s International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction recorded 245 natural
disasters during the year, of which 224
were weather-related and accounted for
7,000 deaths.

Never before had the agency been called upon
to deliver relief in an urban environment that
had been so damaged — shorn almost
completely of infrastructure, with operations
further hampered by the government’s
severely restricted capacity to respond.
Despite the difficulties, WFP managed to
reach more than two million beneficiaries
with more than 9,000 metric tons of rice
within the first two weeks.

For WFP, the greatest challenge occurred
as 2009 drew to a close and the new year
dawned. Early in January 2010, Haiti
was struck by a 7.0 magnitude earthquake,
which devastated the island country’s
capital city and surrounding regions.
In seconds, Port-au-Prince lay in ruins,
creating the conditions for the most
complex emergency operation WFP
had ever mounted.

The Haiti quake came on the heels of a
multiple disaster on the other side of the
world. In late September and throughout
October, the Philippines was pummeled
by a string of typhoons, which submerged
80 percent of the capital city of Manila in
fetid floodwaters and laid waste to the
country’s rice bowl in northern Luzon.

Staff and volunteers distribute highenergy biscuits in Port-au-Prince in
January 2010 while MINUSTAH
peacekeepers ensure a safe environment.

6

WFP responded with an extensive relief
operation that would eventually reach more
than 1 million people and cost almost
$57 million by the time the initiative ended
in June, 2010.
In Uganda, mothers with young babies
receive food assistance from WFP
at a medical centre.

The typhoons that hammered the Philippines
highlighted yet another challenge WFP
faced in 2009, one that it shares with the rest
of the planet. Erratic weather conditions are
global and require harmonized and concerted
efforts worldwide. To this end, WFP
enhanced cooperation throughout the year
with a host of UN, government, nongovernmental and private organizations
to prepare for and respond to the
increasing number of weather-related
disasters on our work.

warnings of climate-related hazards
throughout the year.
But not even cutting-edge technology could
mask the fact that WFP faced an unusual set
of challenges in 2009. And those experiences
clearly demonstrated that a “business as
usual” approach was not enough in the search
for solutions to global hunger.

These included following up the successful
weather-index based insurance pilots WFP
has operated in China and Ethiopia, as well as
undertaking country-level feasibility
assessments in China, Ethiopia, Kenya and
Mali. With support from the Rockefeller
Foundation, WFP continued to develop
RiskView, a software platform that quantifies
weather-related food security risk in
operational cost terms.

Accordingly, WFP began one new initiative in
2009 and accelerated another that had been
launched the previous year.
The new initiative tackled chronic
malnutrition. Rather than focusing on only
the caloric content of generalized food
rations, WFP began to design individual
programmes for the specific nutritional needs
of separate groups of vulnerable people,
particularly young children and mothers.
At the same time, new nutritionally enhanced
food products were developed and deliveries
to targeted groups expedited.

To strengthen the information pool about
climate and weather-related disasters, WFP
signed a memorandum of understanding
with the World Meteorological Organization
and as 2009 ended was working on a similar
arrangement with the UN Environment
Programme.

Purchase for Progress, or P4P, first launched
late in 2008, uses WFP’s ability to buy food
as a tool to both stimulate production and
link small farmers to agricultural markets. In
2009, P4P began to gather pace. By the end
of the year, the project had started
implementation in 19 of 21 selected pilot
countries, with 39,000 metric tons of staple
crops purchased from 80 farmers’
organizations in 13 countries.

WFP also drew on its partnerships in the
scientific community, both public and
private, to introduce a range of innovative
new technologies designed to ensure that the
agency is better prepared for emergencies
and able to respond faster and more
effectively when they occur.

Both of these initiatives underlined the new
approach WFP embarked upon in 2010 in the
search for the most appropriate — and
effective — measures to deal with the
changing face of global hunger.

Recent advances in satellite and other remote
sensing technologies proved particularly
effective, equipping WFP with “eyes in the
sky” to forecast, monitor and deliver early
7

In the midst of WFP’s vast
emergency response to Typhoon
Ketsana, Filipinos use boats and
other floatation devices to move
around a village in Laguna
province.

8

WFP

9

WFP and the Millennium
Development Goals
2007

2008

2009

2007-2009
change

MILLeNNIUM DeVeLOPMeNT
V
GOAL 1

KeY FIGUReS

Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger

BeNeFIcIARIeS
86.1

102.1

101.8

▲

million hungry people in 75 countries
(77 countries in 2008, 80 countries in 2007)

71.0

83.9

84.1

▲

million women and children

1.9

1.9

2.0

▲

million refugees

8.8

9.5

14.1

▲

million internally displaced people

0.8

0.9

2.1

▲

million returnees

QUANTITY OF FOOD AID
3.3

3.9

4.6

▲

million metric tons of food distributed

2.1

2.8

2.6

▲

million metric tons of food procured

DeVeLOPING
V
cOUNTRIeS AND WFP ASSISTANce
88.5

87.7

89.7

▲

percent of development multilateral resources
reaching concentration criteria countries

74.0

66.0

70.0

▼

percent of development resources reaching
least-developed countries

79.4

75.6

82.0

▲

percent of food procured by tonnage
in developing countries

72.0

68.0

67.1

▼

percent of WFP’s resources reaching
sub-Saharan African countries

MDG 2

Achieve Universal Primary Education

19.3

20.5

20.7

▲

million schoolchildren receiving school
meals/take-home rations

46.6

49.3

46.7

▲

percent who were girls

▲

Increase

▬

No change

▼

Decrease

10

2007

MDG 3

2008

2009

2007-2009
change

KeY FIGUReS

Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women

52.2

51.9

52.2

▬

percent of beneficiaries who were women or girls

240

266

342

▲

thousand women were in leadership positions
on food management committees

5.1

6.7

6.5

▲

million women receiving household food
rations at distribution points in general food
distributions

4.2

5.1

5.2

▲

million household food entitlements were
issued in women’s names for general food
distributions

MDG 4

Reduce Child Mortality

53.6

62.2

62.1

▲

million children were assisted in WFP
operations

5.7

6.3

5.9

▲

million children diagnosed with malnutrition
received special nutritional support

▲

million vulnerable women receiving additional
nutritional support through maternal child
health interventions

MDG 5
2.0

MDG 6

Improve Maternal Health
2.8

2.8

Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases

20

17

15

▼

of the 25 highest hIV
V and AIDS prevalence
countries receiving WFP assistance

1.8

2.4

2.6

▲

million people affected by hIV
V and AIDS
receiving WFP food assistance

50

47

43

▼

countries receiving assistance under
tuberculosis and hIV
V and AIDS prevention
activities

MDG 7
17.1

MDG 8

Ensure Environmental Sustainability
21.3

20.4

▲

million people receiving WFP food as an
incentive to build assets, attend training, build
resilience to shocks and preserve livelihoods

Develop a Global Partnership for Development

15

15

18

▲

stand-by partners

12

10

9

▼

FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessment
missions conducted

8

14

13

▲

UNhcR/WFP joint assessment missions
conducted

84

150

115

▲

corporate and private entities donating cash
and in-kind gifts worth $145 million in 2009

2 815

2 837

2 398

▼

non-governmental organizations working
with WFP

11

The local non-profit organization
Proshika demonstrates how to
use micronutrient powder
distributed by WFP in
Bangladesh’s cyclone-affected
areas in 2008.

Nutrition
THE RIGHT FOODS
WFP embarked on a new and improved
approach to nutrition in 2009, launching
initiatives aimed at delivering the right food
at the right time to the right groups of people.

commodities, all fortified with essential
vitamins, minerals, proteins and fatty acids.
At the same time, WFP accelerated
distribution of enhanced products to
vulnerable groups. The number of children
under five, nursing mothers and pregnant
women receiving fortified food rations
doubled, rising to 290,000 in 2009 from
125,000 in 2008. Deliveries of specialized
food products to children under two
increased nearly eight-fold in the same
period, climbing to 115,000 from 15,000.

These take WFP a step beyond mass
deliveries of food in bulk towards a more
finely tuned provision of assistance that
tailors interventions to the specific nutritional
needs of highly vulnerable groups, with
special emphasis on young mothers and
children.
To reach that goal, WFP continued to spur
development of new food products during the
year and expanded its food basket to
include a range of nutritionally enhanced

Driving WFP’s effort were some grim
statistics. Nearly 200 million children under
five in the developing world are stunted or
12

The Missionnaires de la
Charité institution,
home to 81 children, is
a beneficiary of WFP’s
hot meals programme,
which served 8,400 hot
meals daily in Jacmel,
Haiti, in January 2010.

chronically under-nourished, while close to
130 million are underweight. Some
3.5 million children under five die every year,
largely as a result of under-nutrition.
The malady permanently robs millions
of children of a bright future, adversely
affecting their mental and physical
development, often with lifelong
consequences. Chronic under-nutrition
in the first two years of life can reduce
cognitive development, diminish school
performance, and lower income potential
in adulthood.
WFP is uniquely placed to combat this
scourge as food is the primary source of
nutrition. Last year, the agency delivered
4.5 million metric tons of food to more than
101 million hungry people. By ensuring that
the best possible nutrition is in every food
intervention, and by carefully developing
those interventions for maximum impact,
WFP can furnish the next generation with
a better future as it fights hunger and
malnutrition worldwide.

When Haiti was devastated by the
earthquake, WFP targeted 53,000 children
under five and 16,000 pregnant and
breastfeeding mothers with special food
to prevent malnutrition. WFP distributed
micronutrient-enriched, high-energy
biscuits and Supplementary Plumpy, a
peanut-based paste fortified with minerals,
vitamins and fatty acids that speeds the
recovery of malnourished children.

WFP’s ability to deliver the optimum
food/nutrition balance has, until recently,
been limited to enhancing basic
commodities such as cereal flour and
vegetable oil with micronutrients, as well as
fortifying specialized food products like corn
soya blend with vitamins, minerals and
proteins. But recent advances in science
and technology have allowed WFP, in
cooperation with public- and private-sector
partners, to not only improve existing food
products but to begin introducing new ones.

WFP used micronutrient powders in
Bangladesh, Kenya and Nepal in 2009, with
subsequent evaluations finding anaemia
prevalence falling by between 15 and
50 percent. Following the distribution of
micronutrient-fortified food in Colombia
last year, levels of anaemia among children
under five dropped from 48 percent
to 29 percent.
In Egypt, WFP supported a flour
fortification programme to ensure that all
flour used to make the baladi bread staple
is fortified with iron and folic acid to
prevent micronutrient deficiencies. By
2009, the programme had fortified more
than 70 percent of wheat flour in the
country. More than 500 millers from
106 mills have been trained in fortification
techniques, quality control and
nutrition awareness.

In the past year, WFP has been developing
formulas for micronutrient powders, which
are sprinkled on cooked food to ensure
recommended daily doses of vitamins and
minerals. It has been upgrading the quality
of its blended fortified foods; exploring how
to fortify staple foods such as rice; piloting
the use of ready-to-use foods for preventing
or treating malnutrition; and researching
complementary food supplements.
13

REACH

Foods, DSM and the Global Alliance for
Improved Nutrition.

A groundbreaking example of effective
country-level coordination is the
ReAch partnership, which WFP hosts
at its Rome headquarters. Jointly
established by FAO, WFP, WhO and
UNIceF in 2008, ReAch facilitates a
country-led process for comprehensive
needs assessments, advocacy, action
planning, and coordination with the
goal of delivering an integrated,
multi-intervention approach to
childhood under-nutrition.

As an initial step, the Boston Consulting
Group conducted a gap analysis in Bangladesh
to determine the underlying causes of
malnutrition in the country and potential
solutions. Heinz also provided funding to
allow WFP to conduct nutrition mapping in
Bangladesh to assist WFP in developing its
country specific nutrition strategy.
Project Laser Beam (PLB) will employ the
many nutritional solutions already available
in the marketplace, ensuring they are
accessible to those in need. When gaps in
products and services are identified, PLB
will call on partners to step into the breach
to develop new ones for the fight against child
hunger in other countries. Special nutritious
foods for children under two are desperately
needed, yet there is a lack of products or
services on the market. PLB aims to
systematically employ current tools while
creating a stimulating environment in
which innovations become real.

PROJECT LASER BEAM
This five-year, $50 million initiative in
Bangladesh and Indonesia will combat undernutrition through changes in food, hygiene
and behaviour. Launched in 2009, it is a
WFP-led initiative working with Fortune 500
companies and others in the private sector as
well as three United Nations agencies — WFP,
UNICEF and WHO. The aim is to harness the
power of global, regional and local businesses.
WFP’s founding partners are Unilever, Kraft

PRIVATE SECTOR
PARTNERSHIPS
Private partnerships continue to be a factor
in WFP’s drive to improve its nutrition
strategy, bringing the expertise of the
private sector to the service of the agency’s
nutrition unit. Two specialists from the life
science company DSM worked with WFP in
2009, one on a rice fortification project in
egypt and the other engaged in research
on the design and delivery of micronutrient
powders in K
Kenya. Six nutritionists were
added to WFP’s roster during the year, all
paid for by private partners. K
Kemin
Industries continued to provide access to
world class food specialists and laboratories
to help extend the shelf life of the food.

WFP provides food rations to
Bhutanese refugees across eastern
Nepal, including supplemental feeding
for the elderly, malnourished children,
and pregnant and lactating women.

14

In Chimaltenango,
Guatemala, WFP
distributes Vitacereal,
a corn and soy
porridge designed to
feed malnourished
mothers and children.

15

Most buildings in downtown
Port-au-Prince were almost
completely destroyed by the
earthquake, making WFP’s
quick response essential.
16

emergencies:: Saving Lives
HAITI
At 16:53 on the afternoon of 12 January,
Haiti was convulsed by a 7.0 magnitude
earthquake. Its epicentre was less than
20 kilometres south-west of the capital,
Port-au-Prince. It took only 35 seconds for
much of the city to be reduced to ruins
and 20 minutes for the huge plume of
dust that rose above it to clear.

handling, border crossing facilitation and
support to cargo flights of the WFP-managed
UN Humanitarian Air Service. Three heavylift helicopters were deployed to deliver relief
to inaccessible areas and two fixed-wing
aircraft chartered to ferry passengers.
At the same time, WFP rolled out food- and
cash-for-work projects to bring immediate
relief and began working with the Haitian
government and other agencies to implement
longer-term recovery programmes, including
cash vouchers and nutritional projects.

The scale of the devastation was immense:
230,000 people dead in the capital and in the
surrounding towns and countryside;
300,000 injured, among them 4,000 who
would lose limbs; close to one million left
homeless. Whole buildings collapsed, killing
nearly everyone inside. The National Palace
— official residence of the Haitian president
— was almost completely destroyed and
overnight became a symbol of Haiti’s plight.
When the government of Haiti appealed for
international assistance, WFP responded with
an emergency operation to bring assistance to
some two million people in the quake zone.
As the lead agency for both logistics and
emergency telecommunications, the agency
quickly established clusters in both sectors.
Within 48 hours, basic telecommunications,
including email, were up and running. Not
long after, the telecommunications cluster
established wireless internet connectivity,
two radio networks, round-the-clock radio
rooms and an IT help desk to provide
technical assistance to the entire
humanitarian community.

The quake hit WFP staff hard. The personal
assistant to the country director was killed in
her home, while two drivers each lost a child.
Others lost friends and relatives or had family
members injured. Close to 90 percent of staff
saw their homes damaged or destroyed.

Logistics support for the humanitarian
community was ramped up, providing vital
civil-military cooperation, common service
transport within Haiti and from the
neighbouring Dominican Republic, transit
hubs in both Haiti and the Dominican
Republic for consolidating of cargo, air cargo

Staff from the sub-office in Jacmel — the
badly-hit town on the southern coast — were
out distributing high-energy biscuits to
survivors at the airfield within hours of the
quake, as were Port-au-Prince staff, many
of them local employees with pressing
demands at home.
17

Those efforts marked the beginning of WFP’s
emergency operation, which would soon
become the single largest humanitarian
intervention of the relief operation. The main
focus was on the capital, home to more than
2.5 million people. The quake’s survivors,
forced from their homes, took refuge in some
300 spontaneous settlements around
the city.

Within days of the quake, WFP started
delivering dry rations — rice, beans, oil,
sugar and salt — to hospitals and children’s
homes around the capital. One such home
was Notre Dame de la Nativité, where more
than 50 children had been crushed to death,
though nearly 80 survived and were moved
to a neighbouring property.
Scores of aid flights were soon arriving
daily at Port-au-Prince’s international
airport, where WFP and most other UN
and humanitarian organisations had
relocated. Other supplies were trucked in
by road from the neighbouring Dominican
Republic, where WFP established a
regional logistics hub.

In the initial phase of WFP’s response,
emergency rations — mainly high-energy
biscuits in stock for hurricane relief or flown
in from the region — were delivered to people
in camps, some with hundreds, others, such
as the Champ de Mars in central Port-auPrince, brimming with thousands of people.

In Carrefour, Haiti, the
Adventist Development and
Relief Agency helped distribute
food delivered by WFP.

18

By the end of January, five aid corridors —
over land, sea and air — were in use. By the
end of March, close to 2,500 metric tons of
relief items had been delivered inside Haiti
to Port-au-Prince and surrounding areas. In
the same period, a fleet of 855 trucks
carried in goods from Santo Domingo,
transporting more than 3,200 metric tons
of food and 23,000 square metres of nonfood items for 75 different humanitarian
organizations, including seeds for the
Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations.

government dignitaries, US military top
brass, diplomats, donors and relief officials.
She also heard first-hand accounts from
local WFP staff and offered them comfort
as well as assurances that they would have
support in rebuilding their damaged
homes.
The next phase saw a massive scale-up
of WFP’s relief operation with the
implementation of general distributions
of two-week rice rations from 16 sites around
the capital. The coupon-based initiative
was created in partnership with the
government, municipal authorities and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs),

WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran
arrived in the stricken capital on 21 January.
During her two-day visit, she held talks with

These children received a
hot meal daily from WFP
at Camp Pechinat, a camp
for displaced persons in
Jacmel, Haiti.

19

as well as US Army and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
security contingents, stabilizing the price of
imported rice locally. It reached some
2.2 million beneficiaries with rice in its first
two weeks of operation.

Tropical Storm Ketsana struck Metro Manila
on 26 September at the height of the seasonal
monsoon rains. In 24 hours, 455 millimetres
of rain fell on the capital, the heaviest
downpour in more than 40 years. It
submerged 80 percent of Manila and
surrounding regions in floodwaters in some
places six metres deep, prompting a massive
flight of the urban population.

In February, WFP and its partners launched
a nutrition drive in camps for pregnant
and breast-feeding women and children
under five, distributing three-week rations
of high-energy biscuits and sachets of
Plumpy’Doz, a ready-to-use nutritious food
supplement.

Eight days later, Typhoon Parma struck the
highlands of northern Luzon, generating
175 kilometre-per-hour winds. The storm
hovered and reversed track twice as it
ravaged the country’s main rice-producing
areas, where more than half of the
Philippines’ crop is grown. By the time Parma
finally left, 500,000 farmers had lost their
rice crops. The high winds and heavy rains
also provoked landslides, cutting roads and
isolating scores of mountain towns and
villages. On 31 October, the area was hit again
when Typhoon Mirinae barreled in from the
Pacific to dump torrential rains on the
already inundated city and its suburbs.

One month after the quake, marked by
a national day of mourning, WFP announced
a long-term food-and-cash-based recovery
strategy to help quake victims rebuild their
lives. Efforts included the re-launch and
expansion of food-for-work projects and
the reactivation of hot meals delivery for
school children.
While continuing to provide lifeline support
for those who had suffered in Haiti’s worst
recorded disaster, WFP’s focus for the
months ahead would be on laying the
nutritional foundation for the country’s
long-term rehabilitation and recovery. In
February, WFP hosted a High-Level Meeting
in Rome on behalf of Haiti, Brazil and the
United States to kick off a global partnership
on medium- and long-term development
plans for Haiti, designed to help Haiti build
a food security plan as part of larger
reconstruction efforts.

In all, close to 10 million people, half of whom
were children, were affected by the succession
of storms. More than four million of those
needed help of some kind, either relief or
early recovery assistance or both. Weeks after
the storms passed, 1.7 million people were
still living in, or dispersed from, areas
semi-submerged in fetid floodwaters.
When the Philippines government requested
international humanitarian assistance, WFP
responded three days later with an emergency
operation to provide food relief to severely
affected people for an initial three-month
period. Rice, canned fish and vegetable oil
were supplied to those most in need, while
the extremely vulnerable — young mothers
and children under five years of age — were
given supplementary nutritional support in
the form of high energy biscuits fortified
with vitamins, minerals and other
micronutrients. Private-sector partner TNT
supported this effort by sending two of its
747 aircrafts full of biscuits.

THE PHILIPPINES
In early autumn, a major tropical storm and
two typhoons swept out of the Pacific Ocean
in rapid succession to batter the northern
island of Luzon in the Philippines. The three
storms killed more than 1,000 people in just
over a month, rendered tens of thousands
homeless and destroyed hundreds of
thousands of hectares of prime rice lands.
20

Philippe Martou of WFP’s aviation service
(left), Jan Steinvick of the Norwegian Refugee
Council (on loan to WFP, in vest) and Natacha
Cauchois of UNHAS (in pink) confer with a
local guide on using helicopters in difficult-toreach areas of Tanay, Philippines.

When the full magnitude of the damage
wrought by the three storms had unfolded,
estimates of the amount of help needed were
revised upward. WFP’s costs in delivering
relief to more than one million people
eventually reached an overall budget of
$56.8 million, and the timeline to provide
assistance was extended to June 2010.

In line with WFP’s new focus on nutrition
improvement, supplementary feeding
programmes for children and young
mothers were also phased down early in
2010 in favour of targeting 50,000 children
between the ages of six months and two
years. WFP also launched a pilot project
using micronutrient powder to cover the
nutritional requirements of 16,000
children for six months. The ultimate goal:
to help the women and children regain
their footing and protect them from
malnutrition as they recover from the
devastation.

When the new year dawned, the focus of
WFP’s emergency operation shifted, with
increasing emphasis on complementary foodfor-work activities to offer assistance over the
medium term to families who lost their
livelihoods.
21

Logistics::
Solving Problems
TEAMWORK: LOGISTICS CLUSTER
Logistics is the core of WFP’s operations.
When emergency strikes, WFP finds a way
to respond within hours, delivering
urgently needed food and life-saving relief
by land, sea and air. But an effective
response requires teamwork, and WFP, as
the designated lead agency of the global
Logistics Cluster, also coordinates services
and staff for the wider humanitarian
community’s efforts to deliver relief to
victims of disaster.

Sri Lanka while mounting relief efforts for
new emergencies in Indonesia, Pakistan,
the occupied Palestinian territories, the
Philippines, Samoa and Zimbabwe.
Completed operations were phased out in
the Central Africa Republic and Chad.
Cluster operations during the year varied
in scope and scale, ranging from a simple
sharing of information to pooling common
air, ocean and overland transport. The aim
throughout was to improve the speed and
effectiveness of the humanitarian response
by wringing the maximum benefit from
the combined logistics assets, expertise
and experience of participating
organizations.

During 2009, WFP continued to play a role in
leading the global humanitarian team. Under
the agency’s direction, the Logistics Cluster
maintained operations in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Haiti, Somalia and

WFP trucks en route to Masisi
from Goma to deliver food
assistance

22

To organize the effort, WFP hosts the Global
Logistics Cluster Support Cell at its Rome
headquarters. Designed to mobilize surge
capacity in emergencies, the Cell’s members
are drawn from Action contre la Faim, Care
International, the Swedish Civil
Contingencies Agency, UNHCR, UNICEF,
WFP and World Vision International.

community and transported 3,392
passengers, including medical and
assessment teams.
WFP’s private sector partners Agility, TNT
and UPS supplied five trucks, which
conducted 152 trips and carried more than
1,000 metric tons of humanitarian cargo.

The Cell’s first emergency in 2009 occurred
at the very beginning of the year when the
Israeli military launched Operation Cast Lead
in the Gaza Strip. As the 23-day conflict
unfolded, increasing numbers of
humanitarian organizations responded with
emergency relief supplies for those caught
in the midst of the fighting.

ETHIOPIA: BYPASSING
BOTTLENECKS
Getting food into landlocked Ethiopia has
always posed problems for WFP, largely
because seaborne assistance must be
channeled through a single port in
neighbouring Djibouti and then hauled
500 miles over land to the Ethiopian capital,
Addis Ababa.

But unlike other emergencies, the major
logistical constraint in Gaza was not the
destruction or loss of infrastructure; rather,
it was restrictions on access to assistance
imposed by the Israeli authorities. In
response, WFP established a common
transport service for the humanitarian
community that dedicated a civil-military
officer to consolidate daily requests to deliver
different types of assistance to the Gaza Strip.
Five transit hubs and three logistics corridors
were established, through which nearly 7,000
metric tons of relief supplies were moved into
the Strip by 31 UN agencies and local and
international NGOs.

For the past two years, the pressure on the
Djibouti port and the overland corridor has
grown even more intense, steadily mounting
along with the continuing rise in Ethiopia’s
humanitarian needs. WFP competes for time
and space with both commercial as well as
government cargoes, many of which are often
designated as high priority by the authorities.
Severe shortages of long-haul trucks have
exacerbated the problem, hampering food
dispatches and resulting in long delays in
reaching beneficiaries.

Later in 2009, the Logistics Cluster was called
to respond to an emergency of a different sort
when a tropical storm and two typhoons hit
the Philippines in rapid succession, causing
widespread flooding and population
displacement.

WFP responded in May 2009 by opening
two alternative corridors into Ethiopia,
bypassing the Djibouti bottleneck. In the north,
WFP reactivated the use of Port Sudan on
Sudan’s Red Sea coast, a route that has been
used in the past to deliver relief supplies to
northwestern Ethiopia. In the south, WFP
established an entirely new route, utilizing the
port of Berbera on the coast of Somalia on
the Gulf of Aden.

WFP immediately shipped four generators to
donate to hospitals and provided inflatable
boats to assist with cargo delivery to areas
inaccessible by road. A UN Humanitarian Air
Service was set up, composed of two MI-171
helicopters. By the end of the operation, the
helicopters had conducted 389 rotations
carrying 410 metric tons of food and relief
items for the government and humanitarian

Both corridors required protracted
negotiations with the various governments and
authorities involved. Initial improvements
were also required at Berbera port, where
23

Ethiopian customs
authorities inspecting
Somaliland trucks

bagging machines were installed and
warehouse capacity enhanced with the erection
of 20 mobile storage units, capable of handling
8,000 metric tons of wheat.

But the road system requires an upgrade.
Transporters often take several days to make
the 300-kilometre journey from Berbera to
Jijiga, usually travelling in convoys of
30 and more trucks. Most of the road is
either gravel or broken tarmac. Breakdowns
are constant and accidents, some fatal, are
common.

Soon, both the Port Sudan and Berbera
corridors were in operation, alleviating the
pressure on overburdened Djibouti. By the end
of 2009, three vessels had docked at Port
Sudan, offloading 65,000 metric tons of cereals
— mostly wheat — which was then trucked to
the border town of Gedarif and delivered to
beneficiary communities in Gonder and
Wereta in northern Ethiopia.

The Ethiopian government, with the support
of several donor countries, is working to
improve the roads. When the rehabilitation
is complete, it will enhance safety and
further reduce transport time. It will also
likely aid commercial imports.

In the south, the Berbera corridor quickly
developed into a cost-effective, time-saving
alternative to Djibouti, particularly for
Ethiopia’s troubled Somali Region, right on
Somalia’s doorstep. As distances are much
shorter, transport costs were drastically
reduced and are likely to fall further once
ongoing road reconstruction is complete.

The Berbera corridor has the potential to
develop into a regular supply link for
importing humanitarian commodities. The
100,000 metric tons shipped through the
port in 2009 amounted to 16 percent of
WFP’s total cereal imports to Ethiopia.
Those numbers could double in 2010,
depending on Ethiopian requirements and
further development of the corridor. The
need is great: Successive droughts,
persistent high food prices and the global
financial meltdown combined to
push as many as six million Ethiopians
to the brink of hunger.

The first WFP grain ship arrived at Berbera
port at the beginning of June. Three more
vessels followed, the last departing Berbera at
the end of December. In all, 100,000 metric
tons of food assistance passed through the
Somali port in 2009.
24

SRI LANKA: DELIVERING
UNDER SIEGE
As the long conflict in Sri Lanka moved
towards its bloody climax in May 2009, the
challenges mounted for WFP’s effort to
deliver food to those caught in the midst of
the escalating hostilities.

partners’ only link to the rest of the world.
Between 19 February and 13 May, WFP sent
2,800 metric tons of food on ICRC-flagged
vessels.
“The logistics team worked around the clock
to obtain the necessary clearances from the
government and the military to deliver
assistance to the conflict zone, ensuring that
no lives were lost because of insufficient
food,” said Adnan Khan, WFP’s Sri Lanka
country director.

Road access to the Vanni area of northeastern
Sri Lanka, scene of the previous battles
between the government and the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Elaam, steadily diminished
until roads were finally shut down completely
late in January. WFP’s last convoy to the
Vanni, which departed on 16 January, itself
came under fire and remained trapped in the
conflict zone for almost a week, stranding
national and international staff.

The number of people in flight from the
conflict steadily rose as the fighting
intensified. By April, the displaced
population had swollen to 130,000 and
WFP distributions were reaching
54,000 a day on average. As 2009 drew to a
close, seven months after hostilities ceased,
300,000 displaced people were being
resettled in the Vanni.

In February, the Sri Lankan authorities
declared a ‘no-fire zone’ along the eastern
coastline of the Mullaitivu district, a
12-kilometre strip of land where up to
100,000 people displaced by the fighting
had gathered. To reach those people, the
government and WFP opened a sea route
to deliver food assistance and other relief
supplies. But with no port facilities on
Mullaitivu’s coast, vessels were forced
to remain hundreds of metres offshore,
where food was off-loaded into local fishing
boats for transport to the shore.

To help Sri Lankans, WFP established a
$7.7 million special operation aimed at
facilitating inter-agency cooperation in the
conflict zones in northeastern Sri Lanka.
Under the special operation, WFP managed
common user hubs in Colombo, Jaffna and
Vavuniya, as well as a logistics base in
Trincomalee. Additional storage sites,
including one at the largest IDP camp at
Menik Farm, were set up in the Vanni.

“We would send off the ferries filled with
food, and they would often return with the
sick and wounded,” recalled WFP Logistics
Officer Belay Atlaw. “It was hectic, always a
race against time. You had to be ready at all
times to take quick action, and start loading
food onto whatever boats were available in
Trincomalee port.”

With the end of armed hostilities, WFP is
now helping to resettle those displaced by
the fighting. Many are living
in remote areas and are in need of food
assistance. Few roads have been cleared of
mines and many remain severely
deteriorated. WFP, together with
government, military forces and mine
action agencies, is working to reach these
remote settlements. Trailers and small
trucks have been employed to deliver food
assistance that will support the rebuilding
of the country.

Food was delivered under cover of night,
arriving in Mullaitivu by morning. WFP’s
partners on the scene — the government
and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) — were themselves caught in
the war zone. Deliveries had to be
coordinated by satellite telephones, the
25

New Tools to Fight hunger
EYES IN THE SKY
They are WFP’s eyes in the sky: a constantly
orbiting array of satellites and remote
sensors. As they wheel around the planet,
they are rapidly changing the way WFP
works, introducing a range of innovative
technologies that allows WFP to be better
prepared for emergencies — and to respond
faster and more effectively when they occur.

international protocols to facilitate the
gathering and sharing of more imagery, more
quickly. Humanitarian agencies like WFP can
now even ask for specific satellites to be
activated, or turned in a certain direction.
This can happen not only after a disaster,
such as an earthquake, has struck; but also
when one may be in the making. WFP can
track the course of a tropical storm,
strengthening the organization’s ability to
forecast and prepare. When three tropical
storms hit the Philippines in little over a
month in 2009, WFP used broader satellite
images to look down from the sky at rural
areas with low populations, and turned to
closely focused images for more urbanised
areas. In effect, appropriate technology
helped WFP target its assistance.

Information is paramount when disaster
strikes. To plan relief operations, WFP needs
a clear picture of events unfolding on the
ground. And to speed help to those in need,
the organization requires accurate data about,
among other factors, how many people are
living in affected areas, where they are
located, and which roads and bridges are
still passable.
Until very recently, getting that type of
information has been a time-consuming,
sometimes costly affair. Conventional printed
maps are often out of date. Manned staff
assessment missions can be slow and
cumbersome if overland, or hugely expensive
when carried out by helicopter.

The typhoons’ tracks were also scrutinized by
satellites, which had been activated under the
international protocols. Information from
satellites and other remote sensing devices
about where the typhoons could make
landfall, and where soils were already so
waterlogged that flooding would be
inevitable, was of immense help in preparing
WFP’s response.

Many of these practices are giving way to
recent advances in satellite and analytical
mapping technology. To fully exploit these
technological developments, WFP has
enlisted the help of an extensive network of
academic and scientific partners, and is more
often using analytical maps and ones created
from satellite imagery, in both its initial
emergency response and in planning the next
phases of an operation.

The skills and resources that WFP has
acquired proved essential when the Haiti
earthquake struck. Within hours of the
disaster, the first WFP analytical maps were
produced by the headquarters mapping team
at the Emergency Preparedness and
Response Branch. The maps showed the
epicentres and how many people were likely
to be affected, providing the initial broad
picture necessary to begin work immediately.
WFP then turned to one of its academic and
scientific partners, ITHACA (Information
Technology for Humanitarian Assistance,
Cooperation and Action), and quickly got

Satellite images are now easier to acquire and
analyse, not least because governments and
space agencies have recently opened up their
satellites to more civilian use, which in turn
has permitted commercial companies to step
into the picture. There are also new
26

hold of the best satellite imagery available to
analyse the impact of the earthquake.

BURKINA FASO:
CASH/VOUCHERS

While other images were of limited use due
to cloud cover, the images ITHACA acquired
were crystal clear and of such high
resolution (one pixel to half a metre on the
ground) that each collapsed or damaged
building and blocked street could easily be
seen. A Rapid Impact Analysis was then
carried out on the capital, Port-au-Prince.
This high-tech process involves the
computerised mapping of key information
on top of the satellite imagery of the damage
to create an immediate picture of the
situation on the ground.

Abdullah’s shop has not been this crowded
for as long as he can remember. Making
his way through the bags of maize and
cans of oil, he struggles to serve his new
customers lining up inside and outside the
tiny dark store on the outskirts of the
Burkina Faso capital, Ouagadougou.
His new customers are the first WFP
vouchers beneficiaries in Africa. They are
just back from a nearby voucher
distribution, and with a voucher worth
about $3, they can buy maize, cooking oil,
sugar, salt and soap.

The maps could easily be updated with new
information, such as where displaced people
were spontaneously gathering, or where a
food distribution site had been established.
When security around distributions became
a concern, the maps showed safe and
passable alternative routes. They responded
to concrete operational needs and allowed
WFP to get food to those who needed it most.

“We realized that high food prices had
created serious vulnerability in urban
areas,” said Annalisa Conte, WFP country
director in Burkina Faso. “People’s
purchasing power had been so eroded that
they would buy soap on credit in the very
same shops that are now part of the
voucher scheme.”

WFP’s first food voucher operation in Africa appeared
in Burkina Faso, where the price of staples had risen
dramatically. Families receive vouchers they can use
for maize, cooking oil, sugar, salt and soap in shops
that have contracted with WFP.

27

VOUCHERS FOR PLUMPY’DOZ

WFP aims to use vouchers more often,
especially in urban areas, where markets are
functioning but some people are too poor to buy
food. Vouchers and cash transfer programmes
inject money into local economies where there
is a functioning infrastructure of markets and
shops. For WFP, they are also a flexible form
of food assistance which reduces the cost of
transporting and storing bulky food stocks.

WFP delivered Plumpy’Doz to children in
Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso
through an innovative voucher system.
In 2009, 360 metric tons of the readyto-use, nutritious food supplement were
distributed to more than 40,000
children under two — 20,237 girls and
20,089 boys. health centres in these
locations report better nutrition among
children who have received the
specialised product, a paste supplement
made from vegetable fat, peanut butter,
sugar and milk. Burkinabe children,
who have grown fond of the
supplement, have nicknamed it
“chocolate”.

Between February and December 2009, almost
200,000 people received vouchers in
Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina’s
second largest city. An impact analysis
undertaken in June 2009 showed that the food
security of those targeted had improved, and
that they had increased their meals per day
from one to two. It also showed that the
programme freed some of their own resources
to meet other basic needs, mostly healthcare
and clothing.
Although the cash transfers, usually dispensed
every six months, roughly represent less than
half of the targeted households’ income, it
came as a particular relief for women, since
most women earn a living collecting sand and
stones for 50 US cents per day.
For Sylvie Dipama of Ougadoudou, one of the
first voucher beneficiaries, not having to
struggle for food for the next six months was
liberating. “I have four children but I had to
send our youngest daughter to my parents as
I could not afford to feed everybody anymore,”
she said on the eve of the launch of the scheme
in early 2009. With food now more easily
available in the household, her children have
been free to attend school rather than help her
in the daily effort to raise money to buy it.

WFP uses ready-to-use supplementary foods in
emergency operations and to help prevent or treat
moderate malnutrition. They are to be used in
addition to breast milk and other food for young
children at high risk of malnutrition.
Plumpy’Doz ingredients:: peanut paste,
vegetable fat, skimmed milk powder, whey,
maltodextrins, sugar.

SYRIA: TELEPHONE VOUCHERS
But more must be done to help voucher
beneficiaries find income-generating
opportunities when they are no longer enrolled
in the programme. A women’s association
in Ouagadougou called “Solidarités et action
sociale” supported by WFP, makes soap bars
and sells them in the shops that are part of
the scheme, giving them a regular market for
their products.

Samar, an Iraqi refugee, lives in the Jarmana
neighbourhood of Damascus, where she is
raising three young children on her own. Her
family’s survival depends on a package of WFP
food assistance that arrives every two months.
Since last September, WFP has helped to ease
Samar’s burden by delivering food in a novel
way — via her mobile telephone.
28

A project in Damascus distributes
WFP food vouchers in the form
of mobile phone text messages
to Iraqi refugees, who
exchange these vouchers for
rice, flour, lentils,
chickpeas, canned fish –
and even cheese and
eggs.

This single mother is part of an innovative
WFP pilot project in which families receive
an SMS text message on their mobile
phones with a code that acts as a kind of
“virtual voucher” at selected government
grocery stores. Beneficiaries can spend all or
part of the voucher on items such as rice,
flour, lentils, vegetable oil or canned tuna.
They are not obliged to spend it all at once,
but can pick and choose, and also buy fresh,
perishable products such as eggs or cheese
that are not included in conventional
rations.
For Samar, the programme has multiple
benefits, not least that she no longer has to
cart home unwieldy sacks of food from
distribution centres. “It’s only me and my
three children at home, so it is hard for me to
travel a long distance and leave the children
alone for too long,” she said. “Now I can just
walk to the store and be back home soon.”
Samar is also delighted with the choices now
available to her.

During the initial phase, participating families
were selected at random from among the
130,000 Iraqis currently receiving regular food
assistance. They attended information
sessions, where they were given SIM cards,
provided free by mobile phone service
provider MTN Syria. Every two months, each
family received one voucher per person, worth
$22 (approximately SYP 1,000). After each
transaction, families received an updated
balance, also sent by SMS to their mobile
numbers.

Hundreds of thousands of refugees are living
in Syrian cities, having fled the conflict in
neighbouring Iraq. While humanitarian
agencies have used phone messages and smart
cards in the past to transfer cash to those in
need, WFP’s pilot is believed to be the first
time mobile phones have been used to help
people access food.

WFP developed the pilot project in
collaboration with the General Establishment
for Storing and Marketing Agriculture and
Animal Products (GESMAAP), part of the
Syrian Ministry of Economy and Trade.
GESMAAP provide food items through its
stores in the Damascus neighbourhoods where
the majority of Iraqi refugees live.

Daly Belgasmi, WFP’s regional director for the
Middle East, Central Asia and Eastern Europe,
noted that “the smiles of mothers as they pick
up milk and eggs at a shop close to home is
what keeps us working hard toward finding
ways that inject some normalcy into the lives
of refugees who are struggling to make a life in
a new place.”

The Syrian government estimates that there
are more than one million Iraqi refugees in
Syria, mostly living in apartments and other
private accommodation. Many had money
when they arrived and already owned and
used mobile phones. But their savings have
dwindled and, as they cannot legally work, the
food assistance is helpful.

The first stage of WFP’s pilot project ran from
September to December 2009 and reached
more than 3,000 people, who spent some
6 million Syrian pounds ($130,000) on food.
The project was extended for another four
months, aiming to double the number of
families reached.
29

Purchase For Progress::
Building capacity
A

dilio de Jesus’ passion has never been
very profitable. The 26-year-old
tenant farmer loves working the land in his
native El Salvador but rarely earns enough
from his maize and beans crops to more
than break even. But in 2009, Adilio finally
turned a profit, thanks largely to WFP’s
Purchase for Progress project, better
known as P4P.

Increasing incomes of small farmers is at the
core of P4P, which uses WFP’s ability to buy
food commodities as a tool to stimulate and
improve agricultural production among
smallholder farmers, helping them link to
agricultural markets.
Launched in September 2008, the project
was underway in 19 of 21 selected pilot
countries by the end of the 2009. During that
period, 39,000 metric tons of staple crops
had been purchased under P4P contracts with
80 farmers’ organizations in 13 countries.
To date, 356 farming groups, representing
close to 630,000 farmers, have been
identified for participation in the project.

“I made a net profit of $500 by selling to
WFP,” he said. “If I had sold my crops to
the coyotes [local traders], I would have
made just enough to cover my costs. This
project makes it worth doing what I like to
do. We work hard but we are rewarded.”

A grinding mill in Kapchorwa,
Uganda, prepares maize for local
consumption or to sell.

30

Adilio’s local association in El Salvador,
El Pesote, is one such organization. Under
the project, the 64 members of El Pesote
have received technical assistance provided
by WFP’s partners to improve their farming
techniques. Members have also gained
access to seed capital to establish a revolving
credit fund that allowed them to buy good
quality seeds and fertilizers. And they have
been trained in post-harvest handling,
standards of quality and organizational
management.

sell 600 metric tons of cereals to WFP. “The
sale was quick, they paid us promptly and we
made a good profit,” said Mamadou Traoré,
60, a longtime member of Faso Jigi.

As a result, El Pesote members were able to
contract with WFP to sell 97 metric tons of
maize. Adilio sold 80 quintals of maize, or
3.6 metric tons, which allowed him to rent
additional land for the following season. His
farmers’ association is negotiating a loan to
fund the expansion of the organization’s
warehouse facilities and infrastructure.

“Currently there are few threshing areas,
there are no adequate storage facilities, and
there is a limited market,” she said.
“Typically, we harvest maize and heap it in
small premises, where it often gets rotten
before we can find buyers. If we do manage
to dry it, we have to take it to Mbale to find
a market. This warehouse is going to solve
a lot of problems.”

P4P works at various levels along the
agricultural chain to help farmers sell more
and at better prices. In Uganda, the project is
promoting warehouse construction, which
Joselyn Mangusho, a farmer in Kapchorwa
and a mother of six, views as an important
development.

P4P combines WFP’s demand for staple crops
with the technical expertise of supply-side
partners to build the capacity of farmers’
organizations, helping them access credit and
improving their ability to deliver a quality
product to profitable markets.

Mbayin Jackson, 30, a maize farmer
in Kapchorwa, Uganda, inspects his
new harvest.

More than 50 partners, including
governments, UN agencies, local and
international organizations and NGOs, and
the private sector, are working with WFP to
implement P4P. More than 10,000 farmers
have acquired new skills in organizational
management, farming techniques, quality
control and post harvest handling.
The effort is beginning to show results. In
Mali, smallholding farmers had never
participated in WFP’s regular tenders to buy
food commodities in the country, largely
because of widespread feeling that they
lacked the capacity to sell their crops to WFP.
Then Faso Jigi, a federation of farmers’
associations, collaborated with P4P and soon
was able to demonstrate that smallholders
could win tenders, providing that the
quantities required were on a scale they could
produce. In 2009, Faso Jigi won a tender to
31

WFP must sometimes delay food
deliveries or field missions because
of threats to safety and security.
Any convoys carrying food require
security clearance, which serves as
a final safety check before they
depart.

32

Security and Safety
PAKISTAN
The security challenges facing WFP grew
tragically clear shortly after noon on
5 October 2009, when a suicide bomber,
later identified as a member of the Taliban,
walked into the agency’s office in Islamabad
and blew himself up.

from vehicle bombs. The assault by a suicide
bomber underscored the need to rethink
security strategies.
Temporary offices were set up at an
Islamabad hotel, where rigorous security
systems were in place after a prior terrorist
attack on the hotel. New permanent
quarters, scheduled for occupation in May
2010, were identified within Islamabad’s
high-security diplomatic enclave.

Five WFP staff members died in the blast:
Information and Communication
Technology Officer Botan Ahmed Ali
Al-Hayawi; Finance Assistant Mohamed
Wahab; Senior Finance Assistant Abid
Rehman; Receptionist Gul Rukh Tahir; and
Office Assistant Farzana Barkat. Four more
WFP staff suffered serious injuries — Syed
Tahir, Atif Sheikh and Muhammed Muneer,
all members of the finance unit, and Adam
Motiwala, who was working in logistics.

Remarkably, WFP’s programmes in Pakistan
continued with only minimal interruption.
The agency provided vital food assistance to
close to 10 million people in the country in
2009, including 350,000 metric tons of
emergency relief to nearly 3 million civilians
displaced by conflict that erupted in the
Swat Valley earlier in the year.

The building housing WFP’s offices was
seriously damaged, resulting in the total loss
of electricity, telephone and internet
connections.

AFGHANISTAN
Outcomes would have been even worse had
WFP not recently completed a $300,000
security upgrade at the site in response to
the growing threat from the Taliban.
Security barriers were erected, walls
reinforced and blast resistant glass installed.
As a result, only one window blew out in the
explosion, and not a single person was
injured by flying shards of glass.

A split second later and WFP driver
Ghulam Hassan would likely have died. But
the remote-controlled roadside bomb
exploded just in front of his white Land
Cruiser, leaving the car’s engine block to
absorb the blast.
The bomb reduced the front end of the Land
Cruiser to a twisted mass of metal and left
Hassan unconscious, with severe leg and
pelvic injuries. After months of medical
treatment and physical therapy in four
hospitals in two countries, Hassan returned
to work on light duty by the end of the year.

Still, the incident profoundly shocked WFP,
as well as the entire humanitarian
community in Pakistan. It was the first
assault on WFP since the agency arrived in
the country in 1968. It was also the first
attack on a UN office by a “person-borne
improvised explosive device”, security
jargon for a suicide bomber. Prior to the
attack, WFP’s main security emphasis had
focused on measures to protect buildings

But the attack he suffered while leading a
WFP convoy through normally peaceful
Parwan province in central Afghanistan was a
sign of the deteriorating security that would
33

pose one of 2009’s greatest challenges in the
country, not just to WFP but to the entire
humanitarian community. Sadly, things
would get worse before year’s end.

of outsourced food monitors for needs
assessment, monitoring and reporting.
Under the arrangement, locally contracted
employees not restricted by UN security rules
conduct project assessment and intensive
monitoring of WFP-supported programmes.
The monitors use the same standard
assessment, monitoring and reporting
toolkits used by WFP staff field monitors.
And like WFP staff, the outsourced monitors
work closely with local communities.

Four months later, just after dawn on
28 October, international staff in Kabul
scrambled into their bunkers as they learned
that men armed with assault rifles and
explosives were laying siege to a private guest
house used by UN staff. Some were close
enough to hear explosions and gunfire. Over
the next several hours, updates trickled in by
text message and the internet, and anxiety
grew as it became clear that several sites were
under attack. Twelve people died, including
five UN colleagues from other agencies.

SOMALIA
Since the start of Somalia’s civil war in 1991,
security has continued to deteriorate. With
each passing year, the situation has grown
worse, both for the long-suffering people of
the country and for the humanitarian
agencies trying to assist them. The year 2009
proved to be no exception.

More regions of Afghanistan were declared
off-limits to UN staff in 2009 due to
insecurity, posing more challenges in
delivering food and implementing
programmes. Despite the security
environment, WFP fed some 9 million
Afghans in all 34 provinces.

It opened with the killing of two WFP staff in
three days in January during food
distributions in southern Somalia and closed
on 31 December with all WFP staff relocating
from parts of the South controlled by the
Al-Shabab movement. In between, there was
real progress in what is probably the most
dangerous and fluid environment in the
world for humanitarian agencies.

Thanks to important investments made in
enhancing security at WFP facilities in 2009,
WFP was able to continue working at full
capacity, without the staff reductions
imposed on other UN agencies due to
inadequate staff accommodation.
WFP also changed some procedures for
protecting commercial trucks in “UN No-Go”
areas, working closely with local communities
in some places and arranging escorts from
Afghan National Police in others, when the
transporters requested it. As a result of these
changes, attacks on WFP commercial convoys
dropped by a third from the previous year,
and the amount of food looted dropped by
80 percent, even as the overall number of
security incidents rose.

Following the killings, WFP secured support
from communities, armed groups and
administrations across most of the south and
was able to resume feeding people. With the
support of donors and the dedication of brave
staff, WFP — the biggest humanitarian
agency working in Somalia — proved that
delivering assistance was still possible,
though often difficult. In total, WFP fed
3.3 million people in Somalia in 2009 with
more than 440,000 metric tons of food.

WFP Afghanistan also took concrete steps to
strengthen its field monitoring in 2009, and
developed a strategy to strengthen it further
in the coming years. In some areas of
Afghanistan inaccessible to UN staff due to
security restrictions, WFP expanded the use

In health and nutrition, WFP doubled its
capacity to assist moderately malnourished
people with nearly 150,000 women and
34

In Bakool province, Somalia,
women wait for food from WFP
under a guard’s protective watch.

children treated in supplementary feeding
programmes. WFP also pilot-tested readyto-use supplementary food (RUSF) to treat
moderate malnutrition. By December, some
18,000 children were receiving RUSF in
Mogadishu, Puntland and Somaliland.

of cargo between Kenya and Somalia and
within Somalia in 2009.
To fend off pirates, naval escorts provided by
the European Union and NATO protected
ships loaded with 263,000 tons of WFP food
— enough to feed 1.3 million people for a
year. More than 500,000 tons of WFP food
have been safely escorted to ports in Somalia
since the naval escort system began in 2007.

In the capital, WFP provided basic food for
hot meals for 80,000 people daily at
16 centres run by the NGO SAACID, and
with partners and donors including the
Danish Refugee Council, the European
Commission Humanitarian Aid Department,
the US Agency for International
Development, and the governments of
Denmark, France, Norway and Sweden. This
brought the number of meals provided to
more than 40 million since November 2007.

Following allegations of food diversions in
Somalia, WFP conducted an internal
investigation, which found no evidence of
WFP staff selling food and no evidence of
transporters selling WFP food to
businessmen. WFP nevertheless tightened its
checks and controls and welcomed any
independent enquiries that might arise.

WFP continued rehabilitating the
Mogadishu port despite area conflict.
Debris, such as sunken tugboats, was
removed from the seabed, and berths were
dredged to a depth of 10 metres from the
original two, allowing larger ships to dock.
A backup generator and 14 heavy duty
fenders were installed and a 64,000-litre
elevated fresh water tank was built. The UN
Humanitarian Air Service managed by WFP
flew 15,000 passengers and 176 metric tons

In contrast to assurances of cooperation that
WFP received early in 2009, a harsher
approach emerged from armed groups in the
south toward the end of the year, including
demands for payments for security and other
unacceptable conditions. With its staff the
objects of threats and intimidation, WFP
pulled its last 45 employees out of most of
southern Somalia. WFP is determined they
should return as soon as possible.
35

The Executive Board discusses
WFP’s IPSAS compliance two
years ahead of schedule.

36

ensuring Transparency:: IPSAS
In

June 2009, WFP completed its
implementation of International
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS),
cementing the agency’s position as a leader
within the United Nations system on matters
of financial management, accountability and
transparency.

advanced the implementation date to
January 2008. Accordingly, the first IPSAS
compliant financial statements were
produced by WFP on schedule in January
2008, and the agency became the first
within the UN system to adopt the
standards.

IPSAS is a series of 26 rigorous financial
reporting and accounting standards
developed for the public sector by experts at
the International Federation of Accountants.
The standards enhance accountability,
transparency and harmonization of financial
reporting in support of better governance and
internal financial management.

The 2008 statements have since received
a clean audit opinion by WFP’s external
auditors. Under IPSAS guidelines, WFP
annually produces five financial statements
on the agency’s financial position, financial
performance, changes in net assets/equity,
cash flow, and comparison of budget and
actual amounts.

The UN’s High-Level Committee on
Management approved the adoption of
IPSAS by UN agencies and organizations in
2005, with an implementation target set for
January 2010. WFP’s Executive Board

WFP’s IPSAS team developed an
implementation manual and a short brochure
to explain the main concepts, created a
dedicated website, and trained more than
3,200 staff on using the standards.

37

Reaching Out:: wfp.org
In January 2009, WFP rebuilt its public
website, making wfp.org the central
anchor of the organization’s
communications work. The goal was to
transform the site into the premiere
information source on global hunger and
a vibrant meeting place for engaging the
general public, journalists, teachers,
students and aid professionals.

news, the site now keeps WFP’s growing
community of readers engaged and educated
about hunger and about what the
organization does to fight it. The make-over
and improved content have helped boost
traffic by 60 percent and online fundraising
by 75 percent year-on-year.
WFP’s 2009 online engagement campaign,
Billion for a Billion, generated WFP’s first
significant buzz on social networks. The
accompanying video, viewed more than
600,000 times on YouTube, demonstrated
that a primarily online campaign can
succeed in engaging people in the fight
against hunger.

This required two things: a strong, versatile
technological platform and a plentiful supply
of sophisticated content. The new wfp.org
provided both. Almost three times as many
stories were published in 2009 as in the
previous year and they came from
58 authors around the world.

Total funds raised online in 2009 reached
just over $2 million. Online supporters grew
to more than 90,000 from 72,000.

Bolstered by multimedia features and
featuring the day’s most relevant hunger

38

WFP provides school
meals to 22 million
children in 60 countries,
encouraging poor
households to send
children to school
regularly. This
young boy is one of
500 pupils to receive
food from WFP at the
Communauté Sainte
Marie school in Haiti
on 12 April 2010, the
three-month anniversary
of the earthquake.

39

Annexes

40

The US military forces offload
military rations for distribution by
WFP staff in Haiti.

41



&{WHG ,YRLUH

42

6DR7RPHDQG3ULQFLSH

5ZDQGD

1LJHU





















0R]DPELTXH

1DPLELD









0DOL

0DXULWDQLD





0DODZL

































0DGDJDVFDU





/HVRWKR

/LEHULD



.HQ\D





*XLQHD%LVVDX



*XLQHD



*DPELD

*KDQD





(WKLRSLD

(ULWUHD





&RQJR'HP5HSRIWKH

'MLERXWL





&RQJR

&KDG









&DSH9HUGH

&HQWUDO$IULFDQ5HSXEOLF









&DPHURRQ

%XUXQGL





%XUNLQD)DVR









 

5HOLHI

%HQLQ

$QJROD

68%6$+$5$1$)5,&$

*5$1'727$/

'HYHORS
PHQW































































6SHFLDO
2SHU


7RWDO





























































5HOLHI

































































































































































 

'HYHORS
PHQW





 

%LODWHUDOV































































7RWDO















































































 









 



























 

6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV


5HOLHI

























































































































 

'HYHORS
PHQW































































7RWDO













































































 









 







 



















 

6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV


5HOLHI

























































































































 

'HYHORS
PHQW































































7RWDO











































































 









 







 



 















 

6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



annex 1
Direct expenses1 by country, Region and Programme category,

43







2WKHUUHJLRQDOH[SHQGLWXUH

727$/5(*,21





7LPRU/HVWH

6UL/DQND









1HSDO

3DNLVWDQ

3KLOLSSLQHV









0DOGLYHV

0\DQPDU



















/DR3'5





,VODPDEDG&OXVWHU

.RUHD'35









,QGLD

,QGRQHVLD















&DPERGLD

&KLQD



%KXWDQ





$IJKDQLVWDQ

 

%DQJODGHVK

$6,$

727$/5(*,21









2WKHUUHJLRQDOH[SHQGLWXUH

=LPEDEZH





=DPELD





















8JDQGD

7RJR

7DQ]DQLD8QLWHG5HSRI

6ZD]LODQG

6XGDQ









6RPDOLD

6RXWK$IULFD









6HQHJDO

5HOLHI

6LHUUD/HRQH

'HYHORS
PHQW

































































6SHFLDO
2SHU



































































































5HOLHI





































































































 





























'HYHORS
PHQW





7RWDO

 

%LODWHUDOV









































































7RWDO





















































































 

 







 







 









6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



























5HOLHI













































































 

























'HYHORS
PHQW




































































7RWDO





















































































 

 



 



 







 



 





6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



























5HOLHI













































































 

























'HYHORS
PHQW





































































7RWDO



























































 

























 

 



 











 



 





6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



2006–2009 (Thousand Dollars)

















$]HUEDLMDQ

*HRUJLD

.\UJ\]VWDQ

5XVVLDQ)HGHUDWLRQ

6HUELD0RQWHQHJUR

7DMLNLVWDQ

2WKHUUHJLRQDOH[SHQGLWXUH

727$/5(*,21

44

727$/5(*,21

2WKHUUHJLRQDOH[SHQGLWXUH

3HUX

3DQDPD

































































0H[LFR

1LFDUDJXD







-DPDLFD

+RQGXUDV

+DLWL





(O6DOYDGRU



*XDWHPDOD



'RPLQLFDQ5HSXEOLF







(FXDGRU

&XED

&RORPELD

%ROLYLD 7KH3OXULQDWLRQDO
6WDWHRI





%DUEDGRV

%HOL]H





5HOLHI

/$7,1$0(5,&$$1'7+(&$5,%%($1





$OEDQLD

$UPHQLD

($67(51(8523($1'&,6

'HYHORS
PHQW

























































6SHFLDO
2SHU



%LODWHUDOV
































































































































































'HYHORS
PHQW



7RWDO

























































5HOLHI

















































































































6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



























































7RWDO

























































'HYHORS
PHQW

























































5HOLHI

















































































































6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



























































7RWDO

























































'HYHORS
PHQW

























































5HOLHI

















































































































6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



























































7RWDO

annex 1 (cont.)
Direct expenses1 by country, Region and Programme category,





6\ULDQ$UDE5HSXEOLF

45

















































6SHFLDO
2SHU



























%LODWHUDOV













































'HYHORS
PHQW



7RWDO



























5HOLHI



















































7RWDO

 

























6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV





























'HYHORS
PHQW

1HJDWLYH¿JXUHVUHSUHVHQW¿QDQFLDODGMXVWPHQWV



DQGH[SHQVHVSUHVHQWHGDUHDFFRUGLQJWR,36$6DQGQRWFRPSDUDEOHWRDQGSUHYLRXV\HDUV¶YDOXHVEDVHGRQ816$6



,QFOXGHVDOOH[SHQVHVIRUELODWHUDOVWUXVWIXQGVWKH*HQHUDO)XQGDQGVSHFLDODFFRXQWV





























5HOLHI

2SHUDWLRQDOH[SHQVHVIURPWKH*HQHUDO)XQGVSHFLDODFFRXQWVDQGWUXVWIXQGVWKDWFDQQRWEHDSSRUWLRQHGE\SURMHFWRSHUDWLRQDUHDFFXPXODWHGXQGHUµ7RWDO¶IRU



([FOXGHV36$FRVWV

27+(5

727$/5(*,21

2WKHUUHJLRQDOH[SHQGLWXUH





2FFXSLHG3DOHVWLQLDQ
7HUULWRU\

<HPHQ





/HEDQRQ















5HOLHI





/\ELD

-RUGDQ

,UDT

,UDQ ,VODPLF5HSXEOLFRI

(J\SW

$OJHULD

0,''/(($67$1'1257+$)5,&$

'HYHORS
PHQW





















































7RWDO

 

























6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV





























'HYHORS
PHQW



























5HOLHI



















































7RWDO

 

























6SHFLDO %LODWHUDOV
2SHU
7UXVW)XQGV
DQG
2WKHUV



2006–2009 (Thousand Dollars)

annex 2
Total confirmed contributions1 in 2009 (Thousand Dollars)

'2125
$)5,&$1'(9(/230(17%$1.
$1'255$
$5*(17,1$
$8675$/,$
$8675,$
%$1*/$'(6+
%(/*,80
%+87$1
%2/,9,$ 7+(3/85,1$7,21$/
67$7(2)
%5$=,/
%85.,1$)$62
%8581',
&$0%2',$
&$1$'$
&+,/(
&+,1$
&2/20%,$
&21*25(38%/,&2)
&52$7,$
&8%$
&<3586
&=(&+5(38%/,&
'(10$5.
(&8$'25
(*<37
(8523($1&200,66,21
)$52(,6/$1'6
),1/$1'
)5$1&(
*(50$1<
*5((&(

727$/









.(1<$

















































































































































































































































27+(56







-25'$1







.$=$.+67$1







,5(/$1'

-$3$1





,1'21(6,$

,7$/<







62







,65$(/






3552





*8,1($

,&(/$1'

,5$





,1',$

(023



*8$7(0$/$

+81*$5<

'(9
















































































46

'2125
.25($5(38%/,&2)
/,(&+7(167(,1

727$/

'(9

(023











/8;(0%285*





0$'$*$6&$5





0$/$:,



0(;,&2




1(:=($/$1'





20$1
3$.,67$1
3$1$0$
3+,/,33,1(6


























































6$8',$5$%,$


































5866,$1)('(5$7,21

6287+$)5,&$








63$,1







6/29(1,$







6,1*$325(











520$1,$




27+(56




32/$1'

4$7$5






32578*$/
35,9$7('21256

62





125:$<

3552



1(7+(5/$1'6

1,&$5$*8$

,5$

















6:('(1















6:,7=(5/$1'















6<5,$





7+$,/$1'



785.(<
8.5$,1(
81,7('1$7,216&(5)
&20021)81'6$1'$*(1&,(6
81,7('.,1*'20
81,7('67$7(62)$0(5,&$
:25/'%$1.
*5$1'727$/
%LODWHUDOFRQWULEXWLRQV













































2WKHUVFRQWULEXWLRQVWRWUXVWIXQGVVSHFLDODFFRXQWVDQGWKH*HQHUDO)XQG
3ULYDWHFRQWULEXWLRQVGRQRWLQFOXGHH[WUDRUGLQDU\JLIWVLQNLQGVXFKDVDGYHUWLVLQJ

47




































WFP executive Board 2009-2010

Member States 2009

Member States 2010

Angola
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Burundi
canada
cape V
Verde
china
colombia
cuba
czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the congo
Denmark
egypt
Germany
Guatemala
Guinea
haiti
India
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Japan
Kuwait
Netherlands
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
United Kingdom
K
United States of America
Zambia

Angola
Australia
Brazil
Burkina Faso
Burundi
canada
china
colombia
cuba
czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the congo
Denmark
egypt
France
Germany
Guatemala
Guinea
haiti
India
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands (the)
Norway
Philippines
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Sudan
Switzerland
Thailand
United Kingdom
K
United States of America

Executive Board Bureau Members 2009

Executive Board Bureau Members 2010

Vladimir V. Kuznetsov
Russian Federation (President)

H.E. Sabas Pretelt de la Vega
colombia (President)

H.E. José Antônio Marcondes de Carvalho
Brazil (Vice
V
President)

H.E. Agnes van Ardenne
Netherlands (Vice
V
President)

Kiala Kia Mateva
Angola

Innocent Mokosa Mandende
Democratic Republic of the congo

Noel D. de Luna
Philippines

H.E. Javad Shakhs Tavakolian
Islamic Republic of Iran

H.E. James Alexander Harvey
United Kingdom
K

Jiří Muchka
czech Republic

48

On a Monday in March 2010,
WFP pulled 130 mules and
horses into service to quickly
bring an aerial delivery of rice
into Haiti’s Moussambe
District.

Notes

Cover: WFP provides food for
the once-a-day hot meal
served in Pinchinat, Port-auPrince’s largest tent city.
Children line up first; this
young girl waited in her
Sunday best, then rejoined her
mother and brother at their
tent to eat. Pinchinat had been
the city’s soccer field before
the January 2010 earthquake.

Acronyms Used
DEV

development project

P4P

Purchase for Progress

EMOP

emergency operation

PSA

Programme Support and Administrative

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the

[budget]
United Nations
GESMAAP

General Establishment for Storing and Marketing
Agriculture and Animal Products

ICRC

International Committee of the Red Cross

IRA

Immediate Response Account

ITHACA

Information Technology for Humanitarian

PLB

Project Laser Beam

PRRO

protracted relief and recovery operation

RUSF

ready-to-use supplementary food

SO

special operation

UNHCR

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees

Assistance, Cooperation and Action
MINUSTAH

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

NGO

non-governmental organization

WHO

World Health Organization

General Notes
Monetary values are in United States dollars (US$), unless otherwise stated.
One billion equals 1,000 million.
Quantities of food are in metric tons (mt), unless otherwise specified.
Direct expenditures include food, external transport, landside transport, storage and handling (LTSH), direct support costs (DSC) and other direct
operational costs (ODOC) components, but exclude indirect support costs (ISC) and programme support and administrative (PSA) costs.
Totals reported in this document are rounded and so may not add up exactly.
The acronym LIFDC refers to low-income, food-deficit (net food-importing) countries with per capita income below the World Bank eligibility
threshold for International Development Association (IDA) assistance and for 20-year International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) terms and to countries included in the World Bank categories I and II. The historical ceiling of per capita gross national income (GNI) for
2005, based on the World Bank Atlas method, is $1,675. In 2009, 82 countries were classified by FAO as LIFDCs.
Three criteria, reviewed every three years, are used by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) to identify least developed
countries (LDCs): i) low income as measured by gross domestic product (GDP) per capita – under $745 for inclusion, above $900 for graduation;
ii) weak human resources as measured by the Augmented Physical Quality of Life Index (APQLI) – life expectancy at birth, per capita calorie
supply, combined primary and secondary school enrolment ratio and adult literacy rate; and iii) a low level of economic diversification as measured
by the Economic Diversification Index (EDI) – share of manufacturing in GDP, share of the labour force in industry, annual per capita commercial
energy consumption and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) merchandise export concentration index. In 2009,
49 countries were categorized as LDCs.
From 2007, WFP must meet the requirement of WFP’s Executive Board to allocate at least 90 percent of development multilateral funds to
concentration countries, which are: i) least developed or have equally low income;1 and ii) facing a problem of chronic malnutrition measured as
greater than 25 percent stunting among children under 5.2

1
2

Per capita GNI less than US$975
Statistics on nutrition in: UNICEF, 2009. The State of the World’s Children 2009. New York

Photo Credits

The World Food Programme’s 2010 Annual Report uses data, photos and stories from the prior year
to chronicle WFP’s operations during calendar year 2009.

Cover: Haiti, WFP/Jim Farrell; Table of contents: Haiti, WFP/Jim Farrell; Page 2, Philippines, WFP/Veejay Villafranca; Page 5, Philippines,
WFP/Veejay Villafranca; Page 6, Haiti, WFP/ Alejandro Chicheri; Page 7, Uganda, WFP/Griet Hendrickx; Page 8-9, Philippines, WFP/Veejay
Villafranca; Page 12, Bangladesh, WFP/Shehzad Noorani; Page 13, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 14, Nepal, WFP/Laura Melo;
Page 15, Guatemala, WFP/ Maxime Bessieres; Page 16, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 17. Haiti, WFP/ Marco Frattini; Page 18,
Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 19, Haiti, Bruno Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 21, Philippines, WFP/Barry Came; Page 22,
DR Congo, WFP/Stephanie Savariaud; Page 24, Ethiopia, WFP/Amir Ismail; Page 27, Burkina Faso, WFP/Vincent Quattara; Page 28, Italy,
WFP/Rein Skullerud; Page 29, Syria, WFP/John Wreford; Page 30, Uganda, WFP/Vanessa Vick; Page 31, Uganda, WFP/Vanessa Vick; Page 32,
Afghanistan, WFP/Susannah Nicol; Page 35, Somalia, WFP/Guled Mohamed; Page 36, Italy, WFP/Rein Skullerud; Page 39, Haiti, Bruno
Stevens/Cosmos for WFP; Page 40-41, Haiti, WFP/ Alejandro Chicheri.

P1004/E15,000/5.09 - Printed by Stilgrafica srl - Rome

Fighting Hunger Worldwide

World Food Programme - Annual Report 2010

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships
Via Cesare Giulio Viola, 68/70 - 00148 Rome, Italy
Tel.: +39-066513-2628 • Fax: +39-066513-2840

