WATER
IN A
CHANGING
WORLD

The United
Nations
World Water
Development
Report 3

V E R T Y
P O
t D
t
E
E
G
M
N

A

O

G

H

R

T

A

V

H

E R N M

t P R

A

T

O

N

t

G

O

R N A N C E
V E
t T

O

T E t G

O
G

M

L

A

B

V

S

U
P

I

L

V

I

C O
N

I S E S t
C R
C L

L

S I N G
R I
S t

I

I

C

E

I

M

P

N

T t C I

A

E

C

R

A

D

E

t

GETTING OUT OF THE BOX – SPHERE OF DECISION-MAKING ABOUT WATER. Many paths to sustainable development are
linked to water, but the decisions that determine how water resources are used or abused are not made by
water managers alone. That central theme of The United Nations World Water Development Report 3 is illustrated
in this figure (which also appears in chapter 1).
The lower section of the figure, titled Water box, is the realm of water sector management. Here, water managers inside the water box and managers of other sectors oversee their own management–resource-use
interactions. Above
them are the actors who
make or influence broad
socioeconomic policies
Political
that affect water.

DECISION-MAKING AFFECTING WATER
actors

The cycle begins with
political-process actors –
in government, civil society
and business – deciding
on socio-economic
development objectives
and formulating policy
and operational decisions
to achieve them. Their
decisions, which respond
to life and livelihoods
requirements, are implemented in a context
of externalities – often
beyond their direct
control – that interact
with and modify drivers
of change, creating
pressures on land and
water resources (among
others).

Civil
society
actors

• Economic

Business and
• Policy
formation
• Resource
allocations
• Political and
operational
decisions

economic
actors

• Social
• Environment
• Demographic
• Policy, law and
ﬁnance
• Technology

Drivers of
change

Response
Modify

options

• Climate change

Pressures
• Finance
• Exploitation
• Pollution
• Urbanization
• Land use
• Water use
• Climate variability

Other sector
management

Create

Life and
livelihoods
• Aspirations
• Poverty alleviation
• Health and
well-being
• Security
• Employment

Demand

Water
box

Demand

Impact

Water resources managers
address the demands
of water uses to meet
the life-sustaining
requirements of people
and other species and to
create and support livelihoods. In doing so, they
may add to – or reduce
– the pressures caused by
Water resources
Water uses
Affect
these drivers. However,
• Rainwater
• Domestic
•
Groundwater
• Agriculture
their actions may fall
• Lakes
• Industry
short of their objectives
Water sector
• Reservoirs
• Energy
management
• Wetlands
• Leisure
because of constraints
• Wastewater
• Transport
related to inadequate
• Desalinated water
• Environment
water, financial or human
resources or because
the external forces are behaving in unforeseen ways. Making progress thus requires returning to the original
political actors in the decision-making process for responses that take these constraints into account.
Needed in place of this discontinuous decision-making process is one in which water managers inform the initial
decision-making and participate in planning the appropriate responses, interacting with the principal actors and
with the managers of other sectors.

The United
Nations
World Water
Development
Report 3

WATER
IN A
CHANGING
WORLD

Published jointly by
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
7, place de Fontenoy, 75007 Paris, France, and
Earthscan, Dunstan House, 14a St Cross Street,
London EC1N 8XA, United Kingdom.
© UNESCO 2009
All rights reserved.
UNESCO ISBN: 978-9-23104-095-5
Earthscan ISBN: 978-1-84407-839-4 (hardback)
978-1-84407-840-0 (paperback)
UNESCO Publishing: http://publishing.unesco.org/
Earthscan: www.earthscan.co.uk
The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries.
The authors are responsible for the choice and the
presentation of the facts contained in this book and for the
opinions expressed therein, which are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Suggested citation
World Water Assessment Programme. 2009. The United
Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water in a
Changing World. Paris: UNESCO, and London: Earthscan.
Cover design
Peter Grundy, London, UK
Book design and typesetting
Communications Development Incorporated, Washington, DC
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data has been
applied for.
Earthscan strives to minimize its environmental impacts
and carbon footprint by reducing waste, recycling and
offsetting its carbon dioxide emissions, including those
created through publication of this book. For more details of
our environmental policy, see www.earthscan.co.uk.
This book was printed in the
United Kingdom by Butler,
Tanner & Dennis. The paper
used is certified by the Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC), and
the inks are vegetable based.

This Report has been published on behalf of the United
Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), with
the support of the following organizations:
United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(UN-HABITAT)
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations University (UNU)
Specialized UN Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP)
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (FCCC)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (ISDR)

Table of contents

Foreword by Ban Ki-moon, Secretary‑General, United Nations   v
Foreword by Koïchiro Matsuura, Director‑General, United Nations
Economic, Scientific and Cultural Organization   vii
Preface

ix

Acknowledgements   xiii
Overview of key messages

xix

Water in a changing world   1
Chapter 1 G
 etting out of the box – linking water to decisions
for sustainable development   3
Opening the water box   4
Sustainable development as the framework for water management   6
Investing in water   9
Global crises and water   14
The need for action – now   20
Structure of the Report   21

Part 1 Understanding what drives the pressures on water   25
Chapter 2 Demographic, economic and social drivers   29
Demographic drivers   29
Economic drivers   32
Social drivers   36

Chapter 3 Technological innovation   41
Recent trends and advances in science and technology   42
The technology dissemination challenge    45

Chapter 4 Policies, laws and finance   49
Policies and laws   49
Financing – the missing link   56

Chapter 5 Climate change and possible futures   68
The influence of climate change on the other drivers of change   69
Identifying possible futures: the need for scenarios   74
Challenges for summarizing the pressures of external drivers on water resources   75

Part 2 Using water   77
Chapter 6 Water’s many benefits   80
Water for economic development   81
Water and poverty reduction   83
Water and health   88
Maintaining ecosystem services    91

Chapter 7 Evolution of water use   96
Water use in the world   97
Domestic water supply and sanitation   102
Water use in agriculture   106
Water for industry and energy   115
Water in a changing world

iii

Table of contents
In-stream water uses   120

Chapter 8 Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment   127
How water use affects water resources   128
Seeking sustainable management of groundwater   131
Growing risks: pollution and degradation of water quality    136
Progress in mitigating pollution    139
Progress in achieving environmental sustainability   145

Chapter 9 Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems   150
Type, extent and effect of competition for water   150
Managing competition through supply and demand management and reallocation   154

Part 3

State of the resource   160

Chapter 10 The Earth’s natural water cycles   166
Overview of the global hydrologic cycle   166
Relationship of water to global biogeochemical cycles   172

Chapter 11 Changes in the global water cycle   181
Changes in the water cycle   181
Links between the terrestrial carbon and water cycles   196
Is the hydrologic cycle accelerating?   200
Assessing future impacts of climate change   201
Summary   202

Chapter 12 Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities   211
Hazards vary with climate regions   211
Changes in average streamflow   212
Changes in extreme events   213
Changes in groundwater   217
Changes in erosion, landslides, river morphology and sedimentation patterns   217
Challenges: hazards and opportunities   222

Chapter 13 Bridging the observational gap   226
The importance of hydrologic observations   226
Recent developments in observation methods, networks and monitoring   227
Changing status of operational data over the recent past   228
Opportunities and challenges   234
Some suggestions for bridging the observational gap   235

Part 4

Responses and choices   237

Chapter 14 Options inside the water box   241
Water governance reform: strengthening policy, planning and institutions   242
Consulting with stakeholders and avoiding corruption: accountability in planning,
implementation and management   251
Capacity development for more effective action   254
Developing appropriate solutions through innovation and research   258
Data and information needs   260
Financing   261

Chapter 15 Options from beyond the water box   269
Promoting win-win scenarios by creating space for change   270
Clearing pathways towards win-win situations: avoiding negative impacts   273
Promoting win-win scenarios through cooperation and knowledge   275
Sustaining change: changing habits through awareness   285
Ensuring sustainable financing   286

Chapter 16 The way forward   291
Making water an integral part of all planning and management decisions   292
Working towards better development outcomes   295
Deciding – and acting!   296

Appendix 1 World Water Development Report indicators   298
Appendix 2 Water-related goals and objectives of major
conferences and forums, 1972-present   302
Abbreviations, data notes and units of measure   306
List of boxes, figures, maps and tables   308
Index   313
iv

World Water Development Report 3

Foreword by
Ban Ki-moon,
Secretary‑General,
United Nations

It is well known that water is life; what this Report shows is that water also means livelihoods. It is the route out of poverty for individuals and communities. Managing water is
essential if the world is to achieve sustainable development.
This challenge is even more pressing as the world confronts the triple threats of climate
change, rising food and energy costs, and the global economic crisis. All three are exacerbating poverty, inequality and underdevelopment.
The United Nations has responded by consolidating our work and joining with partners
who can make a difference through UN-Water, which brings together more than two
dozen UN agencies and other stakeholders. The initiative’s World Water Assessment Programme is setting an example of system-wide cooperation based on the understanding
that water is such a central consideration that it must be an integral part of all planning
and investments.
Developing countries and countries in transition are striving to manage their water resources more effectively. I call on the bilateral donors to support those efforts by increasing water’s share of official development assistance above the current level of 5.4%.
This is important not only for development; it is a matter of security, too. Lack of basic
services can contribute to political instability. Armed conflicts can further disrupt these
services.
There has been a widespread failure to recognize water’s vital role in providing food, energy, sanitation, disaster relief, environmental sustainability and other benefits. This has
left hundreds of millions of people suffering from poverty and ill health and exposed to
the risks of water-related diseases.
This situation is unconscionable. Governments and the international development
community must make more and immediate investments in water management and
related infrastructure. We must all work together to address this matter of life and livelihoods. This Report is meant to spur such action, and I commend it to a wide global
audience.

Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General
United Nations
Water in a changing world

v

Foreword by
Koïchiro Matsuura,
Director‑General,
United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural
Organization

With the release of this third edition of The United Nations World Water Development Report, it is clear that urgent action is needed if we are to avoid a global water crisis. Despite
the vital importance of water to all aspects of human life, the sector has been plagued by
a chronic lack of political support, poor governance and underinvestment. As a result,
hundreds of millions of people around the world remain trapped in poverty and ill
health and exposed to the risks of water-related disasters, environmental degradation and
even political instability and conflict. Population growth, increasing consumption and
climate change are among the factors that threaten to exacerbate these problems, with
grave implications for human security and development.
The current Report provides a comprehensive analysis of the state of the world’s freshwater resources. It also, for the first time, shows how changes in water demand and
supply are affected by and affect other global dynamics. It represents a considerable collaborative achievement for the 26 UN agencies that make up UN-Water and are engaged
in the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), which leads the monitoring and
evaluation behind the Report. UNESCO is very proud to have played a pivotal role in the
launch of this flagship programme and to continue to support its work by housing the
WWAP Secretariat. I am confident that this third volume will prove crucial as a working
tool for policy-makers and other stakeholders, providing solid evidence from which to
develop an effective and sustainable approach to water issues.
The Report could not come at a more important time. We have passed the halfway point
towards the 2015 target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and
despite progress, massive challenges remain. Millennium Development Goal 7 calls for
halving the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation. While the world is on track to achieve the water target globally, large
regions of the world and many countries lag behind, and some risk backsliding. This
is particularly the case in sub-Saharan Africa and low-income Arab states. On current
trends the sanitation target will be missed by a wide margin in the majority of developing countries. But water is linked not only to Millennium Development Goal 7. It also
directly affects, as this Report establishes, the achievement of all eight Millennium
Development Goals, including, notably, the first goal, the eradication of extreme poverty
and hunger.
Water is a cross-cutting issue that demands a coordinated approach. Our success in avoiding a global water crisis is directly linked to our ability to address other global challenges,
from poverty eradication and environmental sustainability to fluctuating food and energy costs and financial turmoil in world economies. It is therefore imperative that global
risks, including those associated with water, be dealt with in an integrated manner. We
must develop interdisciplinary tools that can take into account different drivers such as
climate change and financial markets to achieve sustainable water management. This

Water in a changing world

vii

Foreword
requires the engagement of all stakeholders, particularly government leaders, as well as
global coordination through the UN system.
Water is essential to facing today’s global challenges and achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. As such, it should be a priority for the United Nations and the global
community as a whole. Be assured that UNESCO stands ready to play its part in this
process.

Koïchiro Matsuura
Director-General
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

viii

World Water Development Report 3

Preface

In 1999 the United Nations system resolved to issue regular editions of The United Nations
World Water Development Report. An expert group, convened by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, developed recommendations for the objectives
and targeted audience of the report (box 1).
The first edition, The United Nations World Water Development Report: Water for People,
Water for Life, was released in March 2003 at the 3rd World Water Forum in Kyoto,
Japan. The second, Water, a Shared Responsibility, was released in March 2006 at the 4th
World Water Forum in Mexico City. The first report provided an inaugural assessment of
progress since the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
in Rio de Janeiro. Both reports were based on key challenge areas (such as water for food,
water for energy, and challenges for governance). Stand-alone assessments were prepared
by UN agencies. The assessments included pilot case studies on which the Report drew in
developing appropriate assessment methodologies and lessons learned.
This third edition embraces a holistic structure and focuses on the second objective
established by the expert group – to accelerate coverage and investments for basic
human water needs (drinking water supply, sanitation and health, food security, mitigation of floods and droughts and prevention of conflicts), giving priority to developing
countries.

Contents of the Report
A major theme of this Report is that important decisions affecting water management are
made outside the water sector and are driven by external, largely unpredictable forces –
forces of demography, climate change, the global economy, changing societal values and
norms, technological innovation, laws and customs and financial markets. Many of these
external drivers are dynamic, and changes are accelerating. The conceptual framework

Box 1

Objectives and targeted audience of The United Nations World
Water Development Report

It is recommended that The United Nations
World Water Development Report be targeted for
national decision-makers and water resources
managers, with two complementary objectives:
•

•

To strengthen and stimulate national capacities and cross-sector institutions in integrated
water development planning and in sustainable management of water resources at river
basin and aquifer levels.
To stimulate an acceleration of coverage and
investments, in priority, for basic human
water needs (drinking water supply, sanitation

Water in a changing world

and health, food security, mitigation of floods
and droughts and prevention of conflicts),
giving a priority to developing countries.
A more effective and targeted support of the international community for such local and national
efforts would also be an important objective of
this awareness-raising and action-oriented report.
Source: United Nations Expert Group Meeting to
Examine Methodologies for the Preparation of a Biennial ‘World Water Development Report’, convened and
organized by the UN Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, New York, 11-14 January 2000.

ix

Preface
that evolved for the Report is on the inside front cover of the Report and in figure 1.1 in
chapter 1. The figure illustrates how developments outside the water domain influence
water management strategies and policies. The Report emphasizes that decisions in other
sectors and those related to development, growth and livelihoods should incorporate
water as an integral component, including responses to climate change, food and energy
challenges and disaster management.
At the same time, the Report’s analysis of the state of the world’s water resources is imbedded in a more expansive context of what can be accomplished through water management. The analysis leads to a set of responses and recommendations for action that
differ from those that have emerged from more introspective analyses of the water sector
because they incorporate the contribution of water to sustainable development.
This Report offers a holistic approach to links between water and climate change, food,
energy, health and human security. Human security, broadly conceived, includes basic
needs for food, water, health, livelihoods and a place to live – issues addressed in the
Millennium Development Goals. As the second part of the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), released in April 2007, demonstrates, poor people are likely to suffer most from the effects of climate change.1

New processes
In keeping with the Report’s broader view on policy options, new processes were applied
in preparing this Report. Fuller treatment is given to such topics as climate change, business and trade, financing, the role of the private sector, water transport and innovations
and new technologies.
The United Nations Expert Group recommendation to involve countries in preparing the
reports was reflected in the first edition in case studies based on 10 countries (including
10 national river basins) with different physical, climate and socioeconomic conditions.
This method was followed in the second edition and in this Report, which presents the
case studies in a companion volume to the main report. The World Water Assessment
Programme is also launching a series of supporting publications that include scientific
side papers, topic and sector reports and dialogue reports, taking the programme out of
its rigid three-year cycle.
The preparatory process for this Report has followed an inclusive, participatory approach
benefiting from opinion and feedback from the scientific, professional and decision-making communities from within and outside the water sector.
Broader input to the Report and the World Water Assessment Programme processes in
general has been achieved through four mechanisms:
•

A Technical Advisory Committee of 11 prominent individuals from around the world
with water sector expertise and broader policy-making experience in their countries
and internationally.

•

Expert groups on indicators, monitoring and data/metadata bases; scenarios; climate
change and water; policy relevance; business, trade, finance and the private sector;
legal issues and water storage.

•

A Report team composed of UN-Water member agencies, their professional and
non-governmental organization partners and the broader community of water and
water-related sectors.

•

Stakeholder engagement through the World Water Assessment Programme Website
and review processes, including public as well as solicited input and feedback from
hundreds of individuals and organizations.

1.

x

‘Poor communities can be especially vulnerable, in particular those concentrated in high risk areas.
They tend to have more limited adaptive capacities and are more dependent on climate-sensitive
resources such as local water and food supplies.’ (IPCC, 2007, Summary for Policymakers. In Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, eds., M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani,
J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden and C. E. Hanson, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p. 9).
World Water Development Report 3

Preface
This Report marks a transition from the first two reports – a transition from being a
report primarily for water managers to being a report for leaders at all levels of government, the private sector and civil society, whose decisions depend on the availability of
water resources and make demands on water management. The Expert Group on Policy
Relevance consulted hundreds of such leaders to obtain their views on policy issues
relevant to the water sector. At the same time, the Report continues to provide useful
data for water managers on the state and use of this precious resource. Past reports have
looked at trends based on historical data. It is clear that change is accelerating and that
the effects of change are not easily projected from trends. To help us understand possible
futures and how to cope with their impact on water resources, the World Water Assessment Programme process looks at the development of scenarios that will serve the fourth
World Water Development Report. This scenario effort takes into account the main drivers
of water, including demographics, climate change, social and economic processes and
technology, along with their interactions.
In preparing this Report new data were available to update only a third of the 60-plus
indicators that were reported in the second edition. And some indicators were found to
be no longer valid. The lack of data was echoed by the coordinators and authors of this
Report, who found that indicators and data were often not available for analysing and
reporting on issues considered important. As a consequence, a new process was developed for indicators and monitoring that aims at a better understanding of the trends
and developments, including changes, in the state of water resources, their uses and the
interface between the state and water uses and between water and other sectors. This reflects a recommendation of Agenda 21 – a comprehensive plan of action agreed at the Rio
Summit for all areas of human impact on the environment – that a detailed data collection for both fluxes of ‘exploitable water resources’ and of ‘associated costs and finances’
be conducted within a comprehensive plan for water development at the basin level.2
To this end, the World Water Assessment Programme established an Expert Group on
Indicators, Monitoring and Data/Metadata Bases, and UN-Water established a Task Force
on Indicators, Monitoring and Reporting, which is coordinated by the World Water
Assessment Programme. Their results will be reported by the World Water Assessment
Programme in a process leading to the fourth World Water Development Report and by UNWater. A table showing the status of indicators reported on in this Report is presented in
appendix 1. More detailed information may be found at www.unesco.org/water/wwap.
Few countries know how much water is being used and for what purposes, the quantity
and quality of water that is available and that can be withdrawn without serious environmental consequences and how much is being invested in water management and
infrastructure. Despite the availability of new remote sensing and geographic information
system technologies that can simplify monitoring and reporting and despite the growing
need for such information in an increasingly complex and rapidly changing world, less is
known with each passing decade. Strengthening such information systems is vital not only
at a national scale but also at a global scale – to inform the construction of global models of
the hydrologic cycle and decisions on where interventions, including external aid, would
be most useful. Chapters 10 and 13 of the Report, in particular, treat this subject.

Challenges remain in managing water resources for development
The contribution of sustainable access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals is well established. Largely ignored,
however, is the fact that water resources are at the core of many of the Millennium Development Goals on which progress is lagging. This Report and others elaborate the direct
and indirect contributions of water management across all the Millennium Development
Goals.
It is not enough to hope that the trickle-down effects of economic growth will result in
equitable distribution that includes the poor. The economic growth and poverty-reducing contributions of water resources must be made explicit and specific at the country
level. Intergovernmental efforts must support such actions and maintain the momentum
of the global commitments made since the Millennium Declaration in 2000.
2.

United Nations, 1992, Agenda 21, Chapter 18, Protection of the Quality and Supply of Freshwater
Resources: Application of Integrated Approaches to the Development, Management and Use of Water
Resources, New York: Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations.

Water in a changing world

xi

Preface
While mitigation of anthropogenic climate change is vital, the blunt reality is that all
­countries – particularly developing countries that will be hit hardest and earliest – and business sectors must also adapt to climate change. Even if greenhouse gas concentrations stabilize in the coming years, some impacts from climate change are unavoidable. These include
increasing water stress in many regions, more extreme weather events, the potential for large
population migration and the disruption of international markets. These challenges cannot
be separated from the challenges of sustainable development in a complex global context.
This report provides evidence of the need for public investments in water resources infrastructure and implementation capacity. It also provides evidence of the vital importance of
water resources and environmental sustainability to engage the private sector, civil society
and communities to invest and become involved, offering examples of how this can be done.
Bilateral donors, important in funding water investments, must avoid the temptation to
reduce their aid budgets during the current global financial and economic crises. Multilateral aid could be an important source of financing for many years to come. Yet both bilateral and multilateral donors appear not to recognize the contribution of the water sector
to growth: the water sector’s share of official development assistance has remained below
6% for some time. This said, the flow of official development assistance has increased in
recent years and so has the water component in dollar terms. But most of the increase has
gone to water supply (and sanitation, to a lesser degree), while aid flows to other water sectors have stagnated in dollar terms and fell as a percentage of total assistance.
Like other physical infrastructure, water infrastructure deteriorates over time and needs
repair and replacement. Investment is also required in operation and maintenance and in
developing the capacity of the sector so that infrastructure meets appropriate standards
and functions efficiently.

The case of sub-Saharan Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, remains mired in poverty. Its progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals lags behind that of other regions. The percentage of the population living in absolute poverty is essentially the same as it was 25
years ago. About 340 million Africans lack access to safe drinking water, and almost 500
million lack access to adequate sanitation. Countries in sub-Saharan Africa store only
about 4% of their annual renewable flows, compared with 70%-90% in many developed
countries, yet water storage is essential to ensure reliable sources of water for irrigation,
water supply and hydropower and to provide a buffer for flood management.

The need to act now
The challenges that face decision-makers are numerous. The context in which they must
make decisions is not well defined. This Report does not attempt to provide a full set of
answers. But it identifies the key issues that must be faced. It describes some of the ways
that decision-makers have dealt with these challenges, providing options for consideration across levels of government and sectors.
Despite the many unknowns, we need to act now – with decisions about investments in
water infrastructure and in implementation capacity to enable environmentally sustainable economic growth and social development and with decisions on safety nets to ensure
basic services that protect the poor.
We hope that this third United Nations World Water Development Report will stimulate
decision-makers in government, the private sector and civil society to act.

Olcay Ünver
World Water Assessment Programme Coordinator
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization
xii

William Cosgrove
United Nations World Water
Development Report 3
Content Coordinator

World Water Development Report 3

Acknowledgements

This Report would not have been possible without the essential and gracious support
of many individuals. The personal support and interest of Koïchiro Matsuura, Director­General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
created an enabling environment. The leadership and guidance of Andras Szöllösi-Nagy,
director of the Division of Water Sciences of UNESCO, allowed the World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP) team to mobilize its collective energy and capacity in the best way
possible. Pasquale Steduto, chair of UN-Water and chief of the Land and Water Division of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), graciously extended his
catalytic support during a challenging process of preparation and production.
The leadership of Uri Shamir, chair of the Report’s Technical Advisory Committee and
professor of engineering at Technion-Israeli Institute of Technology, and the expertise
of the committee members helped create a product of sound scientific basis and superior quality, which was further enhanced by the work of WWAP’s Expert Groups. We
acknowledge the efforts of Gerald Galloway, professor of engineering at the University of
Maryland, in helping to reach out to hundreds of decision-makers worldwide, enabling
the Report to be policy relevant to its primary intended audience.
We acknowledge the support of the World Bank, FAO and Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development in providing the most recent data and information available, sometimes before they were published. We especially thank the Italian Ministry of
Environment, Land and Sea for its generous provision of funds; the Italian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs for its support; and the government of the Umbria Region of Italy for the
beautiful new premises that now house the WWAP at the Villa La Colombella, Perugia.
We thank the Report’s editors, Bruce Ross-Larson and Meta de Coquereaumont, and
their production team at Communications Development Incorporated – Joseph Caponio,
Amye Kenall, Allison Kerns, Christopher Trott and Elaine Wilson – for the extraordinary
support they provided.
The WWAP also thanks the following individuals and organizations from around the
world for their generous and varied contributions to the Report.

UN-Water
Pasquale Steduto, chair; Aslam Chaudhry, Johan Kuylenstierna and Frederik Pischke

UNESCO
Alice Aureli, Jonathan Baker, Jeanne Damlamian, Siegfried Demuth, Walter Erdelen,
Rosanna Karam, Shahbaz Khan, Anil Mishra, Djaffar Moussa-Elkadhum, Anna Movsisyan,
Mohan Perera, Amale Reinholt-Gauthier, Léna Salamé and Alberto Tejada-Guibert

World Water Development Report 3 teams
Chapter coordinators
Tim Kasten (UNEP) with the support of Thomas Chiramba (UNEP); Andras Szöllösi-Nagy
(UNESCO) and Wolfgang Grabs (WMO), associate coordinator, with the support of
Siegfried Demuth (UNESCO) and Anil Mishra (UNESCO); Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO);
Håkan Tropp (UNDP Water Governance Facility); Olcay Ünver (WWAP)
Water in a changing world

xiii

Acknowledgements
Content coordinator
William Cosgrove
Process manager
George de Gooijer
Chapter facilitators
Richard Connor, William Cosgrove, George de Gooijer, Denis Hughes and Domitille Vallée

Graphics coordinator
Akif Altundaş

WWAP publications coordinator
Samantha Wauchope

United Nations World Water Assessment Programme
Technical Advisory Committee
Uri Shamir, chair; Dipak Gyawali, deputy chair; Fatma Attia, Anders Berntell,
Elias Fereres, M. Gopalakrishnan, Daniel Pete Loucks, Laszlo Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini,
Henk van Schaik, Albert Wright
Sponsors and donors
Italian Ministry of Environment, Land and Sea; Government of Region of Umbria, Italy;
Government of Japan; UNESCO Etxea, Basque Water Agency (URA) and Danish International Development Assistance; and US Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water Resources
Secretariat
Olcay Ünver, coordinator; Michela Miletto, deputy coordinator; Akif Altundaş,
Floriana Barcaioli, Adriana Fusco, Lisa Gastaldin, Georgette Gobina, Simone Grego,
Shaukat Hakim, Rosanna Karam, Engin Koncagül, Lucilla Minelli, Stéfanie Néno,
Abigail Parish, Daniel Perna, Jean-Baptiste Poncelet, Astrid Schmitz, Marina Solecki,
Toshihiro Sonoda, Jair Torres, Domitille Vallée, Casey Walther and Samantha Wauchope
Expert groups
Indicators, monitoring and databases
Mike Muller and Roland Schulze, co-chairs; Joseph Alcamo, Amithirigala Jayawardena,
Torkil Jønch-Clausen, Peter C. Letitre, Aaron Salzberg, Charles Vörösmarty, Albert Wright
and Daniel Zimmer
Business, trade, finance and involvement of private sector
Ger Bergkamp and Jack Moss, co-chairs; Margaret Catley-Carlson, Joppe Cramwinckel,
Mai Flor, Richard Franceys, Jürg Gerber, Gustavo Heredia, Karin Krchnak, Neil McLeoud,
Herbert Oberhansli, Jeremy Pelczer and Robin Simpson
Climate change and water
Pierre Baril and BertJan Heij, co-chairs; Bryson Bates, Filippo Giorgi, Fekri Hassan,
Daniela Jacob, Pavel Kabat, Levent Kavvas, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Zekai Şen and
Roland Shulze
Legal issues
Stefano Burchi and Patricia Wouters, co-chairs; Rutgerd Boelens, Carl Bruch,
Salman M. A. Salman, Miguel Solanes, Raya Stephan and Jessica Troell
Policy relevance
Gerry Galloway and Dipak Gyawali, co-chairs; Adnan Badran, Qiu Baoxing,
Antonio Bernardini, Benito Braga, Max Campos, Peter Gleick, Rajiv Gupta,
Mohammed Ait Kadi, Celalettin Kart, Juliette Biao Koudenoukpo, Juan Mayr, Jack Moss,
Mike Muller, Hideaki Oda, Marc Overmars, Victor Pochat, Jerome Delli Priscoli,
Cletus Springer, Carel de Villeneuve, Zhang Xiangwei and Jiao Yong
Scenarios
Joseph Alcamo and Gilberto Gallopin, co-chairs; Vahid Alavian, Nadezhda Gaponenko,
Allen Hammond, Kejun Jiang, Emilio Lebre la Rovere, Robert Martin, David Molden,

xiv

World Water Development Report 3

Acknowledgements
Mike Muller, Mark Rosegrant, Igor Shiklomanov, Jill Slinger, Narasingarao Sreenath,
Ken Strzepek, Isabel Valencia and Wang Rusong
Storage
Luis Berga and Johan Rockström, co-chairs; Alison Bartle, Jean-Pierre Chabal,
William Critchley, Nuhu Hatibu, Theib Oweis, Michel de Vivo, Arthur Walz and
Carissa Wong

Contributing and partner organizations
AquaFed; Conservation International; Global Water Partnership; International Centre
for Water Hazard and Risk Management; International Institute for Advanced Systems
Analysis; International Research and Training Center on Erosion and Sedimentation;
International Water Association; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Stockholm Environment Institute; UNDP Water Governance Facility at Stockholm
International Water Institute; UN-Water Decade Programme on Capacity Development;
UNEP-DHI Centre for Water and Environment; University of Dundee Centre for Water
Law, Policy and Science; UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education; World Business
Council on Sustainable Development and World Water Council

Case studies
Editor
Engin Koncagül (WWAP)
Editorial team
Rebecca Brite and Alison McKelvey Clayson
Maps
AFDEC
Case study contributors
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay (La Plata River basin)
Miguel Ángel López Arzamendia, Silvia González, Verónica Luquich, Victor Pochat and
staff of the Intergovernmental Coordinating Committee of the La Plata River Basin
Bangladesh
Saiful Alam, Mozaddad Faruque, Azizul Haque, Md. Anwarul Hoque,
Jalaluddin Md. Abdul Hye, Md. Azharul Islam, Andrew Jenkins, A. H. M. Kausher,
Hosne Rabbi, Md. Mustafizur Rahman, Md. Shahjahan and the Bangladesh Ministry of
Water Resources
Brazil and Uruguay (Lake Merín Basin)
Gerardo Amaral, José Luis Fay de Azambuja, Ambrosio Barreiro, Artigas Barrios,
Jorge Luiz Cardozo, Daniel Corsino, Adolfo Hax Franz, Henrique Knorr, Fiona Mathy,
Juan José Mazzeo, Joao Menegheti, Claudio Pereira, Jussara Beatriz Pereira,
Martha Petrocelli, Carlos María Prigioni, Hamilton Rodrigues, Aldyr Garcia Schlee,
Carlos María Serrentino, Manoel de Souza Maia and Silvio Steinmetz
Cameroon
Kodwo Andah and Mathias Fru Fonteh
China
Dong Wu, Hao Zhao, Jin Hai, Ramasamy Jayakumar, Liu Ke, Pang Hui, Shang Hongqi,
Song Ruipeng, Sun Feng, Sun Yangbo and Xu Jing
Estonia
Erki Endjärv, Harry Liiv, Peeter Marksoo and Karin Pachel
Finland and Russian Federation (Vuoksi River basin)
Natalia Alexeeva, Sari Mitikka, Raimo Peltola, Bertel Vehviläinen, Noora Veijalainen and
Riitta-Sisko Wirkkala
Italy
Beatrice Bertolo and Francesco Tornatore

Water in a changing world

xv

Acknowledgements
Republic of Korea
Republic of Korea Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs
Netherlands
Marcel E. Boomgaard, Joost J. Buntsma, Michelle J. A. Hendriks, Olivier Hoes,
Rens L. M. Huisman, Jan Koedood, Ed R. Kramer, Eric Kuindersma, Cathelijn Peters,
Jan Strijker, Sonja Timmer, Frans A. N. van Baardwijk, Tim van Hattum and Hans Waals
Pacific Islands
Marc Overmars, Hans Thulstrup and Ian White
Pakistan
Ch. Muhammad Akram, Mi Hua and Zamir Somroo
Spain (Autonomous Community of the Basque Country)
Fernando Díaz Alpuente, Ana Oregi Bastarrika, Iñaki Urrutia Garayo, Mikel Mancisidor,
Sabin Intxaurraga Mendibil, Josu Sanz and Tomás Epalza Solano
Sri Lanka
M. M. M. Aheeyar, Sanath Fernando, K. A. U. S. Imbulana, V. K. Nanayakkara,
B. V. R. Punyawardena, Uditha Ratnayake, Anoja Seneviratne, H. S. Somatilake,
P. Thalagala and K. D. N. Weerasinghe
Sudan
Gamal Abdo, Abdalla Abdelsalam Ahmed, Kodwo Andah, Abdin Salih,
Swaziland
Kodwo Andah, E. J. Mwendera and the Swaziland Department of Water Affairs
Tunisia
Mustapha Besbes, Jamel Chaded, Abdelkader Hamdane and Mekki Hamza
Turkey (Istanbul)
Gülçin Aşkın, Zeynep Eynur, Canan Gökçen, Canan Hastürk, S. Erkan Kaçmaz, Selami Oğuz,
Gürcan Özkan, Vildan Şahin, Turgut Berk Sezgin, Aynur Uluğtekin and Aynur Züran
Uzbekistan
Abdi Kadir Ergashev, Eh. Dj. Makhmudov, Anna Paolini and Sh. I. Salikhov
Zambia
Osward M. Chanda, Hastings Chibuye, Christopher Chileshe, Peter Chola, Ben Chundu,
Adam Hussen, Joseph Kanyanga, Peter Lubambo, Andrew Mondoka, Peter Mumba,
Mumbuwa Munumi, Priscilla Musonda, Christopher Mwasile, Kenneth Nkhowani,
Imasiku A. Nyambe, Liswaniso Pelekelo, Zebediah Phiri, Friday Shisala, Lovemore Sievu
and George W. Sikuleka

Participants at preparatory meetings and workshops

Inception meeting – 7-11 November 2007 – Paris, France
Virginie Aimard, Guy Alaerts, Joseph Alcamo, Reza Ardakanian, Pierre Baril,
Francesca Bernardini, Gunilla Björklund, Janos Bogardi, Rudolph Cleveringa,
James Dorsey, Elias Fereres, M. Gopalakrishnan, Wolfgang Grabs, Dipak Gyawali,
BertJan Heij, Molly Hellmuth, Denis Hughes, Tim Kasten, Henrik Larsen,
Peter C. Letitre, Daniel Pete Loucks, Jan Luijendijk, Robert Martin, Michel Meybeck,
Jack Moss, Yuichi Ono, Léna Salamé, Monica Scatasta, Uri Shamir, Laszlo Somlyody,
Manfred Spreafico, Alberto Tejada-Guibert, Lucio Ubertini, Henk van Schaik,
Charles Vörösmarty, James Winpenny, Junichi Yoshitani and Daniel Zimmer
Integration meeting – 19-25 April 2008 – Perugia, Italy
Daniel Adom, Virginie Aimard, Guy Alaerts, Joseph Alcamo, Youssef Al-Mooji,
Fatma Attia, Pierre Baril, Luis Berga, Anders Berntell, Gunilla Björklund, Robert Bos,
Andrew Bullock, Stefano Burchi, Thomas Chiramba, Engin Çitak, Rudolph Cleveringa,
Elias Fereres, Carlos Fernandez, Gilberto Gallopin, Gerry Galloway, M. Gopalakrishanan,
Wolfgang Grabs, Dipak Gyawali, Joakim Harlin, BertJan Heij, Molly Hellmuth,
Sarah Hendry, Denis Hughes, Niels Ipsen, Tim Kasten, Yanikoglu Kubra, Kshitij M. Kulkarni,
Johan Kuylenstierna, Jon Lane, Henrik Larsen, Peter C. Letitre, Dennis Lettenmaier, Daniel
Pete Loucks, Robert Martin, Anil Mishra, Jack Moss, Mike Muller, Yuichi Ono, Walter Rast,
xvi

World Water Development Report 3

Acknowledgements
Ahmet Saatci, Léna Salamé, Darren Saywell, Roland Schulze, Uri Shamir, Laszlo Somlyody,
Toshihiro Sonoda, Alberto Tejada-Guibert, Jon Martin Trondalen, Duygu Tuna,
Lucio Ubertini, Stefan Uhlenbrook, Wim van der Hoek, Pieter van der Zaag, Henk van Schaik,
Charles Vörösmarty, James Winpenny, Albert Wright, Adikari Yoganath and Daniel Zimmer
Workshop on indicators, monitoring and databases – 18-20 June 2008 – Perugia, Italy
Karen Frenken, George de Gooijer, Jan Hassing, Engin Koncagül, Mike Muller, Stéfanie
Néno, Gerard Payen, Roland Schulze, Charles Vörösmarty and Casey Walther
Workshop on policy relevance – 28 July – 1 August 2008 – Perugia, Italy
Michael Abebe, Altay Altinors, Kodwo Andah, Ger Bergkamp, Thanade Dawasuwan,
Gerry Galloway, Dipak Gyawali, Saadou Ebih Mohamed, Jack Moss, Stéfanie Néno,
Joshua Newton, Jerome Delli Priscoli, Khomoatsana Tau and Håkan Tropp

Solicited consultations

Real-time Delphi survey on scenarios, October 2007
Joseph Alcamo, Fatma Attia, Pierre Baril, Bryon Bates, Anders Berntell,
Elias Fereres Castiel, Gilberto Gallopin, Nadezhda Gaponenko, Filipo Giorgi,
Jerome Glenn, Stela Goldenstein, M. Gopalakrishnan, Wolfgang Grabs, Dipak Gyawali,
BertJan Heij, Danielle Jacob, Pavel Kabat, Tim Kasten, Zbigniew Kundzewicz,
Peter Loucks, David Molden, David Seckler, Uri Shamir, Zekai Şen, Igor Shiklomanov,
Roland Shulze, Lazslo Somlyody, Ken Strzepek, Lucio Ubertini, Isabel Valencia,
Henk van Schaik, Wang Rusong and Albert Wright
Real-time Delphi survey on storage, February 2008
Alison Bartle, Luis Berga, Jean-Pierre Chabal, Imo Efiong Ekpo, John Gowing,
Robert T. Heath, Jia Jinsheng, Marna de Lange, Peter Stuart Lee, Jan Lundqvist,
Maimbo Mabanga Malesu, Norihisa Matsumoto, Adama Nombre,
Alberto Marulanda Posada, Johan Rockström, Herman E. Roo, Giovanni Ruggeri,
Bernard Tardieu, Richard M. Taylor, Barbara van Koppen, Arthur Walz, Martin Wieland,
Qiang Zhu and Przemyslaw Zielinski
Public online consultation on the table of contents, March 2008
Diepeveen Aleid, Abdullatif Al-Mugrin, Elfadil Azrag, Nick Blazquez, Marcia M. Brewster,
Olga Daguia, Binayak Das, Orock Tanyi Fidelis, Mikkel Funder, Cristy Gallano,
Andreas Grohmann, Alfred Heuperman, Peter Kabongo, Tom McAuley, F. H. Mughal,
Farhad Mukhtarov, Kefah Naom, N. Parasuraman Ngappan, Cyprien Ntahomvukiye,
Gerd Odenwaelder, Gbenga Olatunji, Michaela Oldfield, Ramadhan, Friederike Schubert,
Paulo de Tarso Castro, Mase Toru, Nicola Tynan, Etiosa Uyigue, Hideo Watanabe,
Maya Wolfensberger, Nayyer Alam Zaigham and the Gender and Water Alliance
Real-time Delphi survey on policy relevance, March 2008
Emaduddin Ahmad, Natalia Alexeeva, Ali Al-Jabbari, Elena Isabel Benitez Alonso,
Miguel Angel, Lina Sergie Atassi, Manuel Rodríguez Becerra, Charlie Bepapa,
Benedito Braga, Martina Bussettini, Mokhtar Bzioui, Adrian Cashman,
Sharif Uzzaman Choudhury, Betsy A. Cody, Christopher Cox, Basandorj Davaagiin,
Dwarika Dhugnel, Francis Flynn, Bertha Cruz Forero, Gerald Galloway,
Iñaki Urrutia Garayo, Zaheer Hussain Shah Gardezi, Peter Gleick, Biksham Gujja,
Handagama, Islam-ul-Haque, Kocou Armand Houanye, Mukdad Hussein,
Upali Senarath Imbulana, Abbasgholi Jahani, Ananda Jayasinghe, Mohamed Ait Kadi,
Badra Kamaladasa, Ville Keskisarja, Julio Thadeu S. Kettelhut, Arzel Hossain Khan,
Juliette Biao Koudenoukpo, Latu S. Kupa, Juan Mayr Maldonado, Olga Marecos,
Jurado Marquez, Polioptro F. Martínez-Austria, Miguel A. Medina, Jr., G. Tracy Mehan,
A. M. Muller, Jadambaa Namjilin, Gustavo Victor Necco, Visa Niittyniemi,
Ali Noorzad, Michel Ouellet, Marc Overmars, Mauri Cesar Barbosa Pereira,
Claudia Patricia Mora Pineda, Giorgio Pineschi, Victor Pochat, Syed Ayub Qutub,
Walid Abed Rabboh, Hifza Rasheed, Josu Sanz, Henk van Schaik, Carlos María Serrentino,
Cletus Springer, Steven L. Stockton, Sumitha Sumanaweera, Vincent D. Sweeney,
Muhammad Aslam Tahir, Sonja Timmer, Francesco Tornatore, Robert Reece Twilley,
Carel de Villeneuve, Erik K. Webb, Cevat Yaman and Farhad Yazdandoost
Electronic survey for water leaders and water experts, July 2008
Sameh Mohamed Abdel-Gawad, Florence Grace Adongo, Emaduddin Ahmad,
Abdalla A. Ahmed, Fernando Alberto, Sibel Algan, Daouda Aliou, Mirtha Almada,
Hugo Pablo Amicarelli, Paula Antunes, Bayoumi Bayoumi Attia, Van Baardwijk, Banadda,
Jayanta Bandyopadhyay, Elena Benitez, Emilia Bocanegra, Lisa Bourget, John Carey,
Water in a changing world

xvii

Acknowledgements
Adrian Cashman, Roberto Torres Castro, Lucas Chamorro, Xu Cheng, Mourad Choyekh,
Murray Clamen, Michael J. Clark, Betsy A. Cody, Ken Conca, Filiz Demirayak,
Carlos Diaz, Kayembe Ditanta, Ajaya Dixit, Ould Mohamed El Hacen Saadou Ebih,
Omar Elbadawy, Evens Emmanuel, Loic Fauchon, Miriam Feilberg, Bertha Cruz Forero,
Iñaki Urrutia Garayo, Roberto Galan Garcia, Elda Guadalupe Vasquez de Godoy,
Elizabeth Granados, Norman Grannemann, Pilar Cornejo R. de Grunauer,
Sylvain Guebanda, Guero, Adrian Ortega Guerrero, Biksham Gujja, G. J. C. Gunatilake,
Carlos Gutiérrez-Ojeda, Dipak Gyawali, Charles Hakizimana, Azizul Haque,
Islam-ul-Haque, Liu Heng, Oda Hideaki, Eduardo Zamudio Huertas, Magda Amin Idris,
Upali S. Imbulana, Mulipola Pologa Ioane, Vijay Jagannathan, Jahani, Santiago Jara,
H. M. Jayatillake, Gerald Jean-Batiste, Badra Kamaladasa, Vakup Karaaslan, Ville Keskisarja,
Wael M. Khairy, Arzel Hossain Khan, Nguyen Hong Khanh, Abdelaziz H. Konsowa,
Juan Jose Ledesma, Peter Letitre, Mark Limbaugh, Ana Deisy López Ramos, Lutfi Ali Madi,
Yvon Maranda, Darysbeth Martinez, Andrés Pérez Mattiauda, Marcus Moench,
Ekhlas Gamal Eldin Mohamed, David Molden, Sadí Laporte Molina, Isaìas Montoya B.,
Mike Muller, Hamza Ozguler, Gürcan Özkan, Eddy Gabriel Baldellón Pedraza,
Amataga Penaia, Ralph Pentland, Mauri Cesar Barbosa Pereira, Andrés Pérez,
Odalis Perez, Mathieu Pinkers, Syed Ayub Qutub, Walid Abed Rabboh,
Santiago Maria Reyna, Decarli Rodríguez, Jorge Rucks, Jayampathy Samarakoon,
Monica Elizabeth Urbieta Sanabria, João Bosco Senra, Carlos Maria Serrentino,
José Joaquín Chacón Solano, Toshihiro Sonoda, Guido Soto, Hugo Herrera Soto,
Steven L. Stockton, Sumitha Sumanaweera, Veronica Tarbaeva, U. Tsedendamba,
Aynur Uluğtekin, Kishor Uprety, Jeroen van der Sommen, Ximena Vargas,
Celso Velazquez, Ingrid Verstraeten, Carel de Villeneuve, Carissa Wong,
Jorge Montaño Xavier, Alaa Yassin and Farhad Yazdandoost
UN-Water consultation, August-September 2008
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, United Nations Environment Programme and World Bank

WWAP side publications series coordinator
Marwa Daoudy

Partners in WWDR Side Publications Series

Zafar Adeel, Yoganath Adikari, Joseph Alcamo, Maite Martinez Aldaya, Reza Ardakanian,
Pierre Baril, Dominique Berteaux, Harriet Bigas, David Bird, Gunilla Björklund,
Sylvie de Blois, Amadou Idrissa Bokoye, Sobhanlal Bonnerjee, Leon Braat, Marco Braun,
Anne Cann, Diane Chaumont, Torkil-Jønch Clausen, David Coates, Jean-François Cyr,
Claude Desjarlais, Paris Edwards, Marie-Joëlle Fluet, Louis-Guillaume Fortin,
Gilberto Gallopín, Jerome Glenn, Matt Hare, Joakim Harlin, Jan Hassing, BertJan Heij,
Andrew Hudson, Niels Ipsen, Harald Koethe, David Lammie, Henrik Larsen,
Jan Leentvaar, Geerinck Lieven, Palle Lindgaard-Jørgensen, Manuel Ramon Llamas,
Ralf Ludwig, Wolfram Mauser, Alastair Morrison, Jasna Muskatirovic, André Musy,
Benjamin Ndala, Gernot Pauli, Alain Rousseau, René Roy, Brigitte Schuster,
Lynette de Silva, Lucia De Stefano, Jon Martin Trondalen, Håkan Tropp, Richard Turcotte,
Wim van der Hoek, Charlotte van der Schaaf, Luc Vescovi, Ruth Vollmer, Ian White,
James Winpenny, Lars Wirkus, Aaron T. Wolf and Junichi Yoshitani

World Water Development Report 3 Messages Series
Coordinator
George de Gooijer

Contributors
Altay Altinörs, Ger Bergkamp, Claire Furlong, George de Gooijer, Dipak Gyawali, Jack Moss,
Joshua Newton, Sharon Velasquez Orta, Darren Saywell, Alberto Tejada-Guibert and
James Winpenny

Special thanks

The Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Secretariat of the 5th World Water Forum
(Istanbul), the Greater Municipality of Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration and
the General Directorate of State Hydraulic Works of Turkey
We apologize for any inadvertent errors or omissions of contributors to the Report. Some
names may be incomplete because they come from participants’ own online registration
information, which may have been incomplete.
xviii

World Water Development Report 3

Overview of
key messages

The amount of freshwater on Earth is
finite, but its distribution has varied considerably, driven mainly by natural cycles
of freezing and thawing and fluctuations
in precipitation, water runoff patterns and
evapotranspiration levels. That situation
has changed, however. Alongside natural
causes are new and continuing human
activities that have become primary ‘drivers’ of the pressures affecting our planet’s
water systems. These pressures are most
often related to human development and
economic growth.
History shows a strong link between
economic development and water resources development. There are abundant
examples of how water has contributed to
economic development and how development has demanded increased harnessing
of water. Such benefits came at a cost and
in some places led to increasing pressure
on the environment and increasing competition among users. Our requirements
for water to meet our fundamental needs
and our collective pursuit of higher living
standards, coupled with the need for water
to sustain our planet’s fragile ecosystems,
make water unique among our planet’s
natural resources.
Important decisions affecting water management are made outside the water sector
and are driven by external, largely unpredictable drivers – demography, climate
change, the global economy, changing societal values and norms, technological innovation, laws and customs, and financial
markets. Many of these external drivers
are dynamic and changing at a faster pace.
Developments outside the water domain
influence water management strategies
and policies. Decisions in other sectors
and those related to development, growth
and livelihoods need to incorporate water
Water in a changing world

as an integral component, including
responses to climate change, food and energy challenges and disaster management.
The analysis of these issues leads to a set of
responses and recommendations for action
that incorporate the contribution of water
to sustainable development.

Chapter 1. Getting out of the box
– linking water to decisions for
sustainable development
The news media today are full of talk of
crises – in climate change, energy and food
supplies and prices, and troubled financial
markets. These global crises are linked to
each other and to water resources management. They arise against a background of
continuing poverty for a large part of the
world. Unless resolved, they may lead to
increasing political insecurity and conflict
at local and national levels.
•

•

The ‘water box’ dilemma must be resolved. Leaders in the water sector – in
water supply and sanitation, hydropower, irrigation and flood control
– have long been aware that water is
essential to sustainable development,
but they do not make the decisions
on development objectives and the
allocation of human and financial
resources to meet them. These decisions are made or influenced by leaders
in government, the private sector and
civil society, who must learn to recognize water’s role in obtaining their
objectives.
Water is essential for achieving sustainable development and the Millennium
Development Goals. Properly managing water resources is an essential component of growth, social and economic
development, poverty reduction and
equity – all essential for achieving the
Millennium Development Goals.

Leaders in the
water sector
have long been
aware that water
is essential to
sustainable
development,
but they do not
make the decisions
on development
objectives and
the allocation
of human and
financial resources
to meet them.
These decisions are
made by leaders
in government,
the private sector
and civil society

xix

Overview of key messages

Alongside the
natural forces
affecting water
resources are new
human activities
that have become
the primary
‘drivers’ of the
pressures affecting
our planet’s
water systems

•

Water is linked to the crises of climate
change, energy and food supplies and
prices, and troubled financial markets.
Unless their links with water are addressed and water crises around the
world are resolved, these other crises
may intensify and local water crises
may worsen, converging into a global
water crisis and leading to political insecurity and conflict at various levels.

Specialists and managers in water supply and
sanitation, hydropower, irrigation and flood
control have long been aware of this. But
they often have a narrow, sectoral perspective that blinds many decisions on water.
And they do not make the decisions on development objectives and financial resources
needed to meet these broader objectives.
Action is required now. Lives and livelihoods depend on water for development.
After decades of inaction, the problems are
enormous. And they will worsen if left unattended. But while the challenges are substantial, they are not insurmountable. The
Report has examples of how some countries and regional and local governments
have solved similar challenges. Recognizing the links between water resources and
other crises around the world and between
water resources and development, leaders
in the water domain and decision-makers
outside it must act together now to meet
these challenges.

Part 1. Understanding what
drives the pressures on water
Alongside the natural forces affecting
water resources are new human activities
that have become the primary ‘drivers’ of
the pressures affecting our planet’s water
systems. These pressures are most often
related to human activities and economic
growth. Our requirements for water to
meet our fundamental needs and our collective pursuit of higher living standards,
coupled with the need for water to sustain
our planet’s fragile ecosystems, make water
unique among natural resources.
Drivers should not be considered in isolation of related socioeconomic and political
factors or of other drivers. Many natural
links also influence how drivers affect
changes, directly and indirectly. Water
properties are governed by biological,
chemical and physical laws that define the
quantity and quality of water resources,
regardless of human influences, and that
are linked in various ways. Superimposed
on these natural processes are human
activities that intensify these processes
xx

and disrupt the natural balance of water
systems.
Economic growth, a principal driver of water
use, is affected by a wide range of policy
decisions, from international trade to education and public health, while the potential
rate of economic growth can be affected by
demographic variables such as population
distribution (local workforce availability)
and social characteristics (workforce capacity
and the role of women) and by the availability of new technologies. Water availability is
also directly subject to the impacts of climate
change, which also can exert additional pressures on the other drivers.
The result of these combined and interacting forces is a continuously increasing demand for finite water resources for which
there are no substitutes. When water resources of acceptable quality can no longer
be provided in sustainable quantities,
the outcome can be overexploitation of
aquatic ecosystems. The ultimate losers are
the exploited aquatic ecosystems and the
organisms (including humans) dependent
on them for survival and well-being.

Chapter 2. Demographic, economic
and social drivers
Human activities and processes of all types
– demographic, economic and social – can
exert pressures on water resources and
need to be managed. These pressures are in
turn affected by a range of factors such as
technological innovation, institutional and
financial conditions and climate change.
Demographic drivers. Population dynamics
(growth, gender and age distribution, migration) create pressures on freshwater resources through increased water demands and
pollution. Changes in the natural landscape
associated with population dynamics (migration, urbanization) can create additional
pressures on local water resources and the
need for more water-related services.
Economic drivers. Growth and changes
in the global economy are having far­reaching impacts on water resources and
their use. Growing international trade in
goods and services can aggravate water
stress in some countries while relieving it
in others through flows of ‘virtual water’
(water embedded in products and used in
their production, particularly in the form
of imported agricultural commodities).
Social drivers. Social drivers are mainly about
individual rather than collective actions
and about the way people think and act on
a day-to-day basis. Social drivers influence
World Water Development Report 3

Overview of key messages
human perceptions and attitudes about the
environment, including water resources, in
turn influencing the pressures people exert
on water through water demands and uses.
Changes in lifestyles represent one of the
principal drivers of change. They reflect
human needs, desires and attitudes (as illustrated in consumption and production
patterns), which are influenced by such social drivers as culture and education and by
economic drivers and technological innovation; the rapid global rise in living standards
combined with population growth presents
the major threat to the sustainability of
water resources and the environment.

Chapter 3. Technological innovation
Technological innovation is driven largely
by both human wants and needs. It can
create both positive and negative pressures,
sometimes simultaneously, resulting in
increased or decreased water demand, supply and quality. One of the most unpredictable drivers, technological innovation
can create rapid, dramatic and unexpected
changes, both in pressures and solutions.
Impediments to the dissemination of
technology must be overcome for developing countries to benefit from innovations
developed in richer countries.

of groundwater, lack of planning, degradation of ecosystems, weakened flood protection, urban expansion leading to heightened
water tensions, and other harmful effects.
Finance. Although water is often described as
a ‘gift of nature’, harnessing and managing
it for the wide variety of human and ecological needs entail financial costs. While there
may appear to be many financing options
for water resources development, governments still have only three basic means of
financing them: tariffs, taxes and transfers
through external aid and philanthropy.
Policy-makers need to make political decisions on socially and environmentally
acceptable trade-offs among different
objectives and on who bears the costs of
such compromise. Commitments have
been made by the donor community to increase assistance to the broad water sector,
but this has led mainly to an increase in
allocations for water supply and sanitation
in dollar terms (although its share of total
official development assistance has stagnated at 4%), and the percentage of total
aid allocated to the water sector remains
below 6% and has been declining.

Chapter 4. Policies, laws and finance

Chapter 5. Climate change and
possible futures

Efforts to implement water management
effectively and efficiently and to properly inform the decision-making process
are facilitated by the adoption of water
resources management laws, policies and
strategies that reflect links between water
and the social and economic sectors. Good
examples can be found in many countries.

The external drivers of change, strongly
connected, create complex challenges
and opportunities for water managers and
decision-­makers in government, the private
sector and civil society. Climate change
and variability, while seldom the main
stressors on sustainable development, can
impede or even reverse development gains.

But even if all the necessary policies and
laws are in place, development of water resources will not take place without adequate
funding of infrastructure and the institutional and human capacity of the sector.

Climate change. There is evidence that the
global climate is changing and that some
of the change is human-induced. The main
impacts of climate change on humans and
the environment occur through water.
Climate change is a fundamental driver of
changes in water resources and an additional stressor through its effects on external
drivers. Policies and practices for mitigating
climate change or adapting to it can have
impacts on water resources, and the way we
manage water can affect the climate.

Policies and laws. Effective policies and
legal frameworks are necessary to develop,
carry out and enforce the rules and regulations that govern water use and protect the
resource. Water policy operates within a
context of local, national, regional and global policy and legal frameworks that must
all support sound water management goals.
Legitimate, transparent and participatory
processes can effectively mobilize input for
designing and implementing water resources policy and create a strong deterrent
to corruption. Corruption remains a poorly
addressed governance issue in the water domain. It can lead to uncontrolled pollution
of water sources, overpumping and depletion
Water in a changing world

Although water is
often described as
a ‘gift of nature’,
harnessing and
managing it
for the wide
variety of human
and ecological
needs entail
financial costs

Public policy, so far dominated by mitigation, could benefit from a better balance
between mitigation and adaptation. Carbon
is a measure of the anthropogenic causes
of climate change – water is a measure of
its impacts. The international community
also has to balance investing for tomorrow’s
likely problems of greater climate variability
and global warming against investing for
today’s problems of climate variability to
xxi

Overview of key messages

Steadily increasing
demand for
agricultural
products to
satisfy the needs
of a growing
population, and
the desire for a
more varied diet,
continues to be
the main driver
behind water use

prevent losses from droughts and floods.
While both are vital, focusing on today’s
problems can also create greater resilience
for dealing with the problems of tomorrow.
Possible futures. Each of the external water
drivers is dynamic and continues to evolve,
as do the direct and indirect pressures they
exert on water resources. Thus, it is difficult
to draw a comprehensive picture of the
future by examining each driver independently. Because the drivers can have even
more of an impact on future water resources
collectively than they can individually,
future scenarios that consider these interactions offer a more holistic picture. Existing
global water scenarios are outdated, incomplete or sectoral and do not fully incorporate each of the external drivers. The evolution of the drivers and the logic behind
their storylines need to be examined and
possibly redefined in view of developments
both inside and outside the water sector
that have occurred over the past decade.

Part 2. Using water
History shows a strong link between economic development and water resources
development. There are abundant examples of how water has contributed to economic development and how development
has demanded increased harnessing of
water. Steadily rising demand for agricultural products to satisfy the diverse needs
of growing populations (for food, fibre and
now fuel) has been the main driver behind
agricultural water use.
The effects of water-depleting and waterpolluting activities on human and ecosystem health remain largely unreported or
difficult to measure, and the need grows
stronger for effective protection of ecosystems and the goods and services they
produce – on which life and livelihoods
depend. As competition among demands
on water increases, society will need to respond with improved water management,
more effective policies and transparent and
efficient water allocation mechanisms.

Chapter 6. Water’s many benefits
Water has always played a key role in
economic development, and economic
development has always been accompanied
by water development. Investment in water
management has been repaid through livelihood security and reductions in health
risks, vulnerability and ultimately poverty.
Water contributes to poverty alleviation in
many ways – through sanitation services,
water supply, affordable food and enhanced
resilience of poor communities faced with
xxii

disease, climate shocks and environmental
degradation. Water of the right quality can
improve health through better sanitation
and hygiene and, when applied at the right
time, can enhance the productivity of land,
labour and other productive inputs. In addition, healthy freshwater ecosystems provide multiple goods and services essential
to life and livelihood.
The importance of water services is especially apparent in societies where normal
social life and political structures have
broken down. In these fragile states the
government cannot or will not deliver core
functions to most of its people, including
the poor. While each fragile state is fragile
in different ways and for different reasons
– war, post-conflict recovery, major natural
catastrophe, prolonged mismanagement
and political r­ epression – a striking commonality in reports from aid agencies is
the prominence of water and sanitation in
relief and reconstruction programmes. The
rapid restoration of viable water services is
often a crucial ingredient of nation-building in these fragile states.

Chapter 7. Evolution of water use
While most of the old challenges of water
supply, sanitation and environmental sustainability remain, new challenges such as
adaptation to climate change, rising food
and energy prices, and ageing infrastructure are increasing the complexity and
financial burden of water management.
Population growth and rapid economic
development have led to accelerated freshwater withdrawals.
Trends in access to domestic water supply
indicate substantial improvement in the
past decade, putting most countries on track
to achieve the water supply target of the
Millennium Development Goals. However,
sanitation is lagging well behind, and most
sub-Saharan African countries and many
rural areas still show unsatisfactory records
for both water supply and sanitation.
Steadily increasing demand for agricultural
products to satisfy the needs of a growing
population continues to be the main driver
behind water use. While world population
growth has slowed since the 1970s and is
expected to continue its downward trend,
steady economic development, in particular
in emerging market economies, has translated into demand for a more varied diet,
including meat and dairy products, putting
additional pressure on water resources.
After agriculture, the two major users of
water for development are industry and
World Water Development Report 3

Overview of key messages
energy (20% of total water withdrawals),
which are transforming the patterns of
water use in emerging market economies.
Water and energy share the same drivers: demographic, economic, social and
technological processes put pressure on
both energy and water. The recent acceleration in the production of biofuel and
the impacts of climate change bring new
challenges and add to the pressures on
land and water resources.
Freshwater ecosystems provide an extensive array of vital services to support
human well-being. A variety of economic
and recreational activities such as navigation, fisheries and pastoral activities
depend on direct use of water in healthy
ecosystems. Yet some environmental services receive inadequate policy attention
and are endangered by the way development sectors use water.

Chapter 8. Impacts of water use on
water systems and the environment
The pattern and intensity of human activity have disrupted – through impacts on
quantity and quality – the role of water as
the prime environmental agent. In some
areas depletion and pollution of economically important river basins and associated
aquifers have gone beyond the point of noreturn, and coping with a future without
reliable water resources systems is now a
real prospect in parts of the world.
While the intensity of groundwater use,
partly encouraged by subsidized rural
electrification, has led to the emergence of
many groundwater-dependent economies,
their future is now threatened by aquifer
depletion and pollution. Prospects for
relaxing use of these key aquifers, remediating water quality and restoring groundwater services to ecosystems look remote
unless alternative management approaches
are developed.
Our ability to maintain the environmental
services we depend on has improved but
remains constrained by an incomplete
understanding of the magnitude and impact of pollution, the resilience of affected
ecosystems and the social institutions that
use and manage water resources systems. A
failure to monitor the negative impacts of
water use on the environment and institutional weaknesses in many developing
countries prevent effective enforcement of
regulatory provisions.
Relevant information about pollution loads
and changes in water quality is lacking precisely where water use is most intense – in
Water in a changing world

densely populated developing countries.
As a result, the often serious impacts of
polluting activities on the health of people
and ecosystems remain largely unreported.
Still, there are signs of progress in how
pollution and the risks of pollution can
be mitigated and trends in environmental
degradation reversed.

Chapter 9. Managing competition for
water and the pressure on ecosystems
Competition for water and shortcomings
in managing it to meet the needs of society
and the environment call for enhanced societal responses through improved management, better legislation and more effective
and transparent allocation mechanisms.

Water and
energy share the
same drivers:
demographic,
economic, social
and technological
processes put
pressure on both
energy and water

Challenges include wise planning for
water resources, evaluation of availability
and needs in a watershed, possible reallocation or storage expansion in existing reservoirs, more emphasis on water demand
management, a better balance between
equity and efficiency in water use, inadequate legislative and institutional frameworks and the rising financial burden of
ageing infrastructure.
Water management choices should emerge
from informed consultation and negotiation on the costs and benefits of all options after considering basin interconnectedness, relationships between land and
water resources, and the consistency and
coherence of decisions with other government policies.

Part 3. State of the resource
The uneven distribution over time and
space of water resources and their modification through human use and abuse are
sources of water crises in many parts of the
world. In many areas hydrologic extremes
have increased. Deaths and material damage from extreme floods can be high, and
more intense droughts, affecting increasing numbers of people, have been observed
in the 21st century. Worldwide, water
observation networks are inadequate for
current and future management needs and
risk further decline. There are insufficient
data to understand and predict the current
and future quantity and quality of water
resources, and political protocols and imperatives for sharing data are inadequate.

Chapter 10. The Earth’s natural water
cycles
Water resources are made up of many components associated with water in its three
physical states (liquid, solid and gas). The
components of the water cycle (rainfall,
xxiii

Overview of key messages

Most climate
scientists agree
that global
warming will
result in an
intensification,
acceleration or
enhancement
of the global
hydrologic cycle,
and there is some
observational
evidence that
this is already
happening

evaporation, runoff, groundwater, storage and others) therefore all differ in their
chemical and biochemical qualities, spatial
and temporal variability, resilience, vulnerability to pressures (including land use and
climate change), susceptibility to pollution
and capacity to provide useful services and
to be used sustainably. A consequence of
this variability is that while human pressures have resulted in large modifications
to the global hydrologic cycle, the directions and degrees of change are complex
and difficult to ascertain. The uneven
distribution of water resources over time
and space and the way human activity is
affecting that distribution today are fundamental sources of water crises in many
parts of the world. Adding complexity, climate change and variability also influence
the water supply, demand and buffering
system, although their precise impacts can
be difficult to isolate.

Chapter 11. Changes in the global
water cycle
Most climate scientists agree that global
warming will result in an intensification,
acceleration or enhancement of the global
hydrologic cycle, and there is some observational evidence that this is already happening. While trends in precipitation have
been noted in some parts of the world, in
other areas precipitation patterns have
remained about the same within the period of observed data. Changes have been
observed in snow cover extent and snow
water equivalent and in the frequency with
which precipitation falls as snow. More
than 15% of the world’s population live
where water resources availability depends
heavily on snowmelt from ephemeral
snowpacks or perennial glaciers. Despite
the evidence of temperature changes, there
is little evidence of detectable changes in
evaporation and evapotranspiration.
Climate change is being superimposed on
an already complex hydrologic landscape,
making its signal difficult to isolate, and yet
making its influence felt throughout the
water supply, demand and buffering system.
Data limitations in record length, continuity and spatial coverage contribute to the
uncertainty, while natural climate variability and multiyear variability associated with
large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns
influence the interpretation of many trends
in ways that are not yet fully understood.
Despite the limitations of global datasets,
many studies have shown changes in
runoff and streamflow. Many have focused
on low (drought) or high (flood) extremes.
Except in regions with flows affected by
xxiv

glacier meltwater, the general conclusion is
that global trends are not present or cannot
be detected at this stage, although climate
change-related trends are evident in some
regions. Groundwater resources have been
heavily used for human supply and agriculture for many years. While many groundwater abstraction schemes access fossil
water (water unrelated to current conditions), renewable groundwater resources depend on highly variable recharge volumes.
It is thus realistic to expect future recharge
regimes to reflect changes in the driving
hydrologic processes (such as precipitation
and evapotranspiration) that might result
from anticipated climate changes. It is
increasingly clear that the assumption of
statistical stationarity is no longer a defensible basis for water planning.
Among the consequences of a changing
hydrologic cycle is its interaction with
the terrestrial carbon cycle. The terrestrial
biosphere may have taken up roughly 25%
of anthropogenic carbon emissions during
the last century; it is unclear how long this
can continue.

Chapter 12. Evolving hazards – and
emerging opportunities
Water-related hazards can be naturally occurring or anthropogenic. Hazards can result from too much water (floods, erosion,
landslides and so on) or too little (droughts
and loss of wetlands or habitat) and from
the effects of chemical and biological pollution on water quality and in-stream ecosystems. The natural variability of water
resources and changes, whatever the cause,
can provide opportunities for management
strategies to respond to potential climate
change threats by implementing more
resource-sustainable policies and practices.
In many places climate-related water events
have become more frequent and more
extreme. In developing countries extreme
floods can result in many deaths, while
in developed countries they can result in
billions of dollars in damages. More intense
droughts in the past decade, affecting an
increasing number of people, have been
linked to higher temperatures and decreased precipitation but are also frequently
a consequence of the mismanagement of
resources and the neglect of risk management. The increased exposure to potential
climate change hazards has led to more
awareness of water resources management.
Changes in flow and inputs of chemical
and biological waste from human activity have altered the water quality and
World Water Development Report 3

Overview of key messages
ecological functioning of many of the
world’s rivers. Global warming is expected
to have substantial effects on energy flows
and matter recycling through its impact
on water temperature, resulting in algal
blooms, increases in toxic cyanobacteria
bloom and reductions in biodiversity.
In areas of increasing water stress groundwater is an important buffer resource,
capable of responding to increased water
demands or of compensating for the declining availability of surface water.

Chapter 13. Bridging the
observational gap
Worldwide, water observation networks
provide incomplete and incompatible data
on water quantity and quality for properly
managing water resources and predicting
future needs – and these networks are in
jeopardy of further decline. Also, no comprehensive information exists on wastewater generation and treatment and receiving
water quality on a regional or global scale.
While new technologies based on satellite remote sensing and modelling present
opportunities, their value is limited by our
ability to ground-truth and validate the
simulated information.
Management of the world’s water resources
requires reliable information about the
state of the resource and how it is changing in response to external drivers such as
climate change and water and land use.
There is little sharing of hydrologic data,
due largely to limited physical access to
data, policy and security issues; lack of
agreed protocols for sharing; and commercial considerations. This hampers regional
and global projects that have to build on
shared datasets for scientific and applications-oriented purposes, such as seasonal
regional hydrologic outlooks, forecasting,
disaster warning and prevention, and
integrated water resources management in
transboundary basins.
Improving water resources management
requires investments in monitoring and
more efficient use of existing data, including traditional ground-based observations
and newer satellite-based data products.
Most countries, developed and developing,
need to give greater attention and more
resources to monitoring, observations
and continual assessments of the status of
water resources.

Part 4. Responses and choices
We have many of the answers. Across the
planet we have already shown that it can
Water in a changing world

be done! But there is no one-size-fits-all
solution. The best mix of responses to a
country’s development objectives and
policy priorities to meet its water challenges depends on the availability of water in
space and in time and the country’s technical, financial, institutional and human
capacities – its culture, political and regulatory frameworks, and markets.
Options within the water domain are
distinct from those outside it. Leaders in
the water domain can inform the processes outside their domain and implement
decisions for the water domain; but it is the
leaders in government, the private sector
and civil society who determine the directions that will be taken. Responses outside
the water domain strongly affect the macro
changes that influence how water is used
and allocated. They also make water adaptation measures more (or less) effective and
less (or more) costly.

Worldwide, water
observation
networks provide
incomplete and
incompatible data
on water quantity
and quality for
properly managing
water resources
and predicting
future needs – and
these networks
are in jeopardy of
further decline

Many countries face multiple challenges
but have limited financial and natural
resources and implementation capacities. Countries need to fully use synergy
opportunities and to make trade-offs
and difficult decisions on how to allocate
among uses and users to protect their water
resources. To achieve results, many actors
need to participate in these decisions.

Chapter 14. Options inside the water
box
There are many practical examples of
solutions within the water domain. Some
options show particular promise. Preparing institutions to deal with current and
future challenges requires support for
institutional development through such
reforms as decentralization, stakeholder
participation and transparency, increased
corporatization where feasible and fair,
partnerships and coordination (publicprivate, public-public, public-civil society),
and new administrative systems based on
shared benefits of water, including when
water crosses borders. Decision-makers
need to consider the influence of water
law, both formal and customary, including
regulations in other sectors that influence
the management of water resources.
Decision-making is improved by consulting
with stakeholders and ensuring accountability in planning, implementation and
management as well as building trust
within the water and related sectors and
fighting corruption and mismanagement.
Strengthening organization structures and
improving the operating efficiency of water
supply utilities will help to improve service
xxv

Overview of key messages

unsustainable
management and
inequitable access
to water resources
cannot continue.
We might not have
all the information
we would like
to have before
acting, but we do
know enough now
to begin to take
significant steps

quality and increase the coverage and
density of connections, while also boosting
revenues and creating a more viable financial base to attract further investment.
Innovation and research are critical for developing appropriate solutions. And greater
institutional capacity and human capacity
are needed, both within the water domain
and in areas or sectors outside the water
domain. Capacity development can occur
through traditional forms of education,
on-the-job training, e-learning, public
awareness raising, knowledge management
and professional networks.
Sound management accountability and
good governance within the water sector
contribute to creating a favourable investment climate. This should include new
approaches such as payment for environmental services.

Chapter 15. Options from beyond the
water box
Dealing with risk and uncertainty has long
been a routine challenge for water resources managers and policy-makers across
sectors and the world. However, issues like
climate change and demographic dynamics have made the risks greater and the task
more complex. Risk management is now
much more important – indeed essential –
to analysis and decision-making.
Drivers and policies outside the water sector
have more impact on water management
than do many policies championed and implemented by water-related ministries. Identifying trade-offs and synergies between
water and other policy sectors can enhance
policy impacts in all sectors and avoid some
adverse effects on water. Because governments, civil society and business leaders
make decisions every day that can affect
water, it is important to identify where such
decisions can also lead to improvements in
water sector management and in water sector and environmental services.
Examples of win-win situations abound –
whether created by governments, communities or businesses – that point to promoting deliberate cooperation between water
and non-water actors and integrating water
issues into external decisions. International
organizations, notably the UN system, can
provide support and expertise to governments, help civil society build capacity and
catalyse leadership in the private sector.

Chapter 16. The way forward
Water and water systems must be managed to achieve social and economic
xxvi

development objectives and to sustain
development. Water resources, properly
managed, are critical to the survival and
well-being of individuals. They can ensure
equity and security in water and sanitation
for families, businesses and communities.
And they can ensure adequate water for
food, energy and the environment as well
as protection from floods and droughts.
Decision-making on water requires seeking
synergies and selecting appropriate tradeoffs. It also requires distinguishing between
short-term ‘fire-fighting’ – responding to
the urgent issues of the day – and long-term
strategic development. Developing multipurpose water schemes and reusing water
wherever feasible can lessen the need for
trade-offs by enabling the same volumes of
scarce water to deliver multiple outcomes.
The donor community can incorporate
water into the broader frameworks of
development aid and focus assistance on
areas where it is needed most – in sub­Saharan Africa, in Asian and Latin American slums and in states recovering from
conflict. Recent G-8 efforts in this direction are promising.
The chief executives of the UN agencies,
following the example of their joint discussions of and collective responses to climate
change, can convene to examine the role
of water, water systems and water management in development and environmental
services, providing direction to agencies
and advice to member countries.
The World Water Assessment Programme
and its partners are working to help reduce
uncertainty, facilitate decision-making and
accelerate investment by highlighting the
links between socioeconomic development
and investment in water management capacity and infrastructure in other sectors.
The challenges are great, but unsustainable management and inequitable access
to water resources cannot continue. We
might not have all the information we
would like to have before acting, but we do
know enough now to begin to take significant steps. Actions must include increased
investment in water infrastructure and
capacity development. Leaders in the water
domain can inform the processes outside
their domain and manage water resources
to achieve agreed socioeconomic objectives
and environmental integrity. But leaders
in government, the private sector and civil
society will determine the direction that
actions take. Recognizing this responsibility, they must act now!
World Water Development Report 3

Water in a changing world

Chapter 1
Coordinator
Olcay Ünver
(WWAP)

Chapter
1

 etting out of the box – linking water
G
to decisions for sustainable development

Facilitator
William Cosgrove

PART

Chapter 1
Getting out of
the box – linking
water to decisions for
sustainable development
Authors: Andy Bullock, William Cosgrove, Wim van der Hoek, James Winpenny
Contributors: Gerry Galloway, BertJan Heij, Molly Hellmuth, Jack Moss, Monica Scatasta
Coordinator: Olcay Ünver (WWAP)
Facilitator: William Cosgrove

Key messages
The ‘water box’ dilemma must be resolved. Leaders in the water ­sector
– in water supply and sanitation, hydropower, irrigation and flood
control – have long been aware that water is essential to sustainable
development, but they do not make the decisions on development
objectives and the allocation of human and financial resources to
meet them. These decisions are made or influenced by leaders in government, the private sector and civil society, who must learn to recognize water’s role in obtaining their objectives.
Water is essential for achieving sustainable development and the Millennium Development Goals. Properly managing water resources is
an essential component of growth, social and economic development,
poverty reduction and equity, and sustainable environmental services
– all essential for achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Water is linked to the crises of climate change, energy and food supplies and prices, and troubled financial markets. Unless their links
with water are addressed and water crises around the world are resolved, these other crises may intensify and local water crises may
worsen, converging into a global water crisis and leading to political
insecurity and conflict at various levels.
The media today are full of talk of ­crises
– in climate change, energy and food
supplies and prices, and troubled financial
markets. These global crises are linked to
each other and to water resources. Unless
resolved, they may lead to increasing political insecurity and conflict at local and
national levels.
These crises arise against a background of
continuing poverty for much of the world.
Managing water resources is essential to
social and economic development, poverty
reduction and equity and to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Sustainable development depends on managing
the costs of service provision using existing infrastructure along with additional
investments in new water infrastructure
Water in a changing world

and rehabilitation, both physical and
institutional.
Specialists and managers in water supply
and sanitation, hydropower, irrigation
and flood control have long been aware
that water is essential to sustainable development. But they often have a narrow,
sectoral perspective that blinds many
decisions on water. And they do not make
the decisions on development objectives
and the allocation of human and financial
resources needed to meet these broader
objectives. These decisions are made or
influenced by leaders in government,
the private sector and civil society. These
leaders must learn to recognize water’s
role in attaining their objectives and act
accordingly.
3

PART

Chapter 1G

an understanding
of water issues
and of the
support needed
for investments,
institutions,
incentives,
information
and capacity
inside the ‘water
sector’ requires
partnerships
between those
responsible for
the economywide benefits of
water and those
responsible for
managing water

And they must act in a changing world, a
world driven by forces that they often do
not control – forces of demography, the
global economy, changing societal values
and norms, technological innovation,
international law, financial markets and
climate change.

Opening the water box
Until the 1990s (and continuing in some
countries) water subsectors generally
worked independently, with specialists in
water supply and sanitation, hydropower,
irrigation, flood control and so on interacting very little.1 As population growth
and other pressures on water (‘water drivers’) brought more and more basins near
closure (the allocation of all of the water
in a basin), the need to manage water
across subsectors at the basin level became
evident. Water management was expanded
during the 1990s to incorporate efficient
water use, equitable sharing of benefits,
and environmental sustainability – what
came to be called integrated water resources management. And in 2002 the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg set for all countries the goal
to develop integrated water resources management plans by 2005.
Many countries are applying integrated
water resources management at the basin
level. But management is still largely confined to the water sector, where it is well
understood that water is essential to all life
on the planet (human and other species)
and to human livelihoods. The sector is
beginning to recognize that decisions by
people outside the water sector determine
how water will be used, but the other
sectors are seen as cross-cutting in water
management. The approach within the
sector has been to invite those working in
other socioeconomic sectors to join in integrated water resources management. But
the societal and political questions that
determine the real allocation and management of water resources also need to take
into account the technological aspects of
integrated water resources management.

The sphere of decision-making and
the water box
Within government, water use is decided
by the interaction of decision-makers in
the main socioeconomic sectors – health,
education, agriculture, housing, industry,
energy, economic development and environment. In many countries this interaction occurs through a cabinet of ministers
presided over by the prime minister or
president. Parallel mechanisms may exist
4

at a regional, state (provincial) or local
(municipal) government level. The role of
these government structures is critical in
water management.
In many countries government directly
controls only a small fraction of investments in the economy, but it determines
the conditions that will attract or discourage investment. To be most effective,
decisions should be taken through an
interactive process that involves leaders in
business (finance, industries, commerce)
and civil society (community-based organizations and other non-governmental
organizations).
Ideally, government, business and civil
society leaders would work together in the
interest of society. Because of the implications of their decisions for water use, an
understanding of water issues and of the
support needed for investments, institutions, incentives, information and capacity
inside what has traditionally been considered the ‘water sector’ requires partnerships between those responsible for the
economy-wide benefits of water and those
responsible for managing water. Leaders
in the water sector must thus ensure that
these leaders outside the ‘water box’ know
the constraints and options for water
resources and help them implement their
decisions efficiently and effectively.
Among the decisions that affect water the
most are those relating to how a country
meets its objectives for energy and food
security, employment, disaster preparedness, environmental sustainability and
other societal goals. These decisions are
made in broader political frameworks and
not by water managers, who subsequently
deal with their implications for water and
with other outcomes that touch on water.
Figure 1.1 illustrates this process.
Outside the water sector is an area of synergy, tradeoffs, coordination and integration, involving higher-level, multisectoral
decision-making processes. Water professionals, stakeholders and individuals can
inform and influence decisions in this
area, affecting outcomes. But they need
to have a seat at the decision-making
table and to respond by implementing
water management effectively and efficiently and by properly informing the
decision-making process. These efforts are
facilitated in the many countries that have
adopted water resources management laws,
policies or strategies that reflect links between water and the social and economic
sectors.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development

Figure 1.1

Decision-making affecting water

Political
actors

Civil
society
actors

• Economic
• Social
• Environment
Drivers of
change

• Demographic
• Policy, law and
ﬁnance
• Technology

• Policy
formation
• Resource
allocations
• Political and
operational
decisions

Modify

Business and
economic
actors

Response
options

• Climate change

Pressures
• Finance
• Exploitation
• Pollution
• Urbanization
• Land use
• Water use
• Climate variability

Create

Affect

Water sector
management

Demand

Water
box

Life and
livelihoods
• Aspirations
• Poverty alleviation
• Health and
well-being
• Security
• Employment

Demand

Impact
Water resources
• Rainwater
• Groundwater
• Lakes
• Reservoirs
• Wetlands
• Wastewater
• Desalinated water

Other sector
management

Water uses
• Domestic
• Agriculture
• Industry
• Energy
• Leisure
• Transport
• Environment

Source: Authors’ construction.

Water in a changing world

5

PART

Chapter 1G

everywhere
decisions related
to development
of necessity
incorporate water
development
decisions,
whether explicitly
recognized or not

Decision-makers and water
management
Providing water is but a means of achieving a country’s development objectives –
generally job creation, food security, GDP
growth and social goals including poverty
reduction. In pursuing these objectives,
decision-makers are challenged by tradeoffs between possible investments and
possible synergies between sectors. Making
trade-offs and searching for synergies require cooperation between those responsible for different sectors of the economy.
Where there has been sustained development, the role of government has generally been to facilitate action by others and
to regulate the process.2 The role of water
managers has been to inform decisionmakers of the constraints and opportunities of water resources management and
water infrastructure development and
then to act in accordance with the national development strategy.
Partnerships have been strongly promoted
in the water sector, particularly for service
provision. Public-private partnerships
have been the predominant model, some
functioning as intended, and some with
mixed impacts. Water user associations in
participatory irrigation management have
become widespread in a number of countries, with some success in improving irrigation scheme management. But whether
the operator is a private company, a public
corporation or a municipal service, the
successes have clearly demonstrated the
importance of the complementary roles of
public decision-makers and authorities on
the one side and service operators on the
other. In the long-term neither can succeed without the other.
Other types of partnerships include civil
society organizations, municipalities and
the private sector. A recent study on Latin
America concluded that proper institutional frameworks, incentives and mutual
trust are keys to successful partnerships.3
River basin organizations are increasingly
playing an important role. Broad coalitions
of development partners, including different levels of government; donors; multinational, international and regional agencies;
and local non-governmental organizations
are being created in some countries, such
as Mozambique,4 to advise on priorities
for public expenditures. Speaking at the
Davos economic summit in January 2008,
U.K. Prime Minister Gordon Brown said
that the Millennium Development Goals
will not be met ‘unless there is a private,
voluntary and government partnership’.5

6

He added that ‘governments have to understand that they have to make it possible for
companies to affect change’ and at times
have to see companies as providers not just
of resources but also of resourcefulness.
Where development is occurring rapidly
and growth is viable, greater emphasis will
be on private sector engagement and market-based mechanisms. Where development
is slower and growth prospects are weaker,
greater emphasis will be on providing basic
services, including safety nets targeting
society’s poorest. Where governments and
institutions are weak (fragile states) emphasis will be on reconstruction and rehabilitation. And where there are humanitarian crises, conflicts and natural disasters, emphasis
will be on emergency responses. Working
across many countries simultaneously,
regional approaches emphasize integration,
regional security and equity. Thus, although
development is taking place in very different settings, with different integrating
frameworks and processes and different sets
of actors, everywhere decisions related to
development of necessity incorporate water
development decisions, whether explicitly
recognized or not.
More important than trying to quantify
the relative ‘market share’ of the public
and private sectors is recognizing that they
face similar challenges, constraints and
difficulties. The task for decision-makers
and political leaders is to create the framework conditions under which operators of
all kinds – public, private, mixed, community providers and others – can provide
services and investments effectively over
the long term.

Sustainable development
as the framework for water
management
In the overview of The Growth Report of
2008 the Commission on Growth and
Development argues that
Growth is not an end in itself. But
it makes it possible to achieve other
important objectives of individuals
and societies. It can spare people
en masse from poverty and drudgery. Nothing else ever has. It also
creates the resources to support
health care, education, and the
other Millennium Development
Goals to which the world has committed itself. In short, we take the
view that growth is a necessary, if
not sufficient, condition for broader
development, enlarging the scope
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
for individuals to be productive and
creative.6

Sustained growth requires water
Growth requires access to natural resources. The Growth Report acknowledges that we
may be entering a period in which natural
resources, broadly defined, impose new
limits on growth. But the report makes
no major reference to the essential role of
water resources. World Water Development
Report 3, which places more emphasis on
development than its predecessors, makes
the case that the availability of water resources and their management are determinants of a country’s growth strategy.
Africa provides a good example because
both growth and water are major challenges there. The African heads of state
recognized the importance of water to development when they gathered in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, in mid-2008 and adopted
a declaration explicitly noting the role of
water as a key to sustainable development
in the region (box 1.1).
Societies do not become wealthy first and
then invest in water management; they
find ways to manage water and risk first,
which then leads to wealth. If they are
wise, they do this in a way that avoids
pollution, cares for equity and otherwise
ensures the sustainability of the resource.
Investment in water infrastructure is
required to meet basic needs in rural areas
and to enhance agricultural productivity
through better management of water. As
development proceeds, with the shift to
commercial and industrial activities in
urban areas, water has to be managed for
energy and food production, transportation, flood control, and drinking water
and sanitation, as well as for industrial
and commercial activities.
Asian Water Development Outlook 2007 highlights the significant global development
challenge this represents.7 That report emphasizes a ‘multi­disciplinary and multi-sector perspective [on water] around the Asia
and Pacific region’ in facing the challenges
of sustaining growth. It highlights
important topics that have been
neglected or are being inadequately
considered in most countries of
the region. Among these is the
urgent need to address the inherent
interrelationships between water
and other important developmentrelated sectors, like energy, food,
and the environment.
Water in a changing world

Box 1.1

Commitment of African heads of state to
water as a key to sustainable development

WE, the Heads of State and Government of the African Union, meeting at
the 11th Ordinary Session of our Assembly in Sharm el-Sheikh, Arab Republic of
Egypt, from 30 June to 1 July 2008,
Recognizing the importance of water
and sanitation for social, economic
and environmental development of
our countries and Continent; . . .
Recognizing that water is and must remain a key to sustainable development
in Africa and that water supply and
sanitation are prerequisites for Africa’s
human capital development;
Concerned that there is an under­
utilization and uneven sharing of water
resources in Africa, and that remains a
growing challenge in the achievement
of food and energy securities. . . .
WE COMMIT OURSELVES TO:
(a) Increase our efforts to implement
our past declarations related to water
and sanitation.
(b) Raise the profile of sanitation by addressing the gaps in the context of the
2008 eThekwini Ministerial Declaration
on sanitation in Africa adopted by [the
African Ministers Council on Water].
(c) Address issues pertaining to agricultural water use for food security as
provided for in the Ministerial Declaration and outcomes of the first African
Water Week.
And particularly;
(d) Develop and/or update national
water management policies, regulatory
frameworks, and programmes, and

prepare national strategies and action
plans for achieving the [Millennium Development Goal] targets for water and
sanitation over the next seven (7) years;
(e) Create conducive environment to
enhance the effective engagement of
local authorities and the private sector;
(f) Ensure the equitable and sustainable
use, as well as promote integrated management and development, of national
and shared water resources in Africa;
(g) Build institutional and human resources capacity at all levels including
the decentralized local government
level for programme implementation,
enhance information and knowledge
management as well as strengthen
monitoring and evaluation;
(h) Put in place adaptation measures to
improve the resilience of our countries
to the increasing threat of climate
change and variability to our water
resources and our capacity to meet
the water and sanitation targets;
(i) Significantly increase domestic
financial resources allocated for implementing national and regional water
and sanitation development activities
and call upon Ministers of water and
finance to develop appropriate investment plans;
(j) Develop local financial instruments
and markets for investments in the
water and sanitation sectors;
(k) Mobilize increased donor and other
financing for the water and sanitation
initiatives. . . .
Source: African Union 2008.

It has little in the way of a detailed roadmap
for water resources development, however.

Benefits from investing in water
Many water investments have been evaluated by the rate of return of single-purpose
schemes without considering the additional benefits possible from multipurpose
projects.8 Increasingly, evidence is emerging of the direct economy-wide benefits
of investments in water (see chapter 6).
For example, there is evidence that local
action on water management in China
has delivered measurable improvements
in local GDP.9 In the 335 counties in
China with primary electrification from
hydropower, annual average income per
7

PART

Chapter 1G

Figure 1.2

The costs of disasters as a share of GDP are
much higher in poor countries than rich
countries

Total economic costs (US$ billions)

Costs as share of GDP (percent)

700

14

600

12

500

10

400

8

300

6

200

4

100

2
0

0
Richest countriesa

Poorest countriesb

a. Annual GDP per capita above $9,361.
b. Annual GDP per capita below $760.
Source: Delli Priscoli and Wolf 2009.

Figure 1.3

US government investments in water
infrastructure during 1930-96 yielded $6 in
damages averted for each $1 invested

Investment in water infrastructure
(1999 US$ billions, adjusted using Construction Cost Index)
800
700

Cumulative benefits

600
500
400
300
200

Cumulative expenditures

100

Annual benefits

0
1928 1934 1940 1946 1952 1958 1964 1970 1976 1982 1988 1994 1999

Source: Based on Delli Priscoli and Wolf 2009.

Box 1.2

Economic impacts of lack of adequate
sanitation facilities in South-East Asia

Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines
and Viet Nam lose an estimated $9 billion a year because of poor sanitation
(based on 2005 prices), or approximately 2% of their combined GDP, according to the first regional study on
the economic impacts of poor sanitation, undertaken in South-East Asia by
the World Bank Water and Sanitation
Project. The highest economic costs
($4.8 billion for the four countries
combined) are from sanitation- and
hygiene-related diseases. Poor sanitation also contributes substantially to
water pollution, adding to the cost of

8

providing safe water for households
and reducing the production of fish
in rivers and lakes ($2.3 billion). There
are also environmental losses (loss of
productive land, $220 million) and
tourism losses ($350 million). Universal sanitation would lead to an annual
gain of $6.3 billion in the four countries. Implementing ecological sanitation approaches (latrines separating
urine and fæces for use as fertilizer)
would be worth an estimated $270
million annually.
Source: Hutton, Haller, and Bartram 2007.

farmer rose 8.1% a year, nearly 3 percentage points more than the national average.
In those communities 30 million people
upgraded their livelihoods from marginalized farming to off-farm labourers in
the industrial and services sector without any negative impact on agricultural
production.
Evidence is also growing of the macro­
economic returns to investments in water
­management – and the costs of failures to
invest. Disasters such as floods (resulting
from typhoons and hurricanes and from
rainfall exceeding the carrying capacity of
channels) and droughts hurt poor economies more than wealthy ones, which are
better prepared to cope with such disasters
(figure 1.2).
Investments in environmental sustainability and water management to prevent
water­-related disasters can have large
payoffs, so countries need not wait to invest until they have achieved middle- or
high-income status. Investments in water
infrastructure by the US Army Corps of
Engineers between 1930 and 1999, for
example, yielded returns of $6 for each
$1 spent and controlled flood damage
despite rising population numbers and
property value at risk over the period
(figure 1.3). The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates returns of $3-$34,
depending on the region and technology, for each $1 invested in safe drinking
water and basic sanitation.10 There is thus
a strong case that improved coverage of
drinking water and sanitation contributes
to economic growth. Policy-makers can
use these data to justify their actions,
identify areas of deficiency and better
prioritize actions.11
Policy-makers also need to better understand the benefits for national development that result from sustainable water
management and provision of safe water.
Expanding safe drinking water and sanitation services would drastically cut the loss
of life from water-related illness and free
up scarce health resources in developing
countries. Five thousand children die each
day from diarrhoea alone – one every 17
seconds.12 Upgrading water supply and
sanitation services can also improve education, allowing more girls to attend school
instead of spending hours each day collecting water. Improved access would also
save millions of work days. The overall
economic loss in Africa alone due to lack
of access to safe water and basic sanitation is estimated at $28.4 billion a year, or
around 5% of GDP.13 Box 1.2 estimates the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
costs of lack of access to adequate sanitation facilities for four South-East Asian
countries.
Environmental degradation from water
pollution and excessive withdrawals also
has negative economic impacts. For example, the damage cost of environmental
degradation in the Middle East and North
Africa has been estimated at some $9 billion a year, or 2.1%-7.4% of GDP.14 Industrial countries are learning the enormous
costs associated with restoring essential
ecosystems. In the United States the costs
have been estimated at more than $60 billion and continue to rise as more becomes
known (box 1.3).

Investing in water

Investment flows to uses with the highest
economic rate of returns. Currently, water
often gives very low returns for very long
payback periods primarily because of the
way it is governed (see chapter 4). Much
political interaction in the water sector
drives operations to ‘structural bankruptcy’. It is not surprising that new investors
are not eager to enter the water sector.
Yet public investment in infrastructure is
declining. And so the needs of the water
sector go unmet.
The challenges in financing water services have been well described in recent
years. Proposed solutions and innovative
responses are presented in the reports
of the World Panel on Financing Water
Infrastructure15 and the Task Force on
Financing Water for All.16 Ultimately, there
are only three sources of financing: user
tariffs, public expenditure and external
aid (official or philanthropical). Recourse
to these sources should be preceded and
accompanied by efficiency measures to
control operating costs and by careful
project selection and design to ensure the
best return to scarce resources.
Many studies have attempted to estimate
the total investments that would be required to provide adequate infrastructure
for water supply and sanitation. Typically
presented as global or regional estimates,
they often ignore the essential precondition of investments in institutions, reform,
and implementation and management
capacities and in replacement of ageing
infrastructure. Because water can be managed only locally, investments must also
be managed locally. Investing in water
requires a holistic approach (figure 1.4).
Sound financial management, as illustrated in figure 1.4, will make it possible
for water authorities and governments to
Water in a changing world

Box 1.3

Estimated costs of restoring essential
ecosystems in the United States

The following are estimates for restoring major essential ecosystems in
the United States. The cost exceeds
$60 billion, and the total is likely to
be higher still as more information
becomes available.
•

•

•

Everglades Restoration: $10.9
billion. Groundwork laid for
Everglades restoration, but
projects are experiencing delays
(www8.nationalacademies.
org/onpinews/newsitem.
aspx?RecordID=11754).
Restoration of the Upper Mississippi River: $5.3 billion for a
50-year ecosystem restoration
plan (www.nationalaglawcenter.
org/assets/crs/RL32470.pdf).
Restoration of Coastal Louisiana: $14 billion towards a
Sustainable Coastal Louisiana

Figure 1.4

by 2050 (www.coast2050.
gov/2050reports.htm).
•

Restoration of Chesapeake Bay:
$19 billion for the Chesapeake Bay
Program (www.chesapeakebay.
net/fundingandfinancing.aspx
?menuitem=14907).

•

Restoration of Great Lakes: $8
billion for Great Lakes restoration
and protection priorities (www.
cglg.org/projects/priorities/
PolicySolutionsReport12-10-04.
pdf).

•

Restoration of California Bay
Delta: $8.5 billion (first seven
years) for large-scale ecosystem
restoration initiatives (www.
nemw.org/calfed.htm).

•

Restoration of Missouri River – to
be determined.

Water investment requires a holistic approach
– links between pricing, financing and
stakeholders

Investment
plans

• Objectives
• Technology requirements

Realistic finance
strategies
Ultimate sources
(filling the gap)
• Users and beneﬁciaries
• Public budgets
• External aid
Leveraging
• To ﬁll the gap
• Increase users’
willingness to pay
(services, efﬁciency,
reforms)
• To bridge the gap
• Attract private
funds
• Integrate ﬁnance
packages

Costs

Financial
needs/gap

Pricing strategies
• Part of sustainable cost recovery
• Trade-offs: ﬁnancial, social, economic, environmental
sustainability
• Leveraging effects: sources and skills
• Payment schemes? Leveraging beneﬁciaries’
willingness to pay
Financing mechanisms (bridging the gap)
• Payment schemes leveraging beneﬁciaries’
willingness to pay
• Attract funds and build appropriate ﬁnance packages
(cost of capital)

Maximizing contributions to sector sustainability by
different stakeholders, including the private sector
• Increase efﬁciency: reduce cost, reduce gap
• Improve service: increase users’ willingness to pay
• Clarify roles and provide stability: attract funds
• Elicit users’ needs: reduce cost/gap, increase
willingness to pay

Source: Authors’ construction.

attract loans or external aid to supplement
their own sources of capital.
Nonetheless, many developing countries,
having applied all of the measures implied
by such a process, will still lack the capital
required to meet basic needs through
9

PART

Chapter 1G

Today, poverty
reduction
strategies still offer
only the prospect
of aligning action
on water with
poverty reduction,
as few current
poverty reduction
strategies give
anything but
superficial
attention to
action on water

water resources development and service
delivery. In those cases it is relevant to
question how much external aid is available, where it is applied and whether the
amount can or should be increased.

Distributing the benefits of growth
The 2007 U.K. Department for International Development policy paper ‘Growth
and Infrastructure’ stated that ‘Growth is
the single most important way of pulling
people out of poverty’.17 It cites empirical literature attributing more than 80%
of recent poverty reduction worldwide to
growth and less than 20% to redistribution (social protection). It gives the examples of China, where 450 million people
have been lifted out of poverty since 1979,
helped by exceptionally high growth
rates, and Viet Nam, which experienced
the most rapid reduction in poverty rates
on record, from 75% in the late 1980s to
less than a third in 2002, thanks to high
growth rates.
That poverty reduction is the overriding policy concern is evidenced by the
primacy of poverty reduction strategies
and national development plans as the
governing mechanisms for partnerships
and finance from the international community. As of mid-2008, 59 countries had
prepared full poverty reduction strategies
and 11 more had completed preliminary
poverty reduction strategies. This represents a significant change. For many
years action on water that could deliver
benefits to the poor lacked government
frameworks that prioritized poverty
reduction and mobilization of financing.
Today, poverty reduction strategies still
offer only the prospect of aligning action
on water with poverty reduction, as few
current poverty reduction strategies give
anything but superficial attention to action on water.
Public expenditure reviews are another
tool to help decision-makers allocate
public funds. These reviews of government
spending can boost efficiency and equity,
development impact and the accountability of public spending. They can also increase the accountability and transparency
of results and support governance reforms
and anticorruption programs.
Economic justification for water investments come from their translation into
economy-wide growth through employment, capital and labour productivity,
taxes, government expenditure, revenue
control, debt, purchasing power, balance
of payments, foreign exchange reserves,

10

trade balances, accelerator impacts on
capital investment, business confidence
and the stock market.
In India water development evened out
the seasonal demand for labour, resulting
in major gains for the country.18 Forecasts by the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development concerning African agriculture’s contribution to growth and poverty
reduction are founded on the economic
justifications of reduced food import bills,
more predictable import profiles, increased
export revenues and reduced poverty at
the household level.19
To attract development-oriented finance,
the growth-increasing and poverty­reducing contributions of water resources
must be made explicit and specific at the
country level. Such specifics will influence
the sources, costs, viability, sustainability
and instruments of finance. National,
basin and local action plans are needed to
align water resources, economic growth
and poverty reduction. Making such alignments and other essential connections
will be more successful within frameworks
such as a round of poverty reduction
strategies, public expenditure reviews and
national development plans.

Reducing poverty, which limits
access to water
The world must acknowledge the crisis of
persistent underdevelopment and poverty.
Since the end of the Second World War
more than 3 billion people have benefited from economic development, but
at least 2 billion people remain in need.
Some 1.4 billion people lived in ‘absolute
poverty’ in 2005,20 a number that does not
take into account the recent wave of increases in energy and food prices.21 These
women, men and children daily face the
consequences of poverty – disease, malnutrition and hunger. They have no capacity to prepare for natural disasters, such
as earthquakes and floods, or to respond
when they strike. The world community
has set the Millennium Development
Goal target of halving the proportion of
people living in poverty by 2015. But we
are far from being on track, particularly in
regions where the need is highest.
Human Development Report 2006 considers the experience of water and sanitation
as reinforcing the ‘long-standing human
development lesson’ that rates of coverage
in access to water and sanitation rise with
income on average (figure 1.5).22 Global
Monitoring Report 2005 notes that in South
Asia an improving investment climate and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
stronger policies, along with gains in basic
service delivery, have sustained rapid economic growth since 1990 and contributed
significantly to poverty reduction and to
reaching the Millennium Development
Goals in some countries.23

The case for investing in Africa
Where investment in water has been
weak, GDP growth has been constrained
– by as much as 10% where the effects of
droughts, floods and natural hydrologic
variability are compounded in less developed economies. Where weak economic
growth has been accompanied by inadequate investment in social protection, the
gap in achieving the Millennium Development Goals has worsened in many countries, with devastating social impacts.
Africa, in particular, remains mired in
poverty (figure 1.6) despite recent economic growth trends in some countries. In
developed countries water storage ensures
reliable sources of water for irrigation,
water supply and hydropower as well as a
buffer for flood management. Countries
in Africa store only about 4% of annual
renewable flows, compared with 70%-90%
in many developed countries. About 340
million Africans lack access to safe drinking water, and almost 500 million lack
access to improved sanitation facilities.
The First African Water Week, convened
in Tunis in March 2008, opened with
a call for greater efforts to ensure water
security nationally and regionally. Donald
Kaberuka, president of the African Development Bank Group, emphasized that
it is no longer acceptable that the
African continent continues to utilize only 4% of its water resources,
when a huge proportion of the
people do not have access to safe
water, and when large populations
are faced with frequent floods and
drought, in addition to food and
energy shortages. Action is urgently
needed.24
In June 2008 the MDG Africa Steering
Group published a number of concrete
recommendations for scaling up opportunities to address poverty in Africa.25 Their
recommendations related to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals in Africa
are summarized in table 1.1.

Investing in water to reach the
Millennium Development Goals
This third edition of the United Nations
World Water Development Report is being
published just beyond the half-way point
Water in a changing world

Figure 1.5

Access to water and sanitation rises with
income

Population with sustainable access to improved drinking water source, 2006 (percent)
100
80
60
40
20

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

GNI per capita, 2006 (purchasing power parity dollars)
Population with sustainable access to improved sanitation, 2006 (percent)
100
80
60
40
20
0

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

GNI per capita, 2006 (purchasing power parity dollars)
Source: Based on data from WHO Statistical Information System (www.who.int/whosis/en/).

Figure 1.6

Poverty remains high in sub-Saharan Africa

Share of population living below the poverty line (percent)
100
$2.00

75

$1.25
50
$1.00
25

0
1981

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

2005

Note: Poverty lines in 2005 prices.
Source: Based on Chen and Ravallion 2008, p. 41.

along the timeline from the Millennium
Summit of 2000 and the 2015 target date
for attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Making progress towards
those goals will rise even higher on political agendas within the next six years.
The Millennium Declaration placed safe
drinking water and basic sanitation firmly
among the development objectives, making it a target of Millennium Development
Goal 7. But while adequate progress is
11

PART

Chapter 1G

Table 1.1

Summary of scaling-up opportunities related to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals in Africa

Scaling-up
opportunity

Summary of
key results

Policy
leadership

Achieving the
Millennium
Development
Goals in Africa

Comprehensive
cross-sector public
expenditure
programmes
against clear
quantitative
targets

SecretaryGeneral and
MDG Africa
Steering Group,
G-8 leadership,
African Union,
private sector,
foundations

Key multilateral financing
mechanisms (among
several funding sources)

Estimated public external
financing needs by 2010
from all funding sources

All multilateral, bilateral and private
mechanisms providing high-quality,
predictable financing

Some $72 billion a year, of which
$62 billion (in 2007 terms) from
Development Assistance Committee
members (following the Gleneagles
G-8 meeting, Monterrey Consensus
and EU official development
assistance targets), with additional
financing from non-Development
Assistance Committee donors,
developing country collaboration,
private foundations and innovative
private co-financing

Source: Based on MDG Africa Steering Group 2008, p. 32.

Box 1.4

Progress in meeting the Millennium
Development Goal target on water supply
and sanitation

The world is on track to meet the Millennium Development Goal target on
drinking water. Current trends suggest
that more than 90% of the global
population will use improved drinking
water sources by 2015.
The world is not on track to meet
the Millennium Development Goal
sanitation target. Between 1990 and
2006 the proportion of p
­ eople without improved sanitation decreased

by only 8 percentage points. Without an immediate acceleration in
progress, the world will not achieve
even half the sanitation target by
2015. Based on current trends, the
total population without improved
sanitation in 2015 will have decreased only slightly, from 2.5 billion
to 2.4 billion.
Source: WHO and UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme 2008, pp. 8 and 23.

being made towards the provision of safe
drinking water, the sanitation target is far
from being met (box 1.4).
And despite progress, the scale of the challenge remains massive. While the water
supply target is being attained at a global
level, large regions of the world and many
countries are far from the target, and
some risk backsliding. This is particularly
the case in sub-Saharan Africa and lowincome Arab states. In many places the
sanitation targets will be missed by a wide
margin.
Both the drinking water and sanitation
targets are vitally important. The contribution of improved drinking water and
sanitation to the achievement of all the
Millennium Development Goals is now
well established.26 This report demonstrates this link throughout; others have
elaborated the direct and indirect contributions of water management across all
the Millennium Development Goals.27
Figure 1.7 depicts these links graphically.
12

These links served as an important advocacy instrument during the International
Year of Sanitation in 2008. High-profile international attention has focused on basic
services in recent years, including declarations at Brasilia (2003), Beppu (2007),
eThekwini (2008), Tunis (2008) and Sharm
el-Sheik (2008). Gaps in drinking water
and sanitation, in particular, have attracted political attention at the highest levels.
Development partnerships are helping
countries that are off track for achieving
the Millennium Development Goals get
back on track. Intergovernmental efforts
are working to maintain the momentum
of the global commitments made since the
Millennium Declaration and of waterspecific processes such as the G-8 Evian
Action Plan28(box 1.5). New initiatives,
such as the 2007 launch of the Millennium Development Goal Africa Initiative
by the UN system, have sought to reinvigorate the efforts of countries that are off
track in their progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.

Sustaining the environment
Environmental sustainability, broadly,
refers to the ability of the environment
to continue to support progressive social
and economic development and to provide
many types of ecosystem services (table
1.2). Multistakeholder processes, such as
the World Commission on Dams, have
seen environmental sustainability rise
in prominence as a factor influencing
water development decisions. And such
inter­national conventions as the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and the United Nations Convention
on Biodiversity have made water a global
issue.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development

Figure 1.7

Cause-effect chains and links between water and the Millennium Development Goals
Horizontal
expansion

Hunger
alleviation
goal

Increased
crop
production

Terrestrial ecosystems

Irrigation

River
depletion

Aquatic ecosystems

Water
harvesting

Aquatic ecosystems

Eutrophication
Agricultural
chemicals

Poverty
alleviation
goal
Sanitation
goal (water
supply and
sanitation
goal)

Incomegenerating
activities

Groundwaterdependent
wetlands

Nitrates in
groundwater
Polluted
water
sources
Industrial
production

Environmental
sustainability
goal

Water
supply
goal

Pollution
Aquatic ecosystems

Human waste
and
latrines

Source: Based on Cosgrove 2006, p. 38.

Today, water management crises are developing in most of the world. UN-Water
reports that in just one week in midNovember 2006 national media sources
reported local but high-profile shortages
in parts of Australia, Botswana, Canada,
China, Fiji, Kuwait, Liberia, Malawi, Pakistan, Philippines, South Africa, Uganda,
the United Arab Emirates and the United
States. 29
Generally regional phenomena, water
crises can emerge as water shortages and
droughts, floods or both, now aggravated
by the consequences of climate change.
They may be natural or caused by demands that exceed supply, lack of infrastructure or poor water management. They
may be the result of waste or abuse resulting in pollution. Together they threaten
the lives and livelihoods of billions of
people and risk irrevocably altering the
planet’s ecosystems.
Every year in developing countries an estimated 3 million people die prematurely
from water-related diseases. The largest
proportion of these deaths are among
infants and young children, followed by
women, from poor rural families who lack
access to safe water and improved sanitation (box 1.6).30 More than 1 million
people die annually from malaria, the vast
majority in poverty-stricken Africa. Another 1 million people die from air pollution
in urban areas. And everywhere the poor
suffer most.
Water in a changing world

Box 1.5

High-Level Event on the Millennium
Development Goals, United Nations, New
York, 25 September 2008: Extract from
compilation of partnership events and
commitments

The event [Water and Sanitation for
All] reiterated the strong political
and diplomatic support for international efforts needed to address
the water and sanitation issues and
enhance human security. It promoted
good water cycle management and
the application of Integrated Water
Resources Management. It reaffirmed
the importance of formulation and
implementation of national assistance
strategies building on the ‘Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness’, while
considering the specific needs and
resources of the recipient countries.
The event emphasized the importance
of mobilizing adequate international
and national financial resources for the
implementation of the national strategies and the need to strive towards
using sector-wide approaches; and developed partnerships with civil society
organizations, local authorities and the
private sector to implement national
strategies and action plans to improve
the accessibility and quality of water
and sanitation services as well as initiatives to establish a ‘Framework for Action’ to focus on the off-track countries,
including the possible consideration
for a ‘Fast Track Initiative’ with catalytic
funding to install a High-Level ‘Task

Force’ to reach [Millennium Development Goal 7], and to make one annual
global progress report and to hold one
annual high-level review meeting.
Japan committed to establish a Water
Security Action Team for Africa to provide safe drinking water for 6.5 million
people and implement a water supply
capacity-building program that would
train 5,000 people over the next five
years. Tajikistan said it would host the
International Freshwater Forum in
2010 as a venue for a preliminary discussion of achievements, challenges
and experiences within the International Decade Water for Life, 2005-15.
The Netherlands said it would help
provide access to safe drinking water
and sanitation for at least 50 million
people by 2015 having already signed
various agreements that will benefit
almost 30 million people, at a cost of
around €1.3 billion. Germany will continue to train Central Asian water experts. The Netherlands and the United
Kingdom committed €106 million in
joint funding for water and sanitation
initiatives in developing countries over
the next five years.
Source: UN 2008.

13

PART

Chapter 1G

Table 1.2

Types of ecosystem services
Cultivated/
agricultural lands

Forests

Oceans

Environmental
goods

•
•
•
•

Food
Freshwater
Fuel
Fibre

• Food
• Fuel

• Food
• Fuel
• Fibre

Regulating
services

•
•
•
•

Climate regulation
Flood regulation
Disease regulation
Water purification

• Climate
regulation
• Disease
regulation

• Climate
regulation
• Water
purification

Supporting
services

• Nutrient cycling
• Soil formation

• Nutrient cycling
• Primary
production

• Nutrient cycling
• Soil formation

Cultural
services

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

• Aesthetic
• Educational

Aesthetic
Spiritual
Educational
Recreational

Aesthetic
Spiritual
Educational
Recreational

Source: Based on MEA 2005.

Box 1.6

Malnutrition attributable to environmental
risks

Experts estimate that poor water and
sanitation services and hygiene practices and inadequate water resources
management contribute to half of all
cases of infant and child underweight,
an estimate corroborated by a World
Bank technical review of 38 recent
cohort studies (confidence interval
of 39%-61%). Evidence from several
of those studies demonstrates that
exposure to environmental health risks

Box 1.7

Source: Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006;
World Bank 2008; Alam et al. 2000.

Water as capital

Classical economists recognized land
(all natural resources), labour and
produced capital as the basic sources
of wealth. Neoclassical economists focused only on labour and capital, treating ‘land’ as another interchangeable
form of capital. Natural resources were
considered abundant relative to demand and therefore not an important
focus for economics, whose task was to
allocate scarce resources – those whose
use constrained alternative economic
opportunities. There was little consideration of the environment’s dual role
as a source of valuable inputs and as a
sink for the economy’s waste and pollution. Nor was much thought given
to the possibility that the world might
reach a scale of resource exploitation at
which the capacity of both the source
and sink functions of the environment
could become binding constraints on
economic growth.
The focus on produced rather
than natural capital is particularly

14

in early childhood leads to permanent
growth faltering, lowered immunity
and increased mortality. A recent
large study from Bangladesh reveals
that dysentery and watery diarrhoea
together can retard weight gain by
20%-25% compared with periods of
no infections.

misleading for water. Prices are typically related to the capital outlays
required to deliver water (that is, for
the infrastructure and operations and
maintenance charges), with little or
no value attributed to the resource
itself. Not only do undervalued water
resources tend to be overused, but
undervaluation also induces distorted
prices that provide poor information
about whether investments make
sense. Focusing only on capital costs
provides no insight into whether
economic activities are creating value
or whether the resource is running out
and needs to be conserved.
Water delivery is highly capital-intensive, so produced capital will remain a
crucial focus for financial and economic analyses of water investments. But
the value of water resources also matters, and water’s availability, quality
and timing cannot simply be assumed.
Source: Bergkamp and Sadoff 2008.

The value of water goes well beyond its
productive value (box 1.7). Citizens who
realize this are calling for action to protect
water, joined by business people who
recognize the importance of protecting
the sources of the water on which they
depend. Many are even paying for such
protection.31
Also to be considered is the impact of
climate change on environmental sustainability. At the High-Level Event on the
Millennium Development Goals at the
United Nations in September 2008 discussion focused on the need for new adaptation strategies and for climate-resilient
national development plans, especially for
the least developed countries:
Linkages between financing for
development and international
climate change financing were
discussed. It was also agreed that
all countries, including donor
countries, the UN system and the
Bretton Woods institutions, need to
clarify the budgetary implications
of adaptation; ensure that adequate
finance mechanisms are in place;
and help meet the additional costs
that climate-resilient development
will entail.32

Global crises and water
While climate change will create important pressures on water, it is not currently
the most important driver of these pressures outside the water sector. The most
important drivers – forces and processes
generated by human activities – are demographics and the increasing consumption
that comes with rising per capita incomes
(see chapter 2).
In the early stages of development population growth is the most important driver.
But most of the projected growth in
demand comes not from high-populationgrowth countries but from countries with
high rates of economic growth and large
current populations. As incomes permit,
people consume more. To start with, there
will be a requirement for more water to
produce food for tens of millions of people
moving from one meal to two meals a day.
Later, still more water will be needed for
food production as people include more
meat in their diets. Changes in lifestyles
will require large amounts of water to
produce and process non-food goods and
services (virtual water), further increasing pressures on the quantity and quality
of water resources. Other demographic
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
drivers include rural-urban migration and
migration in response to political conflict
and environmental crises.
Other external forces that may create
either positive or negative pressures on
water resources include pricing policies and
subsidies for water and water-related goods,
trade patterns, developments in science
and technology, consumption patterns,
evolution of policies and laws, social movements and global and national politics.
Except for climate change, these forces
will not create pressures directly (or only)
on water management. The pressures will
be felt first at the level of sector ministers,
whose responses will translate into strategies that affect the water sector. These
ministers will have to make decisions
under conditions of risk and uncertainty.
The better informed they are, the more
likely they are to make the right decisions.
For water managers this means being able
to provide reliable information about
where and when water is available, of what
quality, where and how it is used, what
happens to wastewater, how much water
leaves the country in exports of goods
that use water in their production (virtual
water) and how much enters the country
in imports. This will be a challenge for
water managers in most countries, which
lack the necessary measurements and do
not systematically collect the necessary

Figure 1.8

the world is facing
global crises in
energy, food, and
climate change and
global warming
that cannot
adequately be
addressed without
considering the
role of water

data. But when the information is available, it will be possible to calculate the
country’s water balance and the water
footprints (volume of water used) of various users. Using this information, water
managers can advise decision-makers in
other sectors of the feasibility of their
plans and the implications for water.
The Report provides ample evidence of
all these facts. This is not the first time
that professionals in the water sector have
attempted to bring them to the world’s
attention. But this time the effort may
be more successful, because this time the
world is facing other global crises – in
energy, food and climate change and
global warming – that cannot adequately
be addressed without considering the role
of water.

Water for energy
Demand for energy – for heat, light, power
and transportation – is increasing rapidly
(see chapter 7). The price of energy commodities has been rising as well. Volatile,
the nominal price of oil – the benchmark
commodity – rose from less than $25 a
barrel eight years ago to about $100 early
in 2008 and more than $140 in June 2008.
Within two months it fell below levels
projected for the longer term by the Energy
Information Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy and was at $35 a barrel
on December 19, 2008 (figure 1.8). Energy

Historical and projected energy demand and oil prices show steadily rising demand and
rapidly rising prices

Btus (quadrillions)

Nominal dollars per barrel

250

250

Projections

Projections

Liquids
Coal

200

150

Natural gas

200

High price

150
Reference

100

100
Low price
Renewables

50

50
Nuclear

0

0
1980

1990

2000 2005 2010

2020

2030

1980

1990

2000

2007

2020

2030

Note: The reference case assumes average GDP growth of 2.4% a year, the high case assumes 3.0% a year, and the low case assumes 1.8% a year.
Source: Based on EIA 2005, 2008a.

Water in a changing world

15

PART

Chapter 1G

The number of
countries without
enough water
to produce their
food is rising.
The situation can
be remedied by
investing in water
infrastructure,
markets, credit,
agricultural
technology and
extension services

prices, particularly the oil prices that drive
them, earlier reflected rising world demand and constraints. The recent financial
crisis, which has slowed economic growth
throughout the world, reducing anticipated
demand, was largely responsible for the
low price of oil at the end of 2008.
The combination of high prices and a
desire to substitute other sources of fuel
led to the recent increase in the production of bioenergy, which has potentially
important impacts on water quality and
availability. Hydropower may be a renewable and non-polluting source of energy
in some countries. Water for cooling is
needed for all thermal sources of power,
including nuclear. In the United States
water withdrawn for cooling (39%)
equals agriculture’s share of water use. At
the same time energy is required to lift
groundwater, pump it through pipes and
treat both groundwater and wastewater.
An estimated 7% of all energy produced
is used for such purposes.33 Increased
demand for water through desalination
may increase energy demand in some
countries, although marginally on a global
scale.

Water for food
Agriculture is by far the largest consumer
of freshwater – about 70% of all freshwater
withdrawals go to irrigated agriculture (see

Figure 1.9

chapter 7). The recent steep rise in food
prices (figure 1.9) has severely hurt many
food-importing countries. Rising demand
for food caused by growing populations
and shifting diets, production shortfall in
some countries, increased costs for key agricultural inputs such as fertilizers (driven
in turn by energy costs), bio­energy-related
incentives in some countries and possible
financial speculation have all contributed
to the problem. The High-Level Conference
on World Food Security: The Challenges of
Climate Change and Bioenergy, a Food and
Agriculture Organization summit in Rome
on 3 June 2008, adopted a declaration acknowledging ‘an urgent need to help developing countries and countries in transition
expand agriculture and food production,
and to increase investment in agriculture,
agribusiness and rural development, from
both public and private sources’.34 It calls
on donors to provide balance of payments
and budget support to low-income foodimporting countries.
At the summit Robert B. Zoellick, president of the World Bank, said that the Bank
recognizes that the energy-food nexus
means that food prices will stay high and
that the ‘task is two-fold, to handle today’s
danger to those for whom securing food
has become a daily struggle, and turn
higher food prices into an opportunity
for developing world agriculture, and

Wheat and rice prices have risen sharply in recent years

Historical and projected prices of wheat and rice, 1970-2017

Wheat

Rice

US$ per tonne

US$ per tonne

800

Projections

1,500

Projections

Real price

1,250

Real price

600
1,000

400

750

500
200
250
Nominal price
Nominal price

0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2017

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2017

Source: Based on OECD and FAO 2008.

16

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
for farmers in developing countries’.35
The summit highlighted the strong links
among food security, economic development, climate change, markets, development assistance and energy and how
actions have implications for other sectors.
While the role of water in agriculture was
discussed at the summit, the final declaration did not mention water and water’s
strong links with these and many other
issues.
Water scarcity may limit food production
and supply, putting pressure on food prices
and increasing countries’ dependence on
food imports. The number of countries and
regions without enough water to produce
their food is rising as populations increase.
The situation can be remedied in many
developing countries by investing in water
infrastructure, markets, credit, agricultural
technology and extension services.

Underinvestment in water
The energy and food crises are taking
place during a time of global financial crisis. A credit crunch has followed the financial crises that began in the United States
and Europe in 2007 and spread around the
globe. The credit crunch has resulted in a
slowdown in economic growth around the
world. The International Monetary Fund
forecast in January 2009 that all industrial
countries would face a period of recession and that some developing countries
are more at risk than others (box 1.8).36
According to the Commission on Growth
and Development ‘developing countries
are most vulnerable to sudden stoppages
of credit and sudden switches of international custom or supply.’37
Developing countries most at risk include
those exporting directly to crisis-affected
countries, those whose exports are experiencing falling world prices and those
whose exports have high income elasticity
(luxury goods, including tourism). Declining tourism revenues and employment
will directly affect the poor. Countries
dependent on foreign direct investment,
remittances and development funds to
finance the current account deficit will
also be at risk. Oil-importing countries
have already been hard hit by the period
of high oil prices.
The high rates of global savings and strong
productivity growth in the three decades
before the financial crisis – when the stock
of financial assets grew three times faster
than GDP – were not accompanied by
investments in physical assets, and their
levels are below those in the last decade.
Water in a changing world

While other factors may also have contributed to these lower levels of investment,
economic uncertainty is a major factor.
Uncertainty about the policy environment in developing and emerging market
economies has always been a concern, but
its influence has strengthened in the currently highly competitive global markets.38
The impact on developing countries will
vary. Budgetary spending on infrastructure is often cut during periods of financial tightening, although for governments
that can afford it, investing in infrastructure can help counter an economic slowdown. Private investment may also suffer,
but since the private sector’s contribution
to the water sector has been relatively
small, the sector is less exposed to any
financial tightening. Countries dependent on aid face uncertain times. Bilateral donors, important in funding water
investments, may be tempted to reduce
their aid budgets. Multilateral aid could be
an important source of financing for the
next few years, especially following recent
record multiyear replenishments of the
International Development Association,
African Development Fund and European
Development Fund. Yet both bilateral and
multilateral aid donors still appear not to
recognize the contribution of the water
sector to growth, as indicated by the sector’s small share of total official development assistance in recent years (less than
4%; see table 4.4 in chapter 4).

Few countries
know how much
water is being
used and for
what purposes,
the quantity and
quality of water
that is available
and that can
be withdrawn
without serious
environmental
consequences and
how much is being
invested in water
management and
infrastructure

Inadequate information on water
and water crises
Managing water is made more difficult by
the lack of knowledge and information required for decision-making and long-term
planning. Few countries know how much
water is being used and for what purposes,
the quantity and quality of water that is
available and that can be withdrawn without serious environmental consequences

Box 1.8

International Monetary Fund updated
economic forecast for 2009

World growth is projected to fall to
0.5 % in 2009, its lowest rate since
World War II. Despite wide-ranging
policy actions, financial strains remain
acute, pulling down the real economy.
A sustained economic recovery will
not be possible until the financial
sector’s functionality is restored and
credit markets are unclogged.
Financial markets are expected to remain strained during 2009. In the advanced economies, market conditions

will likely continue to be difficult until
forceful policy actions are implemented to restructure the financial
sector, resolve the uncertainty about
losses, and break the adverse feedback
loop with the slowing real economy.
In emerging economies, financing
conditions will likely remain acute for
some time – especially for corporate
sectors that have very high rollover
requirements.
Source : IMF 2009, pp. 1-2.

17

PART

Chapter 1G

Scarcity – low
available water per
capita – is forecast
to worsen where
population growth
is still high, as in
sub-Saharan Africa,
South Asia and
some countries in
South America and
the Middle East

and how much is being invested in water
management and infrastructure (see chapter 13).
Underfunding of observation, monitoring
and information systems leads to weaknesses in infrastructure, research and
development, and training and to reduced
efficiencies. Less is known with each passing decade, despite the availability of new
remote sensing and geographic information system technologies that can simplify
monitoring and reporting and despite the
growing need for such information in an
increasingly complex and rapidly changing
world. Such information is vital not only at
a national scale but also at a global scale –
to inform the construction of global models of the hydrologic cycle and decisions
on where interventions, including external
aid, would be most useful. One move in
that direction is the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Convention
on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes,
which requires signatories to exchange
data on water quality and quantity and
pollution sources and the environmental
conditions of transboundary waters.

Climate change and water
Some parts of the world have no shortage of water. Others, such as North and
Southern Africa, the Middle East and parts
of South Asia, South-East Asia and South
America, suffer scarcity because of low
annual rainfall. Others suffer seasonal
scarcity. Yet others suffer from extreme
rainfall, causing floods. Some suffer from
both low and extreme rainfall, at different times. In some large countries, such as

Box 1.9

Extracts from Declaration of Leaders Meeting
of Major Economies on Energy Security and
Climate Change at the G-8 Hokkaido, Toyako,
summit, 9 July 2008

Climate change is one of the great
global challenges of our time. Conscious of our leadership role in meeting such challenges, we, the leaders
of the world’s major economies, both
developed and developing, commit to
combat climate change in accordance
with our common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities and confront the interlinked
challenges of sustainable development, including energy and food
security, and human health.
We will work together in accordance
with our Convention commitments to
strengthen the ability of developing

18

countries, particularly the most vulnerable ones, to adapt to climate change.
This includes the development and
dissemination of tools and methodologies to improve vulnerability and adaptation assessments, the integration of
climate change adaptation into overall
development strategies, increased implementation of adaptation strategies,
increased emphasis on adaptation
technologies, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability, and
consideration of means to stimulate
investment and increased availability
of financial and technical assistance.
Source: G-8 2008.

Mozambique and the United States, parts
of the country may experience damaging
intensive rainfalls while other parts suffer
prolonged drought. These variations matter
most where they affect large populations.
Scarcity – low available water per capita
– is forecast to worsen where population
growth is still high, as in sub-­Saharan
Africa, South Asia and some countries in
South America and the Middle East.
Adapting to climate change adds a critical
challenge to this picture for all countries,
particularly for developing countries,
whose capacity to adapt is low, and for
cities in coastal areas (see chapter 5). Even
if greenhouse gas concentrations stabilize
in the coming years, some impacts from
climate change are unavoidable. These include growing water stress, more extreme
weather events, higher levels of migration
and the disruption of international markets. Climate models show that extremes
of rainfall are likely to worsen, resulting
in more floods and droughts in regions
already affected – often regions with
low income levels per capita, widespread
absolute poverty, high population growth
and rapid urbanization. If climate change
brings significant shifts in the availability of water resources, patterns of human
migration could be affected.
These challenges cannot be separated from
the challenges of sustainable development. For some developing countries the
incremental costs of adapting to climate
change will soon approach the current
value of aid inflows. The leaders of the
G-8, meeting in Hokkaido, Japan, in July
2008, committed to accelerating action
on technology development, transfer,
financing and capacity building to support
adaptation (box 1.9). Such action must
include water resources, which will be
most affected by climate change. A recent
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change document on adaptation
noted that:
sector-specific adaptation planning
and practices were discussed in the
areas of agriculture and food security, water resources, coastal zones
and health. Those sectors were
selected based on their importance
to Parties and organizations as
highlighted in their submissions.39
The world is right to be concerned about
climate change, which poses major threats
to humans and ecosystems. The 2007
United Nations Climate Change Conference in Bali, Indonesia, acknowledged that
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
even the minimum predicted shifts in
climate for the 21st century, at more than
twice the 0.6° Celsius increase that has
occurred since 1900, would be significant
and disruptive. The intergovernmental
response has focused primarily on mitigation of climate change, embracing wideranging measures, including reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, transferring
clean technologies and protecting forests.
These measures may slow climate change.
They will not halt or reverse it.
It will be two generations before these
measures begin to have an effect. And
even if successful, they imply a considerably changed future climate. (They are
not aimed at reversing changes already
under way.) In the meantime people must
be protected from the consequences of
global climate change through adaptation
measures. Adaptation, as embodied in the
Nairobi Work Programme of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, is based on gaining a better
understanding of the impacts of climate
change and making informed decisions on
practical measures.40
The water situation and the vulnerability
of poor communities present a strong case
for action on climate change. Projections
warn of changes in water availability and
quality that could have disastrous consequences. Water is the principal medium
through which climate change will affect
economic, social and environmental conditions. Changes in water availability will
have economy-wide impacts.
Yet while the world appears motivated to
respond to the impacts of future climate
change, it remains unmotivated to act on
the water crises that are with us today.
Even without climate change, development
is threatened in many regions by factors
that we have already failed to address time
and again. The Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change’s April 2008 report on
water points this out clearly (box 1.10).

Security and water
Climate change, especially its implications
for scarce water resources, is a matter of
collective security in a fragile and increasingly interdependent world. At a 2007 UN
Security Council debate on the impact of
climate change on peace and security UN
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted that
climate change has implications for peace
and security, as well as serious environmental, social and economic implications,
especially ‘in vulnerable regions that face
multiple stresses at the same time – preWater in a changing world

existing conflict, poverty and unequal
access to resources, weak institutions, food
insecurity and incidence of diseases such
as HIV/AIDS.’41 He outlined ‘alarming,
though not alarmist’ scenarios, including limited or threatened access to energy
increasing the risk of conflict, a scarcity
of food and water transforming peaceful
competition into violence, and floods and
droughts sparking massive human migrations, polarizing societies and weakening
the ability of countries to resolve conflicts
peacefully.

while the world
appears motivated
to respond to
the impacts of
future climate
change, it remains
unmotivated to act
on water crises that
are with us today

In Africa alone by 2020, 75-250 million
people may be exposed to increased water
stress due to climate change. If coupled
with increased demand, this will hurt livelihoods and exacerbate water-related problems.42 Research centres such as the Oxford Research Group43 are underpinning
the security concerns of the United Nations, the European Union44 and national
governments45 about climate change and
its impacts on water. The forces at work are
global in scale, the aggregate result of the
behaviour of all countries. Dealing with
them will require international cooperation and coordination. Yet at the same
time national leaders must continue to act
and make decisions at a national level.
As climate change and adverse water impacts increase in politically charged areas,
conflicts will likely intensify, requiring
new and rapid adaptive security strategies. Hydrologic shocks that may occur
through climate change increase the risk
of major national and international security threats, especially in unstable areas
(box 1.11). Adverse changes in internal,
interjurisdictional and transboundary waters can put food, social, health, economic,
political and military security at risk.
Some fragile states (map 1.1) have experienced widespread conflict that has
resulted in the destruction of economic

Box 1.10

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Technical Report on Water and Climate Change

Current water management practices
may not be robust enough to cope
with the impacts of climate change
on water supply reliability, flood
risk, health, agriculture, energy and
aquatic ecosystems. In many locations, water management cannot
satisfactorily cope even with current
climate variability, so that large flood
and drought damages occur. As a
first step, improved incorporation of

information about current climate
variability into water-related management would assist adaptation to
longer-term climate change impacts.
Climatic and non-climatic factors,
such as growth of population and
damage potential, would exacerbate
problems in the future. (very high
confidence)
Source: IPCC 2008.

19

PART

Chapter 1G

Box 1.11

example, rehabilitation of damaged irrigation infrastructure and expansion of water
supply and sanitation formed a significant
part of the 2006 Somali Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction Plan.46 Similarly, rehabilitation of infrastructure after major natural
disasters provides an opportunity to address long-standing infrastructure deficits.

UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon warns
that water shortages are increasingly driving
conflicts

‘The challenge of securing safe and
plentiful water for all is one of the
most daunting challenges faced by
the world today.

the rains failed and water became
scarce.

‘Until only recently, we generally assumed that water trends do not pose
much risk to our businesses. While
many countries have engaged in
waste-water treatment and some conservation efforts, the notion of water
sustainability in a broad sense has not
been seriously examined.
‘Our experiences tell us that environmental stress due to lack of water may
lead to conflict and would be greater
in poor nations.
‘Ten years ago – even five years ago –
few people paid much attention to the
arid regions of western Sudan. Not
many noticed when fighting broke out
between farmers and herders, after

‘Today everyone knows Darfur. More
than 200,000 people have died. Several million have fled their homes.

The need for action – now

‘There are many factors at work in
this conflict, of course. But almost
forgotten is the event that touched it
off – drought. A shortage of life’s vital
resource.

Water has remained too low on the list of
political priorities for too long, a situation
that cannot be allowed to continue. Action
is required now. Lives and livelihoods depend on water for development. Changes
in human behaviour and activity are accelerating, affecting demand for water and
its supply. Because investments have been
neglected, development is lagging, people
are suffering and the environment is deteriorating. The resources needed to address
the problems of water management are
minuscule compared with the financial
resources that have been pledged and secured to deal with carbon emissions or the
current financial crisis. After decades of
inaction, the problems are enormous. And
they will worsen if left unattended.

‘We can change the names in this sad
story. Somalia. Chad. Israel. The occupied Palestinian territories. Nigeria. Sri
Lanka. Haiti. Colombia. Kazakhstan.
All are places where shortages of water
contribute to poverty. They cause
social hardship and impede development. They create tensions in conflictprone regions. Too often, where we
need water we find guns. . . .’
Source: Ban Ki-moon 2008.

infrastructure. The vulnerability of affected populations is worsened by the state’s
loss of control over the forces of law and
order and ultimately by its loss of political
legitimacy. Installing infrastructure and
renewing institutional capacity following
conflict have the potential to set postconflict nations on a path to recovery. For

Map 1.1

Although substantial, the challenges are
not insurmountable. In part 4 the Report
shows how some countries and regional
and local governments have solved similar
challenges. The decisions on development
objectives and the allocation of human
and financial resources needed to meet

Fragile states as defined by the International Development Association

Territory of
Kosovo

Uzbekistan
Afghanistan
Lao People's Democratic Republic

Haiti

Mauritania
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Guinea

Chad
Nigeria

Sierra
Togo
Leone São Tomé
Liberia
and Príncipe
Angola
Côte
d’Ivoire
Republic of
the Congo

Eritrea
Sudan
Djibouti

Myanmar

Cambodia
Central African
Republic
Burundi
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Comoros
Zimbabwe

Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Timor-Leste

Vanuatu
Tonga

Note: Fragile states are low-income countries that score below a threshold on the International Development Association’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment, a tool used to assess the quality of country policies. The list is prepared annually.
Source: Based on IDA 2007.

20

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
them are made or influenced by leaders
in government, the private sector and
civil society. They are the ones who must
recognize the role of water in attaining
their objectives – and demonstrate the will
to act now.

Structure of the Report
The Report has four parts. Part 1 examines water drivers – or what drives the
pressures on water. Externalities, mostly
human-induced, create pressures on water.
Human activities and processes of all types
– demographic, economic and social – can
exert pressures on water resources that
need to be managed. These pressures are
affected by a range of factors such as technological innovation, climate change, and
policies, laws and financial conditions
Part 2 is about using water. History shows
strong, mutual links between economic
development and water development.
Steadily increasing demand for agricultural products to satisfy the diverse needs
of a growing population (for food, fibre
and now fuel) has long been the main
driver behind agricultural water use. In a
situation of tight balance between food
supply and demand, climate events –
droughts in particular – have an increasingly strong impact on food price volatility. There is a growing need to protect
ecosystems and the goods and services
they produce and on which life and livelihoods depend. As competition among
demands on water increases, society will
need to respond more effectively through
improved water management, policies
and transparent and efficient water allocation mechanisms.

Notes
1.

There were exceptions, such as the development of the Tennessee River in the
United States beginning in the 1930s
under the Tennessee Valley Authority.

2.

Commission on Growth and Development 2008.

3.

Phumpiu and Gustafsson 2007.

4.

See www.pap.org.mz.

5.

Speaking at the session Re-Thinking Social Responsibility on 25 January 2008,
as cited in Maidmont 2008.

Part 3 explores the state of water resources.
The uneven distribution over time and
space of water resources, and how that
distribution is being modified, are fundamental sources of the water crisis. Global
warming is expected to result in an intensification, acceleration or enhancement of
the global hydrologic cycle. There is some
observational evidence that this is already
happening. In many places climate extremes have become more frequent or more
intense, with droughts and floods affecting
increasing numbers of people. Worldwide,
water observation networks are inadequate
for current needs and are at risk of further
decline. The data to understand and predict
water quantity and quality are lacking.
Part 4 is on responses and choices. It
shows that we can do what it takes to manage water resources properly to avert crises
and promote sustainable socio­economic
development. Others have already shown
the way. But there is no one-size-fits-all
solution. The best mix of responses to a
specific country’s development objectives
and policy priorities to meet various water
challenges depends on the availability of
water of acceptable quality for its intended
use and the country’s technical, financial,
institutional and human capacities and its
culture, political and regulatory frameworks and markets.

The decisions
on development
objectives and
the allocation
of human and
financial resources
needed to meet
them are made
or influenced
by leaders in
government, the
private sector and
civil society – not
by water managers
or specialists

Leaders within the water domain can
inform the processes outside their domain
and manage water resources to achieve
agreed socioeconomic objectives. But it
is the leaders in government, the private
sector and civil society who determine
the directions that development will take.
Recognizing this, they must act now!

10. Hutton and Haller 2004.

24. Kaberuka 2008.

11. Schuster-Wallace et al. 2008.

25. MDG Africa Steering Group 2008.

12. UN-Water 2008.

26. WELL 2005.

13. WHO 2006.

27. Poverty-Environment Partnership 2006.

14. Hussein 2008.

28. G-8 2003.

15. Winpenny 2003.

29. UN-Water 2007.

16. van Hofwegen 2006.

30. World Bank 2008.

17. DfID 2007, p. 2.

31. Worldwatch Institute 2008, pp. 117-21.

18. World Bank 2003.

32. United Nations 2008.

19. NEPAD 2002.

33. Hoffman 2004.

20. Originally defined as $1.00 per day
and revised to $1.25 in 2005 to reflect
evolving purchasing power parity

34. FAO 2008.

6.

Commission on Growth and Development 2008, p. 1.

7.

ADB 2007, p. vi.

8.

The benefits of investing in water are
presented in greater detail in chapter 6.

21. Chen and Ravallion 2008.
22. UNDP 2006, p. 6.

37. Commission on Growth and Development 2008, p. 103.

SIWI 2005.

23. World Bank 2005.

38. Rajan 2006.

9.

Water in a changing world

35. Zoellnick 2008.
36. IMF 2009.

21

PART

Chapter 1G
39. UNFCCC 2007.
40. UNFCCC 2005.
41. UN Security Council 2007.
42. IPCC 2008.
43. The Oxford Research Group, in a
briefing paper on sustainable security, argues that the effects of climate
change – ­displacement of peoples, food
shortages, social unrest – have longterm security implications far greater
than those of terrorism and notes that
the U.S. Department of Defense’s Office
of Net Assessment takes the same view
(Abott, Rogers, and Sloboda 2006,
p. 7).
44. Such as the statement by the European
Commission and the Secretary General/
High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana (2006, p. 2):
‘Investment in mitigation . . . as well
as ways to adjust to the unavoidable
should go hand in hand with addressing
the international security threats created
by climate change.’
45. Such as U.K. Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett’s statement in the 2007 UN
Security Council debate on the impact
of climate change on peace and security that climate change exacerbates
many threats (UN Security Council
2007) and the testimony of Deputy
Director of National Intelligence for
Analysis (NIA) Thomas Finger before
a Joint House committee that an NIA
assessment found that sub-Saharan
Africa, the Middle East and Central and
South-East Asia are most vulnerable to
warming-related drought, flooding,
extreme weather and hunger (House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and U.S. House Select Committee on Energy Independence and
Global Warming 2008, p.13).
46. UNDP and World Bank 2007.

References
Abott, Chris, Paul Rogers, and John Sloboda. 2006. Global Responses to Global
Threats Sustainable Security for the 21st
Century. Oxford, UK: Oxford Research
Group.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2007.
Asian Water Development Outlook 2007:
Achieving Water Security for Asia. Manila:
Asian Development Bank.
African Union. 2008. Sharm El-Sheikh
Commitments for Accelerating the
Achievement of Water and Sanitation
Goals in Africa. Declaration I. Assembly
of the African Union, Eleventh Ordinary Session, 30 June-1 July, Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt. www.africa-union.
org/root/au/Conferences/2008/
june/summit/dec/ASSEMBLY%20
DECISIONS%20193%20-%20207%20
(XI).pdf.

22

Alam, Dewan S., Geoffrey C. Marks, Abdullah H. Baqui, M. Yunus, and George
J. Fuchs. 2000. Association between
Clinical Type of Diarrhoea and Growth of
Children under 5 Years in Rural Bangladesh. International Journal of Epidemiology
29 (5): 916-21.

activities/diplomacy/gfsp/documents/
Solana_security_report.pdf.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2006. Rapid
Growth of Selected Asian Economies: Lessons and Implications for Agriculture and
Food Security. Synthesis Report. Bangkok:
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.

Ban Ki-moon. 2008. Address by the UN
Secretary-General to the session “Time
is Running Out on Water,” of the Davos
World Economic Forum, 24 January
2008, in Davos, Switzerland. www.
un.org/apps/news/infocus/sgspeeches/
search_full.asp?statID=177.

———. 2008. Declaration of the High-Level
Conference on World Food Security:
The Challenges of Climate Change and
Bioenergy. High-Level Conference on
World Food Security, 3-5 June, Rome.
www.un.org/issues/food/taskforce/
declaration-E.pdf.

Bergkamp, G., and C. W. Sadoff. 2008.
Water in a Sustainable Economy. In State
of the World: Innovations for a Sustainable
Economy. Washington, DC: Worldwatch
Institute.

G-8. 2003. Water: A G8 Action Plan. G8
Summit, 1-3 June, Evian, France.

Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion.
2008. The Developing World Is Poorer than
We Thought, but No Less Successful in
the Fight against Poverty. Policy Research
Working Paper 4703. World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2008. Declaration of Leaders Meeting of Major Economies on
Energy Security and Climate Change.
Hokkaido Toyako Summit, 9 July, Toyako,
Hokkaido, Japan. www.mofa.go.jp/
policy/economy/summit/2008/doc/
doc080709_10_en.html.

Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive
Development. Conference Edition. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Hoffman, Allan R. 2004. The Connection: Water and Energy Security. Energy
Security, 13 August. Institute for Analysis
of Global Security. www.iags.org/
n0813043.htm.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. 2007. Water
for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. London: Earthscan, and Colombo:
International Water Management Institute.

House Permanent Select Committee
on Intelligence and House Select
Committee on Energy Independence
and Global Warming. 2008. National
Intelligence Assessment on the National
Security Implications of Global Climate
Change to 2030: Statement for the
Record of Dr. Thomas Fingar, Deputy
Director of National Intelligence for
Analysis and Chairman of the National
Intelligence Council, 25 June 2008. U.S.
Congress, Washington, DC.

Cosgrove, W. J. 2006. Water for Growth
and Security. In Water Crisis: Myth or Reality?: Marcelino Botin Water Forum 2004.
Peter Rogers, M. Ramon Llamas, and
Louis Martinez-Cortina, eds. London:
Taylor and Francis.
Delli Priscoli, J., and A. T. Wolf. 2009. Managing and Transforming Water Conflicts.
International Hydrology Series. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
DfID (Department for International
Development). 2007. Growth and Infrastructure Policy Paper. Department for
International Development, London.
EIA (Energy Information Administration).
2005. International Energy Annual 2005.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Energy. www.eia.doe.gov/iea.
———. 2008a. Annual Energy Outlook 2008
(DOE/EIA 0383/2008). Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Energy.
———. 2008b. World Energy Projections Plus.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Energy.
European Commission and the SecretaryGeneral/High Representative for
Foreign and Security Policy. 2006.
Report on Climate Change and International Security to the European Council,
3 March 2006. Council of the European
Union, Brussels. www.envirosecurity.org/

Hussein, M. A. 2008. Costs of Environmental Degradation: An Analysis in the
Middle East and North Africa Region.
Management of Environmental Quality 19
(3): 305-17.
Hutton, Guy, and Laurence Haller. 2004.
Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of
Water and Sanitation Improvements at
the Global Level. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Hutton, Guy, Laurence Haller, and Jamie
Bartram. 2007. Economic and Health
Effects of Increasing Coverage of Low
Cost Household Drinking-water Supply
and Sanitation Interventions to Countries
Off-track to Meet MDG Target 10. Background paper for Human Development
Report 2006, World Health Organization,
Public Health and the Environment,
Geneva.
IDA (International Development Association). 2007. List of Fragile States. The
International Development Association of
the World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
web.worldbank.org/.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Getting out of the box – linking water to decisions for sustainable development
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2009.
World Economic Outlook Update. January.
Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
weo/2009/update/01/index.htm.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2008. Technical Paper
on Climate Change and Water. IPCCXXVIII/Doc. 13, Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, Geneva. www.ipcc.
ch/meetings/session28/doc13.pdf.
Kaberuka, Donald. 2008. Opening Statement. African Development Group First
African Water Week: Accelerating Water
Security for Socio-Economic Development of Africa, 26-28 March, Tunis.
Maidmont, Paul. 2008. Re-thinking
Social Responsibility. Forbes 25
(January). www.forbes.com/leadership/citizenship/2008/01/25/
davos-corporate-responsibility-lead
-cx_pm_0125notes.html.
Manning, Nick. 1999. Strategic Decisionmaking in Cabinet Government: Institutional Underpinnings and Obstacles.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
MDG Africa Steering Group. 2008. Achieving the Millennium Development Goals
in Africa: Recommendations of the MDG
Africa Steering Group. New York: United
Nations.
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment).
2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being:
Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2002. Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme. New
Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Midrand, South Africa.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) and FAO
(Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations). 2008. OECD-FAO
Agricultural Outlook 2008-2017. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Phumpiu, P., and J. E. Gustafsson. 2007.
Reform or Adjustment? From the Liberal
and Neo-liberal Policy Reform Process in
Honduras. Paper from 5th International
Water History Association Conference:
Pasts and Futures of Water, 13-17 June,
Tampere, Finland.
Poverty-Environment Partnership. 2006.
Linking Poverty Reduction and Water
Management. Poverty-Environment
Partnership.
Prüss-Üstün, A., and C. Corvalán. 2006.
Preventing Disease through Healthy
Environments: Towards an Estimate of the
Environmental Burden of Disease. Geneva:

Water in a changing world

World Health Organization. www.who.
int/quantifying_ehimpacts/publications/
preventingdisease/en/index.html.
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2006. Investment
Restraint, the Liquidity Glut and Global
Imbalances. Remarks by the Economic
Counsellor and Director of Research,
International Monetary Fund, at the Conference on Global Imbalances organized
by the Bank of Indonesia in Bali, Indonesia, November 16, 2006. www.imf.org/
external/np/speeches/2006/111506.htm.
Schuster-Wallace, Corinne J., Velma I.
Grover, Zafar Adeel, Ulisses Confalonieri, and Susan Elliott. 2008. Safe
Water as the Key to Global Health. Hamilton, Canada: United Nations University
International Network on Water, Environment and Health.
SIWI (Stockholm International Water
Institute). 2005. Making Water a Part
of Economic Development: The Economic
Benefits of Improved Water Management
and Services. Stockholm: Stockholm
International Water Institute.
UN Security Council. 2007. Security Council Holds First-ever Debate on Impact
of Climate Change on Peace, Security,
Hearing over 50 Speakers. UN Security Council 5663rd meeting, 17 April
2007. United Nations Security Council,
Department of Public Information, News
and Media Division, New York, 17 April.
www.un.org/News/Press/docs/2007/
sc9000.doc.htm.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006. Beyond Scarcity. Power,
Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme) and World Bank. 2007.
Somalia Reconstruction and Development Programme: Deepening Peace
and Reducing Poverty. Somalia Joint
Needs Assessment, United Nations and
World Bank Coordination Secretariat,
Nairobi. www.somali-jna.org/downloads/
ACF7C9C.pdf.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change). 2005.
Five-year Programme of Work on the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on Impacts, Vulnerability and
Adaptation to Climate Change. FCCC/
CP/2005/5/Add.1, Bonn, Germany.
———. 2007. Report on the Workshop
on Adaptation Planning and Practices.
FCCC/SBSTA/2007/15, United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
United Nations. 2008. Compilation of
Initiatives and Commitments relating

to the High-Level Event on the Millennium Development Goals. High-Level
Event on the Millennium Development
Goals: Committing to Action: Achieving
the Millennium Development Goals, 25
September, New York.
UN-Water. 2007. Outcome of Seminar Coping with Water Scarcity. Outcome of the
Seminar on Coping with Water Security,
23 August, Stockholm. www.unwater.
org/www-seminar2.html.
———. 2008. Sanitation Is Vital for Health.
Factsheet 1. International Year for Sanitation, New York.
van Hofwegen, Paul, and Task Force on Financing Water for All. 2006. Enhancing
Access to Finance for Local Governments.
Financing Water for Agriculture. Chaired
by Angel Gurría. Marseille, France: World
Water Council.
WELL. 2005. Supporting the Achievement of
the MDG Sanitation Target. WELL Briefing
Note for CSD-13, WELL, Leicestershire.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006.
Economic and Health Effects of Increasing Coverage of Low Cost Water and
Sanitation Interventions. UNHDR Occasional Paper, World Health Organization,
Geneva.
WHO (World Health Organization) and
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s
Fund) Joint Monitoring Programme.
2008. Progress on Drinking Water and
Sanitation: Special Focus on Sanitation.
New York and Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Winpenny, James. 2003. Financing Water
for All. Report of The World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure, chaired by
Michel Camdessus. Kyoto: World Water
Council, 3rd World Water Forum, and
Global Water Partnership.
World Bank. 2003. Water Resources Sector
Strategy: Strategic Directions for World
Bank Engagement. World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2005. Global Monitoring Report.
Millennium Development Goals: From
Consensus to Momentum. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
———. 2008. Environmental Health and
Child Survival: Epidemiology, Economics Experiences. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Worldwatch Institute. 2008. State of the
World: Innovations for a Sustainable
Economy. New York: Norton Institute.
Zoellnick, Robert B. 2008. Speech by
President of World Bank at United Nations’ High-Level Conference on World
Food Security: The Challenges of Climate
Change and Bioenergy, 3 June 2008,
Rome, Italy.

23

Chapter
2

Demographic, economic and social drivers

3

Technological innovation

4

Policies, laws and finance

5

Climate change and possible futures

1

PART

Understanding what drives
the pressures on water

Chapters 2-5
Coordinator
Tim Kasten
(UNEP) with the
support of Thomas
Chiramba (UNEP)
Facilitator
Richard Connor

PART

1

Authors: Richard Connor and Walter Rast

The amount of freshwater on Earth is
finite, but its distribution has varied
considerably, driven mainly by natural
cycles of freezing and thawing and
fluctuations in precipitation, water
runoff patterns and evapotranspiration
levels.
That situation has changed, however.
Alongside natural causes are new and
continuing human activities that have
become primary ‘drivers’ of the pressures affecting our planet’s water systems. These pressures are most often
related to human development and economic growth. Our requirements for
water to meet our fundamental needs
and our collective pursuit of higher
living standards, coupled with the need
for water to sustain our planet’s fragile
ecosystems, make water unique among
our planet’s natural resources.
Chapters 2-5 describe these water drivers and their interactions as they relate
to the sustainability of water resources
and systems. They also examine how to
make reasonable predictions about the
future. Such forecasts are relevant for
policy-making directed to water resources and for development activities,
investment planning and other activities generally considered to be outside
the domain of the water sector – or
‘outside the water box’.

Part 1 examines the processes behind
the rising pressures on our water supplies, identify the ones most likely to
have the greatest impact on the world’s
water resources in the coming decades and describe the context within
which water will be managed. These
chapters describe what we know about
the current situation and recent trends
and forecast possible futures related to
processes that we refer to as drivers of
change and define as:
a set of fundamental processes
that are external to the water sector and that directly or indirectly
co-determine the evolution of the
water system in terms of the quality, quantity and spatial distribution of the resource.
At the turn of the century the World
Water Vision exercise of the World
Water Council – the first and largest
international effort to develop global
water scenarios – identified a series
of ‘driving forces’ that ‘represent key
factors, trends or processes which
influence the situation, focal issues or
decisions, and actually propel the system forward and determine the story’s
outcome’.1 Using this definition, the
Vision team selected major drivers and
organized them into six clusters: demo­
graphic, economic, technological,

PART

1

social, governance and environmental. This part of the ­Report draws on
these clusters, with the exception of the
environment, which is defined as a use
and is covered extensively in part 2. To
this list we have added climate change,
discussed in chapter 5 and throughout
the Report. This part of the Report also
describes many of the complex links
between the drivers, which can cause
both positive and negative feedback
impacts.
In describing drivers ‘external to the
water sector’, we have sought to identify
key forces or processes of change over
which water sector users, managers
and decision-makers have little direct
influence. Thus, water use sectors (agriculture, energy, domestic and industrial) are not drivers even though they
have a major impact on the resource
because they are not external to the
water sector. The drivers of ­agriculture
– and its demand for water – are such
fundamental processes as population
growth, changes in dietary preferences
as living standards rise, and increasing
demand for non‑food agricultural products such as bioenergy. The drivers of
change are the demographic, economic
and social forces that, in combination,
exert pressures on the agriculture sector. This leads to an evolution in agriculture practices, which can also be

influenced by technological innovation
and agricultural and trade policies, all
of which eventually affect the quality
and quantity of water.
These drivers should not be considered
in isolation of related socioeconomic
or political factors and other drivers.
Many natural links influence how drivers affect changes, directly and indirectly. Water properties are governed by
biological, chemical and physical laws
that define the quantity and quality of
water resources and that are linked in
various ways. Temperature, a physical factor, can affect the metabolism of
aquatic organisms, a biological process. The excessive biological production (such as excessive algal growth)
associated with increased temperature
can degrade water quality, a chemical
property.
Superimposed on these natural processes are human activities that exacerbate
these processes, disrupting the natural
balance of water systems. The growth
of algae or aquatic plants in a lake,
for example, is stimulated by excessive
nutrients and minerals washed into
the lake as a result of human activities,
accelerating natural growth processes
to levels that can cause water quality
degradation and interfere with beneficial water uses.

PART

1

Drivers are thus the forces and processes generated by human activities.
Consider governments’ efforts to improve citizens’ livelihoods and standards of living by increasing economic
growth. Economic growth is affected
by a wide range of policy decisions,
from international trade to education
and public health, while the potential
rate of economic growth can be affected by demographic variables such as
population distribution (local workforce
availability) and social characteristics
(workforce capacity) and by the availability of new technologies. Economic
activity also requires adequate quantities of natural resources, including
freshwater. And water availability is directly subject to the impacts of climate
change, which can exert additional
pressures on other drivers.
A rising standard of living is typically
accompanied by increased consumption and production of goods, along
with rising demands for water-related
household services and water resources
to facilitate economic growth and related activities. Rising demand for meat
and fish in urbanized and emerging
market economies, for example, has increased fishery activities and livestock

­ roduction, generally a water-intensive
p
activity. The feedback loop of degraded
water quality from livestock feedlot
runoff can diminish fish production
or alter its quality. There is also sociological evidence that urbanization
shifts fishing pressures from natural
water systems to artificial systems.
Thus, urbanization and globalization,
with changes in diets and lifestyles,
are strong drivers of water use, even
though decisions made outside the
water sector are driving them.
The result is a continuously increasing
demand for finite water resources for
which there are no substitutes. When
water resources of acceptable quality
can no longer be provided in sustainable quantities to meet such demands,
aquatic ecosystems can be overexploited as each sector or user group tries
to satisfy its own water needs at the
expense of others. The ultimate loser
is the sustainability of the exploited
aquatic ecosystems and the organisms
(including humans) dependent on them
for survival and well-being.
Note
1. Gallopín and Rijsberman 2000,
p. 18.

PART

Chapter 2

1

Demographic,
economic and
social drivers
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, Richard Connor, Anne Goujon, Molly Hellmuth,
Patrick Moriarty, Walter Rast, Koko Warner and James Winpenny
Contributors: Arjen Hoekstra, Walter Rast and David Wiberg
Coordinator: Tim Kasten (UNEP)
Facilitator: Richard Connor

Key messages
Human activities and processes of all types – demographic, economic and social – can exert pressures on water resources and
need to be managed.
These pressures are in turn affected by a range of factors such
as technological innovation, institutional and financial conditions and climate change.
The rapid global rise in living standards combined with population growth presents the major threat to the sustainability of
water resources and environmental services.

Demographic drivers
Authors: Richard Connor, Anne Goujon,
Molly Hellmuth and Koko Warner
Contributors: Walter Rast and David Wiberg
Key messages
•
Population dynamics (growth, age distribution, urbanization and migration)
create pressures on freshwater resources through increased water demands
and pollution.
•

Changes in the natural landscape
associated with population dynamics
(migration, urbanization) can create
additional pressures on local fresh­
water resources and the need for more
water-related services.

Demographic processes such as population
growth, age distribution, urbanization
and migration create some of the greatest pressures on water resources quantity
and quality. These demographic processes directly affect water availability and
quality through increased water demands
and consumption and through pollution
resulting from water use. They affect water
resources indirectly through changes in
Water in a changing world

land use and water use patterns, with
significant implications at local, regional
and global levels. And the availability and
quality of water as well as trends in water
use can influence demographic processes.
The world’s population is growing by
about 80 million people a year, implying
increased freshwater demand of about
64 billion cubic metres a year.1 An estimated 90% of the 3 billion people who are
expected to be added to the population
by 2050 will be in developing countries,
many in regions where the current population does not have sustainable access to
safe drinking water and adequate sanitation.2 Many governments lack the financial resources and institutional capacity to
provide for these needs, while countries
that have experienced gains in the number
of people with access to water supply and
sanitation services since 1990 may see
these gains eroded by population growth.
The demographics of the global population
are changing, with important implications
for water resources. By 2050, 22% of the
world’s population is expected to be 60
years old or older, up from 10% in 2005. At
the same time, the world has more young
29

PART

1

Chapter 2D

the world will
have substantially
more people in
vulnerable urban
and coastal areas
in the next 20
years. In areas
with already-scarce
water resources
water managers
will have to look
beyond the water
sector for solutions

Map 2.1

people than ever, with nearly half the world
population being under the age of 25.

environment for their livelihood, can also
induce migration.

While the world’s urban population grew
rapidly during the 20th century (from
220 million to 2.8 billion), the next few
decades will see an unprecedented scale of
urban growth across developing countries.
In Africa and Asia the urban population
is expected to double between 2000 and
2030. By 2030 the towns and cities of the
developing world will make up an estimated 81% of urban humanity.3

The net implication of these demographic
processes is clear: the world will have substantially more people in vulnerable urban
and coastal areas in the next 20 years. The
rate of slum formation is nearly the same
as the rate of urban growth. In areas with
already-scarce water resources water managers will have to look beyond the water
sector for solutions. They will have to work
closely with leaders in other sectors, such
as education, health, social services and
agriculture, to respond effectively to the
demographic challenge.

Today, there are an estimated 192 million
migrants worldwide, up from 176 million
in 2000.4 Coastal areas, with 18 of the
world’s 27 megacities (populations of 10
million or greater), are thought to face the
largest migration pressures.5 About 75%
of people residing in low-lying areas are
in Asia, with the most vulnerable being
poor people. International migration is
increasing as a result of such factors as
demographic changes, economic disparities, trade liberalization, environmental
changes and new communication technologies. Impacts of climate change can
substantially accelerate migration (see
chapter 5). Demographic changes affect
international migration in two ways.
Rapid population growth, combined with
economic difficulties, push people to cities, while a declining and ageing population induces countries to accept migrants,
who are typically willing to work at much
lower wages than native workers. Water
shortages and hazards, particularly where
people are directly dependent on the

Population growth
We live in a demographically divided
world, with population still growing rapidly in some regions (Africa and the Middle
East), ageing rapidly in others (Europe and
East Asia) and already declining in others
(Europe; map 2.1).
Besides Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union, where annual population
growth is already negative, Australia,
China, Japan, New Zealand and Western Europe will also soon see shrinking
populations. Around 2060 South Asia and
Pacific will also experience negative population growth rates. Other regions are less
susceptible to negative population growth
forces. Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle
East will continue to experience high rates
of population growth well into the future.
This timing will characterize most of the
problems of water scarcity.

Expected areas of population growth and decline, 2000-2080

Ratio of population 2080/2000
Increase
1.00-1.24
1.25-1.49
1.50-1.74
1.75-1.99
2.0-2.99
3.0-5.8
Decrease
0.5-0.7
0.8-1.0
No data
Source: Lutz, Sanderson, and Scherbov 2008.

30

World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Demographic, economic and social drivers
Most population growth will occur in
developing countries, mainly in regions
that are already in water stress and in
areas with limited access to safe drinking
water and adequate sanitation facilities.
More than 60% of the world’s population
growth between 2008 and 2100 will be in
sub-Saharan Africa (32%) and South Asia
(30%). Together, these regions are expected to account for half of world population
in 2100. Such rates of population growth
will have major social and environmental
impacts, given the level of economic development in many affected countries.

Age distribution
The age of the population will influence
consumption and production patterns,
with attendant impacts on natural resource needs, including freshwater. The
resource needs and services associated
with increasing longevity will include
greater provision of medicines, medical
facilities and health-care providers. For
younger people the globalization of trade
and advertising tempts those in developing countries to want more and those in
developed countries who already have
more to want even more. These needs and
wants translate into higher consumption
and production patterns, requiring additional resources, including freshwater.

Urbanization and the growth of
informal human settlements
In 2008 world population was estimated to
be equally split between urban and rural
areas, marking the transition from a rural
dominated to an urban dominated world.
By 2030 the number of urban dwellers
is expected to be about 1.8 billion more
than in 2005 and to constitute about
60% of the world’s population (figure 2.1),
while the number of rural inhabitants is
expected to decline slightly from 3.3 billion to 3.2 billion. Almost all (95%) of the
increase in urban populations is expected
in developing countries, especially in
Africa and Asia, where the urban population is projected to double between 2000
and 2030.6 Urbanization rates are much
lower in developed countries and are even
declining in some countries.
Despite the continuing growth of megacities – which require natural resources
and create waste in quantities not seen
in human history­– most of the world’s
urban populations live in cities with fewer
than 500,000 inhabitants. The growth of
small and mid-size cities will have significant impacts on water resources. In most
established or formal urban areas access
to water supply and sanitation services is
Water in a changing world

believed to be better than in rural areas.
But in informal urban areas residents
have little access to safe drinking water or
adequate sanitation services, increasing
the danger of water- and sanitation-related
diseases. It is through such informal urban
areas that most urban growth occurs.
In addition to the sociological and health
implications of increased population density in urban settlements, urbanization has
unique environmental impacts. Urbanization is accompanied by the transformation
of natural land surfaces into impervious
surfaces, such as streets, parking lots, roofs
and other types of structures that block
the percolation of rainwater and snowmelt
into soil. Such construction increases the
flow velocity of water over the land surface,
carrying polluting materials into receiving water systems, degrading water quality
and causing local pollution problems. This
urban drainage effect has increased the
frequency of flash floods, causing casualties and infrastructure damage.

Most population
growth will occur
in developing
countries and
mainly in regions
that are already
in water stress, in
areas with limited
access to safe
drinking water
and adequate
sanitation facilities

Migration
Migratory populations include traditional
groups of subsistence-level pastoralists
and agriculturalists, as well as family
groups and individuals seeking greater
opportunities and refugees fleeing the
consequences of war, conflict or natural
disasters. Refugees often pass through
camps or informal settlements that may
be artificially sustained by aid agencies or
governments. The result is the rapid denuding of the surrounding area as people
search for water and fuel wood in order
to survive – ­leading to soil degradation,
deforestation, land clearing and a scarcity
of potable water. Migratory pastoralists

Figure 2.1

By 2030 about 60% of the world’s population
is expected to live in urban areas

Share of population residing in urban areas, 2005 and 2030 (percent)
100
80

2005
2030

60
40
20
0
World

Africa

Asia

Europe

Latin
America
and the
Caribbean

Northern
America

Oceania

Note: Regions are official UN regions.
Source: United Nations 2006b.

31

PART

1

The relation
between water
and migration
is two-way:
water stressors
drive migration,
and migration
contributes to
water stress

Chapter 2D
and agriculturalists can also have significant localized impacts on the surrounding
landscape through such practices as overgrazing of livestock and slash and burn
agriculture. While generally considered
rural dwellers, these migrants frequently
constitute a large share of those seeking
better economic opportunities and better
access to water and sanitation services,
shelter, health services and food stocks
in established urban areas, leading to the
proliferation of informal communities on
the fringes of cities.
The relation between water and migration
is two-way: water stressors drive migration,
and migration contributes to water stress.
Water stressors, such as water scarcity and
flooding, can trigger migration decisions.
The social, economic and political context
in which water stresses occur will influence the migration response. And if the
natural environment becomes inhospitable, people are motivated to move to areas
where their locally specific knowledge may
no longer apply. Once people move, their
places of destination must provide them
with water resources, which can lead to
further environmental stresses.
In these situations the arrival of additional
people can worsen existing water crises and
strain the capacity of the urban infrastructure. Water conflicts can be exacerbated
through migration or the presence of
refugees, and the fragile balance of human
populations and water resources can be
upset. Increasingly, links between environmental issues, including water, and security
issues, including migration, have become
a topic of scientific research and policy
debate. Climate change, which is predicted
to lead to greater frequency and intensity of
extreme weather events, is likely to result in
an overall increase in the displacement of
people in the future (see chapter 5).
Estimates of potential environmentally
displaced people range from 24 million to
almost 700 million who could be displaced
by water-related factors, including development projects designed to relieve future
water availability stresses.7 Part of the
complexity in unraveling the connection
between migration and environmental
factors such as water resources is that people rely indirectly or directly on the environment for their livelihoods. In addition,
development policies and political and
economic stability – or the lack of it – can
affect both migration and water resources.
Given these complexities, it is difficult to
estimate the magnitude of potential migration as a result of environmental factors.

32

One positive outcome of migration is the
lessening of the pressures on the vacated
lands, which may allow some ecosystems
to recover. In Europe and North America
the rural exodus has resulted in the growth
of new parklands in some locations.

Challenges
With rapidly ageing populations in some
places and rapidly ageing populations
combined with a shrinking population
in others, it is important to consider the
quality dimensions of education and
health as well as the quantitative dimensions of population size and age structure
in addressing the water needs of evolving
communities. To meet the challenges of
rapid urban population growth, decisionmakers can focus on positive factors that
affect fertility decline – social development, investments in health and education, empowerment of women and better
access to reproductive health services – in
contrast to antimigration approaches.

Economic drivers
Authors: Richard Connor, Walter
Rast and James Winpenny
Contributor: Arjen Hoekstra
Key messages
•
Growth and changes in the global
economy are having far-reaching impacts on water resources and their use.
•

Growing international trade in goods
and services can aggravate water stress
in some countries while relieving it in
others through flows of ‘virtual water’,
particularly in the form of imported
agricultural commodities.

Global economic expansion affects water
through growth in the number of consumers and through changes in their
consumption habits, in the way goods and
services are produced and in the location
of activities, all of which affect international trade. Growth in global output
is currently estimated to slow to 2.2%
in 2009, though this will likely be less
because of the economic volatility arising from the global financial crisis.8 The
growth output is also unevenly distributed. Several emerging market economies
are registering continuously high growth
rates, transforming them into major global
economic forces. Brazil, China, India and
the Russian Federation are, on Goldman
Sachs’ latest forecast, expected to overtake
the combined economic strength of the
G-8 by 2032.9 Even sub-Saharan Africa,
long a growth straggler, is experiencing
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Demographic, economic and social drivers
growth rates of 6% or more, fuelled largely
by oil and commodities.
Water is affected by economic forces, while
the state of water resources has a strong
feedback to the economy. In periods of
water shortages public authorities are
likely to close factories and divert water
from farmers to release water supplies for
households. Water contamination from
industrial effluents may result in factory
closures and relocation, while the depletion and contamination of groundwater
may compel industries to relocate. Lack
of water storage infrastructure may cause
heavy economic losses from flooding and
drought. Polluted water has high costs for
human health. In short, adequate investments in water management, infrastructure and services can yield a high economic return by avoiding such related costs.10
Globalization – used here as shorthand for
the increasing international flows of goods
and services, people, investments and
­finance – may make the situation worse,
but it can also provide solutions. Producing
and exporting goods and services with a
large water footprint (the volume of water
used in producing the goods and services
consumed) could aggravate the problems
of a water-scarce economy. Yet such an
economy could gain from importing
goods with a high water content (importing virtual water). Companies can escape
their local water problems by relocating to
other countries. However, growing corporate awareness of a firm’s water footprint
is leading to greater transparency about
the impact of a firm’s supply chain on its
water environment. Globalization is also
enabling the spread of water expertise provided by international firms and through
global communications of service providers in other countries. These companies are
a key part of water solutions through the
desalination, re-use and wastewater treatment technologies they bring with them.
The following sections focus on economic
processes that have exerted pressures on
water resources and how they are managed. In addition to globalization, these
processes include the global food and fuel
crises and international trade (virtual water
and increasing awareness of the water footprints of production and services).

Globalization
While economic integration is a dominant
feature of globalization, social, cultural, political and institutional aspects are also important. Changes in consumption patterns
through growing demands and easier access
Water in a changing world

to goods and services, increased transport
and energy needs and global access to innovation and knowledge all play a role in
globalization – and all have an impact on
water resources and the environment.
Globalization has raised the productivity and living standards of people in the
countries that have opened themselves
to the global marketplace. However, the
gains from globalization have not been
evenly distributed. Many people remain on
the fringes, and some have fallen further
behind. Exclusion, grinding poverty and
environmental damage create dangers. An
estimated 1.4 billion people – often referred
to as the ‘bottom billion’ – live on just
$1.25 a day.11 Those who suffer the most
usually have the least to start with – indigenous peoples, women in developing countries, the rural poor and their children.

1

The gains from
globalization have
not been evenly
distributed: many
people remain on
the fringes, and
some have fallen
further behind

In many cases rapid economic growth has
failed to provide opportunities for these
poorest of the poor. Social services remain
severely unfunded, and environmental and
energy problems, including water quality
and lack of service delivery, are acute. In
advanced economies increased economic
insecurity has been associated with rising
inequality and the squeezing of social
provisioning. In middle-income countries
economic shocks, accelerated trade liberalization and premature de­industrialization
have constrained economic diversification
and formal job creation. Elsewhere, intractable poverty has fed a vicious circle of
economic insecurity and political instability and, on occasion, communal violence.12
Such situations increase the threat of
degrading water resources and reducing
environmental services.
In addition to these indirect pressures are
the direct pressures, such as proliferation
of invasive species. Related to the increasing exchange of goods through international shipping, invasive species have
caused enormous environmental damage
to aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.

The global food crises and the rising
cost of fuel and energy
Reversing decades of low prices, the twoyear period 2006-08 has seen sharp, and
largely unanticipated, increases in food
prices. Because poor people spend one-half
to three-quarters of their income on food,
a steep increase in the price of rice, grains
and edible oils is tantamount to a large
reduction in income. While in the long
run higher food prices are an opportunity
for those who live and work in rural areas
(especially if they have the technology and
33

PART

1

Chapter 2D

The world will
need almost 60%
more energy in
2030 than in 2002.
Water is needed
for the production
of energy of all
types, so expansion
of energy supply
will affect water
resources

the inputs – including water – needed to
raise their productivity to its full potential), in the short run higher prices create
a crisis for the urban and rural poor.
Although Africa and other low-income
countries are particularly vulnerable, even
middle-income countries are at risk if they
lack well developed safety nets.
According to the Commission on Growth
and Development, there are many potential causes for the steep food price
increases. Contributing factors include
rising demand, shifting diets, droughts,
increased costs of agricultural inputs (such
as fertilizers) and policies that encourage
the use of agricultural land and output for
bioenergy production. Although there is
no consensus yet on the relative importance of these factors, many believe that
policies favouring bioenergy over food
need to be reviewed.13 The 2008 Declaration of the High-Level Conference on
World Food Security: The Challenges of
Climate Change and Bioenergy cautions:
We are convinced that in-depth
studies are necessary to ensure that
production and use of biofuels is
sustainable in accordance with the
three pillars of sustainable development and takes into account
the need to achieve and maintain
global food security.14
Other longer-term factors may also have
been at play. The low agricultural prices
prevailing until recently may have led governments to neglect investments in rural
infrastructure, research and development,
storage and food security programmes that
were once a priority. In parallel, agricultural policies in many countries encouraged
non-food commodities such as bioenergy,

Figure 2.2

The cost of energy to consumers has been
rising since the 1970s

Estimated energy costs, 1970-2005 (nominal US$ per million Btus)
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1970

1975

1980

Source: Based on EIA 2008.

34

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

fibres and narcotics over food commodities.
Many major food-producing countries have
reacted to the crisis by restricting exports to
help contain prices at home, driving international prices still higher. Global markets
in food have become temporarily fragmented. The recent food crisis has encouraged
countries to re-consider food self-sufficiency, giving it prominence over purely economic considerations. This will likely have
an impact on national food and agriculture
policies for several years, with implications
for water resources management.
A drive towards food self-sufficiency would
have undesirable consequences for national water security, especially for countries
in arid regions. Such policies, though
beneficial for rural development, increase
a country’s national water footprint and
forfeit growth in higher-income, less
water-intensive sectors.
Crude oil prices have also risen sharply in
recent years – from under $25 a barrel in
2002 to more than $150 in July 2008 before
dropping back to just under $40 in early
January 2009. Among the likely contributing factors to the rise is increased demand
linked to economic growth in emerging
market economies. This growing demand
has also increased pressure to exploit new
sources of oil. Many of these, such as the
tar sands in Western Canada, have a very
high water – and ­environmental – footprint
(see chapter 3). Increasing oil prices are also
likely linked to the overall increase in the
cost of energy, which has been rising steadily since the early 1970s (figure 2.2).
Like food security, energy security is important for GDP growth. According to the
International Energy Agency, the world will
need almost 60% more energy in 2030 than
in 2002, with economic growth in developing countries driving most of the increase.15
Development of hydropower is one energy
strategy to reduce dependence on fossil
fuels and limit greenhouse gas emissions,
and developing countries possess significant
hydropower potential. Water is needed for
the production of energy of all types (see
chapter 7), so expansion of energy supply will affect water resources and related
environmental services. Energy to support
growth within urban centres will depend
largely on water resources management
responses to centralized power production.
Growth in small towns will likely rely more
on off-grid renewable energy sources.
High prices can provide incentives for
greater efficiency in fuel consumption and
agricultural production and can generate
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Demographic, economic and social drivers
more income for people in rural areas. High
fuel prices are likely to spur the development of alternative energy types like wind
and solar, which require little water, and
many countries also benefit from higher
tax proceeds when energy prices rise –
resources that could be used for further
investments in efficiency and development.

or lakes cross national boundaries. What
transforms water into a global issue is trade
in goods and services with a substantial
water content either in the finished product
or in its production (so-called virtual water).
Providing water and wastewater services to
households, industries and farmers can also
have implications for international trade.

Water and trade: virtual water
and growing awareness of water
footprints

Countries with water shortages can import water-intensive goods and services,
while water-abundant countries can take
advantage of their bountiful water supplies through exports. While this beneficial trade happens broadly at a regional
level (box 2.1), many countries have trade
patterns that do not promote or benefit
from this advantage. Through patterns of
consumption and imports, countries can
aggravate water shortages and pollution of
their water supplies. Trade distortions and
failure to properly price water resources
may worsen the water-related problems of
trading partners (see map 7.3 in chapter 7
and map 8.1 in chapter 8).

The concepts of water footprints and
virtual water are used to describe the relations among water management, international trade and politics and policies, and
water resources use as it pertains to human
consumption. Water footprints measure
how much water is used in the production
and consumption of goods and services (as
well as how much pollution is generated),
while virtual water is a tool for determining the movement of water through international trade.
Because water is heavy relative to its value,
it is not feasible to transport it in bulk over
long distances, with the exception of limited schemes for drinking water. Thus, water
is predominantly a local concern, although
it becomes a regional issue where rivers

Box 2.1

Countries with
water shortages
can import waterintensive goods
and services, while
water-abundant
countries can
take advantage
of their bountiful
water supplies
through exports

Many companies are beginning to understand the need to measure their water
footprint, including that of their supply chains, and to relieve water stress in
the communities where they operate.

Virtual water

Water-intensive products are heavily
volume of water used for agricultural
would require 15.6 billion m3 a year. From
traded over large distances, as countries
a global perspective this trade in cereals
production.
import and export water in virtual form as
saves 8.5 billion m3 of water a year. Deagricultural and industrial commodities.
spite some trade from countries with low
Many countries, including Japan, Mexico
The global volume of virtual water flows in
water productivity to countries with high
and most countries in Europe, the Middle
commodities is 1,625 billion cubic metres
productivity, global water savings through
East and North Africa, have net virtual
(m3) a year, accounting for about 40% of
international trade of agricultural products
water imports (see map). Water security in
total water consumption. About 80% of
has been estimated at about 350 billion
many countries thus strongly depends on
these virtual water flows relate to agriculm3 a year, equivalent to 6% of the global
external water resources (see chapter 7).
tural products trade,
Regional virtual water balances and net interregional virtual water flows related to trade in
and the remainder to
agricultural products, 1997-2001
industrial products
trade.
Global virtual water
trade can save water
if products are traded
from countries with
high water productivity to countries with
low productivity. For
example, Mexico
imports wheat, maize
and sorghum from the
United States, which
requires 7.1 billion m3
of water a year in the
United States to produce. If Mexico produced the imported
crops domestically, it

15.8
10.2

16.7
15.1

75.8
Net virtual water imports
(billions of cubic metres per year)
-108 North America
-107 South America
-70 Oceania
-45 North Africa
-30 South-East Asia
-16 Central Africa
-5 Southern Africa
2 Central America
13 Former Soviet Union
18 Eastern Europe
47 Middle East
150 Central and Southern Asia
152 Western Europe

18.7

49.0

15.5

49.0
19.2

29.0

12.2

10.4

Regional virtual water balance (billions of cubic metres per year)

Source: Based on Hoekstra and Chapagain 2008.

Water in a changing world

35

PART

1

Chapter 2D

A growing middle
class is consuming
much more milk,
bread, eggs,
chicken and beef,
the production
of which is more
water-intensive
than the simpler
diets they are
replacing

Motivating companies to assess their water
footprints is the desire to gain the goodwill of customers and potential customers and the need for cost control and risk
management, including safeguarding
access to the water essential for their
operations. Recent business initiatives to
support sustainable water management
include the CEO Water Mandate launched
at the 2007 UN Global Leadership Forum,
the World Economic Forum’s call for a
‘coalition’ of businesses to engage in water
management partnerships and the World
Business Council for Sustainable Development’s creation of a water diagnostic tool
and water scenario planning supports.16
Water is increasingly viewed as a potential
threat and constraint to economic growth.
As an example, China’s remarkable economic growth has been accompanied by
serious environmental problems, most notably water shortages in the north and pollution from wastewater effluents across the
country (box 2.2). Massive projects begun
to divert extensive water resources from
the south to its more populated north will
doubtless result in major environmental
and social issues.
Trade and investment patterns are ultimately driven by demand, and changes in consumption and lifestyle accompany rising
income levels in all countries. ‘How much
water do people drink?’ (on average, 2-5
litres a day in developed countries) is much
less relevant than ‘How much water do
people eat?’ (3,000 litres a day in developed
countries, according to one estimate).17 Economic growth in emerging market economies is driving the growth of a middle class
that is consuming much more milk, bread,
eggs, chicken and beef, the production of

Box 2.2

Water: a brake on economic growth and
corporate prospects

While the scarcity of freshwater is felt
acutely in Africa and West Asia, water
scarcity is already an economic constraint in major growth markets such
as China, India and Indonesia, as well
as commercial centres in Australia
and the western United States. If current consumption patterns continue,
two-thirds of the world’s population
will live in water-stressed conditions by 2025. Compounding – and
politicizing – these challenges is the
reality that fully a third of the world’s
population lacks access to sufficient
quantities of safe water to meet their
basic needs.

In the next two to five years many companies will need to adapt to water availability concerns, including water stress
and flooding; water quality concerns,
including increasingly contaminated
surface and groundwater supplies; and
water access concerns, specifically competition with other water users. Corporate leaders who prepare careful water
strategies for managing medium-term
business risks and opportunities will not
only be prepared to meet the future –
gaining advantage in some of the key,
and most water-constrained, global
­markets – but can also help shape it.
Source: Pacific Institute 2007.

36

which is more water-intensive than the
simpler diets they are replacing.18 Likewise
in the services sector, tourism and recreation are creating an increasingly large water
footprint in host societies.
The concepts of virtual water and water
footprints are useful in illustrating the
true influence of economic activity on
water. With greater awareness should come
measures to improve water productivity
(‘output per drop’) in water-stressed environments and to reduce the polluting side
effects of production.

Challenges
Globalization is bringing increasing economic opportunities to many, while leaving behind some who need them most: the
world’s poorest people living in the least
developed countries. The first challenge is
to shift this balance so that the less fortunate can have access to basic products and
services, including sustainable access to
safe drinking water and adequate sanitation services.
A second major challenge is to ensure that
the cumulative action of economic activities and all other water drivers does not
overwhelm nature’s ability to provide for
human needs. The expansion and growth
of the global economy, and the resulting
increases in human consumption, drive
human demands to use more natural resources, including freshwater. However, the
goods and services provided by ecosystems
(such as water, biodiversity, fibre, food, feed
and climate) are finite and vulnerable. Balancing economic development and environmental sustainability – and all the drivers influencing these links – ­remains a core
requirement for sustainable development.

Social drivers
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, Richard
Connor, Anne Goujon, Patrick Moriarty,
Walter Rast and James Winpenny
Key messages
•
Social drivers influence human perceptions and attitudes about the environment, including water resources, in
turn influencing the pressures people
exert on water through water demands
and uses.
•

Changes in lifestyles are one of the
principal drivers of change. They
reflect human needs, desires and
attitudes (as illustrated in consumption and production patterns), which
are influenced by such social drivers
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Demographic, economic and social drivers
as culture and education and by
economic drivers and technological
innovation; the rapid global rise in living standards combined with population growth presents the major threat
to the sustainability of water resources
and the environment.
Social drivers are mainly about individual
rather than collective actions and about
the way people think and act on a day-today basis. The four social drivers considered here are poverty, education, cultures
and value systems, and lifestyles and
consumption patterns.

Poverty
Poverty leaves people with few choices.
They must do what is necessary for their
survival, whatever the environmental
consequences. Slash-and-burn agricultural
practices, overexploitation of inland fisheries and the proliferation of informal settlements around urban areas in developing
countries attest to this reality. And even as
many developing countries have addressed
problems of hunger and malnutrition,
water quality has been degraded and per
capita water availability has worsened. The
poorest communities are also commonly
in areas most vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change and variability, including
unstable hillsides and low-lying coastal
areas, and lack the capacity to cope with
natural disasters.
The inadequate water resources and sanitation facilities associated with poverty result in such environmental consequences
as water pollution and degraded aquatic
ecosystems, often the source of poor
people’s livelihoods. High levels of waterassociated disease (such as schistosomiasis,
malaria, trachoma, cholera and typhoid)
are also common. And many people living
in poverty engage in artisanal activities,
such as metal working, that can generate
large quantities of water pollutants.
Poor people often pay the highest relative
prices for water. Inhabitants of informal
settlements, for example, do not normally
receive water delivery services from central
water supply agencies, but typically pay
exorbitant prices for drinking water (sometimes of dubious quality) from local water
dealers. And in rural areas in developing
countries people can spend hours each day
fetching water.
History suggests that some initial level of
economic development may be necessary
before attention is given to environmental
sustainability. However, there is sufficient
Water in a changing world

Whatever actions
are taken to reduce
poverty, it must
also be recognized
that increasing the
economic wellbeing of the very
poor will ultimately
translate into
higher demand for
natural resources,
including water

evidence to believe that the two may not
necessarily be in conflict. First, some processes are irreversible (for example aquifer
depletion and contamination) and need to
be halted now. Second, the state of water resources – and the environment in ­general –
affects the poor disproportionately, so attention to environmental sustainability must
especially recognize their urgent needs. And
third, investments in environmental protection, water management and water supply
and sanitation services, among others, can
have high pay-offs in economic benefits.
But whatever actions are taken to reduce
poverty, it must also be recognized that
increasing the economic well-being of
the very poor will ultimately translate
into higher demand for natural resources,
including water. This will require tradeoffs, especially where these resources are
lacking or over-exploited.

Education
An educated populace typically has a better
understanding of the need for sustainable
use of aquatic ecosystems and the important environmental goods and services
they provide. Education can also lead to
greater water use efficiency. For example,
knowledge of water systems, new materials
and emerging technologies (such as package treatment plants) can help extend water
services to informal areas. Knowledge of
water conservation practices also facilitates
improved water use efficiency in these areas.
More education enables people to improve
their economic circumstances, leading to
empowerment, better health and longer
life expectancy. At the community level
the education of broad segments of society
can accelerate the demographic transition,
through declines in fertility and infant
mortality rates (figure 2.3). An educated

Figure 2.3

The fertility rate declines with rising female
literacy, 1990

Total fertility rate (births per woman)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Literacy rate, adult females (percent)
Source: Institute for Statistics 2006; World Population Prospects Database.

37

PART

1

Chapter 2D

An educated
populace typically
has a better
understanding
of the need for
sustainable use of
aquatic ecosystems
and the important
environmental
goods and services
they provide.
Education can also
lead to greater
water use efficiency

society is also more likely to be democratic
and politically stable, working to reduce
inequity and promote the acceptance of
cultural diversity. Thus, education not only
fosters economic growth, but also increases
expectations of a better quality of life for
individuals, their families and society.

driver, particularly at the household and
community levels. As described in box 2.3,
this ongoing process brings about social,
environmental and health benefits that
can have positive repercussions for the
community as a whole in how water services are received and managed.

While education is fundamental to improved economic and social well-being,
in many fast-growing countries in Africa,
South Asia and elsewhere, the predicted
growth in population is likely to depress
school enrolment. Because of budget and
capacity constraints, schools may not
be able to cope with the growth in the
number of children to be enrolled.

The perceived values of natural resources
reflect cultural perspectives as well as
economic perspectives. Lakes and reservoirs, for example, provide many valuable
services, including water for drinking
and sanitation, agriculture, industry and
livestock uses and, in the case of reservoirs, for electricity generation. They
serve as buffers against water shortages
and excesses and as contaminant sinks
for their drainage basins. They provide
food and economic livelihoods through
fisheries, aquaculture and environmental
tourism. They are important aquatic ecosystems and provide habitat for rare and
threatened species. And they can possess
important cultural and religious values
that emphasize humanity’s connections
to the natural world. Which of these uses
are pursued or emphasized depends largely
on the cultural perspectives and economic
values assigned to them by society.

In many settings access to schooling also
is linked to improved access to safe drinking water and sanitation facilities. Separate
sanitation facilities in schools for boys
and girls have been shown to increase the
attendance of girls and are also important
for maintaining a minimum comfort level
for female teachers. Improving access to
water and sanitation facilities, by increasing family incomes, enables households
to pay for school fees and equipment. And
a reduced incidence of water- and sanitation-related diseases contributes to less
absenteeism and better performance.

Culture and values
Culture describes the patterns of human
activities and the symbolic structures that
impart significance and importance to
these activities (such as art, institutions,
science, beliefs and moral systems). Because
such structures are passed from generation
to generation, culture can be defined as the
way of life for an entire society.
In several regions the empowerment of
women has emerged as an important

Box 2.3

The role of women within the water sector and the importance of gender mainstreaming

In most developing countries gender
inequity persists in access to and control
of a range of productive, human and
social capital assets. Consequently, the
core components of poverty (capability,
opportunity, security and empowerment)
differ along gender lines.
In the water sector women labour to
provide water for household needs while
men make decisions about water resources
management and development at both
the local and national levels. Women draw
water for household use, transport it home
and store it until it is used for cooking,
cleaning and washing. In areas of low water

38

One of the most powerful manifestations
of cultural values is religious belief. Many
religions describe the role of humanity
as both a moulder and a steward of the
environment. Virtually all of the world’s
major religions see a spiritual challenge
in the ecological crises evident today.19
Religious beliefs that highlight humanity
as a steward, rather than master, of the environment can be a powerful influence in
developing and sustaining the awareness
of societies and communities of their roles
in using and conserving natural resources,
including water.

coverage women collect water from drains,
ditches or streams that are often infected
with pathogens and bacteria, causing
severe illness or even death. In addition,
women spend considerable time collecting
water at the expense of income-generating
activities. This also exposes them to sexual
abuse and other forms of violence and
leaves less time for girls to attend school.
Lessons from Africa and the rest of the
world have demonstrated that increased
participation by women in decision-making
leads to better operation and maintenance
of water facilities, better health for the
community, greater privacy and dignity for

women, more girls attending school and
increased income opportunities for women.
The immediate action by water sector
participants is to ensure gender mainstreaming in any planned action, including
legislation, policies and programmes in all
areas and at all levels. This will ensure that
the voices of marginalized and disadvantaged women and men are integrated in
design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of policies and programmes
and therefore help to achieve sustainable
water provision for all.
Source: Adapted from Mutagamba 2008.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Demographic, economic and social drivers
Religious beliefs can also sometimes accelerate the degradation of these resources.
One example is the Hindu practice of
cremating their deceased family members
in funeral pyres and placing their ashes
into the Ganges River, which is considered holy. However, incomplete cremation
results in incompletely burned human
remains being put into the river, causing degraded water quality and increasing the potential for the transmission of
waterborne diseases. The custom is deeply
rooted in religious beliefs, making it difficult to address with a strictly scientific
rationale. Religious significance has been
observed for water systems in other societies around the world.

Lifestyles and consumption patterns
Lifestyles and associated consumption
choices are increasingly considered the most
important drivers affecting water resources,
along with population growth. And the
pressures these drivers generate can be
transmitted through trade and investment
activities to other regions. As standards
of living rise in developing countries and
countries undergoing economic transition,
the demand for larger homes and for ‘luxury’ items such as kitchen appliances, cars
and other vehicles and the energy to run,
heat and or cool them is increasing the demand for the resources required to produce,
generate and operate them. Thus, humanity’s environmental footprint is expanding
dramatically. And despite some laudable
efforts to develop cleaner technologies to
shrink this footprint (see chapter 3), population growth and the changing lifestyles and
consumption choices associated with rising
living standards will continue to threaten
the sustainability of water resources and the
environment.
The evolution of eating habits and changes
in diets as living standards rise are among
the most important drivers of agricultural water use for several crops in many
countries. The quantity of water used per
person for food production depends on
a society’s dietary habits, in particular
on the relative importance of meat and
dairy products in diets. Massive social and
economic changes taking place in many
developing countries are lifting millions of
people out of poverty and creating a new
middle class with increasing demands for
such food as milk, bread, eggs, chicken
and beef to complement their traditional
and less water-intensive diets.20
A simple calculation illustrates the impacts of changing food habits on water
resources. It is estimated that the Chinese
Water in a changing world

consumer who ate 20 kilograms (kg) of
meat in 1985 will eat more than 50 kg in
2009,21 increasing demand for grain to
feed livestock. Assuming that 1 kg of grain
requires 1,000 liters of water to produce,
the annual water footprint of this change
in diet for some 1.3 billion Chinese will
translate into a need for 390 cubic kilometres (km3) of water. Similar changes are
taking place in other countries with growing economies. For the extremely poor,
eating even two meals a day instead of one
can substantially increase per capita water
consumption (see box 7.4 in chapter 7).
As this example suggests, lifestyles and
consumption patterns are, in essence, the
sum of all drivers. They bring together
economic growth, technological innovation, the evolution of culture and values,
population dynamics (population growth
and the number of people who have
reached a certain standard of living) and
governance (how wealth is distributed).

1

The desire for a
better lifestyle
is arguably one
of the most
powerful human
motivations, and
the production of
goods to satisfy
these growing
human wants
is often not
possible without
the overuse of
natural resources

Challenges
Once people’s survival needs are met, their
wants become more prominent. These
wants usually focus on increasing human
comfort and convenience and are generally
associated with rising consumption of material goods and non-essential services such
as travel and leisure. The desire for a better
lifestyle is arguably one of the most powerful human motivations, and the rapid global rise in living standards, combined with
population growth, poses the major threat
to the sustainability of water resources and
the environment. The production of goods
to satisfy these growing human wants is
often not possible without the overuse
of natural resources. Further, it is accompanied by the production of wastes and
other non-useful by-products. Unrestrained
fulfillment of the desire for a better lifestyle
will be accompanied by environmental
stresses, many of them unprecedented.
The major challenge is to reconcile human
needs and human wants with the ability of nature to provide or replenish the
resources to produce them. Global society
must address the dual goal of enhancing
human well-being and lifestyles while
ensuring the sustainability of the ecosystems and environmental conditions that
provide the desired goods and services.
Achieving this goal will prove impossible
unless humans recognize and better understand the links between their actions
and the condition and sustainability of the
natural environment. Raising awareness
to bring about behavioural change is one
approach, but a still elusive goal.
39

PART

1

Chapter 2D

Notes
1.

Hinrichsen, Robey, and Upadhyay 1997.

2.

United Nations 2007.

3.

UNFPA 2007.

4.

United Nations 2006a.

5.

Morton, Boncour, and Laczko 2008.

6.

UNFPA 2007.

7.

Klaus Töpfer, former head of the United
Nations Environment Programme, talks
of 22-24 million environmental migrants
(Biermann 2001), whereas Norman
Myers (2005) reports ‘at least’ 25 million
in 1995 (latest date for a comprehensive
assessment), especially in the African
Southern Sahara, Central America,
China and South Asia. Myers expects the
number to reach 50 million by 2010.
The United Nations Refugee Agency
(UNHCR 2002, p. 12) estimated that
there were approximately 24 million
people around the world who fled their
homes because of floods, famine and
other environmental factors. Christian
Aid released a report in 2007 estimating that up to 685 million people were
forced to move because of environmental factors, including development
projects such as dams that inundated
large areas of inhabited land. All of these
estimates are from OSCE (2007).

8.

More information on the revised forecast can be found in IMF 2008a.

9.

Poddar and Yi 2007.

10. SIWI 2005.
11. World Bank 2008.
12. United Nations 2008.
13. Commission on Growth and Development 2008.
14. High Level Conference on World Food
Security 2008, article 7.f.
15. IEA 2006.
16. WBCSD 2006.
17. World Economic Forum 2008.
18. Wiggins 2008.
19. Bassett, Brinkman, and Pedersen 2000.
20. Wiggins 2008.
21. Wiggins 2008.

References
Bassett, Libby, John T. Brinkman, and
Kusumita P. Pedersen. 2000. Earth
and Faith. A Book of Reflection for Action.
Nairobi: Interfaith Partnership for the Environment and United Nations Environment Programme.
Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive
Development. Conference Edition. Washington, DC: World Bank.
EIA (Energy Information Administration). 2008. Annual Energy Review 2007.

40

Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office. www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/aer/pdf/
aer.pdf.

Sachs. http://usindiafriendship.net/viewpoints1/Indias_Rising_Growth_Potential.
pdf.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2008. Declaration of the High-Level Conference on
World Food Security: The Challenges of
Climate Change and Bioenergy. High
Level Conference on World Food Security, 3-5 June, Rome.

SIWI (Stockholm International Water
Institute). 2005. Making Water a Part of
Economic Development: The Economic
Benefits of Improved Water Management
and Services. Stockholm: Stockholm
International Water Institute.
United Nations. 2006a. Trends in Total
Migrant Stock: The 2005 Revision. New
York: Population Division, Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, United
Nations.

Gallopín, G. C., and F. Rijsberman. 2000.
Three Global Water Scenarios. International Journal of Water 1 (1): 16-40.
Hinrichsen, D., B. Robey, and U. D. Upadhyay. 1997. Solutions for a Water-Short
World. Population Reports Series M, no.
14. Baltimore, MD: Population Information Program, Johns Hopkins School of
Public Health.

———. 2006b. World Urbanisation Prospects:
The 2005 Revision. Fact Sheet 3. New
York: Population Division, Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations. www.un.org/esa/population/publications/WUP2005/2005WUP_FS3.pdf.

Hoekstra, A. Y., and A. L. Chapagain.
2008. Globalization of Water: Sharing the
Planet’s Freshwater Resources. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006.
World Energy Outlook 2006. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, and International Energy
Agency.
IMF (International Monetary Fund).
2008a. World Economic Outlook Update: Rapidly Weakening Prospects Call
for New Policy Stimulus. Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund. www.
imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/
update/03/.
———. 2008b. World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries.
Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund.
Institute for Statistics. 2006. World Education Indicators Data Centre Literacy Statistics. Paris: United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov. 2008. The Coming Acceleration of
Global Population Ageing. Nature 451
(20): 716-19.
Morton, A., P. Boncour, and F. Laczko.
2008. Human Security Policy Challenges.
Forced Migration Review: Climate Change
and Displacement. Issue 31. Oxford,
United Kingdom: Refugee Studies Centre, University of Oxford.
Mutagamba, Maria Lubega. 2008. The
Role of Women within the Water Sector
and The Importance of Gender Mainstreaming. The 5th World Water Forum
Newsletter 4.
Pacific Institute. 2007. At the Crest of a Wave:
A Proactive Approach to Corporate Water
Strategy. Oakland, CA: Business for Social
Responsibility and the Pacific Institute.
Poddar, Tushar, and Eva Yi. 2007. Global
Economics Paper Issue no. 152: India’s
Rising Growth Potential. Goldman Sachs
Global Economic Website, Goldman

———. 2007. World Population Prospects:
The 2006 Revision. New York: Population
Division, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, United Nations.
———. 2008. World Economic and Social Survey 2008: Overcoming Economic Insecurity.
New York: Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, United Nations.
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human
Settlements Programme). 2006. State
of the World’s Cities 2006/7. London:
Earthscan.
UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund).
2007. State of World Population 2007:
Unleashing the Potential of Urban Growth.
New York: United Nations Population
Fund.
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund).
2006a. Childinfo: Monitoring the Situation of Children and Women, Child Mortality Info Database. www.childmortality.
org/.
———. 2006b. The State of the World’s Children 2007: The Double Dividend of Gender
Equality. New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
WBCSD (World Business Council on
Sustainable Development). 2006. Business in the World of Water: WBCSD Water
Scenarios to 2025. Washington, DC:
World Business Council on Sustainable
Development.
Wiggins, Jenny. 2008. Feature: Developing
Tastes. Financial Times Magazine, 27-28
January. www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8e606e1e
-cbb2-11dc-97ff-000077b07658.html
?nclick_check=1
World Bank. 2008. World Development Indicators 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Economic Forum. 2008. Managing
Our Future Water Needs for Agriculture,
Industry, Human Health, and the Environment. Discussion Document for the
World Economic Forum Annual Meeting
2008. www.european-waternews.com/
download/whitepaper_uploadfile_2.pdf.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Demographic, economic and social drivers

Chapter 3

1

Technological
innovation
Authors: Richard Connor and Walter Rast
Contributor: Gunilla Björklund
Coordinator: Tim Kasten (UNEP)
Facilitator: Richard Connor

Key messages
Technological innovation is driven largely by both human
wants and needs.
Technological innovation can create both positive and negative
pressures, sometimes simultaneously, resulting in increased or
decreased water demand, supply and quality.
Technological innovation is one of the most unpredictable drivers. It can create rapid, dramatic and unexpected changes, both
in pressures and solutions.
Impediments to the dissemination of technology must be overcome if developing countries are to benefit from innovations
developed in richer countries.
Technological change takes different
forms, each with different potential
impacts on the environment. Some innovations reduce environmental pressures
(by lowering emissions or using water
resources more efficiently, for example),
while others increase them (by increasing
water demands for their production, for
example). Most innovations create both
positive and negative pressures on the
environment, while the main purpose of
technology is to make processes (production, transformation and communication,
for example) more efficient, which generally means more cost-effective, the environmental benefits of some technologies have
also yielded broader economic benefits. In
recent decades, for example, greater environmental regulation and corporate social
responsibility, combined with pressures
from society, have prompted cleaner and
more environmentally friendly technologies and increased their overall value.
Disseminating technology is as important
as developing it. Controls on the dissemination of technology, especially from
Water in a changing world

developed countries (where much of the
technology is generated) to developing
countries (which are less able to afford or
generate it), inhibit the ability of developing countries to stay economically and
environmentally competitive.
In the water sector the expansion of
scientific knowledge and technological
applications is changing the way water is
used, cleaned and reused to meet human,
economic and environmental needs.
Industries are investing in new technologies and processes that reduce water use
and wastewater discharges. Household
consumers are being offered water-saving
technologies such as low-flush toilets,
low-flow showers and faucet aerators.
Agricultural productivity is being leveraged by drip irrigation and maintained by
soil fertility and conservation techniques.
Water supplies are being enhanced in
many countries through innovative wastewater treatment and reuse techniques.
And breakthroughs continue in desalination: advances in technologies and energy
efficiency in the past decade have made
41

PART

1

Chapter 3T

Water supplies are
being enhanced
in many countries
through innovative
wastewater
treatment and
reuse techniques

This chapter looks at six areas – in which
water-related technologies are emerging
rapidly – that are likely to exert strong
pressures on the supply, use and management of water resources: environmental research and development, renewable energy,
information and communications technology, biotechnology, bioenergy and nanotechnology. It also describes the challenges
and difficulties associated with the dissemination of technology, which is especially
important for developing countries.

can have positive benefits – reducing water
demand and increasing water availability
(for example, rainwater harvesting) – while
others can increase water demands (such
as using crops to produce bioenergy). In
analysing technological advances and
interventions, it is also useful to distinguish their structural elements (such as
construction of a plant, dam or irrigation
system) and their non-structural elements
(including public awareness campaigns,
educational programmes and information
sharing). This section outlines some key
technology areas and provides some insight on how new developments can affect
water resources.

Recent trends and advances in
science and technology

Environmental research and
development

desalination an economic option for water
supplies in coastal cities (see figure 9.3 and
box 9.5 in chapter 9).1

Key message
•
Technological innovation is driven
largely by both human wants and
needs.
People are the ultimate drivers of change
on a global scale, through both their
needs (their requirements for survival) and
their wants (their desires for products and
services that enhance safety, comfort and
well-being). Although not true everywhere or to the same degree, technological
advances that address these wants and
needs are a major reason why many people
enjoy a standard of living that includes
access to safe drinking water and adequate
sanitation.
It is sometimes difficult to determine
whether technology development drives
water demands or whether increasing water
demands associated with human activities
drive technology. Some new technologies

Figure 3.1

Many developed countries have increased
their investment in environmental research
and development

Share of environmental R&D in total government R&D, 1981-2005 (percent)
5

Korea, Rep.
Germany

4
3

France

2

Japan

1

United States

0
1985

Source: Based on OECD 2008.

42

1990

The focus of the R&D activities varies with
national sustainable development priorities and interests and available funding.
Germany, for example, has focused on
clean processes and production technologies, Norway on energy and the environment and the United States on climate,
water and hydrogen as an energy source.
There also appears to be a correlation
between environmental regulations and
environmental technology, with regulation spurring industries and water use sectors to address water availability and water
quality. Environmental regulations may be
counterproductive in facilitating environmental technology in some situations,
however, since once required standards are
met, incentives to engage in further technology development may dissipate.

Renewable energy

United Kingdom

1981

Many developed countries have increased their investment in environmental research and development (R&D) to
encourage new technologies to improve
environmental quality (figure 3.1). Perhaps
more important, developed countries also
encourage research by the private sector through subsidies and tax incentives
for specific types of research. This has
been much less the case in most developing countries, however, because of the
many competing claims on their limited
financial resources. Thus, the main path
of technology transfer is from developed
countries to developing countries.

1995

2000

2005

The renewable energy sector has seen
remarkable innovation over the past two
decades. Innovation has accelerated in
response to recent public and political
pressure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions thought to be contributing to
global climate change. First-generation
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Technological innovation
(hydropower and biomass combustion)
and second-generation (solar heating and
wind power) technologies are now being
followed by third-generation technologies
such as concentrated solar power, ocean
energy, enhanced geothermal systems and
integrated bioenergy systems. As these
innovations have lowered relative costs,
the use of renewable energy resources has
risen worldwide (figure 3.2).

Figure 3.2

The use of renewable energy sources rose
worldwide between 1990 and 2004

Average annual change in renewable energy production, 1990-2004 (percent)
25
20

World
OECD

15
10

If current policies are maintained, global
energy demands are expected to grow by
as much as 55% through 2030, according
to the International Energy Agency.2 China
and India alone would account for about
45% of this projected increase (based on
conservative economic growth figures), and
developing countries overall for 74%. Electricity generation from hydroelectric and
other renewable energy resources is projected to increase at an average annual rate of
1.7% between 2004 and 2030, for an overall
increase of 60%. Although renewable
energy would still account for only a small
part of total energy demand, the increase in
renewable energy production could have a
large impact on water resources, especially
increases in hydropower generation.
Future development of hydropower will
be limited by two main factors. One is
the spatial and geophysical potential for
new hydropower installations. In many
developed countries, including Australia,
the United States and much of Western
Europe, most of the suitable sites for hydropower installations have already been
developed (see map 7.6 in chapter 7). The
second limiting factor is financial investment capacity, which has been the primary constraint in developing countries,
including in most of Africa. Pressure from
environmental groups opposed to dams,
particularly to large dams, may also constrain future hydropower development.
Since renewable energy resources alone are
not sufficient to meet the predicted dramatic increase in energy demands through
2030, fossil fuel extraction and development of nuclear energy will continue to
increase, as will their impacts on water
resources and the environment. Coal consumes about 2 cubic metres (m3) of water
per megawatt hour of electricity generated,
nuclear power about 2.5 m3 and petroleum
about 4 m3. Extracting petroleum from
Canada’s tar sands, which have received
much criticism as an ‘unclean’ source of
oil, consumes an estimated 20-45 m3 of
water per megawatt hour, nearly 10 times
that for conventional oil extraction. Thus,
as fossil fuel sources become increasingly
Water in a changing world

5
0
Solid
Geothermal
biomass

Hydro Waste/biogas/
liquid biomass

Solar

Wind

Total primary
energy supply

Source: Based on OECD 2008.

inaccessible, the water footprint of oil tar
sands is likely to increase dramatically.

Information and communications
technology
Advances in information and communications technology can affect the cost and
effectiveness of monitoring ecosystem
health and quality. Reductions in the costs
of sensors, coupled with satellite-based
wireless data transfer, have greatly facilitated the monitoring of water resources
(water quality, water levels, flow rates and
so on) and the delivery of water-related
services, all in real time.
Improved monitoring through advanced
information and communications technology can intensify the environmental
effectiveness of policy measures, from the
improved tracking of potentially hazardous materials to the monitoring of emissions from large stationary and smaller diffuse (non-point) and mobile sources. The
greatest number of patents for monitoring
environmental impacts between 1978
and 2002 was granted for water pollution
treatment, attesting to the importance of
information and communications technology innovations in the sustainable management of water resources. Still lacking,
however, are adequate original field data
required for ground-proofing, monitoring and forecasting data and for informed
decision-making (see also chapter 14).

Biotechnology and genetically
modified organisms
Plant and animal breeding has increased
agricultural productivity and therefore
affected water productivity. Progress has
been concentrated in crop and animal productivity and resistance to pests, disease
and weather extremes.
43

PART

1

Biotechnology can
have a valuable
role in addressing
water scarcity and
quality challenges
in both developed
and developing
countries,
especially in
agriculture

Chapter 3T
The green revolution of the 1970s and
1980s is an example of the dramatic effects
of how taking advantage of technological
advances can improve the livelihoods and
incomes of the poor. The principal technologies involved in the green revolution
were irrigation, fertilizer and pest control,
together with high-yielding varieties of
maize, wheat and rice. The green revolution in Asia doubled cereal production
during 1970-95, while increasing the land
area devoted to cereals by only 4%. By the
late-1990s it was clear that many people,
including segments of the poorest population groups, had reaped substantial benefits from higher incomes, less expensive
food and increased demand for their labour associated with the green revolution.
The green revolution also demonstrates
that unintended consequences can accompany new technologies. The excessive use of agrochemicals has polluted
waterways, while wasteful irrigation has
contributed to water scarcity in some areas
and to water logging and soil salinization
in others. High livestock concentrations
have contributed to the spread of disease.
As monoculture of crops for export or for
use as animal feed replaced traditional
polyculture techniques, the economic outcomes for some small farmers deteriorated
as increased production of cereal crops
caused prices to fall and crop susceptibility
to pests and plant diseases spread. Increased agricultural production also led to
higher water demands, exacerbating water
scarcity problems in some arid and semiarid regions (see chapter 8).
Genetically modified organisms are a more
recent agricultural advance. A genetically
modified organism is an organism whose
genome has been altered through genetic
engineering. A large share of food crops,
such as corn, cotton and soybeans, have
been genetically modified to increase
yields and resistance to pests and chemical
herbicides. Although this technology offers the potential for developing droughtresistant crops, with obvious advantages
for water-scarce regions, little progress
has been made towards this goal, and
no breakthrough is expected in the near
future.
Micro-organisms are an especially promising avenue, since there is considerable
knowledge and experience in genetic
experimentation with them. As decomposers of organic material, they are capable
of breaking down or otherwise neutralizing many types of polluting materials
in the environment. Micro-organisms are

44

currently used, for example, in biological
processes in municipal wastewater treatment plants to treat or break down organic
materials in wastewater. Micro-organisms
that can more efficiently break down oil
pollution in aquatic ecosystems and soils
following oil spills or other industrial
accidents are receiving attention. Similar
avenues may become evident for research
into the treatment of other types of water
pollutants.

Bioenergy
Bioenergy, derived most commonly from
plant materials, is a renewable energy
source that is less likely to increase carbon
dioxide emissions that contribute to global
warming (in contrast to fossil fuels, which
return long-stored carbon to the atmosphere). Cellulose, including agricultural
residues, waste products and woody biomass, is also showing promise as a bioenergy source (see chapter 7).
This new technology is not without
problems. For maize and sugarcane used
to create bioenergy, a major problem is the
need for large quantities of water to grow
the crops (see box 7.2 in chapter 7) and for
considerable quantities of fossil fuel energy
for tillage, fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation,
harvesting and transport machinery, and
processing.3 Research is currently focused
on the development of second-generation
bioenergy, converting wood, crop residues
and other biomass sources into liquid biofuel. Non-food crops such as jatropha do
not require the intensive management and
soil quality that food crops need and therefore may not compete directly with food
crops for resources (water and good agricultural land). Second-generation bioenergy
technology has the potential to increase
energy yields significantly, but may not be
commercially viable for 5-10 years.
Producing bioenergy from crops traditionally grown as food will require additional
agricultural production to make up for the
lost food sources, and more water as well.
Increased bioenergy production has also
resulted in a significant increase in some
food prices by diverting grain traditionally
grown for food.4 More than one-third of
maize production in the United States in
2008 was being used to produce ethanol5
and about half the vegetable oils produced
in the European Union were being used
for biodiesel fuel.6 Although the impact
is extremely difficult to assess, bioenergy
production is estimated to have caused
up to 70%-75% of the rise in the global
prices of some food stocks, including approximately 70% of the increase in maize
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Technological innovation
prices.7 Higher energy prices worldwide
and a weak US dollar are believed to have
caused the remainder.8
Bioenergy production also causes environmental impacts unrelated to climate, particularly impacts arising from agricultural
practices (see chapter 7). Examples include
tillage-based soil erosion, eutrophication
from fertilizer runoff, increased pesticide
loads to aquatic habitats and biodiversity loss from land use changes. Further,
the use of bioenergy could spawn other
problems, as reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions (from switching from fossil fuels
to biofuels) could be offset by the clearing
of new land to make room for more crop
production. Cutting down forests could release carbon dioxide and reduce biodiversity. Under conditions of water scarcity,
producing fuel for automobiles instead of
producing food to feed a growing population becomes less socially acceptable,
especially in developing countries.

Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology, the design and manufacture of extremely small electronic
circuits and mechanical devices built at the
molecular level of matter, shows particular
promise for water resources. Key areas are
desalinization (see box 9.5 in chapter 9),
water purification, wastewater treatment
and monitoring. The first three areas involve the use of nanofiltration technology,
nanomaterials and nanoparticles to remove
or reduce water contaminants. Monitoring
involves the use of nanosensors.
Many nanotechnology-based approaches
are less a major departure from traditional
methods of addressing such issues than
a means of improving existing applications and devices.9 Seawater desalinization
plants are already in operation around the
world, and many technologies can effectively remove microbes and other contaminants from water. And although operation
efficiencies vary, wastewater treatment
plants also exist in many developed and
developing countries.
Nanotechnology has the potential to
greatly improve water quality and quantity through water treatment or remediation. Nanofiltration membranes and other
advanced filtration materials can facilitate
water desalinization and increased water
reuse and recycling, improving desalinization efficiency and reducing associated
costs (especially for energy). Another
emerging area is the development of nano­
materials, which can act as a ‘sponge’ to
enhance the removal of specific heavy
Water in a changing world

metals from water supplies. Research is
exploring the use of nanoparticles as
catalysts for chemical reactions of other
materials as a means of degrading them
and for removing salts and heavy metals. Such treatments could be targeted to
chemicals for which existing technologies
are inefficient or costly and could eventually permit human use of heavily polluted
and saline water for drinking, sanitation
and irrigation.

1

Nanotechnology
shows particular
promise for
desalinization,
water purification,
wastewater
treatment and
monitoring

For water monitoring nanotechnology
encompasses new and enhanced sensors
for detecting biological and chemical
water contaminants present in very low
concentrations. New sensor technology,
coupled with micro- and nanofabrication
technology, may eventually lead to the
development of highly accurate and portable sensors.
There are also impediments to the largescale use of nanotechnologies to address
water resources issues. While many
nanotechnologies are already in use, many
are still at varying stages of research or
development. Thus, although such technology could help developing countries
increase water treatment or remediation
efficiency and reduce costs associated with
traditional treatment methodologies, it
is unclear when nanotechnology-based
applications will be ready for wide-scale
use. And even though nanotechnologies
may prove very efficient and cost-effective
over the long term, initial acquisition and
application costs are high in many cases.
Using such technologies also will require
the technical capacity to maintain and
operate them.
There also are some risks associated with
nanotechnology-based approaches, specifically the possibility that engineered
nanoparticles used to catalyse chemical
reactions may end up in water systems.
Little is yet known about how such
materials may interact with biological
organisms, so the possibility of toxicity to humans and ecosystems must be
considered.

The technology dissemination
challenge
Key message
•
Technology is constantly evolving,
and the availability of technologies
can differ widely between developed
and developing countries because
of impediments to dissemination
of research and adaptation to local
conditions.
45

PART

1

Chapter 3T

With the bulk
of technological
innovation
originating
in developed
countries,
introducing
appropriate
technologies
into developing
countries is a
key challenge of
development

Technological progress is both a determinant and an outcome of rising incomes.
At the national level it can occur through
invention and innovation, the adoption
and adaptation of existing but new-tothe-market technologies and the spread of
technologies across individuals, firms and
the public sector within a country.
With the bulk of technological innovation originating in developed countries,
introducing appropriate technologies into
developing countries is a key challenge of
development. It requires both the willingness to transfer the technology and the
capacity to pay for, absorb, adapt and use
the technology so that it generates longterm benefits.

Exporting technology to developing
countries
The number of patents and scientific
journal articles focusing on technology is
strongly correlated with GDP per capita.10
Most developing countries lack the ability
to generate innovations at the technological frontier. Moreover, relatively undeveloped domestic technology sectors and the
lure of better economic and scientific opportunities abroad draw highly educated
nationals from many developing countries
to cutting-edge research sectors in highincome countries.
The lack of advanced technological competence in developing countries means
that technological progress occurs there
mainly through the adoption and adaptation of existing technologies. The penetration of older technologies, such as fixedline telephones, electric power networks,
transportation, health care and water
services – many ultimately provided by
governments – has tended to lag behind

Figure 3.3

that of newer technologies (figure 3.3).
Many of these older technologies require
infrastructure that is expensive to create and maintain and that relies on large
numbers of people with scarce technical
skills. In addition, the diffusion of older
technologies today depends on the intensity and efficiency with which government
services were delivered in the past, many
of which have a poor record.
The rates of acceptance and application
of newer technologies have been higher
than those of older technologies because
rates of acceptance and application are
more directly correlated with income. The
infrastructure for newer technologies such
as mobile phones and the Internet is generally less expensive to create and requires
fewer (although more skilled) workers to
operate and maintain. Moreover, with
regulatory reform in many countries the
private sector now offers these services in
a competitive environment, rather than
in the state-owned, monopolistic environments of the past. Supplying such new
technologies has thus been more responsive to market demands and less constrained by the stringencies of government
budgets or state enterprises. Furthermore,
demands for such products have been
boosted by low end-user costs, resulting
from competitive pricing strategies, and
the characteristics of some newer technologies that lend themselves to sharing more
readily than do some older technologies.

Absorptive capacity for technology
Most technological progress in developing countries has been achieved through
absorption and adaptation. A country’s
ability to absorb, adapt and apply foreign
technologies depends mainly on its exposure to foreign technologies (the pace at

The absorption of older and more recent technologies depends on more than income

Index
0.8
Absorption of older innovations, 2000-05
Absorption of newer innovations, 2000-03
0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
High-income
countries

Upper-middle-income
countries

Lower-middle-income
countries

Low-income
countries

Note: Each bar represents a single country.
Source: Based on World Bank 2008.

46

World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Technological innovation
which technologies diffuse across countries) and its ability to absorb, adapt and
use the technologies to which it is exposed
(the pace at which technologies diffuse
within a country). Successful use depends
on the technological absorptive capacity
of the economy – the macroeconomic and
governance environment, which influences the willingness of entrepreneurs to
take risks on new and new-to-the-market
technologies – and the level of technological literacy and advanced skills in the
population.
Government policy also has a crucial
role. Governments are often the primary
delivery channel for technologies such as
electricity, fixed-line telephones, transportation infrastructure and medical and
educational services. And government
policy can create a business environment that facilitates firm entry and exit
and that is not hostile to exploiting new
technologies. Too often, government
regulations or features of the domestic market prevent firms from making
money by exploiting a new technology,
thus impeding the spread of technology
within a country. Policy should also ensure that R&D and dissemination efforts
give priority to creating and introducing
products for which a market (domestic
or foreign) exists and to helping firms
exploit those opportunities.

Investing in research and
development
Countries do well to invest in technology
research and development. Research and
extension programmes in agriculture, the
sector that consumes the most water, have
exceptionally high internal economic rates
of return (table 3.1).
Many resource constraints can be overcome by technological capital and supporting institutions. Productivity gains,
including genetic improvements that
enable more production per unit of land,
also enable more production per unit of
water. For most developing countries gains
in agricultural productivity arise from
investments in adaptations of inventions
produced in developed countries.

environment has an internal system of
checks and balances for its own maintenance and that of the animals and plants
that inhabit it. Humanity has acquired
technologies that can radically affect these
natural checks and balances.
Many positive impacts are associated with
technological advances, such as a reduced
burden of disease and loss of life due to
medical advances, decreased malnutrition
due to the green revolution and other agricultural advances, and increased economic
livelihoods due to industrialization and
urbanization and attendant technologies.
But maintaining a sustainable relationship
between people and the natural environment requires maintaining a balance
between the technologies we develop to
meet human needs and nature’s ability to
supply them. And there is ample evidence
that this balance is not being achieved in
many places around the world, as demonstrated by excessive water abstractions,
degraded water quality, and damaged
aquatic ecosystems and biological communities. Some of these impacts result from
ignoring the environmental consequences
of human development actions. Others
result from ignorance of the many, often
subtle, interactions between the natural
environment and the human activities
that fundamentally affect it.

maintaining
a sustainable
relationship
between people
and the natural
environment
requires
maintaining a
balance between
the technologies
we develop to
meet human needs
and nature’s ability
to supply them

Consider crop-based bioenergy production. The increased production and use
of bioenergy to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions associated with the burning of
fossil fuels must be balanced against the
rising need for water resources, associated pollution and sufficient agricultural
land on which to grow the crops to supply
crop-based bioenergy. An unintended impact has been rising prices for some foods,
as cereal crops are currently used for the
production of bioenergy rather than for
food. Our choices of technology require
appropriate consideration of their benefits
and costs, including their negative environmental impacts.

Table 3.1

Return on investments in agricultural research
and extension
Median internal rate of return
(percent)a

Challenges

Investment

A major technology challenge is how
to balance the benefits and risks of new
technologies. For the first time in human
history, technology has provided humanity with the means to reshape the
structure and functioning of the natural
environment and thus to alter the possibilities for future development. The natural

Agricultural extension programmes

41

Applied research

49

Pre-invention science

60

Water in a changing world

a. The internal rate of return is the rate of discount at which the present value of benefits is
equal to the present value of costs.
Source: FAO 2000.

47

PART

1

Chapter 3T

Notes
1.

Bergkamp and Sadoff 2008.

2.

IEA 2007.

3.

Pimentel and Patzek 2005.

4.

Mitchell 2008.

5.

US Department of Agriculture 2008.

6.

Mitchell 2008.

7.

Mitchell 2008.

8.

FAO 2008.

9.

Hillie et al. 2005, p. 43; Berger 2008.

10. World Bank 2008.

References
Berger, M. 2008. Nanotechnology and
Water Treatment. Nanowerk website. www.nanowerk.com/spotlight/
spotid=4662.php.
Bergkamp, G., and C. W. Sadoff. 2008.
Water in a Sustainable Economy. In State
of the World: Innovations for a Sustainable
Economy. Washington, DC: Worldwatch
Institute.

48

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2000. Agricultural Production and Productivity in
Developing Countries. In The State of
Food and Agriculture 2000. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
———. 2008. Soaring Food Prices: Facts,
Perspectives, Impacts and Actions
Required. HLC/08/INF/1. Background
paper for the High-Level Conference on
World Food Security: The Challenges of
Climate Change and Bioenergy, Rome,
3-5 June 2008.
Hillie, T., M. Munasinghe, M. Hlope, and
Y. Deraniyagala. 2005. Nanotechnology, Water and Development. Global
Dialogue on Nanotechnology and the
Poor: Opportunities and Risks. Meridian
Institute, Washington, DC.
———. 2007. World Energy Outlook 2007.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development and International Energy Agency.

Mitchell, Donald. 2008. A Note on Rising
Food Prices. Policy Research Working
Paper 4682, Development Prospects
Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2008.
OECD Environmental Outlook to 2030.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Pimentel, D., and T. W. Patzek. 2005.
Ethanol Production Using Corn, Switchgrass, and Wood; Biodiesel Production
Using Soybean and Sunflower. Natural
Resources Research 14 (1, March): 65-76.
US Department of Agriculture. 2008.
Grain and Oilseeds Outlook for 2008.
Prepared for the Agricultural Outlook Forum, February 21-22, Crystal City, VA. www.usda.gov/oce/
forum/2008_Speeches/Commodity/
GrainsandOilseeds.pdf.
World Bank. 2008. Global Economic
Prospects 2008: Technology Diffusion in
the Developing World. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Technological innovation

Chapter 4

1

Policies, laws
and finance
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, Stefano Burchi, Richard Connor,
William Cosgrove, Sarah Hendry, Patrick Moriarty,
Walter Rast, Léna Salamé and James Winpenny
Contributors: Jack Moss, Monica Scatasta, Jon Martin Trondalen and
World Water Assessment Programme Expert Group on Legal Issues
Coordinator: Tim Kasten (UNEP)
Facilitator: Richard Connor

Key messages
Effective policy and legal frameworks are necessary to develop,
carry out and enforce the rules and regulations that govern
water use and protect the resource.
Water policy operates within a context of local, national, regional and global policy and legal frameworks that must all
support sound water management goals.
Legitimate, transparent and participatory processes can effectively mobilize input for designing and implementing water resources policy and create a strong deterrent to corruption.
Although water is often described as a ‘gift of nature’, harnessing and managing it for the wide variety of human and ecological needs entail financial costs.
While there may appear to be many financing options for water
resources development, governments still have only three basic
means of financing them: tariffs, taxes and transfers through
external aid and philanthropy.
Policy-makers need to make political decisions on socially and
environmentally acceptable trade-offs among different objectives and on who bears the costs of such compromise.

Policies and laws
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, William
Cosgrove, Patrick Moriarty, Walter
Rast and Léna Salamé
Contributors: Richard Connor, Jon Martin
Trondalen and World Water Assessment
Programme Expert Group on Legal Issues
Effective policy and legal frameworks
are necessary to develop, implement and
enforce rules and regulations for controlling water uses. Although policy and law
go hand in hand, they are fundamentally
different. Policy serves mainly as a guide
for decision-makers. Law provides a set of
enforceable rules.
Water in a changing world

Water policy, developed at international
and national levels, can lead to the establishment of international, national and
local laws. Effective implementation and
enforcement require an adequate institutional and governance framework – one
that is legitimate, transparent and participatory and that has proper safeguards
against corruption. The legal system
within which water law operates can be a
strong instrument of change – or a severe
impediment to progress.
Water law sets the framework for stakeholders’ use of water resources and
responds to pressures from demographic,
economic and social drivers. Policy‑makers
49

PART

1

Chapter 4

Because
the political
negotiations
involved in global
and regional
conventions or
water-sharing
agreements are
meant to avoid
conflicts between
different uses or
users of water, they
serve as drivers for
water management

use water law to establish the rules of the
game for water users within a given community, country or region.

International and regional water
policy
International goals and objectives for
water resources, negotiated at UN meetings, conferences and summits or in
ministerial-level sessions of the World
Water Forum, can be viewed as political
benchmarks. Because the political negotiations involved in global and regional
conventions or water-sharing agreements
are meant to avoid conflicts between different water uses or users, they serve as
drivers for water management. The global
policy framework for water began with the
Stockholm Declaration of 1972, followed
by other important international milestones over the years (see appendix 2).
Ratifying conventions means assenting
to implement the actions and activities
agreed to by the involved parties. Implementation requires that the proper institutions exist, that national laws are compatible with convention requirements and
that political and financial measures are
in place to ensure popular participation.
It also requires a policy framework with
operational goals, objectives and follow-up

Box 4.1

The EU Water Framework Directive – uneven
implementation

The EU Water Framework Directive
for water protection and management provides for the identification
of European waters and their characteristics on the basis of individual
river basin districts and the adoption
of management plans and measures for each water body. Entered
into force 22 December 2000, the
directive seeks to prevent and reduce
pollution, promote sustainable water
use, protect the aquatic environment, improve the status of aquatic
ecosystems and mitigate the effects
of floods and droughts through the
management of inland surface waters, groundwater, transitional waters
and coastal waters.
Within four years of the directive’s
entry into force, member states were
to complete an analysis of the characteristics of each river basin district,
a review of the impacts of human
activities on their water resources, an
economic analysis of water use and
a registry of areas requiring special
protection. Within nine years they
were to produce a management plan

50

and programme for each river basin
district.
In a 2007 report the European Commission noted that several EU member
states may fail to meet the targets,
particularly because of the physical
deterioration of aquatic ecosystems as
a result of overexploitation of water
resources, and the high levels of pollution from diffuse sources. The report
also cited problems in meeting the
deadlines for incorporating the directive into national law. However, the
establishment of river basin districts
and the designation of competent
national authorities appear to be well
under way. The European Commission
finished with recommendations for
addressing the reported shortcomings, integrating sustainable management of water resources into national
policies, maximizing public participation and giving advance notice of
its plans for future European water
management policy.
Source: European Parliament and Council
2000; CEC 2007.

processes. As an example, the EU Water
Framework Directive, negotiated by the
EU member states, requires intranational,
multilevel institutional structures, including legal systems, to ensure implementation of the directive for transboundary
river basins and groundwater as well as
national river basins (box 4.1).

International and regional legal
frameworks
International water law is part of public international law. The rules of international
law apply to sovereign states. But because
there is generally no higher authority to
enforce such rules, individual countries
must generally ensure their own compliance. The first step in enforcement is
identifying the applicable rules.
These rules are found in treaties, international custom, general principles of law
and the writings of ‘learned publicists’.1
Treaties usually provide the most accessible
source of law, but the other sources cannot
be ignored. In the non-navigational uses
of international watercourses, rules of customary law are often invoked by countries
in the absence of codified law. A treaty applies only to parties to the treaty and only
after the treaty has come into force and is
thus legally binding. Finally, the normative content (requirements) of the treaty
rules must be established and agreed to by
all parties involved to determine whether
a country’s actions are in accordance with
its treaty obligations.
Law may also be developed at a regional
level. Such law typically supersedes national law. Treaties may operate regionally
between two or more countries. Regional
bodies such as the European Union may
also create law for their members. EU law,
unlike international law, can be directly
binding on its members and has strong
enforcement mechanisms.
In most cases the directly applicable law is
national law, which ensures implementation of any international treaties that a
country has signed. Within national law
the specific law-making powers and hierarchies of laws are determined by the constitutional arrangements within a jurisdiction. National law also includes customary
law as well as water laws directly relating
to water resources (for example, pollution
control and water abstraction permits).
In addition to the formal legal framework
and the customary laws that national law
formally codifies and recognizes, there are
also water rules and rights by which water
user collectives and other actors abide.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Policies, laws and finance
These hybrid sets of water rules, common
in most parts of the world, are often crucial in everyday water affairs and conflict
resolution.
There are also many other areas of law
not directly addressed to water issues that
nevertheless affect management of the
water environment. These include land
use planning, environmental assessment,
nature conservation and environmental
law. Public health laws influence the supply of water and sanitation, as does land
tenure reform. Individuals are reluctant to
invest in sanitation where they have no security of tenure, nor will water companies
lay pipes in such land. Legal provisions
on freedom of information and access to
justice, human rights and other constitutional measures are also important parts of
a governance framework.
Conflicts and regional instability (or
stability) can influence water demand and
use, particularly in water-scarce regions.
This is the case where competition arises
between different water uses within a
country or where water disputes exist
between countries, as between Bangladesh and India over the Ganges River and
among the riparian countries along the
Danube River. (This subject is discussed
further in chapter 9.) There are more than
400 registered agreements over shared
watersheds,2 most between two riparian
countries. Although the UN Convention
on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses
of International Watercourses was adopted
by the UN General Assembly in 1997, it
has not yet been ratified by a sufficient
number of countries to enter into force.
One of the most successful conventions
on water resources is the regional United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe
Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes, convened in Helsinki in
March 1992.3 This convention, entered
into force in 1996 and currently ratified by
35 countries, serves as a driver for water
management in participating countries.

National legal framework: managing
water resources and service delivery
Law and policy are interconnected, with
particular legislation derived from water
policy in many cases.4 Making laws operational is often a painstaking process,
because of the need to develop implementation regulations and manuals on interpreting the law. Often implementation is
by trial and error, requiring feedback and
the establishment of practices and cases
on how to interpret aspects of water law.
Water in a changing world

For developing countries the long-term
goal of such legislation is poverty reduction through a well managed and sustainable water sector. Associated goals include
efficient service delivery, protection of
consumer rights, financial sustainability
and service coverage to the poor in both
urban and rural areas.
Governance of the water sector is complex
and involves actors beyond the water sector. The actors can be national legislatures
and governments, other sector agencies,
local governments, river basin authorities, representatives of indigenous peoples, consumer bodies, private companies
and others. Who is involved may differ
with the issues concerned – for example,
surface waters, groundwater, coastal waters
or wetlands. Effective action on such a
complex group of interests requires open
communication and strong coordination
facilitated by an appropriate legislative and
regulatory framework. The Government
of Australia recognized this need when it
adopted the Commonwealth Water Act
in 2007 and subsequent regulations (box
4.2).5

1

There are
fundamental
differences
between managing
water resources
and delivering
water services.
It is misleading,
therefore, to
discuss resources
management
and services
delivery in the
same institutional
context

There are fundamental differences between managing water resources and
delivering water services. Managing water
resources involves a wide range of institutions at local, state, national, regional
and international levels. Delivering water
services (including administration) usually
falls under the authority of elected local
officials and specific local institutions. It is
misleading, therefore, to discuss resources
management and services delivery in the
same institutional context.
Decentralization, for example, can affect
how water resources and water distribution services are managed. It is a political
process, however, not necessarily a waterspecific solution to providing improved
water services. It requires that water institutions integrate the physical watershed
and administrative boundaries, nesting
these within each other at different scales.
Success with such integration for catchment bodies below the river basin scale
has been limited, however, with evidence
from countries like South Africa suggesting that such integration may often be too
complex to implement.
Table 4.1 shows the range of measures
required to address water rights and water
management. Table 4.2 shows additional
measures that may be required to address
the provision of water services. The tables
draw from a study across four jurisdictions
51

PART

1

Chapter 4

Box 4.2

Australian water law reform

Australian states have been reforming their
water laws within a framework set out by
the Commonwealth government, called
the National Water Initiative. The initiative
is intended to provide security of entitlements to water, including ecosystems use.
It has a formula for sharing risk between
government and users should water availability change in the future due to climate
change or other factors.
The National Water Initiative and related
policies require water trading, which
enables water to be properly valued
and allocated to higher-value uses. But
this means that water rights have to be
separated from land rights, which can in
turn make it difficult for small-scale farms
to survive. This has implications for equity
and the potential need for structural adjustment funds. It also has consequences

for supportive legal regimes. For example,
there may be a need for a secure registry
of water rights, similar to a registry of land
rights.
There are also consequences for infrastructure. For example, Queensland separates
the ownership and management of distribution facilities (irrigation networks) from
the storage infrastructure (dams), and
users of the irrigation networks cannot opt
out of operating costs without the consent
of the licence holder, to avoid leaving the
system without an owner. If water were
to be traded out of an irrigation area, the
previous owners might no longer pay for
the system, leaving the new owners with a
liability but no income.
However, Australian states do not rely on
water trading to manage water. In every

– Scotland, England, South Africa and
Queensland, Australia.6

Key policy and regulatory issues
Although water allocation systems can be
difficult to establish, managing competing
water uses requires clear, widely accepted
allocation rules, especially where water is
scarce. Water allocation systems should
balance equity and economic efficiency.
Environmental concerns also require
equal attention, though they are often
neglected in the process. In Chile, for

Figure 4.1

Formal and informal legal framework of
water rights
Normative
domain

Technical and
biophysical
domain

National
and
international
law

Market
law

Organizational
domain

Source: Based on Boelens 2008.

52

Ancestral
law

Local
water
law

Development
project
law

Political and
economic
domain
Religious
law

Cultural and
spiritual
domain

state there will be a structure for river
basin management and stakeholder engagement through water resources plans
produced by the states. These plans will
allocate water, and only when a plan is in
place will it be possible to trade water, as
for example under the Queensland Water
Act of 2000.
The first requirement is thus to have a
sound system to manage water and allocate it to users, which should be the focus
of water law reforms, especially where
human and financial resources are limited.
Only a planned system can account for the
public good elements of water. Markets
alone cannot.
Source: www.nwc.gov.au/nwi/index.cfm;
Roper, Sayers, and Smith 2006; Queensland
Government 2000; Hendry 2006.

example, the environment is not granted
any water licences, while in South Africa
decision-makers are debating how to put
water law on environmental protection
into practice. Lawmakers must address
public policy implications, including
equity and water reallocations in times of
drought or other emergencies. And permit
systems should be sufficiently flexible
to adapt to global changes and climate
variability.
Much water governance takes place outside
formalized legal systems, particularly in
developing countries (figure 4.1). Such
‘traditional’ rights systems form a dynamic
mixture of rules, principles and organizational forms of different origins. They
combine local, national and global rules
and often mix indigenous, colonial and
contemporary norms and rights. Important sources for these complex, local rights
systems tend to be state laws, religious
laws (whether formal or indigenous),
ancestral laws, market laws and the rights
frameworks of multiple water project
interventions, which often set their own
regulations.
Local water rights thus exist in conditions
of legal pluralism, where rules and principles of different origins and legitimization
coexist and interact.7 In the eyes of water
users in many parts of the world, legitimate water authority and water rights are
not restricted to official law. Water users
also clearly distinguish water rights as
defined by lawyers (officially codified or
recognized) from their own, living rights
systems.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Policies, laws and finance

Table 4.1

1

Laws addressing water rights and water management
Options for provision

Legislative
requirement
High-level
principles,
purposes and
duties

Integrated water resources
management and river
basin planning
•
•
•
•

Catchment
planning

•
•
•

Water rights and
abstraction licensing

Water quality and
water pollution

Primary law
Ownership or trusteeship of
resource
Equity, water efficiency and
integration
Priority uses in law or policy (e.g.,
basin plans)

•

Ownership or trusteeship of
resource if not in water resources
management law
High-level duties on water users
(e.g., sustainable and beneficial
use)
Priority uses in law or policy (e.g.,
basin plans)

•

High-level duties on water users
(e.g., sustainable and beneficial
use, no waste, efficiency)

Catchment based
Alignment with administrative
boundaries
Coordination with other strategic
planning processes (e.g., land
use, biodiversity)

•

Licence in accordance with
catchment plans if they exist

•

Licence in accordance with
catchment plans if they exist

•

•

Define water
environment

•
•
•

Surface and groundwater
Coastal waters
Wetlands

Control all waters:
• Surface and groundwater
• Coastal waters
• Wetlands

Control all waters:
• Surface and groundwater
• Coastal waters
• Wetlands

Regulatory
structure

Water authority:
• Government department
• Agency
• Stakeholder-led

Water authority:
• Government department
• Agency
• Stakeholder-led

Water authority or environmental
authority:
• Coordination mechanisms

Participation

Stakeholder engagement for
planning in primary law

Stakeholder engagement through
water resources management
framework

Stakeholder engagement through
water resources management
framework

Licensing

Status of plan:
• Regulatory (direct licensing)
• Indirect (sets targets)
• Managerial (sets targets,
incentives)

Integrated water use licences for
abstraction and discharge?

Integrated water use licences
for abstraction and discharge
(dependent on regulatory structure)?

•

•

Tiered system
(proportionate)

•

Tiered system (e.g., general rules
and full licences)
Exemptions (e.g., domestic use,
subsistence use, volume limits)

•
•

Licence
conditions

Duration, review periods and tests
for grant, review and reallocation

Water trading

Prohibit, permit and encourage

Tiered system (e.g., general rules
and full licences)
Emission, quality and ecological
standards – progressive approach
Management of diffuse pollution

Duration, review periods and tests
for grant, review and reallocation

Source: Hendry 2008.

Understanding the nature of water rights
in each system and water territory thus
requires taking into account their multilayered bundles: their rights to use and
withdraw, operate, supervise and manage,
and control. Focusing only on the local
level is clearly inadequate. Multistakeholder platforms or other arenas for achieving
common goals and establishing patterns
of governance – which include recognizing informal water rights, empowering
marginalized social and ethnic groups
and representing all interested parties in
allocation and decision-making – have the
potential to ensure fairer and smoother
reallocation of water resources (box 4.3).
Water in a changing world

Participatory water management
Participants in the consensus-building
World Water Vision exercise indicated
that the Vision could be achieved only if
empowered individuals and communities
participated at all levels of decision-making on water resources management. Their
concerns were pragmatic, driven more by
considerations of governance systems than
by equity. Thus the World Water Vision
report concluded that
Both public and private management of water will improve through
greater accountability, transparency, and rule of law. Incentives
53

PART

1

Table 4.2

Chapter 4
Laws addressing provision of water services

Legislative requirement

Options for provision

Regulators
Economic, duties of supply and quality standards
Environmental

•
•
•

Ministry, sector agency (e.g., water industry commission, office of water
services) or multiutility (e.g., competition authority)
Ministry or environment agency
Separate consumer body?

Providers

•
•

Local government
Water board or agency

Vertical disintegration and integration
Horizontal disaggregation and aggregation

•
•

Abstraction, treatment, distribution and supply
Regional (‘competition by comparison’?)

Private sector involvement

•
•
•

Forbidden?
Public sector preference?
Short-term contracts

Constitutional and
human rights

•
•

High level
Additional enforcement mechanisms

High-level duties
(on regulators, providers and users)

•
•

•

Private company

•
•
•

Build-operate-transfer
Leases and concessions
Divestiture

•
•
•

Consumer protection
Competition
Economic efficiency and return on
capital

•

Universal service obligation
Conservation, efficient use (water
efficiency)
Sustainable and secure supply

Duties of supply

•
•

Universal (progressive?)
In service areas

•
•

Reasonable cost
Drinking water customer service
standards

Tariffs, metering and disconnections

•
•
•
•

Banded
Two-part
Free basic service
Participation in tariff-setting

•
•

Presumption of metering
Powers to disconnect or limit supply
for non-payment

Emergency powers

•
•

Climate and drought
Pollution incident

•
•

Infrastructure failure
Ministers, water providers and
regulators

Storm water

•

Incorporate storm water management into water services provision (and
potentially into abstraction licensing and pricing)

Conservation and demand management

•
•

High-level duties on conservation and efficient use
Highest appropriate standards for built environment, grey water reuse

Source: Hendry 2008.

must improve for all stakeholders.
More community participation will
provide a sense of ownership and
empowerment to local stakeholders. The role of education in making this process possible cannot
be overestimated. Public access to
information will provide an incentive to elected officials and private
operators, who will be held responsible for results, including maximizing social welfare. It will also
reduce opportunities for corruption
and for capture of the system by
powerful elites.8
Role of non-governmental organizations. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) can
play a valuable role in a country or local
community. Normally operating outside
the formal government, NGOs may be
community-based organizations, povertyfocused large external organizations
such as Oxfam and the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, and charities funded
54

by religious organizations. Issue-related
organizations such as the Council of
Canadians and IUCN–International Union
for Conservation of Nature may also be
important contributors at a national or
regional scale. Where such organizations
exist, they should be involved in the participatory processes. A thorough analysis
of the contributions of the NGO sector to
the Millennium Development Goals and
to water management, showing the unique
characteristics of different kinds of NGOs,
their contributions, their limitations and
a perspective on their future role would
be a useful contribution to the related
literature.
Participation in the irrigation sector. Along
with market tools (such as privatization
and removal of subsidies), water management policies have been shaped by calls
for a more participatory development
approach that advocates smaller government and local participation in governance, management and financing. At the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Policies, laws and finance
same time, to comply with the structural
adjustments required by international
financial institutions in the last few decades, governments have decreased public
spending in most sectors and disengaged
from them. Such strategies have led to
major changes in water management, particularly in irrigation, where governments
have embarked on reform.9
One of the most important and far­reaching reforms is the irrigation management transfer that has been taking place
in more than 57 countries on 5 continents
(box 4.3). Overall, this transferring of
responsibility and authority for managing
irrigation systems from the public sector
to the community has forced a new look
at how services are provided to users and a
move from supply-driven to demand-driven approaches. And the closer involvement
of water user associations has resulted in
increased accountability, transparency
and responsibility, as has been reported in
China and Mexico, for example.10

Participation reduces corruption
Global Corruption Report 2008: Corruption in
the Water Sector estimates that corruption
in the water sector can raise the investment costs of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals target for water and
sanitation by almost $50 billion.11 Corruption in the sector includes falsified
meter readings, distorted site selection of
boreholes or abstraction points for irrigation, collusion and favouritism in public
procurement and nepotism in the allocation of public positions.
Corruption remains a poorly addressed
governance issue in the water domain.
This domain is a high-risk sector for corruption because water service provision
is a near natural monopoly. The resource
is becoming increasingly scarce in many
countries, and the water domain involves
large and often complex construction
contracts. Furthermore, water has multifunctional characteristics and is used and
managed by a mix of private and public
stakeholders.12
Corruption – on a petty or grand scale
– occurs across the water spectrum and
among all water sector actors. According
to Global Corruption Report 2008, in some
countries corruption siphons off as much
as 30% of the budget.13 By diverting funds
from investment or operation and maintenance, corruption reduces access to water.
And for many poor people, paying bribes
is the only means of securing access to
water supplies.
Water in a changing world

Corruption undermines poverty reduction efforts and impedes economic, social
and sustainable development. Poor people
generally suffer most from corruption,
overpaying for water service delivery or
bearing the health burdens arising from
lack of sustainable access to safe drinking
water. The indirect costs of corruption are
also high. There is a strong correlation
between access to adequate water and sanitation and infant mortality (see chapter 6).

Corruption remains
a poorly addressed
governance issue in
the water domain

Corruption can lead to uncontrolled pollution of water sources, overpumping and
depletion of groundwater, lack of planning, uncontrolled degradation of ecosystems, weakened flood protection, urban
expansion leading to heightened water
tensions, and other harmful effects. In
water-scarce southern Spain tens of thousands of properties have been developed
illegally, particularly in seaside resorts.
In the Andalucian city of Ronda this
practice led to a severe governance crisis,
and pollution now jeopardizes water supplies.14 Where corruption is widespread,
achieving the Millennium Development
Goals will take much longer – not only
with much higher cost in direct investment in services and management, but
also in indirect costs, such as water-related
diseases and loss of lives, ecosystems and
productive capacities. It also threatens

Box 4.3

Experience with irrigation management
transfer

Irrigation management transfer is the
transfer of responsibility and authority for managing irrigation systems
to water user associations. It began
in the 1960s in Taiwan, Province of
China; Bangladesh; and the United
States; in the 1970s in Mali, New
Zealand and Colombia; and in the
1980s in the Philippines, Mexico,
Tunisia and the Dominican Republic.
It peaked in the 1990s in Turkey,
Morocco, Australia, Peru, Albania
and Zimbabwe, but still continues
in countries such as Pakistan and
Sudan (2000), India (2001) and China
(2002), each with unique experiences
and results.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
International Water Management
Institute database on experience
with irrigation management transfer
provides information on the key factors that motivated adoption of the
new policy. The most commonly cited
is a shortage of government funds
for operating and maintaining the

system, followed by difficulties with
fee recovery.
Overall, the results have been mixed.
Financial sustainability and lack of
clarity about the financial and technical
assistance provided to water user associations by the government have been
a concern. Monitoring and evaluation
are essential. The concept of ‘farmer
participation’ was often translated
into a fixed set of principles, such as
volumetric control, cost recovery, water
pricing, economic, water use efficiencies and downstream control, that
were not relevant in all contexts. For
example, Andean farmer-managed irrigation systems typically have upstream
control techniques and management
structures, which provide transparency
and ease of operation. For them, participating in water distribution usually
means involving everyone in the system’s management and decisions on
water distribution to individual fields.
Source: Garces-Restrepo, Vermillion, and
Muñoz 2007; Boelens 2008.

55

PART

1

Corruption is an
important driver
of uncontrolled
pollution of
water sources,
overpumping
and depletion
of groundwater,
lack of planning
and uncontrolled
degradation
of ecosystems,
diminishing flood
protection, urban
expansion leading
to heightened
water tensions
and other
harmful effects

Chapter 4
existing achievements by undermining institutions and the sustainability of
infrastructure.
Legitimate, transparent and participatory
processes can be effective in garnering
support for the design and implementation of water resources policy and of
deterring corruption. But participatory
processes require adequate institutional,
policy, legal and economic instruments.
Political leadership is required to put these
processes in place and demonstrate support for them. International assistance and
interventions to reduce corruption will
have only limited effect if political will is
absent.

Implementing regulations
Water resources management is underpinned by a functioning legal system that
includes:
•

Water resources legislation, the
province of the legislature and the
executive.

•

Implementation and administration
of legislation, the province of the
executive.

•

Adjudication of civil disputes among
water litigants, the province of the
judiciary.

•

Prosecution of criminal offenders by
the executive and the judiciary.

Following adoption of a law by the
legislature, the executive needs to address relevant details not included in the
legislation by preparing implementation regulations. Neither legislation nor
implementation regulations will make
much difference, however, unless they
are effectively administered by the water
resources administration. Nor will they
secure rights in the resource unless a judiciary can adjudicate disputes effectively,
impartially, expeditiously and transparently. Finally, the legislation needs
vigorous enforcement and systematic
monitoring, using a set of indicators to
gauge effectiveness and improve system
performance.

characteristics of the country or community will make a significant contribution
to meeting this challenge. But a greater
challenge is to ensure that such laws and
the regulations that support them make a
difference on the ground by effectively administering and enforcing them. And the
security of rights in the resource must be
adjudicated by an effective, impartial, expeditious and transparent judicial system.

Financing – the missing link
Authors: Richard Connor, William Cosgrove,
Walter Rast and James Winpenny
Contributors: Jack Moss and Monica Scatasta
Virtually all water-related activities,
whether structural (infrastructure) or
not (planning, data collection, regulation, public education and so on), require
money to develop, implement and carry
out. Even if all the necessary policies and
laws are in place, lack of funding will
bring necessary actions to a standstill.
Adequate funding and the willingness to
invest in water management and infrastructure are therefore major determinants
of the availability of sufficient quantities
of water of acceptable quality.
Although water is often described as a
‘gift of nature’, harnessing and managing water for human and ecological needs
entail financial costs. These costs are often
widely ignored, underestimated or underfunded, with the result that important
functions and assets are neglected and
under­provided, while existing assets and
services deteriorate.
Three functions are involved in water
management, each with associated costs:
•

Water resources management and
development, including watershed
and river basin development, storage, flood-risk management, environmental protection and pollution
abatement.

•

Water services to municipalities and
households, commerce and industry,
agriculture, and other economic sectors, including the costs of wastewater
treatment, rehabilitation, operations
and maintenance and inadequate
infrastructure.

•

Integrative functions, such as water
sector policy development, research,
monitoring, administration, legislation (including compliance and enforcement) and public information.

Challenges
Water resources development and management in the interests of national
development objectives require effective
policy and legal frameworks that also
respect deeply rooted customary practices.
Participatory processes that take account
of the social, economic and cultural
56

World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Policies, laws and finance
The costs associated with these functions are either capital (investment) costs
or annual recurrent costs, both variable
and fixed. To function properly, the water
sector must cover all costs – not just those
of major physical infrastructure – in a
sustainable way. That means ensuring reliable, predictable finance from government
revenues (taxes), the sale of water services
or long-term aid commitments.
Financing is often a limiting factor in effectively managing the water sector. The
solution is to focus not only on increasing
flows of funds to the sector but also on
achieving a realistic balance between the
demand for and supply of financing to ensure financial sustainability. Demand for
funds needs to be rationalized by developing realistic investment plans, minimizing the recurrent costs of service delivery
and ensuring the sustainability of water
resources and the safe and reliable delivery
of services to maintain users’ willingness
to pay.
The logic differs for the three sources of
finance for the water sector. The rationale for local user financing is users’
consumption of the resource and local
authorities’ responsibility in most cases
for the main decisions about water services and tariffs. The rationale for national
government finance is often the national

Figure 4.2

or regional benefits to be gained from
managing the resource. Capital investment costs tend to be covered largely
by governments, except where assets
are privately owned (for example, farmers who have their own infrastructure).
The international community provides
mainly ‘catalytic’ funding to jumpstart
projects, which includes providing
financial guarantees. Decisions made at
the international and national government levels are most likely to be outside
the ‘water box’, while local user concerns
more directly address specific systems for
water supply and sanitation.

Investment in water management
capacity
The water sector has been plagued by
lack of political support, poor governance, under­resourcing and under­
investment. These ills are manifested in
non-­transparency, lack of accountability,
unsustainable economics, high levels of
unaccounted for water and low revenue
collection. They have led to infrastructure
deterioration, the breakdown of services
and ultimately customer dissatisfaction.
Figure 4.2 illustrates how this combination
of factors creates a vicious cycle of low
funding, weak political support and poor
service provision. Breaking this vicious
cycle will require more than investments
in hardware.

lack of political
support, poor
governance,
underresourcing
and
underinvestment
in the water
sector have led
to infrastructure
deterioration,
the breakdown
of services
and ultimately
customer
dissatisfaction

If the vicious cycle of low funding is reversed, the benefits to society will be enormous

Potential investments
driven away by
perception of high
risk and low returns

Funds lost to system:
• Non-recovery
• Corruption
• Rents

Inadequate
investment
Operational
inefficiency

Inadequate
maintenance

Low
perception of
value

Low fee revenues
and low willingness
to increase taxbased water
funding

Infrastructure
degradation

Good quality human
resources driven away
by lack of opportunity
and low achievement

Low service
quality

Loss of positive
externalities
and increase of
negative
externalities

Source: J. Moss based on ideas from A. Mathys; Moss et al. 2003.

Water in a changing world

57

PART

1

Chapter 4

In most urban
public water
systems charges
barely cover the
recurrent costs
of operation and
maintenance.
In rural areas
neglect of
operation and
maintenance and
cost recovery
contribute to
widespread
non-­functionality

Investment is also required in the operation and maintenance of physical
infrastructure so that it meets appropriate standards and functions efficiently.
Operations and maintenance are neglected nearly everywhere in favour of
new infrastructure investments, regardless
of the country’s level of development. In
the United States bringing water supply
and sewerage infrastructure up to current
standards will cost more than $1 trillion
over the next 20 years, with hundreds of
billions more required for dams, dikes and
waterway maintenance.15 The World Business Council for Sustainable Development
estimates that the total costs of replacing
ageing water supply and sanitation infrastructure in industrial countries may be as
high as $200 billion a year.16 Investment
in physical infrastructure must be accompanied by the ‘soft’ infrastructure of policies and legal systems (as described earlier)
and human capacity.17 Yet much bilateral
aid for sanitation and drinking water fails
to achieve a balance between soft and
hard infrastructure (figure 4.3).
In most urban public water systems charges
often barely cover the recurrent costs of
operation and maintenance, leaving little
or no funds to recover the capital costs of
modernization and expansion. A survey of
such systems in 132 cities in high-, middleand low-income countries found that 39%
did not recover even their operation and
maintenance costs (true of 100% of cities
in South-East Asia and the Maghreb).18
Moreover, water infrastructure deteriorates
over time. To keep it functioning properly
requires routine repairs, service and replacement of worn parts. These activities,

Figure 4.3

New infrastructure seems to dominate donor
investments in drinking water and sanitation
Infrastructure

Share of investment (percent)

‘Soft’ support

100

75

50

25
Sanitation

Drinking water

0
Austria

Germany

France

European
Commission

Austria

France

European
Commission

Note: Soft support includes support for policies, legal systems and human capacity building.
Source: Based on data from UN-Water 2008.

58

easy to postpone, are widely neglected.
The result is infrastructure that deteriorates to a level that can no longer provide
reliable access to safe drinking water to
those who are nominally receiving the
service. Leakage (loss) rates of 50% are not
uncommon in urban distribution systems.
Much of the apparatus for treating wastewater is also failing. According to a report
by the Task Force for the Implementation
of the Environmental Action Program
for Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central
Asia, municipal water utilities have now
become the main polluters of surface
waters in many East European, Caucasus
and Central Asian countries. The task
force reports that up to 90% of nitrogen
and phosphorus discharges into the Black
and Caspian Seas originate from riverine
inputs, which mostly transport municipal
wastewaters.19
In rural areas neglect of operation and
maintenance budgets and cost recovery
contribute to widespread non-­functionality.
A recent survey of almost 7,000 rural water
schemes in Ethiopia found that 30%40% were non-functional.20 A shortage of
finance for wages, fuel, materials and spare
parts was a common factor.
The deficit in financing, especially for
operation and maintenance costs, is a substantial addition to the investment costs
of achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Although governments often
turn to external aid to fill financing gaps,
donors also seem to favour financing new
infrastructure over operation and maintenance (see figure 4.3).

High costs of new and remedial
infrastructure
While operation and maintenance costs
have been especially neglected, water
infrastructure has not been funded at
anything close to the required level. Many
networks and installations in mature
economies are ageing and deteriorating.
Member states of the European Union are
committed to upgrading their water and
wastewater treatment systems to comply
with EU environmental legislation. But
many urban water systems in Eastern
Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia are in
poor condition, with no similar plans for
upgrades. In developing and emerging
market economies the pace of growth and
urbanization, combined with rising environmental expectations, is creating the
need for costly new investments.
Table 4.3 gives a sense of the magnitude
of investment requirements over the next
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Policies, laws and finance
20 years for water supply and wastewater services infrastructure and the gap
between financing needs and projected
revenues, by region. These calculations do
not include other sizeable funding requirements, such as water resources development and management and water governance.21 Raising and spending these huge
sums will require quickening the pace of
reform (including water pricing) across the
water services industry, with implications
for both regulators and consumers.
The cost of rehabilitating or decommissioning existing infrastructure is likely to
be enormous. Repairing, strengthening or
modifying older dams, for instance, will
entail sizeable outlays. In extreme cases
decommissioning a dam may be a rational
decision (where it has outlived its purpose,
where it is old and unsafe, where sedimentation is high or where river flows need
to be maintained for fisheries and other
ecosystems). Rehabilitating or decommissioning also depends on whether the costs
of maintaining the dam exceed its expected future economic and financial benefits.
Both rehabilitation and decommissioning
costs are site specific.22
The cost of new water supply is rising. In
developed countries and in many places
elsewhere, the easiest investments for exploiting water resources have already been
made. With available dam sites decreasing, water tables falling and the distances
between the point of abstraction and
water use increasing, the costs of exploitation and supply are rising. Costs are also
pushed up by the growing need to treat
water before use.
Sanitation has been severely neglected. Estimates of the cost of achieving the 2015
Millennium Development Goal target for
sanitation vary widely, due to differences
in approach and a weak information base.
The World Health Organization estimates
the total annual cost of meeting the target at just over $9.5 billion. 23 If estimates
of current costs are correct, resources in
the sanitation sector would have to be
almost doubled to meet the 2015 target
(although estimates of current spending
probably underestimate the contributions by households to their own sanitation services). If the full cost of tertiary
wastewater treatment for waste streams
in urban areas is added, the total rises to
$100 billion, the current value of total
annual official development assistance.
More cost-effective alternatives need to
be explored – urgently – if the sanitation
target is to be met.
Water in a changing world

Table 4.3

Annual capital requirements for water supply
and wastewater services and water financing
gaps, by region, 2006-25

(US$ billions)
Region

Capital
needed

Low
gap

Medium
gap

High
gap

Eastern Europe,
Caucasus and
Central Asia

28.1-40.5

13.4

20.0

26.1

North America

23.9-46.8

3.3

4.9

21.4

Latin America

4.3-6.5

2.9

4.0

5.1

38.2-51.4

29.5

32.9

36.5

Rest of world

14.3-22.6

18.5

22.4

26.1

Total

92.4-148.0

67.5

84.2

115.2

Developed Asia
and China

Note: The gaps refer to the difference in projected investment needs for three different
estimates of their size and existing sources of revenue from tariffs, official development
assistance and government budgets and loans.
Source: Owen 2006.

UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of
Sanitation and Drinking-Water: 2008 Pilot
Report – Testing A New Reporting Approach
(GLAAS report) looks at the constraints to
progress towards the sanitation target from
the human resources, institutional capacity and financial system capacity perspectives (figure 4.4).
Operation, maintenance and rehabilitation remain critical challenges. Respondents to the GLAAS survey indicated that
flooding events and earthquakes were the
main causes of damage to infrastructure.24
Increased weather variability linked to

Figure 4.4

In the few countries surveyed financial system
constraints weighed heavily on achieving the
Millennium Development Goals sanitation
target

Sanitation sector capacity in GLAAS pilot countries with data; latest available data, 2005-07
(number of countries)
Very high
High
Medium
Low
Very low
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Human
resources

Institutional
capacity

Financial system
capacity

Note: GLAAS is Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water.
Source: Based on data from UN-Water 2008.

59

PART

1

Chapter 4

Figure 4.5

Household expenditure and private sector
investments in drinking water supply are
generally unknown

Funding sources for drinking water in GLAAS pilot countries with data, latest
available data, 2006-07 (percent)
Internal private sector
Households
Internal government
External funding
100

75

50

25

0
Ghana

Madagascar

Mongolia

Nepal

Uganda

Viet Nam

Note: GLAAS is Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water.
Source: Based on data from UN-Water 2008.

climate change and armed conflict bring
added risk.
African countries, recognizing the urgency
of the situation, signed the eThekwini
Declaration in February 2008 in Durban,
South Africa, committing them to prepare
or update national sanitation and hygiene
policies, allocate budget funds for sanitation, improve sanitation information and
monitoring tools and increase capacity. The
declaration also called on external support
agencies to provide financial and technical
assistance for sanitation and hygiene promotion and to improve aid coordination.

Sources of financing
There are three sources of revenue for
financing water supply and sanitation
services:
•

User tariffs, including payment for
environmental services, which can
include cross-subsidies within the sector or from other sectors (for example,
electricity or other municipal services).

•

Public expenditures funded by taxation.

•

Transfers in the form of external aid,
from official or philanthropic sources.

External borrowing (debt, equity and
bonds, facilitated by risk-management
instruments such as guarantees) can help
spread payments over time for large upfront investments and manage the overall
cost of financing.
The 2008 GLAAS pilot report raises concerns about countries’ limited resources
60

to invest in operation, maintenance and
capital rehabilitation for drinking water
and sanitation systems.25 These expenditures are difficult to assess because many
are hidden in sector budgets or are not
accounted for, as in the case of many
private sector and household investments
(figure 4.5). Data in the GLAAS report,
available for three of the seven pilot countries, indicate that external funding – for
many countries the main source of funds
for drinking water and sanitation system
investments – is directed mainly to infrastructure projects.
Reviewing and revising investment needs
(the demand side of financing) by reducing costs are as important in closing the
financing gap as finding new sources of
funds. The full cycle of expenditures has
to be considered, from operation and
maintenance to technological choices
about equipment and its eventual replacement or upgrading. For example, improving collection efficiency and reducing
unaccounted for losses in distribution
systems can make more water available for
new consumers and help fund operations.
Demand-side considerations also include
such under­lying determinants as coverage
levels, services levels and environmental
regulations.
Fund disbursements can also be accelerated, so that disbursement delays do not
cause new funding to be postponed. Inefficient budgeting and budget allocation
processes can lead to such disbursement
delays. To ensure that funds are disbursed
more efficiently during the budget period,
funds can be allocated to regions of a
country or to local authorities according
to their relative capacity to implement
projects. Finalizing the budget process
before the budget year starts makes it possible to begin disbursements in the first
quarter of the year.
A strategic financial plan, based on an
in-depth examination of all demand- and
supply-side aspects affecting the financing
gap, will help ensure the financial sustainability of projects. It will direct investment
choices towards the most financially and
functionally appropriate processes and
technologies, thus maximizing benefits.
And it will make projects more attractive
to external financiers by reducing the
perception of risk.
A lot of funds move through the water
system but is used inefficiently. Examples
include high payments to informal providers outside the public networks, payments
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Policies, laws and finance
to corrupt operators to obtain water from
networks and large public subsidies that
end up in the wrong hands. Households
spend large sums on coping strategies,
such as time and money spent on alternative sources of water and on household
water filters.
Tariffs – pricing water and willingness to
pay. The obvious source of finance for the
recurrent costs of water services is user
charges, supplemented by government
subsidies. The continuing underpricing
of water to consumers encourages waste
and use of water for low-value purposes in
all sectors, depriving the sector of essential funds. This is a major contributor to
underinvestment in water infrastructure,
management and services and imposes
heavy costs on society.
Maintaining the quality and reliability of
services is essential (box 4.4), even if there
is a parallel push for increased access, since
these characteristics affect users’ willingness to pay. Transparency, accountability
and operational efficiency in service provision are also essential to user satisfaction.
Affordability also needs to be determined.
It is based on macroaffordability­– of investment choices (driven by coverage, service levels, technology and other choices)
and the cost efficiency of service provision
– and household affordability, determined
by current expenditure on water and sanitation services (including the hidden costs
of securing access when people lack access
to formal services and the consequences of
access to unsafe services) and their willingness to pay for improved service levels.
Charging for water. Although prices can be
strong drivers of positive change in a well
functioning economic system, in practice,
prices have had a relatively minor role in
managing water demand. Many people are
deeply ambivalent about using water prices
to manage water resources or are strongly
opposed to pricing water at the cost required to deliver it to consumers, especially in the politically sensitive segments
of agriculture and urban households. As a
result, water is often grossly underpriced.
One survey of municipal water utilities
in low-income countries found that 89%
had no cost recovery measures in place,
9% had partial cost recovery of operation
and maintenance costs, and only 3% made
any effort to recoup the costs of capital
outlays.26
A common yardstick for assessing the affordability of water charges for households
Water in a changing world

Box 4.4

1

Dalian water supply project in China –
successful expansion of services

Dalian, a port city at the southern
end of the Liaodong Peninsula, in
northeastern China, was declared
an ‘open’ coastal city in 1984 and
given considerable autonomy in
its economic planning. The Dalian
Economic and Technology Development Zone, established in 1988,
has become one of China’s most
successful economic zones. By the
early 1990s, however, water shortages had become a serious constraint
to economic growth. Many areas had
water service for only a few hours a
day. Frequent service disruptions had
major public health implications. The
Dalian Water Supply Project, begun
in the mid-1990s, provided new
infrastructure to address the water
shortages and meet increasing water
demands.

The project achieved its objectives. All
constructed facilities were operating satisfactorily, and the 73,000
residential water connections in Dalian
exceeded the predicted number. The
project also increased water supply to
commerce and industry, removing potential constraints to economic expansion and improving the investment
environment. The project evaluation
confirmed two important findings.
Local government commitment was
the most important contributor to the
success of the project. And water consumers will accept the need for higher
tariffs once they are convinced that
services are adequate and reliable.
Water tariffs were increased substantially from 1995 to 2001, at an average
annual rate of 12.8%.
Source: ADB 2004.

is that payments should not exceed 3% (in
some cases 5%) of net household income.
In practice, surveys show that in developed countries households connected to
urban public systems pay on average 1% of
incomes on water bills, including the cost
of sewerage, which may be double that for
water. Such an average is not a very reliable indicator, however, especially given
the wide variability among income levels
in a country. Generally speaking, poorer
groups tend to pay a higher share of
household income for water. In developing
countries the picture is complicated by the
widespread use of informal and small-scale
private water distributors charging full
market prices; in these cases the poorest
households can pay 3%–11% of income on
water.27
As recognition of this inequitable economic burden on the poor has spread,
pressure on governments and service
providers has increased to ensure delivery
of a minimal supply of potable water to all
households at a reasonable price. Achieving this objective would require tariff
rates based on a household’s ability to pay
and subsidies that cover the excess cost of
service delivery for those who can least
afford to pay.
Where pricing is used to cover water supply costs (for example, cities committed
to water demand management, private
irrigation schemes, markets for irrigation
water and penalties for water pollution), it
is an important driver of reforms. Where
61

PART

1

Where prices
cannot adjust
to financial
realities, stresses
emerge as water
shortages, water
waste, inefficient
water use,
inadequate water
infrastructure
investments
and poor waterrelated services

Chapter 4
prices cannot adjust to financial realities,
stresses emerge as water shortages, water
waste, inefficient water use, inadequate
water infrastructure investments and
poor water-related services. Water quality
may be inconsistent, and maintenance
and rehabilitation of distribution systems
may be neglected. Capital investment
may also be inadequate, resulting in the
failure to develop adequate water supply
and sanitation services. However, even
in situations where pricing is actively
used to cover water supply costs, the long
history of water as a public good means
that water prices have been heavily subsidized by tax-­f unded distributions from
individuals and corporations that may
not be direct beneficiaries of the services
provided.
In agriculture some farmers rely on public
irrigation systems while others have private arrangements (for example, groundwater and water harvesting systems). In
privately owned systems energy subsidies
(for pumping water) are a key factor affecting efficiency. Farmers using public
irrigation systems often pay little or nothing towards recurrent costs and usually
nothing towards the capital costs of the
irrigation infrastructure. This affects how
farmers use water, as one survey in India
discovered:
Farmers have no incentive to use
water efficiently as charges are
too low and are based on the area
irrigated. Inefficient water use
has led to severe environmental
problems – rising groundwater
levels, water-logging and soil salinity. Administration is ineffective.
Assessment and collection of fees
is often carried out by different
departments, or a department not
related to irrigation. Farmers need
to be involved in setting rates,
because at present they simply oppose any suggestion of an increase
in price. 28
Though widely accepted, the ‘polluter
pays’ principle has not had a major impact
on polluters’ behaviour or on raising funds
that could be allocated for environmental
purposes, with the exception of developed
countries and a much smaller number
of developing countries. Although not a
financing source, the alternative method
of water pollution quotas has similarly
been limited to the industrial, urbanized
economies, with almost negligible successful examples from developing countries
(see chapter 8).29

62

Multipurpose water projects that crosssubsidize irrigation and household water
use from hydropower revenues are another
form of tariff-based financing. The hydropower components of dams and water
storage schemes tend to perform better
financially than the associated irrigation
projects, which often fail to recover both
operating and capital costs. Thus, the
power element cross-subsidizes irrigation
and other water users – and often navigation, flood control and other public goods
as well. In the United States this kind of
cross-subsidy was a planned part of the
management of the Grand Coulee Dam in
the Columbia River Basin and of the major
river basin development works of the Tennessee Valley Authority.30
Role of the private sector. Several reports
conclude that the private sector provides
very few water supply and sanitation services in developing countries. The United
Nations Development Programme’s Human
Development Report 2006, for example,
estimates that although the number of
people served by the private water sector grew from roughly 50 million in 1990
to 300 million in 2002, less than 3% of
people in developing countries are covered by private or partially private companies.31 These figures almost certainly
understate the real scale of private sector
service provision, since they consider only
larger-scale private operations and investments. Private operators also include small
and medium-size companies with fixed or
mobile distribution systems as well as the
much larger spread of informal operators
that cover huge swathes of low-income
urban areas.
The substantial role of small and mediumsize entrepreneurs and operators is just
beginning to be studied (figure 4.6). A
World Bank report found 10,000 small
service providers in a limited sample of 49
countries,32 while an International Institute for Environment and Development
study estimates that the global number
may exceed 1 million.33 In addition, the
provision of infrastructure by property developers has not been examined but could
be substantial.
The landscape for private water operators today is very different from that of
a decade ago. Several major multinationals have withdrawn from international
projects, leaving just two or three to
pursue system concessions, build-operatetransfer and management contracts,
especially in the Middle East, China and
South-East and East Asia. The gap is being
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Policies, laws and finance
filled by new private water companies
based mainly in China, South-East Asia,
the Russian Federation and Latin America,
servicing emerging local and regional
markets. Small-scale and informal water
providers have continued to enlarge their
share of urban markets in developing
countries.
A high proportion of the contracts won
by the new market entrants are for desalination and wastewater treatment, which
address the growing water scarcity in arid
regions and the serious pollution caused
by untreated municipal wastewater. The
diversity of the new market entrants, their
access to local sources of finance and their
typically good political connections augur
well for successful implementation.
External private investment in the water
sector is significant, of the same order as
that of official development assistance
(figures 4.7 and 4.8). The domestic private
sector is becoming a water funding source
in some middle-income countries, where
powerful local conglomerates are moving
into water services, drawing on their own
equity and that of other local commercial
sources. Further down the financial scale
small informal operators dominate large
portions of the water market in urban and
peri-urban communities. Although some
of these operators invest in networks, most
use mobile facilities, financed by their
own equity or short-term credit. At the
street level bottled water sellers have proliferated. A necessity in many areas across
developing countries, where failing public
supply systems are often contaminated by
wastewater or storm water, the use of bottled water is a lifestyle choice in developed
countries.
Government financing from public revenues.
The public sector accounts for more than
70% of investment in the water sector.34
There are marked differences in how – and
how much – governments finance and
subsidize the water sector. In many poor
countries, where fiscal constraints are
severe, water supply is only one of many
priority sectors that governments are
under domestic pressure or international
commitment to finance.
Funding for infrastructure has varied with
economic development and urbanization.
At earlier stages the central government
generally supports infrastructure provision through subsidies and administrative
assistance (box 4.5). As countries develop,
the portion of central government support
declines, and the cost of environmental
Water in a changing world

Figure 4.6

Private water operators have a substantial
role in developing and developed countries

Urban residents served, 1991-2007 (millions)
200

150

Developing
countries

100
Spain

50

Other developed countries
United Kingdom
France

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Source: Based on data from Marin 2009.

Figure 4.7

External private investment in the water
sector, though variable, has been significant
since the early 1990s

US$ billions
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Note: Refers to management and lease contracts, concessions (or management and operation contracts with major private capital commitments), greenfield projects and divestitures for potable water generation and distribution and sewerage collection and treatment.
Source: World Bank Private Participation in Infrastructure Database (http://ppi.worldbank.
org).

Figure 4.8

Official development assistance to the water
supply and sanitation sector is rising again
after a decline during the 1990s

Official development assistance to the water sector ($ billions)
5
Development Assistance Committee countries, annual

4
3

Development Assistance Committee
countries, moving average

2
Multilateral agencies, moving average

1
0
1971

Multilateral agencies, annual

1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Source: Based on OECD-DAC 2008.

63

PART

1

Chapter 4

G-8 leaders in
June 2002 made
a commitment to
give priority to
the water sector

services is transferred to users, polluters
and local governments.
Some countries that have benefited from
debt relief or from the oil and commodities boom have transformed their public
finances, but this has not necessarily
translated into improved water service
provision. Several emerging market
economies, with large concentrations
of poor, unserved populations, are in
stronger budgetary positions than they
were a decade ago, though this is being
placed at risk by the recent fluctuations
in the cost of oil, power and food and the
global financial crisis, with subsidies rising
accordingly. Improving budgetary circumstances provide opportunities for increasing investments in the development of the
water sector.
Financing through external aid. Official
development assistance from donor countries and multilateral donors to the water
supply and sanitation sector increased

Box 4.5

Subsidizing water supply and sanitation in
the Republic of Korea

In the Republic of Korea the central
government provides direct subsidies for water supply and sanitation
infrastructure to local governments
or service providers. The amount
of the subsidy depends on the size
of the city and the type of facility.
Subsidies differ for construction and
operation. Typically, subsidies are
50%-80% for water source development in rural areas and 50% for local
waterworks improvements. Wastewater treatment is eligible for a 50%
grant, and sludge treatment for loans
of 30%-70%.

For municipal water supply, revenue
from tariffs now covers an increasing
share of production costs, rising from
69% in 1997 to 83% in 2005. For regional water supply systems supplied
by the national water company, Korea
Water Resources Corporation (Kwater), full cost recovery was achieved
by 2004. Tariffs still fall short of actual
costs for sewage treatment. During
1997-2004 the central government
paid 53% of the total investment costs
for sewage treatment, using proceeds
from the national liquor tax.
Source: OECD forthcoming.

Table 4.4

Commitments of official development assistance
from bilateral and multilateral agencies, 2004-06

(US$ millions)
Sector
Water transport

2004

2005

2006

416

503

304

Hydropower plants

755

480

652

Agricultural water resources

608

830

790

Water supply and sanitation

3,127

4,405

3,879

Total water sector
Total all sectors
Water sector as share of all sectors (%)
Source: OECD, DCD/DAC 2007.

64

4,951

6,218

5,625

79,431

107,078

104,369

6.2

5.8

5.4

during the 1970s and 1980s but decreased
during the 1990s, with less aid for large
infrastructure, before rising again in 2000
(see figure 4.8).
Support from multilateral agencies remained relatively stagnant from the 1970s
– when it was about the same as bilateral
assistance – until about 2000, when both
sources of financial aid began to increase.
But it still remained substantially less than
official development assistance from bilateral sources.
Leaders at the meeting of the G-8 in
Evian, France, in June 2002 made a commitment to give priority to the water
sector. Official development assistance
increased substantially in the years immediately thereafter. While the amount
going to the water supply and sanitation
sector increased, aid to the other water
sectors remained relatively unchanged
(table 4.4). However, overall lending for
water remained at less than 6% of total
official development assistance, and the
share of total lending declined.
External assistance from philanthropic
sources, such as foundations and religious groups, highlights an awareness of
the importance of water and sanitation.
Although these funds are generally much
lower than those from multilateral and
bilateral sources, a few of the largest foundations (for example, the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation) can rival some bilateral
sources.

Recent financing initiatives – a new
financing agenda
Over the last five years there have been
several key initiatives on shaping the agenda of international water financing, notably the World Panel on Financing Water
Infrastructure (chaired by Michel Camdessus), the Task Force on Financing Water
for All (chaired by Angel Gurria) and the
UN Secretary-General’s Advisory Board on
Water and Sanitation (UNSGAB). Financing Water for All, the report of the World
Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure,
addresses the financial architecture of
the global water sector, including many
proposals to improve its governance.35 The
Gurria task force report focuses on factors influencing the demand for finance
and the scope for developing the financial
capacity of subnational entities.36 The
UNSGAB stresses the importance of capacity building, especially in local authorities,
and inspired creation of the Global Water
Operators Partnership Alliance for peer
group support.37
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Policies, laws and finance
These initiatives occurred while domestic
savings in emerging market economies
were growing rapidly and local capital
markets were developing. Sharp rises in
the price of oil and other primary commodities had enriched producer countries
and transformed their public finances,
while causing budgetary problems in
primary-commodity-importing countries. International commercial finance
for water has become sharply polarized.
Lenders and portfolio38 investors have
eagerly pursued opportunities in sound
water companies, solvent municipalities
and profitable projects (such as desalination), but many countries and municipalities have been relegated to financial
backwaters.

and finance. Among recently created
finance facilities that operate at this
level are the African Water Facility,
the EU Water Facility and the Rural
Water Supply and Sanitation Initiative of the African Development
Bank.
•

Developing guarantees and risk-sharing
instruments. Guarantees and other
forms of credit enhancement can lift
local borrowers and bond issuers over
the critical threshold of creditworthiness and mitigate specific risks.
International financial institutions
and other agencies have improved
their capacity for risk sharing, and
several new bodies have been formed
specifically for this purpose (such as
GuarantCo).40

•

Developing local capital markets and
local-currency finance. A number of
countries (such as India and South Africa, some countries in Latin America
and South-East and East Asia) have
municipalities and utilities with sufficient financial standing to attract loan
finance or to issue their own bonds. A
significant proportion of the unserved
populations (almost a half for water
and more than a third for sanitation)
live in countries classified as middle
income, with the potential to raise
subsovereign finance of this type.

•

Increasing role of small-scale local water
providers. It is estimated that smallscale providers serve 25% of the urban
population in Latin America and East
Asia and 50% in Africa and South East
Asia.41

•

Instituting tariff reform and the principle of sustainable cost recovery. In most
cases tariffs will be the main source
of revenue for covering the recurrent
costs of water services, although full
cost recovery through tariffs is rarely
feasible in poor countries. Sustainable
cost recovery focuses on securing all
three of the basic sources of revenue
for water and sanitation services
(tariffs, taxes and external aid) as predictable sources of revenue for water
operators, which can be used to leverage other sources of funding.

•

Paying for environmental services.
­Environmental goods and services
take many forms, including potable
water supply, irrigation water, flood
control benefits, water for transportation and aesthetic benefits. Payment

Recent policy developments
A number of policies and financing tools
have been developed to respond to this
new agenda:39
•

Increasing commitments of official development assistance for water – and in
more user-friendly forms. International
aid for water has bottomed out and
commitments are starting to rise, led
by a few donor agencies.

•

Using official development assistance
to leverage other financial sources. An
approach that has made a promising
beginning in Kenya and elsewhere is
to use output-based aid to promote
microfinance.

•

Establishing national water financing
strategies. Governments in Africa,
Eastern Europe and the Caucasus and
Central Asia and elsewhere are producing coherent financing strategies,
supported by programmes of the Organisation for Economic Co-­operation
and Development, the EU Water
Institute, the World Bank Water and
Sanitation Program and other agencies
and programmes.

•

Promoting finance to subsovereign entities. In most countries responsibility for water services is devolved to
subsovereign layers of administration.
Donors have been adapting their
products and procedures to facilitate
the provision of finance to subsovereign agencies.

•

Establishing facilities to provide finance
at decentralized levels. Much of the
development of household water
and sanitation services arises from
community initiatives, organization

Water in a changing world

1

Lenders and
investors
have pursued
opportunities
in sound water
companies, solvent
municipalities
and profitable
projects, but many
countries and
municipalities have
been relegated
to financial
backwaters

65

PART

1

Chapter 4
systems for such environmental
services are easier to implement and
administer for more visible and direct
uses (such as admission costs for recreational uses).

Challenges
Developing and managing water resources to meet human needs and maintain essential ecosystems entail financial costs.
The challenge is both to have more funds
flow to the water sector and to ensure its
financial sustainability. Sound, strategic
financial planning is needed to balance

Notes
1.

United Nations 1945.

2.

Transboundary Freshwater Dispute
Database (www.transboundarywaters.
orst.edu).

3.

www.unece.org/env/water/.

4.

This section draws on Boelens 2008.

5.

Government of Australia 2008.

6.

Hendry 2008.

7.

See von Benda-Beckmann, von BendaBeckmann, and Spiertz 1998.

8.

Cosgrove and Rijsberman 2000, p. 64.

9.

Garces-Restrepo, Vermillion, and Muñoz
2007.

10. Garces-Restrepo, Vermillion, and Muñoz
2007.
11. Transparency International 2008.
12. Stålgren 2006.
13. Transparency International 2008.
14. Transparency International 2008.
15. ASCE 2008.
16. WBCSD 2005.
17. United Nations 2008, p. vii.
18. Global Water Intelligence 2004.
19. EAP Task Force 2007.
20. Winpenny 2008.
21. Rees, Winpenny, and Hall 2008.
22. World Commission of Dams 2000.
23. Hutton and Haller 2004.
24. UN-Water 2008.
25. UN-Water 2008.
26. Olivier 2007.
27. UNDP 2006.
28. Bosworth et al. 2002.
29. Kraemer et al. 2003.
30. World Commission on Dams 2000.
31. UNDP 2006.
32. Kariuki and Schwartz 2005.
33. McGranahan and Owen 2006.
34. UNDP 2006.
35. Winpenny 2003.

66

funding requirements with cost-effective
management that focuses on demand
as well as supply. Full cost recovery has
been advocated as a solution to the water
financing crisis for many years. In the
real world, however, water resources
management and services delivery always
receive some level of subsidy. Keeping
in mind the obligation to meet the basic
water services needs of all, the challenge
for policy-­makers is to make decisions
about the acceptable trade-offs among
different objectives and about who bears
the costs.

36. van Hofwegan and Task Force on
Financing Water for All 2006.
37. UNSGAB 2006.
38. Purchase of a fixed-interest security,
such as a bond, or equity shares giving
less than 10% ownership of a company.
39. For a full description of these and other
policies and tools, see Winpenny 2003
and van Hofwegen and Task Force on
Financing Water for All 2006.
40. Winpenny 2005.
41. Dardenne 2006; McIntosh 2003.

References
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2004.
Evaluation Highlights of 2003. Manila,
Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers). 2008. 2005 Report Card on
America’s Infrastructure. 2008 Update.
American Society of Civil Engineers.
www.asce.org/reportcard/2005/index.
cfm.
Boelens, R. 2008. The Rules of the Game
and the Game of the Rules: Normalization and Resistance in Andean Water
Control. PhD diss., Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
Bosworth, B., G. Cornish, C. Perry, and F.
van Steenbergen. 2002. Water Charging in Irrigated Agriculture: Lessons
from the Literature. Report OD 145, HR
Wallingford, Ltd., Wallingford, UK. www.
dfid-kar-water.net/w5outputs/electronic_
outputs/od145.pdf.
CEC (Commission of the European Communities). 2007. Towards Sustainable
Water Management in the European
Union – First Stage in the Implementation of the Water Framework Directive
2000/60/EC. Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council [SEC(2007) 362]
[SEC(2007) 363], Brussels.
Cosgrove, W., and F. Rijsberman. 2000.
World Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. London: Earthscan.

Dardenne, B. 2006. The Role of the Private
Sector in Peri-urban or Rural Water Services
in Emerging Countries. ENV/EPOC/GF/
SD(2006)2. Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Environment Directorate, Paris.
EAP Task Force for the Implementation of
the Environmental Action Program for
Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central
Asia. 2007. Financing Water Supply
and Sanitation in EECCA Countries and
Progress in Achieving the Water-Related
Millennium Development Goals. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
European Parliament and Council. 2000.
Directive 2000/60/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23
October 2000: Establishing a Framework for Community Action in the Field
of Water Policy. Official Journal of the
European Communities 22 (12). http://
eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=OJ:L:2000:327:0001:0072:EN:
PDF.
Garces-Restrepo, C., D. Vermillion, and
G. Muñoz. 2007 Irrigation Management
Transfer: Worldwide Efforts and Results.
FAO Water Reports No. 32. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
Global Water Intelligence. 2004. Tariffs:
Half Way There. Oxford, UK: Global
Water Intelligence.
Government of Australia. 2008. Water Act
2007. Act 137. C2007A00137. www.
comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/
Act1.nsf/0/80C5168EF63926C2CA2574
1200026703/$file/1372007.pdf.
Hendry, S. 2008. Analytical Framework for
National Water Law Reform/Analytical
Framework for Reform of Water Services
Law. PhD diss., University of Dundee,
United Kingdom.
Hutton, Guy, and Laurence Haller. 2004.
Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of
Water and Sanitation Improvements at
the Global Level. Geneva: World Health
Organization.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Policies, laws and finance
Kariuki, M., and J. Schwartz. 2005. SmallScale Private Service Providers of Water
Supply and Electricity. World Bank Working Paper 074, World Bank, Washington,
DC.
Kraemer, R. A., Z. G. Castro, R. S. da
Motta, and C. Russell. 2003. Economic
Instruments for Water Management:
Experiences from Europe and Implications
for Latin America and the Caribbean.
Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
Marin, Philippe. 2009. Public-Private
Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities:
A Review of Experiences in Developing
Countries. Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility and World Bank, Washington, DC.
McGranahan, G., and D. L. Owen. 2006.
Local Water and Sanitation Companies
and the Urban Poor. Human Settlements
Discussion Paper (Water 04). London:
International Institute for Environment
and Development.
McIntosh. A. C. 2003. Asian Water Supplies:
Reaching the Urban Poor. Manila: Asian
Development Bank, and London: International Water Association.
Moss, J., G. Wolff, G. Gladden, and E. Guttieriez. 2003. Valuing Water for Better
Governance: How to Promote Dialogue
to Balance Social, Environmental, and
Economic Values. White paper for the
Business and Industry CEO Panel for
Water. Presented at the CEO plenary
session of the Third World Water Forum,
10 March, Osaka, Japan. www.wbcsd.
org/DocRoot/8d4hpTlQ6FCa4jn7Y5Cl/
Valuing_water_report.pdf.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). Forthcoming. Strategic Financial Planning for
Water Supply and Sanitation [provisional
title]. Paris: Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development)-DAC
(Development Assistance Committee). 2008. Measuring Aid to Water
Supply and Sanitation, Statistics on
Aid to the Water Sector. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, Paris. www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/32/37/41750670.pdf.
OECD, DCD/DAC (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,

Water in a changing world

Development Co-operation Directorate, Development Assistance Committee). 2007. Development Database on
Aid Activities: Creditor Reporting System:
Aid Activities in Support of Water Supply
and Sanitation. Paris. www.oecd.org/
document/0/0,2340,en_2649_34447
_37679488_1_1_1_1,00.html.
Olivier, A. 2007. Affordability: Principles and
Practice. Presentation to Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development
Expert Meeting on Sustainable Financing
for Affordable Water Services: From Theory
to Practice, 14-15 November, Paris.
Owen, David Lloyd. 2006. Financing Water
and Wastewater to 2025: From Necessity
to Sustainability. New York: Thomson
Financial.
Queensland Government. 2000. Water
Act 2000. Act 34. Brisbane, Queensland.
www.legislation.qld.gov.au/LEGISLTN/
ACTS/2000/00AC034.pdf.
Rees, J., J.Winpenny, and A. Hall. 2008.
Water Financing and Governance. GWP
Technical Committee, Background Paper
12, Global Water Partnership.
Roper, H., C. Sayers, and A. Smith. 2006.
Stranded Irrigation Assets. Staff Working
Paper, Australian Government Productivity Commission, Melbourne. www.
pc.gov.au/research/staffworkingpaper/
strandedirrigation
Stålgren, P. 2006. Worlds of Water: Worlds
Apart. How Targeted Domestic Actors
Transform International Regimes. Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.
Transparency International. 2008. Global
Corruption Report 2008: Corruption in the
Water Sector. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006: Beyond Scarcity: Power,
Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
———. 2008. Creating Value for All: Strategies
for Doing Business with the Poor. New York:
United Nations Development Programme.
United Nations. 1945. Statute of the
International Court of Justice. Charter of
the United Nations. United Nations, New
York. www.icj-cij.org/documents/index.
php?p1=4&p2=2&p3=0.
———. 2008. World Economic and Social Survey 2008: Overcoming Economic Insecu-

1

rity. New York: Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, United Nations.
UNSGAB (United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory Board on Water and
Sanitation). 2006. Hashimoto Action
Plan (formerly known as The Compendium of Actions). United Nations Secretary
General’s Advisory Board on Water and
Sanitation, New York.
UN-Water. 2008. UN-Water Global Annual
Assessment of Sanitation and DrinkingWater (GLAAS): 2008 Pilot – Testing a
New Reporting Approach. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
van Hofwegan, Paul, and Task Force on Financing Water for All. 2006. Enhancing
Access to Finance for Local Governments:
Financing Water for Agriculture. Chaired
by Angel Gurria. Marseille, France: World
Water Council.
von Benda-Beckmann, K., F. von BendaBeckmann, and J. Spiertz. 1998. Equity
and Legal Pluralism: Taking Customary
Law into Account in Natural Resource
Policies. In Searching for Equity: Conceptions of Justice and Equity in Peasant Irrigation, ed. R. Boelens and G. Dávila. Assen,
The Netherlands: Van Gorcum.
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 2005. Water
Facts and Trends. World Business Council
on Sustainable Development, Washington, DC.
WCD (World Commission of Dams).
2000. Dams and Development: A New
Framework for Decision-Making. London:
Earthscan.
Winpenny, James. 2003. Financing Water
For All. Report of the World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure, chaired by
Michel Camdessus. Kyoto: World Water
Council, 3rd World Water Forum, and
Global Water Partnership.
———. 2005. Guaranteeing Development?
The Impact of Financial Guarantees. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, Development Centre
Studies, Paris.
———. 2008. Financing Strategies for Water
Supply and Sanitation: A Report from the
OECD Task Team on Sustainable Financing to Ensure Affordable Access to Water
Supply and Sanitation. COM/ENV/EPOC/
DCD/DAC(2008)4. Paris: OECD Environment Directorate and OECD Development Co-operation Directorate.

67

PART

1

Chapter 5
Climate change
and possible
futures
Authors: Richard Connor, Gilberto Gallopín, Molly Hellmuth and Walter Rast
Contributors: Joeseph Alcamo, BertJan Heij and World Water
Assessment Programme Expert Group on Scenarios
Coordinator: Tim Kasten (UNEP)
Facilitator: Richard Connor

Key messages
There is evidence that the global climate is changing. The main
impacts of climate change on humans and the environment
occur through water.
Climate change is a fundamental driver of changes in water resources and an additional stressor through its effects on other external drivers.
Policies and practices for mitigating climate change or adapting
to it can have impacts on water resources, and the way we manage water can affect the climate.
Chapters 2-4 have described how external
drivers exert pressure on water resources.
These drivers of change are strongly interconnected, creating complex challenges
and opportunities for water managers
and decision-makers. Apart from extreme
events (such as droughts and floods),
climate change is seldom the main stressor
on sustainable development, although the
direct and indirect impacts of increasing
climate variability can impede and even
reverse development gains (see figure 5.1
for a depiction of climate change processes, characteristics and major threats).
Climate change may not fundamentally
alter most of the world’s water challenges,
but as an additional stressor it makes
achieving solutions more pressing.

drivers, influencing how much water we
need. Climate change can directly affect
the hydrologic cycle and, through it, the
quantity and quality of water resources
(see chapter 11). It can lower minimum
flows in rivers, affecting water availability
and quality for its flora and fauna and for
drinking water intake, energy production (hydropower), thermal plant cooling
and navigation. Anthropogenic climate
change can also directly affect demand for
water, when demand for crops increases in
certain seasons, for instance (see chapter 7
for the implications of climate change on
uncertainty in agriculture). The other drivers, by contrast, exert pressure on various
water use sectors that, in turn, affect water
resources.

All of the potential impacts of climate­related disasters, including economic
losses, health problems and environmental
disruptions, will also affect – and be affected by – water.

Managing water has always been about
managing naturally occurring variability.
Climate change threatens to make this
variability greater, shifting and intensifying the extremes, and introduces greater
uncertainty in the quantity and quality
of supply over the long term (see part 3).
More subtly, climate change may alter the
timing, magnitude and duration of precipitation events, which could pose problems

Climate change differs from the other
drivers. It is the only supply-side driver,
ultimately determining how much water
we have; the other drivers are demand-side
68

World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Climate change and possible futures

Figure 5.1

Climate change: processes, characteristics and threats

Main climate characteristics

Changes in
precipitation
Ice cap
melting

Clouds

Climate change processes

Carbon
cycle
disturbances

Average
temperature
rise
“global
warming”

Salinity
Ocean
circulation
upheaval

Gulf Stream

Abrupt modification
climate
change Europe
cooling

(enhanced)
Greenhouse
effect

Human activities
Increase in
impermeable
surface

Sea level
rise

Urbanization

Carbon
dioxide

Cyclones

Nitrous
oxide
Methane

Land use
changes
Deforestation

Water
temperature

A spanner in
the climate wheel

Floods
Heat
waves

Greenhouse
gas emissions

Droughts

Diseases
spread

Disasters
Biodiversity
losses

Transport

Fossil fuel
burning

Casualties

Agriculture

Heating

Loss of
traditional
lifestyles

Famines

Industry

Economic
losses

Major threats

Source: Based on UNFCCC 2007a.

for the sustainability of water supplies and
the continuity of treatment.

interlinking pressures into account in
identifying scenarios, or ‘possible futures’.

The decisions and policies put in place
today for mitigation (such as reducing
greenhouse gas emissions, applying clean
technologies and protecting forests) and
adaptation (such as expansion of rain­water storage and water conservation practices) can have profound consequences
for water supply and demand both today
and over the long term.1 Climate change
also adds to the uncertainty surrounding
all the other drivers. Thus, examining
climate change forces considerations of the
interconnectedness of all the drivers. This
chapter focuses on the pressures that climate change can exert on the other drivers
and outlines a process for taking these

The influence of climate change
on the other drivers of change

Water in a changing world

The relationships between climate change
and the other drivers are complex and
interwoven. This section summarizes the
influence of climate change on the other
five major drivers: demographic processes,
economic growth, social change, technological innovation and policies, laws and
finance.

Demographic processes
The impacts of anthropogenic climate
change, including increased water scarcity and flooding and accelerated glacial
69

PART

1

Chapter 5C

Weather-related
disasters such
as floods and
droughts are
undermining
economic
development
in many of the
world’s least
developed
countries, causing
human suffering
and disrupting
economic activities

Figure 5.2

melting and sea level rise, have the
potential to accelerate human migration.
Drought, desertification and other forms
of water scarcity are already estimated to
affect as many as one-third of the world’s
people and are predicted to worsen.

that substantial population displacements
will take place within the next 30-50
years, particularly in coastal zones. All of
these climate change refugees will require
shelter, water and sanitation services.

The recent Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) report notes that
millions of people in densely populated
low-lying coastal areas risk increasing
exposure to flooding by storm surges
over the 21st century.2 The IPCC expects
sea level rise to exacerbate floods, storm
surges, erosion and other coastal hazards.
Global warming can expand the endemic
zones of water-related infectious diseases
like dengue, malaria and schistosomiasis,
making it increasingly difficult for people
to remain in affected areas. Recurring
floods or storm surges, if not managed
effectively, could drive large numbers of
people permanently from their homes.
Current IPCC projections of rising temperatures and sea levels and increased
intensity of droughts and storms suggest

Climate change and its accompanying risks
have direct and indirect effects on development and economic growth. Sea level rise,
climate variability and weather extremes
such as heat waves, floods and droughts
are severe, direct threats to human life and
property (see chapter 12). Tackling them
requires mobilizing resources that may
have to be reallocated from other investments. Their damage can substantially
harm a country’s gross domestic product
(GDP). Economic performance is especially
affected in developing countries because of
their high and direct dependence on natural resources, notably rain-fed agriculture
(see chapter 7), and their inadequate access
to economic and technological resources.

GDP growth tracks rainfall variability in
Ethiopia (1983-2000) and Tanzania (1989-99)

Ethiopia
GDP growth (percent)

Rainfall variability (percent deviation from the mean)

8

60
40

6
20
4

0
–20

2

–40
–60

0
1983

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Tanzania
GDP growth (percent)

Rainfall variability (percent deviation from the mean)
20

30
20

10
10
0

0

–10

–10

–20
–20

–30
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Source: Based on van Aalst, Hellmuth, and Ponzi 2007.

70

1996

1997

1998

1999

Economic growth

Adverse climate conditions such as increased floods and droughts can also result
in the underperformance of investments.
Climate uncertainty and unpredictability
can be powerful barriers to investments,
and ultimately to economic growth, even
in years when climate conditions are
favourable. The changing climate also
complicates infrastructure design and
long-term investment planning. And internal and cross-border migration, driven by
growing pressure on natural resources, can
create tension among population groups
and between countries.3
There is clear evidence of a relationship
between climate variability and economic
performance in countries in which agriculture is a large share of GDP, as in Ethiopia
and Tanzania (figure 5.2). Evidence also
suggests a strong relationship between
economic development and vulnerability
to disaster. Across developing countries
losses associated with disasters are so large
as to undermine development and poverty
reduction goals. And yet climate risks are
seldom adequately considered in infrastructure designs, agriculture investments
and water management plans.
Weather-related disasters such as floods
and droughts are undermining economic
development in many of the world’s least
developed countries, causing human
suffering (see table 12.1 in chapter 12)
and disrupting economic activities (table
5.1). And substantial financial and other
development resources are being diverted
each year to post-disaster relief, emergency
World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Climate change and possible futures
assistance, reconstruction and rehabilitation. Poorly managed climate risks also
exact an indirect toll by discouraging
private investment. With climate change
and inadequate climate risk management,
investors lack the reliable infrastructure,
predictable human resources and stable
markets needed to promote investment.
An estimated 40% of development investments are currently at risk, according to
analyses by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD).4
These analyses indicate that while many
development efforts contribute to reducing vulnerability to climate variability and
change, climate risks are seldom explicitly
factored into development projects and
programmes. Similar issues affect sector
and national development strategies.
The potential impacts of climate change
on the global economy received international attention with the release of The
Stern Review in 2006.5 It concluded that by
2050 extreme weather could reduce global
GDP by 1% and that, unabated, climate
change could cost the world at least 5% in
GDP each year. If even more dramatic predictions come to pass, the cost could rise
to more than 20% of GDP. Such declines
could in turn lead to an overall drop in official development assistance, exacerbating
the struggle of poor people and countries
to adapt and develop their water resources.
Some other estimates of the costs of adapting to climate change are in box 5.1.

Table 5.1

Economic impacts of flood and drought in Kenya,
1997-2000
Costs
($ millions)

Impact area
1997-98 El Niño flood impact
Transport infrastructure
Health sector
Water supply infrastructure
Total flood impact

777

89

56

6

45

5

878

Share of GDP 1997-98 (percent)

11

1998-2000 La Niña drought impacts
1,400

58

Hydropower

Industrial production

640

26

Agricultural production

240

10

Livestock

137

6

Total drought impact

2,417

Share of GDP 1998-2000 (percent)

16

Source: World Bank 2004.

Box 5.1

The cost of adapting to climate change

Estimates of the costs of climate change
impacts vary because they depend
on future greenhouse gas emissions,
mitigation measures and assumptions
about anthropogenic climate change itself and about how effectively countries
will adapt to it. The following are some
estimates of the costs of adaptation for
developing countries:
•

Social change

World Bank estimates of the
additional costs to adapt or
climate-proof new investments
range from $9 to $41 billion a
year. And a recent update by the
United Nations Development
Programme put the mid-range of
the costs of adaptation at about
$37 billion a year in 2015.

at $28-$67 billion and as high as
$100 billion a year several decades from now. Estimates of the
additional investments needed
in water supply infrastructure in
2030 are $11 billion, 85% of it in
developing countries.
•

Oxfam estimates the current costs
of adaptation to climate change
for all developing countries at
more than $50 billion a year.

Unlike the more obvious effects of climate
change on demographic processes or the
global economy, the additional pressures
that climate change is likely to exert on
social change are often more subtle. Managing climate-related risk is a key enabler
of development. Identifying and reducing
the risks associated with climate-related
­hazards – including droughts, floods,
cyclones, rising sea levels and extreme
temperatures – can help to protect people,
livelihoods and assets, thereby promoting
the achievement of economic development goals.

unless societal exposure and vulnerability
are reduced.

Climate change and greater climate variability will increasingly affect the poorest
and most marginalized groups, making
them even more vulnerable to the impacts
of climate change. Climate uncertainty –
the inability to anticipate climate extremes
– hurts investment and innovation and
limits the success of other development
interventions. In inhabited hazard-prone
areas disasters and losses are inevitable

The most likely societal effects of climate
change will come from changes in lifestyle
and consumption patterns. Reflecting
human needs and wants, changes in lifestyle and consumption patterns are among
the most important drivers of change (see
chapter 2). In emerging market economies
rising standards of living are boosting
demand for high-level goods and services,
many with a large ecological and water

Water in a changing world

Share of total
(percent)

•

The United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
estimates additional investments
for adaptation to climate change

While there is considerable debate
about these estimates, they provide
useful order-of-magnitude numbers
for assessing resources available for adaptation. Current Global Environment
Facility funds (about $160 million) are
several orders of magnitude too little
to meet these projected needs.
Source: World Bank 2006; UNDP 2007;
UNFCCC 2007b; Oxfam 2007.

71

PART

1

Chapter 5C

Some interventions
in the water
system might be
counterproductive
when evaluated in
terms of mitigation
of climate change

footprint. In the world’s richest countries,
meanwhile, growing awareness of climate
change is slowly inducing people to alter
their lifestyles and live in a more sustainable manner. Large cars are being replaced
by smaller, more energy-efficient vehicles
in some places, and governments are offering subsidies for purchasing energy‑efficient appliances. But these changes alone
are unlikely to substantially counteract the
pressure from rising living standards in
emerging market economies.

Technological innovation
Climate change will be a major driver of
technological innovation and transfer.6
Massive amounts of new investments will
be required over the next 30 years to meet
the growing energy needs of developing countries. Investments in adaptation
will be necessary to safeguard vulnerable
groups and infrastructure.
The relationship between climate change
mitigation measures and water can be reciprocal. Mitigation measures can adversely influence the quantity and condition
of water resources and their management,
while some water management policies
and measures can increase greenhouse gas
emissions and affect other sectoral mitigation measures. Thus, interventions in the
water system might be counterproductive
when evaluated in terms of mitigation of
climate change.
For example, many developed countries
are shifting energy production from thermal energy plants that burn fossil fuels
and emit large quantities of greenhouse
gases to ‘clean’ energy sources. Thus,
significant increases in the development
of hydroelectric installations, a source of
clean electricity, could be anticipated as

Box 5.2

Micro-hydro plants in Nepal are expected to
provide electricity access to 142,000 households
and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions

Nepal has vast hydro resources.
And while only about 27% of rural
households are connected to a power
grid (the urban share is 90%), off-grid
power generated by micro-hydro
plants provides many rural households
with electricity for lighting, milling
and other needs. The generating
capacity of these plants varies from 5
to 500 kilowatts.
Through a project supported by the
World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme and the governments of Denmark and Norway,

72

micro-hydro plants are being installed
for local communities by prequalified private companies that receive
subsidies and technical assistance.
Installation of micro-hydro plants will
be phased in until 2011. The microhydro power plants, which qualify for
emission reduction credits under the
Clean Development Mechanism, will
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
replacing diesel fuel used for lighting
and milling.
Source: http://go.worldbank.org/
9G19LTLEH0.

the global community unites to combat
climate change, although in many developed countries most of the ‘best’ sites for
hydropower installations have already
been developed (see map 7.6 in chapter
7). Some of the climate-­related benefits of
hydropower are illustrated in box 5.2.
However, there is evidence that hydroelectricity generation can also generate
considerable amounts of greenhouse gases,
which are released from sediment and
decaying organic matter at the bottom
waters of reservoirs.7 Artificially flooded
reservoirs of sufficient depth can experience anaerobic conditions as organic
matter decomposes and, when the bottom
waters are disturbed, emits large quantities of methane and other greenhouse
gases. The problem arises most frequently
in warmer climates, where reservoirs are
prone to stratification and where there is
year-round algal growth.
Biofuels, an alternative to fossil fuels in
transport, are another means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Higher oil
prices in recent years have made bioenergy
more competitive. World Energy Outlook
2006 projected an average rate of growth
of bioenergy production of 7% a year.8 By
2030 biofuels are expected to meet 4% of
road-transport fuel demand worldwide,
up from 1% today. But careful attention
also must be given to minimizing negative externalities associated with producing bioenergy, such as upward pressure
on food prices and the impact on food
security.9
Developing countries will need to rely
on technology development and transfer
in mitigating and adapting to climate
change. That will require removing obstacles to technology transfer and providing
incentives for accelerating and scaling
up transfers, along with cooperating on
research and development (see chapter 3).
According to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), most technologies for adapting to climate change are already available
in developing countries, and examples of
successful implementation and operation
abound, from coastal revetment to vaccination programmes.10

Policies, laws and finance
Climate change can stress political governance structures by increasing management
and budget requirements for public services to mitigate climate change or to cope
with its impacts, including public health
care (box 5.3), disaster risk reduction and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Climate change and possible futures
public security. As stress mounts, the
resilience of already unstable social and
political structures lessens, especially in
countries with limited resources. At the
international level pressures build on
governance systems to combat climate
change, mainly through the UNFCCC and
growing public awareness.
Most efforts have focused on mitigation
strategies, which are especially important
for policies in energy (a major water use
sector), international trade and transportation. In many countries climate change
issues fall under the authority of the ministry for environment or natural resources.
But as regional carbon trading markets
emerge and as economies become ever
more carbon-constrained, the ministries of
finance and planning will need to become
more directly involved.
Most governance structures today are too
weak to tackle current water problems,
much less prepare for emerging problems,
including climate change. And there is
still very little evidence about which types
of governance responses work in which
contexts and what their impacts are on
water equity, efficiency and sustainability.
Water reforms in most countries have not
considered the implications of climate
change or other major drivers of water use
and the need for long-term planning.
Effective funding mechanisms are lacking
for developing countries to support adaptation to climate change, which affects
development at many levels. In Africa the
impacts of climate change are expected
to range from increased energy shortages, reduced agricultural production,
worsening food security and malnutrition to the increasing spread of disease,
more humanitarian emergencies, growing
migratory pressures and increased risks
of conflict over scarce land and water
resources. Africa is least able to meet the
costs of adapting to these impacts, yet
it receives the least from current carbon
finance mechanisms. Its governance
structures and capacity are not ready for
the inter­sectoral action that adaptation
requires.11
Supporting developing country efforts to
design adaptation strategies also requires
better analysis. Information is needed at
the local level, incorporating country­specific characteristics and sociocultural
and economic conditions. At the macrolevel information on both rich and poor
countries is required to support international negotiations and to identify
Water in a changing world

Box 5.3

1

Health and climate change

Climate change can affect health
through multiple pathways, such as
greater frequency and intensity of
heat waves, fewer cold-related illnesses, increased floods and droughts,
changes in the distribution of vectorborne diseases and effects on the risk
of disasters and malnutrition. The
overall balance of impacts on health
is likely to be negative, and populations in low-income countries are
likely to be particularly vulnerable to
the adverse effects. However, many

of the projected impacts of climate
change on health are avoidable.
Climate change is expected to exacerbate some health problems rather
than cause new diseases to emerge.
Strengthening public health prevention strategies, including improving
water supply and sanitation services
and disease surveillance, would be an
essential part of any effective response.
Source: Haines et al. 2006; CampbellLendrum, Corvelan, and Neira 2007.

the overall costs of adapting to climate
change.

Challenges for the impact of climate
change on water resources and
management
One of the most pressing challenges of climate change is addressing the vulnerability of human populations, particularly the
poor, to the impacts of extreme hydrologic
events, such as floods, storm surges and
droughts. Over the longer term the effects
of incremental climate change are likely
to influence decisions about food security,
energy security and land use, all with vital
implications for water resources and management and environmental sustainability
(see chapter 7). In this context climate
change can intensify existing pressures,
thereby increasing risk, vulnerability and
uncertainty.
For water managers anthropogenic climate
change poses a new set of challenges –
because they can no longer plan, design
and operate hydrologic systems based on
historical statistics. Climate change means
learning to manage under increased
uncertainty. Climate change is a new risk
to be taken into account in policy development, planning and operations at the
global, basin, national, local and company
levels. It calls for increasing use of ‘climate
knowledge’ to better understand climate
variability at different time scales, to assess
the socioeconomic impacts observed in
the past, to monitor current conditions of
relevant environmental factors (climate,
vegetation, water, diseases) and to provide
the best possible information on future
climate, from seasons to decades, for specific decisions and activities. Addressing
the threats and opportunities of climate
change and its impacts on water resources
and supplies is vital for even the most
remote rural areas as part of a broader
developmental agenda.
73

PART

1

the water
drivers interact
and can have
even more of an
impact on future
water resources
collectively
than they can
individually

Chapter 5C
Although water is an important component in most energy-generating processes,
its role in climate change mitigation policy
is minor. Where water and climate change
are most strongly linked is in adaptation
policy, which functions in highly dynamic
hydrologic, social, economic and demographic contexts. For water adaptation
measures to be effective, however, there
must be complementary climate change
mitigation measures outside the water
sector.

Scenarios, which are sets of equally plausible futures, differ from forecasts, which
are individual interpretations of a most
probable future based on extrapolation of
the best available information. Scenarios
are not forecasts. Because the real world
is so complex, forecasts are often wrong –
especially those involving a time horizon
of 20 years or more. Scenarios provide a
means of looking beyond the water sector
in search for an adequate causal understanding of different water issues.

Because climate variability and change affect all the major water drivers, adaptation
measures are needed in all sectors. Over
the long term adaptation means applying
a long-term, climate-focused approach
to existing policies and programmes. But
because the poor are the most vulnerable
and the least able to cope with change, it
is particularly important to strengthen the
link between adaptation to climate change
and economic development – a difficult
challenge. Over the shorter term the best
approach might be to manage climate
variability by prioritizing risk-reduction
strategies and reinforcing the capacity of
hydrometeorological services to provide
information for development needs.

Scenarios can contribute to several goals in
the pursuit of sustainable water resources:
•

The need for a long-term view. A longterm view of water for sustainable
development requires taking into
account the slow unfolding of some
hydrologic, environmental and social
processes and allowing time for waterworks investments and water mitigation schemes to yield results.

•

The need to make decisions in a context
of high uncertainty. Decision-makers in
the water sector must often address
water management issues against a
background of rapidly changing environmental conditions and increasing
uncertainty. The uncertainty results
from both a limited understanding of
human and ecological processes and
the intrinsic indeterminism of complex dynamic systems. Further, water
resources futures depend on future
human choices, which are unknown.

•

The need to include non-quantifiable
factors. The world’s water system
includes and is influenced by many
factors that are difficult to quantify
(such as cultural and political variables and processes), as well as factors
that can be quantified and modelled
mathematically (such as hydrologic
and climatological dynamics and economic factors). Qualitative scenario
analyses can provide insight into
these factors that simulation models
cannot.

•

The need for integration and breadth.
Water resources must be viewed holistically, considering both their natural
state and the need to balance competing demands – domestic, agricultural,
industrial and environmental – to
ensure sustainability. Decisions on
land use can affect the availability and
condition of water resources, while
decisions about water resources can
also affect the environment and land

Each country will face its own challenges
and must determine how to respond in
the short, medium and long run. With
multiple challenges but limited financial
and natural resources and capacities, countries will need to make hard choices about
water use and allocation.
There tends to be a push and pull effect
between identifying adaptation needs
based on a climate change rationale and
anchoring response options in baseline
development activities. This separation
between climate adaptation and development is artificial. Governments need to
design climate-smart development policies
and programmes, in part by strengthening
sectoral capacities.

Identifying possible futures: the
need for scenarios
Each of the water drivers is dynamic and
continues to evolve, as do the direct and
indirect pressures they exert on water
resources. Thus, it is difficult to draw a
comprehensive picture of the future by
examining each driver independently. The
drivers interact and can have even more of
an impact on future water resources collectively than they can individually. Future
scenarios that consider these interactions
offer a more holistic picture.
74

World Water Development Report 3

PART

1

Climate change and possible futures
use. Decisions about economic and
social futures can affect hydrology
and ecosystems. And decisions at the
international, national and local levels
are connected. Sustainable management of water resources requires
systemic, integrated decision-making
that recognizes the interdependence
of decisions; scenarios are particularly
helpful for this purpose.
•

•

•

The need for perspective. Qualitative
scenarios provide guidance, perspective and context for computer models
and sectoral studies, while models
and studies provide consistency and
feasibility checks for some elements of
water scenarios, as well as numerical
estimates of the modelled variables.
Further, global scenarios provide a
context for scenarios on a smaller
geographic scale (local, watershed,
national or regional). Many important
changes in a river basin are determined by factors from outside the
study area.
The need to organize understanding
for decision-making. Decision-makers
may have difficulty identifying the
elements from different studies that
are most relevant for their decisions.
Scenarios are developed with decisionmaking in mind. They are constructed
to focus attention on causal processes
and decision points, the unfolding of
alternatives and the branching points
at which human actions can significantly affect the future.
The need for an arena for conversation
among water stakeholders. Scenarios
provide common frameworks for
mapping and highlighting critical
concerns of diverse stakeholders and
identifying alternatives – setting the
stage for discussions, debates and
negotiation.

Over the past decade several global scenarios have been developed for the water sector. One of the most comprehensive was
the scenario work for the World Water Vision in 2000.12 The Vision generated three
scenarios: a technology, economics and
private sector scenario in which private
sector initiatives lead research and development and globalization drives economic
growth, but the poorest countries are left
behind; a values and lifestyles scenario in
which sustainable development is a global
priority, with emphasis on research and
development in the poorest countries; and
a business-as-usual scenario.
Water in a changing world

In 2006 the World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WBCSD) produced three scenarios focusing on the role
of business and water.13 Its three storylines
focus on efficiency (more value per drop),
security (meeting the basic needs of all)
and interconnectivity (a ‘whole system’
approach; table 5.2). In another example
using driver categories similar to those in
this Report, the Global Environment Outlook
(GEO4) report of 2007 generated four different scenarios: markets first, policy first,
security first and sustainability first.14

new global water
scenarios are
needed. Existing
global water
scenarios do not
fully incorporate
each of the
drivers described
in this chapter

Despite these recent endeavours, experience indicates that new global water
scenarios are needed. Existing global water
scenarios do not fully incorporate each of
the drivers described in this chapter. The
scenarios are either outdated (those of the
World Water Vision) or partial, incomplete
or sectoral (WBCSD, GEO4). In addition,
the evolution of the drivers and the logic
behind their storylines need to be examined and possibly redefined in view of
developments both inside and outside the
water sector since 2000. Finally, important
new policy initiatives have emerged since
the last world water scenarios, such as the
adoption of the Millennium Development
Goals.

Challenges for summarizing the
pressures of external drivers on
water resources
Multiple external drivers exert pressures
on water resources through changes in
water demands and uses. Some of these
pressures are summarized in the table at

Table 5.2

The three water scenarios of the World Business
Council for Sustainable Development, to 2025

Scenario

‘Hydro’

‘Rivers’

‘Ocean’

Water challenge

Efficiency (more
drops for less and
more value per
drop)

Security
(quantity and
quality for all)

Interconnectivity
(taking the whole
system into
account)

Business challenge

Innovation

Social license to
operate

Business role in
water governance

The five key story
themes

• Hard times in
huge towns
• Huge
opportunities
• High-stakes
innovation
• Hydro economy
• Beyond legacy
systems

• The security
deficit
• Two sides of
the river
• The trust
deficit
• Access and
equity
• Political
reallocation –
local solutions

• Unintended
consequences
• Global Fair Water
Movement
• The tipping
point
• Accountability
tools
• Networked
global water
governance

Source: WBCSD 2006.

75

PART

1

Chapter 5C
the beginning of part 2. The challenge is
to get decision-makers inside and outside
the water sector to adopt appropriate measures to reduce the negative pressures on
water and increase the positive pressures.
Making this challenge more difficult are
the links between drivers (as illustrated

Notes
1.

IPCC 2008.

2.

Nicholls et al. 2007.

3.

van Aalst, Hellmuth, and Ponzi 2007.

4.

OECD 2005.

5.

Stern 2006.

6.

IPCC 2008.

7.

Giles 2006.

8.

IEA 2006

9.

FAO 2008.

10. UNFCCC 2006.
11. van Aalst, Hellmuth, and Ponzi 2007.
12. Cosgrove and Rijsberman 2000.
13. WBCSD 2006.
14. UNEP 2007.

References
Campbell-Lendrum, D., C. Corvalán, and
M. Neira. 2007. Global Climate Change:
Implications for International Public
Health Policy. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 85: 235-37.
Cosgrove, W., and F. Rijsberman. 2000.
World Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. London: Earthscan.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2008. The State
of Food and Agriculture 2008: Biofuels:
Prospects, Risks, and Opportunities. Rome:
Food and Agriculture Organization.
Giles, J. 2006. Methane Quashes Green
Credentials of Hydropower. Nature 444
(7119): 524-25.
Haines, A., R. S. Kovats, D. Campbell­Lendrum, and C. Corvalan. 2006.
Climate Change and Human Health:
Impacts, Vulnerability and Public Health.
Public Health 120 (7): 585-96.

76

by the pressures imposed by rising living
standards), which involve demographic,
social and economic factors but are also
influenced by technology and governance. Generating a picture of this complex future would be greatly assisted
by the development of a set of future
scenarios.

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006.
World Energy Outlook 2006. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, and International Energy
Agency.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2008. Technical Paper
on Climate Change and Water. IPCCXXVIII/Doc.13, Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, Geneva. www.ipcc.
ch/meetings/session28/doc13.pdf.
Nicholls, R. J., P. P. Wong, V. R. Burkett, J.
O. Codignotto, J. E. Hay, R. F. McLean,
S. Ragoonaden, and C. D. Woodroffe.
2007. Coastal Systems and Low-lying
Areas. In Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability, eds. M.
L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2005.
Bridge over Troubled Waters: Linking
Climate Change and Development. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Oxfam. 2007. Adapting to Climate Change
– What’s Needed in Poor Countries, and
Who Should Pay. Oxfam Briefing Paper
104, Oxfam International, Oxford, UK.
Stern, N. 2006. The Stern Review: The
Economics of Climate Change. London:
Cabinet Office, HM Treasury.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme). 2007. Human Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting Climate
Change. Human Solidarity in a Divided
World. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2007. Global Environment Outlook 4 (GEO4): Environment for

Development. Nairobi: United Nations
Environment Programme.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change). 2006.
Application of Environmentally Sound
Technologies. Technical Paper FCCC/
TP/2006/2, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
New York. http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/2006/tp/tp02.pdf.
———. 2007a. Climate Change: Impacts, Vulnerabilities and Adaptation in Developing
Countries. Bonn, Germany: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
———. 2007b. Investment and Financial
Flows to Address Climate Change. Background paper, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
New York.
van Aalst, M., M. Hellmuth, and D.
Ponzi. 2007. Come Rain or Shine: Integrating Climate Risk Management into
African Development Bank Operations.
African Development Bank Working
Paper 89, African Development Bank,
Tunis.
WBCSD (World Business Council for
Sustainable Development). 2006.
Business in the World of Water: WBCSD
Scenarios to 2025. Washington, DC:
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development.
World Bank. 2004. Towards a Water-Secure
Kenya. Water Resources Sector Memorandum, Report 28398-KE. World Bank,
Washington, DC.
———. 2006. Clean Energy and Development: Towards an Investment
Framework. Paper DC2006-0002.
Development Committee, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

World Water Development Report 3

Climate change and possible futures

2

PART

Using water

Chapter
6

Water’s many benefits

7

Evolution of water use

8

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment

9

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems

Chapters 6-9
Coordinator
Jean-Marc Faurès
(FAO)
Facilitator
Domitille Vallée

PART

2

Author: Domitille Vallée

History shows a strong link between
economic development and water resources development. Abundant examples can be drawn of how water has
contributed to economic development
and how development has demanded
increased harnessing of water. Such
benefits came at a cost and in some
places led to increasing competition
and conflicts between users and pressure on the environment.
While demand from all sectors is on
the rise, in most places it is agriculture
that accounts for the bulk of water use.
Steadily rising demand for agricultural
products to satisfy the diverse needs
of a fast growing population (for food,
fibre and now fuel) has been the main
driver behind agricultural water use –
and such demand is expected to continue to grow. In parallel, changing lifestyles and consumption patterns and
rapidly growing cities and industries
are claiming increasing amounts of
water and are putting heavy pressure

on local resources. The effects of water
depleting and polluting activities on
human and ecosystem health remain
largely unreported or difficult to measure, and the need grows stronger for
effective protection of ecosystems and
the goods and services they produce –
on which life and livelihoods depend.
As competition among demands on
water increases, society will need to
respond with improved water management, more effective policies and transparent and efficient water allocation
mechanisms. The drivers described in
part 1 create pressures on society that
lead to changes in water use (see table).
The 2003 and 2006 editions of The
United Nations World Water Development Reports examined many aspects
of water use. Some, such as the use
of groundwater, are covered more
extensively in this edition. Similarly,
the availability of new information is
reflected in the treatment here of water
supply and sanitation.

PART

2

Drivers create pressures that influence water use patterns
Demographic Economic
growth
growth

Social
change

Technological Policies, laws
innovation
and finance

Climate
change

Agriculture

Rising demand
for food and
subsequent
pressure on
land and water
resources

Rising demand
for meat, fish
and high-value
agricultural
products

Environmentally sensitive
behavioural
changes can
lead to more
vegetarian
diets

Greater agricultural water
productivity

Agriculture and
trade policy
(subsidies,
import/
export quotas,
etc.) dictates
crop yields
and water
requirements

Shifts in crop
patterns,
greater reliance
on irrigation in
places, generally greater
crop evapo­
transpiration

Energy

Rising demand
and pressure to
develop more
energy sources

Rising demand
and pressure
to develop
more energy
sources, sometimes ‘dirty’
resources (e.g.,
tar sands)

Awareness can
lower demand

Greater
efficiency (production and
supply)

Energy policy
(and price
speculation)
dictates supply
sources (hydro
and renewables, fossil,
nuclear)

Change in
production
patterns, with
different water
demands
(quantity
and quality
implications)

Urbanization
and potential
for increased
disease
transmission

Greater access
to medical
services, safe
water and
sanitation

Education
increases
good health
possibilities

Health care
and education
policy (e.g.,
universal coverage, subsidies)

Shifting limits
and timing of
vector-borne
diseases

Increased
demand for
basic goods
and services

Positive feedback loop

Rising living
standards
change
demands for
consumer
products

Can increase
or decrease
environmental
impacts (both
in some cases)

Can promote
or impose
standards

Increased
uncertainty
and risk

Increased
competition
for land and
resources

Can increase
natural
resource use
and pollution

Awareness can
lower impact

Can increase
or decrease
impacts –
sometimes
both

Can impose
protection
measures

Growth of
informal
human
settlements

Can aid in poverty reduction
if services and
opportunities
are available

Increasing
expectations for poor
communities

Low-cost
technologies
are increasingly
accessible

Can impose
equity rules on
allocation and
pricing policies

Users

Health

Industry

Environment

Poverty
focus

Greater
resources
needs and
environmental
degradation

Increased need
for natural
resources to
fuel economic
growth
Source: Compiled by Richard Connor.

Consumption lifestyles
can increase
demand

Consumption lifestyles
can increase
impact

Development
of new or
‘dirty’ sources
Increasing
quality of
health care
Unexpected
negative
impacts (e.g.,
pesticides)

Greater vulnerability of the
poor (floods,
droughts, disease outbreaks)

Can prompt
energy
and water
efficiency
Threatens
ecological
balances
Leads to shifting habitats

May hinder
efficient provision of needed
services

Will affect the
poor the most
Impacts will
affect developing countries
(with limited
resources)
more than
developed
countries

PART

2

Chapter 6
Water’s many benefits
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, Andy Bullock, Molly Hellmuth,
Walter Rast, Domitille Vallée and James Winpenny
Contributors: Moses Abukari, Cecile Brugère, Rudolf Cleveringa,
Richard Connor, Jennifer Hauc, Walter Huppert, Jean Margat,
Audrey Nepveu, Mary Renwick, Guido Santini, Eva Schiffer and World
Water Assessment Programme Expert Group on Storage
Coordinator: Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO)
Facilitator: Domitille Vallée

Key messages
Water has always played a key role in economic development,
and economic development has always been accompanied by
water development.
Investment in water management has been repaid through livelihood security and reductions in health risks, vulnerability
and ultimately poverty.
Water contributes to poverty alleviation in many ways –
through sanitation services, water supply, affordable food and
enhanced resilience of poor communities faced with disease,
climate shocks and environmental degradation.
Water of the right quality can improve health through better
sanitation and hygiene and, when applied at the right time, can
enhance the productivity of land, labour and other productive
inputs. In addition, healthy freshwater ecosystems provide multiple goods and services essential to life and livelihoods.
People have traditionally settled near
water sources. An adequate and dependable source of water is needed to sustain
humanity and to support future growth
and development. Investment in water
management has been repaid through increased livelihood security and reductions
in health risks, vulnerability and ultimately poverty.1 Poverty reduction is closely
linked to enhanced access to water.2
Where economic growth has been strong
and prosperity has been fairly equitably
distributed, poor individuals and households have been able to reach the targets
of the Millennium Development Goals.
Conversely, where governments are unable
or unwilling to deliver the basic services,
water emerges among the most pressing
issues (box 6.1).
Experience shows that access to water is
fundamental for economic growth and
livelihoods. In rural and agriculture-based
80

economies water is often the most important factor for agricultural production
and other livelihood activities.3 In urbanbased, labour-intensive manufacturing
economies water is needed for nearly all
productive activities.4 Secure access to
water with reliable storage and irrigation
has boosted economic growth in many of
the developed economies of the Americas
and Europe, and through the green revolution in Asia has enabled the transformation of agriculture-based economies to industrial and emerging market economies.5
Past efforts of development and water
use have often ignored the water needs
of life on Earth and have placed at risk
the resources on which life depends (see
chapter 8). The links connecting water
resources, the environment and economic
sectors are complex. As a result, our understanding of all the ways that natural processes influence human well-being remains
incomplete, impeding our ability to ensure
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water’s many benefits
sustainable economic and social development. This chapter explores our current
understanding of the links between water
and growth, poverty reduction, health and
the environment.

Water for economic
development
Water development is essential to growing
economies. Over the centuries the world has
witnessed an unprecedented expansion in
urban water supply, irrigation, dam storage,
drainage, water transport facilities and other
water schemes as development has occurred
at different rates in different regions.

Box 6.1

2

Water services are a crucial element of
nation-building in fragile states

The importance of water services is
especially apparent in societies where
normal social life and political structures have broken down. Categorizing
them as fragile states, the UK Department for International Development
defines these as countries ‘where the
government cannot or will not deliver
core functions to the majority of its
people, including the poor’. Among
the most important functions of the
state for poverty reduction is ‘the ability to protect and support the ways
in which the poorest people sustain

themselves’. While each fragile state
is fragile in different ways and for
different reasons – war, post-conflict
recovery, major natural catastrophe,
prolonged mismanagement and political repression – a striking commonality in reports from aid agencies is the
prominence of water and sanitation in
relief and reconstruction programmes.
The rapid restoration of viable water
services is often a crucial ingredient of
nation-building in these fragile states.
Source: DfID 2005, p. 7; OECD 2008.

Water development and growth
Water infrastructure supports growth and
poverty reduction and should be planned
by taking the possible impacts into account
(box 6.2). The principal drivers of growth
and change have often come from outside the domain of water managers. Water
development has largely responded to and
been affected by developments in the wider
political economy, such as market-oriented

Box 6.2

reforms, openness to global trading systems
and advances, supply chains and regional
production networks. Storage, irrigation,
urban water supply and wastewater have all
been part of the enabling infrastructure.
These have been led by public policies and
microeconomic developments (productivity changes, capital and input accumulation, and technology). In some cases

Storing water for development

For millennia people have tried to control
and store irregular water flows by creating
reservoirs and storing water to regulate
seasonal flows, limit floods and overcome
dry spells.
Today, in parts of many countries demand
exceeds available runoff. These countries
depend on dams and water harvesting
systems to control irregular storm runoff.
The situation is particularly acute in arid
and semi-arid areas where rainfall periods
are short and floods can be especially
destructive. Demands are often seasonal,
relating not only to agriculture, but also to
peak demands for tourism and hydropower production. Increasingly, it will be
impossible to do without some form of
water storage, either surface (reservoirs or
water-harvesting systems) or underground
(cisterns and aquifers). Global changes, in
particular the impacts of climate change,
elevate the need for water storage to a
higher priority.

fuels and the need to shift towards cleaner
energy production. Emerging market economies with fast-growing industries and
cities need to secure more energy. China,
India and Thailand and many countries in
Latin America are looking to invest in water
infrastructure in neighbouring countries (as
South Africa has done in Lesotho), if necessary to secure their water futures.
Water storage is a particularly important
component of flood management. Its importance will likely increase in a changing
global climate, especially in regions where
the severity of storms is projected to
intensify and where precipitation may be
higher. The potential for increased storms
and extreme rainfall events means that
dams and other large-scale infrastructure
will need to be built to higher engineering
standards, to withstand future risks.

Food production has always been an
important driver of water storage. In
countries where the majority of the people
live in rural areas, irrigation is increasingly
indispensable to ensure reliable supplies of
water during the growing season.

Small- and large-scale storage complement one another. Smaller decentralized and participatory water harvesting
systems have increased water availability
and, consequently, agricultural production, at household and community levels,
especially among the poor. A diversity
of storage types and capacities reduces
vulnerability to catastrophic events.

Satisfying demand for energy through hydropower has also led to the construction
of dams. This becomes more imperative
with the highly fluctuating cost of fossil

Large storage projects may represent
a more appropriate solution for multi­
purpose projects that provide hydropower,
irrigation, flood control and drought

Water in a changing world

management, and water supply for large
urban areas. Their management is complex because storage can frequently compromise needs for other uses (for example,
the need to lower reservoir water levels for
flood control, maintain levels for energy
production and replicate natural flows for
protection of species). Integrated water
management at the basin level using realtime hydrologic information from weather
radar and computer models of individual
reservoirs allows optimum management
of storage and release to satisfy domestic,
agricultural, industrial and environmental
requirements.
Dams, especially large dams, are controversial, as they leave a heavy footprint on
the natural environment and often displace
large numbers of people, sometimes disrupting traditional societies. Nevertheless,
many countries continue to plan for such
large infrastructure projects to increase
storage capacities and meet other needs
considered vital to improve development
and avoid crises. Such projects should
strive to balance the desired objectives –
­economic growth and reduced ­vulnerability
– with the likely associated environmental
and social costs. Each storage project must
evaluate the trade-offs involved. The World
Commission on Dams has provided a basic
framework for such an assessment.
Source: WWAP Expert Group on Storage 2008;
WCD 2000.

81

PART

2

Chapter 6

Figure 6.1

The shift of economies from agriculture-based
to industrialized, 1965-2001

Agriculture’s contribution to growth in three types of economies, 1990-2005 (percent)
80
60

Actual poverty data
Predicted poverty data
Poverty data over time

Agriculture-based
countries

Can we afford not to invest in water?

India (1965-94)

40
20

Brazil (1970-96)

0
-20
0.0

Urbanized countries

0.2

Indonesia (1970-96)
China
(1981-2001)

Transforming
countries

0.4
0.6
Rural poor/total poor, 2002

0.8

1.0

Note: Arrows show paths for Brazil, China, India and Indonesia.
Source: Based on World Bank 2007.

infrastructure development has been promoted by specific sectors in the economy
that directly benefit from them, while the
costs are usually borne by society at large.
Agriculture – especially food ­production –
has historically been a first stage of national
development (figure 6.1). For example, the
Republic of Korea’s industrial take-off in the
1960s was preceded by decades of rapid agricultural growth, with productivity driven
by comprehensive land reform that saw
smallholdings displace traditional tenant
farming. In Thailand poverty fell from 57%
in 1962 to 10% in 2002, with initial declines led by growth in agricultural production. Viet Nam laid the foundation for rapid
post-war economic growth through liberalization of markets and macroeconomic
stability, together with increased security
of land tenure that permitted transfers of
land-use rights. Between 1990 and 2003,
as the economy grew at 7.5% a year and
agriculture at 4.2%, the $1 a day poverty
index dropped from 50.7 to 13.1. Agricultural productivity improvements largely
drove gains in the early reform period as
Viet Nam became the world’s second largest
exporter of rice, coffee and pepper. During
this period of sustained economic growth,
Asia witnessed a major expansion in irrigation infrastructure in water storage, urban
water supply and wastewater treatment.
Development in a country or community
is constrained by the abilities to gain access to water and – should the resource
become scarce – to make the necessary
economic, social and environmental tradeoffs (see chapter 16). Changes in rainfall
and more variable runoff as a result of
climate change are likely to reduce water
availability and represent a clear challenge
for development (see chapter 11). Where
82

runoff is extremely variable, the potential
ability to store floodwater has the dual
advantage of saving water for later use
while protecting human settlements and
development infrastructure.
Evidence of the macroeconomic returns to
investment in water is growing. The cost
of a series of major typhoons and resulting
flood damage in post-war Japan has been
estimated at 5%-10% of GNP. Investment
in soil conservation and flood control
following legislation in the early 1960s
reduced the impact of flood damage to less
than 1% of GNP.6 A rise in investment in
domestic water use was accompanied by a
sharp drop in reported illnesses and death
from infectious water-borne diseases and a
virtual end to related infant deaths.7
There are even more examples of the
economic cost of lack of investment in
water. In Kenya the combined impact of
the winter floods of 1997/98 and drought
between 1998 and 2008 has been estimated at $4.8 billion – effectively a 16%
reduction in GDP (see table 5.1 in chapter 5).8 Evidence suggests that floods and
drought in Kenya translate into a direct
annual loss of 22% of GDP over a 2.5 year
period. The Mozambique floods of 2000
caused a 23% reduction in GDP and a
44% rise in inflation. Inability to tackle
hydrologic variability in Ethiopia has been
estimated to cause a 38% decline in GDP
and a projected 25% increase in poverty
for 2003-15.9 Worldwide, more than 7,000
major disasters have been recorded since
1970, causing at least $2 trillion in damage
and killing at least 2.5 million people.10
Improving water management would help
countries reduce the damage of climate
variability and the extreme events that
can cripple economies. Year after year, the
human costs of delayed investments are
mounting.

GDP, water investments and water use
While the links between water development and GDP are strong, they are also
complex. Asian Water Development Outlook
2007 emphasizes the need for a multidisciplinary and multisector perspective on
water in the Asia and Pacific region to face
the challenges of sustaining growth.11 The
report highlights the need to address the
links between water and other important
development-related sectors, such as energy, food and the environment.
Actions that target rural economies will
benefit the largest number of people. As of
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Water's many benefits
2007, 3 billion people live in rural areas,
most of them dependent on agriculture for
their livelihood. Agricultural economies
are especially vulnerable to lack of water
during critical crop-growing seasons. Their
performance is influenced by the ability to
secure and control water through infrastructure, such as water harvesting storage,
reservoirs and canals, and the ability to
transport it to crops when required.

literature.13 Water contributes to poverty alleviation in many ways – through
sanitation services, water supply, affordable food and enhanced resilience of poor
communities to disease, climate shocks
and environmental degradation. Water
of appropriate quantity and quality can
improve health and, when applied at the
right time, can enhance the productivity
of land, labour and other inputs.

Investments in physical infrastructure
must be accompanied by investments in
‘soft’ infrastructure, the dense network of
institutions and human capacity needed to
secure spaces in which individuals, households, firms and communities are able to
pursue their day-to-day activities with a
reasonable degree of predictability and stability and with due regard for the interests
of others.12 Investments are also required
for the operation and maintenance of
physical infrastructure (see chapter 9).

The daily water supply for multiple
household uses is determined by the
time, labour and financial costs required
to access water. The economic and social
returns from water access for different uses
determine net livelihood benefits or losses.

Figure 6.2

The relation between freshwater use and level
of development is inconclusive

Freshwater withdrawal per capita, 2002 (cubic metres per year)
2,500

However, while there is a strong relation
between water investment and growth, the
relation between the quantity of water used
and a country’s level of development is
inconclusive (figure 6.2). Many water-poor
economies have developed, while the ratio
of water use to GDP in many developed
countries has been declining (figure 6.3).

2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

Water and poverty reduction

0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

GDP per capita, 2002

The relationship between water and poverty is widely discussed in the development

Figure 6.3

Source: Data on water withdrawal, AQUASTAT; data on GDP per capita, World Bank.

The ratio of water use to GDP has been declining in many countries

Cubic metres of water per dollar of GDP
6

Egypt
India
Iraq
China
Morocco
Iran, Islamic
Rep.
Cyprus
Jordan
Turkey
Tunisia
Algeria
Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
Saudi Arabia
Malta

5

4

3

0.5

Portugal
Spain
Russian
Federation
United
States
Italy
Japan
Greece
Canada
Israel
United
Kingdom
France
Germany
Sweden
Norway

0.4

0.3

0.2
2

0.1

1

0

0.0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1997

2000

1975

1980

1985

1990

1997

2000

Source: Based on Margat and Andréassian 2008.

Water in a changing world

83

PART

2

The poorest
populations in the
world have the
lowest access to
water supply and
sanitation services
and are the most
dependent on
water resources
for sustainable
livelihoods.
They are at the
losing end of
the equity curve,
most vulnerable
to changing
environmental and
social conditions
and most likely
to be adversely
affected by the
vagaries of climate

Chapter 6
Benefits or losses may take the form of
reduced vulnerability to shocks, increased
productive capacity, increased social
benefits and increased capacity to maintain service levels. Studies in India show
clear evidence of poverty alleviation and
income gains for all rural groups, even the
landless, through increased working days
as a result of improved access to water.14

Distributing the benefits of growth
A major lesson of Human Development
Report 2006 on poverty and the global
water crisis is that the distribution of
economic growth affects the rate at which
the growth is converted into poverty
reduction.15 Thus, every 1% increase in
growth has reduced poverty by about 1.5%
in Viet Nam – twice the 0.75% reduction
in Mexico, with its larger income gap. The
report records that some countries, such as
Bangladesh and Thailand (for sanitation)
and Sri Lanka and Viet Nam (for water),
have performed far better than expected
solely on the basis of income, as compared
with others, such as India and Mexico (for
sanitation). The lesson is that income matters but that policy shapes the conversion
of income into human development.
The poorest populations in the world have
the lowest access to water supply and sanitation services and are the most dependent
on water resources for sustainable livelihoods. They are at the losing end of the
equity curve, most vulnerable to changing
environmental and social conditions and
most likely to be adversely affected by the
vagaries of climate. As noted in Human
Development Report 2006, access to water
in many developing countries mirrors the
distribution of wealth. The Millennium
Development Goals and other poverty reduction efforts such as Poverty Reduction
Strategy Papers have been designed specifically to address these types of inequities.
One clear message from the past decade of
poverty reduction initiatives is the diversity of approaches to development. Unlike
health and education, which are firmly
ensconced in the arena of social services,
water management has often tended to fall
between the economic and growth agenda
or the human development and basic services agenda. Neither agenda has held sway
across all countries.
Human Development Report 2006 unequivocally identifies the crises in drinking water
and sanitation as a crisis for the poor, on
the evidence that almost two in three
people lacking access to safe drinking water
survive on less than $2 a day and one in

84

three on less than $1 a day.16 More than 660
million people without adequate sanitation
live on less than $2 a day, and more than
385 million on less than $1 a day. This evidence highlights clearly the financing difficulties of improving access through household investment. This is important because
households, not public agencies, often make
the largest investment in basic sanitation,
with the ratio of household to government
investment typically being 10 to 1.17
With household poverty widespread, the
burden has shifted to governments. A
strong social and economic case has been
made over the past decade for investments
in water supply and sanitation as essential prerequisites for economic growth.
There is also evidence that more equitable
economic growth in Asia has delivered improved water supply and ­sanitation – with
rising wealth making possible household
investments in basic services and higher
government expenditure for basic services.
WaterAid in its 2005 response to the Camdessus Report of 2003 points to growth as
an enabler of government finance for the
provision of basic services: ‘For national
governments in developing countries to
double their allocations to water, their
national incomes need to rise substantially. This requires, amongst other things,
a healthy balance of trade and a growing
national economy.’18
Rising levels of income inequality may
make access to services more difficult for
those who most need it. The UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs suggests a package of universal social policies
and targeted economic policies tailored to
individual country conditions. The package would be based on a strong ‘social contract’ to provide a ‘global social floor’ that
provides a minimum level of security –
including water security – in line with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.19

The different situations and water
needs of the urban and rural poor
Some 1.4 billion people are classified as
poor:20 44% in South Asia, about 24% each
in sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia, and
6.5% in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The water-related needs of poor people differ in urban and rural contexts.
The urban poor often live in informal settlements following rapid urban growth: 77%
of the population in Latin America is urban;
38% in Africa. Those figures are expected to
rise over the next few decades with projected urban expansion. People in informal
settlements live without many of life’s basic
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Water's many benefits
necessities: safe drinking water, adequate
sanitation services, access to health services,
durable housing and secure tenure.21 Affordable, safe, piped water is available to only a
small share of low-income urban dwellers.
The financing of water services is the key to
expanding access, but the illegal status of
the large majority of slum dwellers is often
a barrier to access to finance or support
(box 6.3). Many informal settlements are in
flood-prone areas and are especially vulnerable to environmental hazards.22 Thus, large
populations of slum dwellers live at high
risk of disease.
For the rural poor, who make up some 75%
of the world’s poorest people, access to
water is essential both for basic needs and
for productive purposes. Lack of access is
often the main factor limiting their ability
to secure their livelihoods. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the International Fund for Agricultural Development have been working
on a response matrix for rural poverty in
Africa to provide planners and policy-makers with a conceptual framework to identify
appropriate context-specific interventions
tailored to the needs of diverse groups of
rural people (table 6.1 and figure 6.4).23
Although interventions are needed in
several areas, water is a key factor because
it plays a central role in agriculture, it is a
frequent constraint on production and it
provides a focal point around which other
interventions can be organized (box 6.4).
Strategies to reduce rural poverty need
to focus on improving productivity in
­agriculture – for most, the main source of
income. Gains require substantial interventions to improve farm-level access and control and management of water resources.
There are many links between rural and
urban areas, and in most places there are
no sharp boundaries between rural and
urban spaces. Families often depend on
both urban and rural locales to make
a living. The share of rural household
incomes from non-farm sources, including migrants’ remittances, is 60% in South
Asia, 40% in Latin America and 30-50%
in sub-Saharan Africa (reaching as high as
80%-90% in Southern Africa).24
Questions remain about how best to realize
the potential benefits of water management
opportunities to assist the poor – particularly about how to most effectively engage
the potential of limited water resources
for all poor people. For example, evidence
from the Zambezi Basin shows that even
full development of the basin’s irrigation
Water in a changing world

Box 6.3

Land tenure and access to water and sanitation

Provision of safe water and adequate
sanitation is often affected by systems
of land tenure. Where sanitation is
provided by individuals, as is common
in rural areas, there is little incentive
to invest without security of tenure.
Where governments seek to improve the provision of public services
through government provision, which
may involve contracts with private sector providers, service providers usually
require a land right (ownership or lease
tenure) before concluding a contract
to provide services.
Resolving these issues requires an
integrated approach across government
departments and related institutions
to ensure that the agencies responsible
for land and property rights recognize
the public and personal health benefits
of sanitation and consequent improvements in the social and economic standing of the poor. In Manila, a megacity

Table 6.1

with a large informal population, the
utilities offered to extend water lines
to the perimeter of slums. Metered
connections to the households would
be managed by resident associations or
non-governmental organizations and
paid for by residents. The residents and
the utilities gained from this solution
as both water costs in slums and illegal
connections were cut by 25%. There
are other examples where improved
land tenure led to better service to the
poorest and to better performance by
public agencies, such as strategies to
facilitate access to tenure title (India)
or integrated land tenure security or
improvement programmes (Morocco,
South Africa, Thailand and Zambia).
Source: Ben Fawcett and Diana Mitlin,
International Water Association, based on
UNDP 2006; http://esa.un.org/iys; World
Water Assessment Programme Expert Group
on Legal Issues.

Water and the characteristics of rural livelihoods

Characteristic of
rural livelihood

Manifestation
of characteristic
among low-income
populations

Manifestation
of characteristic
among high-income
populations

Agricultural output (crops
and livestock yield)

Low

High

Health and water access

Poor

Good

Direct natural resource
dependency

High

Low

Susceptibility to flood and
drought risk

High

Low

Knowledge and adaptive
capacity

Traditional

Sophisticated

Source: Sullivan et al. forthcoming.

potential could benefit no more than 18%
of the basin’s rural poor, even considering
off-farm multipliers. 25 This argues for a
dual approach, with interventions to reduce
farmers’ vulnerabilities to rain-fed agriculture as an essential accompaniment to the
development of both smallholder irrigation
and large-scale infrastructure to support
macroeconomic growth.
Unless the growth and poverty-reducing
contributions of water resources are made
more explicit and specific at the country
level, development-oriented finances are
unlikely to follow. Those specifics will
influence decisions about the sources,
costs, viability, sustainability and instruments of development finance. But only
national and local action plans can secure
85

PART

2

Figure 6.4

Chapter 6
Different categories of rural inhabitants in Africa

<1%

Large-scale farmers (commercial)
Large-scale infrastructure investments; improve
political, fiscal and legal environment; supervision

≈10%

Emerging smallholders (market-oriented)
Cost-sharing on irrigation investment; improve
market access, land tenure, credit
Traditional farmers (smallholder, mainly subsistence)
Irrigation investment; targeted subsidies;
improve market access, land tenure;
increase resilience to climate shocks
Highly vulnerable population (survival)
Social, vunerability reduction
programmes; basic services; rural
employment; highly subsidized

75%-80%
10%-15%

Source: Based on Faurès and Santini 2008.

Box 6.4

Four water dimensions of rural livelihoods

A livelihood approach puts people at the
centre of development strategies, connecting their ability to move out of poverty
with their capacities and assets. Water’s
importance as an asset is determined by
the quantity available daily for household,
agriculture and livestock consumption and
by its ability to stimulate economic and
social returns.
A 2008 joint pilot project of the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the International Fund for Agricultural Development
proposes a rural water livelihoods index
and a draft framework for assessing the
performance of water-related interventions for reducing rural poverty. The index
considers four water-related components
that influence rural livelihoods: access to
basic water services, crop and livestock
water security, clean and healthy water
environment, and secure and equitable
water entitlement.
The rural water livelihoods index is established on the model of both the human
development index and the water poverty

World map of the rural water livelihoods index, 2008

Rural water
livelihood index
High
Medium-high
Medium-low
Low
No data
Note: Lower values reflect relatively worse conditions.
Source: Sullivan et al. forthcoming.

index (a composite index that attempts
to capture the relationship between
water and poverty). It is limited to eight
subindicators for which data are available
at the country level for most of the world.
Though imperfect, a world mapping of
the index shows that the highest returns

the necessary alignments among water
resources, economic growth and poverty
reduction. Formalizing those alignments
within a new round of poverty reduction
strategies, which are more growth‑oriented, will help make the essential connections explicit.

Benefits of multiple-use approaches
A multiple-use approach to meeting the
water needs of poor communities can
bring multiple benefits. Poor households
86

to water investment are to be found where
income and livelihoods are the lowest, in
sub-Saharan Africa.
Source: Poverty Environment Partnership 2006;
Faurès and Santini 2008; Sullivan 2002; Sullivan
et al. 2003; Sullivan et al. forthcoming.

throughout the world depend on subsistence activities such as small-scale vegetable gardening, fish rearing, livestock watering, brick making, basket making, textile
weaving, beer brewing and other handicrafts that require water. These activities
often also provide a much-needed source
of income. Better water access for domestic
and agricultural use is likely to result in
improved outcomes for poor households,
by improving household productivity
and health and releasing labour into the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Water's many benefits
household production system, stimulating
household income growth.26
Poor households use water from natural
streams, from human-made structures
(irrigation canals and wells) and from rainwater harvested for small-scale irrigation
or domestic purposes. Although few water
sources have a single use or user, a singleuse perspective has dominated thinking
on water development and services (box
6.5), particularly where communities
provide water supply systems in rural and
poor peri-urban areas.
Multiple-use water systems yield both
financial and non-financial benefits (figure 6.5). Evidence from around the world
indicates that if the multiple-use reality
were acknowledged and investments were
made to upgrade single-purpose systems
to serve multiple functions, more than 1
billion poor people could benefit.27 For
example, upgrading domestic systems to
provide 100 litres per person per day could
generate income of $40-$80 per capita per
year. In South Africa this approach resulted
in improved income as the productive use
of domestic water rose from 17% of average
household income in villages with limited
water to 31% in villages with adequate provision.28 The income generated by multipleuse services can enable repayment of initial

Figure 6.5

and ongoing costs for most service levels
and technology options, making multipleuse services more likely to be sustained.
When poor people can access water for
such household use and for small-scale
productive water points, they are better
able to avoid hunger and survive droughts.
A multiple-use approach can improve
health and reduce the incidence of waterborne diseases and lower child mortality.
It can also contribute to gender equity by
reducing the time women spend fetching
water. In rural areas this approach could

Box 6.5

Defining water services: single or multiple uses?

Water services are defined as the
provision of water of a given quality,
quantity and reliability at a specified place. The definition emphasizes
outputs – what people receive – rather
than infrastructure.
Single-use approaches involve design,
finance and arrangement of water
services for a single intended use, such
as for irrigation or domestic purposes,
the most important single-use services
in rural areas. Single-use approaches
are the standard model of water service delivery.

Multiple-use approaches involve planning, finance and management of
integrated water services for multiple
domestic and productive uses based
on consumer demand. ‘Domestic +’
approaches involve provision of
water services for domestic as well
as productive activities. ‘Irrigation +’
approaches involve provision of water
services for irrigation as well as domestic and non-irrigation productive
activities.

Source: Renwick et al. 2007.

Benefits of a multiple-use approach to water
Size of benefit/poverty impact

Domestic+ irrigation+ services progressively and
synergistically broaden benefits of single-use
services and more comprehensively address the
multidimensional aspects of poverty.

Domestic+

Irrigation+
Low

Health

Time
savings

Income

High

Improved
food security/
nutrition

Low
Diversification
of livelihoods;
reduced
vulnerability

High

Equity and
empowerment

Highest-level
multiple-use services

Intermediate-level
multiple-use services

Basic-level
multiple-use services

Basic domestic or
basic irrigationa
a. Assumes no unplanned uses as they cannot ensure sustainable generation of benefits.
Source: Renwick et al. 2007.

Water in a changing world

87

PART

2

Chapter 6

Access to safe
water and
adequate
sanitation services
has proved to be
one of the most
efficient ways
of improving
human health

provide water for garden plots to meet
household needs.

Water and health
Access to safe water and adequate sanitation services has proved to be one of the
most efficient ways of improving human
health. The World Health Organization
has estimated the economic costs that can
be avoided through adequate sanitation
and the economy-wide returns to various levels of investment in water supply
and sanitation services (table 6.2). Every
$1 invested in improved water supply and
sanitation yields gains of $4-$12, depending on the type of intervention.
Almost one-tenth of the global disease
burden could be prevented by improving water supply, sanitation, hygiene and
management of water resources. Such
improvements reduce child mortality and
improve health and nutritional status in a
sustainable way. They yield multiple social
and economic benefits, enhancing wellbeing and, indirectly, people’s access to
health-related services. Upgrading water
supply and sanitation services could also
improve education outcomes by enabling
more girls to attend school instead of
fetching water, while providing sanitary
facilities in schools encourages higher
female enrolment in secondary schools
and improves the working environment
for female teachers. There is thus a strong
conceptual case that improved coverage of
drinking water and sanitation contributes
to meeting the Millennium Development
Goals and to accelerated growth.

Table 6.2

Benefit-cost ratio by water and sanitation
intervention in developing regions and Eurasia
Annual
benefits
($ millions)

Benefit-cost
ratio

Halving the proportion of people without
access to improved water sources by 2015

18,143

9

Halving the proportion of people without
access to improved water sources and
improved sanitation by 2015

Intervention

84,400

8

Universal access to improved water
and sanitation services by 2015

262,879

10

Universal access to improved water
and improved sanitation and water
disinfected at the point of use by 2015

344,106

12

Universal access to a regulated piped water
supply and sewerage connection by 2015

555,901

4

Note: Benefit-cost ratio is total benefits divided by total costs. The higher the ratio, the
greater the benefits relative to the costs. Projects with a benefit-cost ratio greater than 1
have greater benefits than costs.
Source: Prüss-Üstün et al. 2008.

88

Saving children
The under-five mortality rate is an important social indicator of development. It is
an indicator of the quality of life, including the income and education of parents,
the efficacy of health services and access to
safe drinking water and sanitation services.
It is also easily measured and so is considered a good indicator of progress towards
the Millennium Development Goals. In
2000 diarrhoea accounted for 17% of the
10.6 million deaths in children younger
than five, and malaria for 8%.29 Undernutrition is an underlying cause of 53% of all
deaths in children younger than five.
Global under-five mortality has fallen
from 93 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 72
per 1,000 in 2005 – a decline of 22.5% –
but the pace of progress has been uneven
across regions and countries. The decline
has been slowest in sub-Saharan Africa.
Benefits of improved access to water and
sanitation for health
Improvements in drinking water, sanitation, hygiene and water resources management could have a particularly large impact
on diarrhoea, malaria and malnutrition
(table 6.3). But investments in improved
water supply and sanitation would also
make a difference for many neglected tropical diseases (such as intestinal nematode
infections, lymphatic filariasis, trachoma
and schistosomiasis) that have environmental transmission pathways. Another
water health issue of increasing concern is
naturally occurring chemical ­contaminants
– notably arsenic and fluoride (see box 8.3
in chapter 8). Such contaminants underline
the need for simple and reliable water quality monitoring systems and have important
implications for the definition of ‘safe’
drinking water used to monitor progress
towards international targets, such as the
Millennium Development Goals.
Benefits go well beyond human health
Access to safe drinking water and adequate
sanitation services is vital to human
health but has other important benefits
ranging from the easily identifiable and
quantifiable (costs avoided, time saved)
to the more intangible and difficult to
measure (convenience, well-being, dignity,
privacy and safety).
In cost-benefit analyses the major benefits
of improving access to water and sanitation derive from the time savings associated with closer location of facilities. Easy
access translates into increased production, higher school attendance and more
leisure time. The case is exceptionally
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water's many benefits

Table 6.3

2

Major diseases attributable to environmental factors
Annual global burden
attributable to water,
sanitation and hygiene

Percent of
total burden
attributable to
environmental
factors
Environmental pathways

Deaths
(thousands)

DALYa
(thousands)

1,523

52,460

94

Water supply, sanitation, hygiene

Malnutrition

863

35,579

50

Water supply, sanitation, hygiene,
water resources management

Malaria

526

19,241

42

Water resources management
Water supply, sanitation

Disease
Diarrhoea

Lymphatic filariasis
Intestinal nematodes
Trachoma
Schistosomiasis

0

3,784

66

12

2,948

100

Sanitation

0

2,320

100

Water supply, hygiene, flies

15

1,698

100

Water supply, sanitation, water resources management

Japanese encephalitis

13

671

95

Water resources management

Dengue

18

586

95

Water supply, sanitation

a. Disability adjusted life year, a summary measure of population health. One DALY represents one lost year of healthy life.
Source: Adapted from Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán 2006; Prüss-Üstün et al. 2008.

strong for sanitation, where the economic
cost of inaction is enormous. Without
improving sanitation, it will be difficult
to fully achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
In addition, urban sanitation systems
comprise a range of processes that represent new business opportunities. These
may include small-scale service provision
for construction of system components
and the collection, transport, storage and

Map 6.1

processing of products from sanitation systems (into biogas, fertilizer, soil conditioners or irrigation water, for example).

Reducing diarrhoeal diseases
Some 1.4 million children die each year
from preventable diarrhoeal diseases. Ordinary diarrhoea remains the major killer
among water-, sanitation- and hygienerelated diseases, contributing to 43% of
deaths.30 Sub-Saharan Africa and South
Asia are the most affected regions (map 6.1).

Diarrhoea deaths in 2004

Sub-Saharan Africa
1,024,000
South Asia
733,000
East Asia and Pacific
177,000
Middle East and North Africa
82,000
Latin America and Caribbean
64,000
Europe and Central Asia
34,000
High-income countries
12,000

Source: WHO 2008.

Water in a changing world

89

PART

2

Chapter 6

Adequate
sanitation and
hand-­washing after
defecation helps
break the chain
of transmission of
fæcal-oral disease

Adequate sanitation and hand-­washing
after defecation helps break the chain
of transmission of fæcal-oral disease. 31
There is strong evidence that hand­washing with soap prevents not only
diarrhoea but also acute respiratory
infections, both major killers of children
ages 1 month to 5 years. For example, in
squatter settlements of Karachi, Pakistan,
hand-­washing with soap cut episodes of
diarrhoea and acute respiratory infections in half. 32 Hand-­washing even
without water (in sand, for example), also
significantly reduces the likelihood of
diarrhoea, emphasizing the importance
of hygiene as well as water provision in
improving health.

Fighting malaria

Combating malnutrition

How much malaria could be eliminated by
managing the environment – by eliminating stagnant water bodies, modifying
reservoir contours, introducing drainage
or improving irrigation ­management –
differs across regions with variations in
vector habitats, with a global average of
42% (see table 6.3). Malaria control programmes that emphasize environmental
management are therefore highly effective
in reducing malaria illness and malariarelated death.35 Much of the attention in
international malaria research and control
has focused on medical solutions, such as
drugs and vaccines, but developing new
tools and approaches for malaria prevention and control, including innovation in
vector control, is essential.

Malnutrition accounts for about a third
of the disease burden in low- and middleincome countries.33 Lack of access to
adequate, safe food, partly related to water
resources management, is one cause of
malnutrition, but up to 50% of malnutrition is related to repeated diarrhoea or
intestinal nematode infections as a result
of unclean water, inadequate sanitation or
poor hygiene (see table 6.3).
Low height-for-age (stunting), an indicator of chronic undernutrition, is useful for
long-term monitoring of the cumulative
effects of poverty, unclean water and inadequate sanitation and a high infectious
disease burden (map 6.2).

Map 6.2

World Malaria Report 2005 states that
malaria continues to exact an unacceptable toll on the health and economic
welfare of the world’s poorest communities.34 During the past decade malaria
resurged or increased in intensity in Africa
and South-East Asia after interruption
of eradication efforts and re-emerged in
several Central Asian and Transcaucasian
countries. Of the estimated 350-500 million clinical disease episodes occurring
annually, around 60% are in sub-Saharan
Africa, as are 80% of the deaths. Most of
the more than 1 million Africans who die
from malaria each year are children under
age five.

Geographical pattern of stunting in children under age five on a country basis

40.0% and higher
30.0%–39.9%
20.0%–29.9%
Less than 20.0%
No data

Source: WHO 2007.

90

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water's many benefits

Maintaining ecosystem services
How water is managed affects the health
of ecosystems. Growing pressure on water
resources affects ecosystems and threatens the ecosystem goods and services on
which life and livelihoods depend.
The natural environment provides food,
essential natural resources and other lifesupporting goods, services and benefits
for people, animals and plants. In addition to supporting the production of food
and fibres, freshwater ecosystems regulate
environmental flows, purify wastewater
and detoxify wastes, regulate climate,
provide protection from storms, mitigate
erosion and offer cultural benefits, including significant aesthetic, educational and
spiritual benefits.
The diversity of ecosystem services varies
with the type of ecosystem and the ways
in which this multifunctionality is managed (figure 6.6).36 Aquatic ecosystems produce significant economic benefits, including flood control, groundwater recharge,

Figure 6.6

shoreline stabilization and protection,
nutrition cycling and retention, water
purification, preservation of biodiversity,
and recreation and tourism. The Nakivubo
swamp, for example, provides wastewater
treatment services worth some $363 million to the citizens of Kampala, Uganda.37
In Uganda alone the use of inland water
resources is worth almost $300 million
a year in forest catchment protection,
erosion control and water purification
services. Almost 1 million urban dwellers
rely on natural wetlands for wastewater
retention and purification services.38
Natural wetlands in the Zambezi Basin in
Southern Africa have a net present value
of more than $64 million – $16 million
in groundwater recharge, $45 million in
water purification and treatment services
and $3 million in attenuation of flood-related damage costs.39 Rice fields – humanmade wetlands in the Ramsar Convention
­t ypology – offer a large range of ecosystem services that can be enhanced or
diminished depending on management
decisions about the use of water and its
productive functions (see figure 6.6).

2

Growing pressure
on water resources
affects ecosystems
and threatens the
ecosystem goods
and services on
which life and
livelihoods depend

Agricultural systems can be managed to produce one
ecosystem function or a range of ecosystem services

Provisioning services

Regulating services

Supporting services

Natural ecosystem

Recreation

Crop
production

Soil
formation

Intensive cropland

Fuel
wood
Regulation
of water
balance

Nutrient
cycling

Climate
regulation

Pest
control

Multifunctionality in rice fields

Religious landscape values

Rice
production

Biodiversity
enhancement
in humandominated
landscapes
Climate
air temperature

Crop
production

Recreation

Fuel
wood
Regulation
of water
balance

Nutrient
cycling
Soil
formation

Climate
regulation

Pest
control

Alder-cardamom system
Commercial timber
and fuel wood
Cardamom
seed

Fish

Fertility transfer
to other systems
Ducks,
frogs,
snails

Prevention of
soil erosion

Cultural services

Water storage,
lowering of
peak floods,
groundwater
recharge

Soil
conservation
Watershed
conservation

Fodder for
livestock

Nitrogen
fixation

Soil fertility
improvement

Source: Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007, figure 6.4.

Water in a changing world

91

PART

2

Chapter 6

It is critical that
allocations to the
‘environment’ or
‘nature’ not be
considered ‘wasted
water’. Most such
allocations can
be considered in
terms of benefits
to people

Map 6.3

Across developing countries 10% of undernourished people depend on direct access
to natural resources, in particular freshwater ecosystems.40 They are vulnerable to
any degradation of these ecosystems or to
changes in the water cycle that affect their
functioning. This is the case for pastoralists moving with their herds from one
water source and pasture area to another,
for capture fishers vulnerable to water
pollution and river water depletion and
for forest-dependent people who are hurt
when forests are cleared for agriculture
or for construction of dams or other large
infrastructure. These people are often as
voiceless as ecosystems in the water allocation process.

withdrawal at the basin level. It is critical
that allocations to the ‘environment’ or
‘nature’ not be considered ‘wasted water’.
Most such allocations can be considered
in terms of benefits to people, recognizing that these in-situ uses may constrain
other uses, particularly during dry periods. Concerns for environmental services
often happen too late, when water use has
gone beyond the capacity of the environment to cope and when competition
is critical. This is the result of decision
processes that do not promote informed,
impartial and balanced outcomes – and
would not do so even if better valuations
were at hand. Water still continues to
often be allocated on a first-come, firstserved sector basis.

Because of the interconnection between
freshwater ecosystems and their services,
developing one service (for example, food
production through increased irrigation)
automatically affects others. The management objective is to balance the delivery
of all services collectively so that ecosystems are used optimally and development
becomes sustainable.

Map 6.3 pinpoints areas where respecting
environmental water requirements has become urgent because water use is reaching
limits that threaten to undermine our life
and development support base – particularly for people who are most vulnerable
and dependent on the environment for
their livelihood.

Nature has to be recognized as a water
stakeholder because it provides important services to society. Ways of valuing
ecosystem services remain highly controversial, however, and implementation of
environmental regulations is still limited
(see chapter 9). In any case, defining
an environmental water requirement –
even if imperfect – provides a voice for
nature in allocation decisions for water

Our reliance on nature and its abundance must be matched by the care we
take of the agro-ecosystems on which
we depend. There are pastures in the
Alps, oases in Morocco and irrigation
systems in the Philippines that have
been used for centuries with no diminution of their productive capacities or
beauty. Rice terraces cascading down the
Ifugao in the Philippines represent the

Water stress level of major river basins, around 2002

Huang-He
(Yellow River) Basin,
China

Water stress indicator
Low

< 0.3
0.3-0.4
0.4-0.5
0.5-0.6
0.6-0.7
0.7-0.8
0.8-0.9
0.9-1.0

High ≥1.0
No discharge

Orange River Basin,
Africa (Botswana, Lesotho,
Namibia, South Africa)

Murray-Darling Basin,
Australia

Major river basins

Source: Based on Smakhtin, Revenga, and Döll 2004.

92

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water's many benefits

Box 6.6

2

Agro-ecosystems and sustainability: an example from Peru

The central Andes are a primary centre of origin
for potatoes. Up to 177 varieties have been
domesticated by generations of Aymara and
Quechua in the Cusco and Puno valleys. Many
cultural and agricultural treasures from the Inca
civilization have been carefully preserved and
improved over centuries to guarantee living conditions in areas that are more than 4,000 metres
above sea level.
One of these is the terracing system used to control land degradation and that allows cultivation
of steep slopes at altitudes ranging from 2,800
metres to 4,500 metres. Maize is cultivated in
the lower areas (2,500-3,500 metres above sea

collective efforts of countless generations
of farmers who developed an ingenious
irrigation system that allowed them to
share water and develop rice varieties
that survive at over 1,000 metres. In the
combination rice-fish systems of Zhejiang Province in China, which date from
the Han Dynasty 2,000 years ago, fish

level), and potatoes mainly at medium altitudes
(3,500-3,900 metres above sea level). Areas at and
above 4,000 metres are used mostly as rangeland
but are also cultivated with high-altitude crops.
In the high plateau, around Lake Titicaca, farmers
dig trenches around their fields and fill them with
water. Warmed by sunlight during the day, the
water gives off warm steam when temperatures
drop at night. the steam serves as frost protection for several varieties of potatoes and other
native crops, such as quinoa. This method is under
consideration for use in irrigation areas in Peru as
an adaptation to climate change.
Source: www.fao.org/sd/giahs.

not only provide food, but they also eat
larvae and weeds in the flooded fields,
reducing the cost, labour and pollution
risks involved in fertilization and insect
control.41 The sophisticated terracing system in the central Andes in Peru allows
cultivation of steep slopes at different
altitudes (box 6.6).

Notes

19. United Nations 2008.

1.

Poverty Environment Partnership 2006.

20. World Bank 2007.

2.

World Bank 2007.

21. UN-HABITAT 2006.

3.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

22. Worldwatch Institute 2007.

4.

UNIDO 2007.

24. Tacoli 2007.

5.

World Bank 2007.

25. World Bank 2005b.

6.

Japan Water Forum and World Bank
2005.

26. Faurès and Santini 2008.

7.

Prüss-Üstün et al. 2008.

8.

Gichere, Davis, and Hirji 2006.

9.

Biemans et al. 2006; Grey and Sadoff
2008.

10. United Nations 2008.
11. APWF 2007.
12. United Nations 2008.
13. GWP Technical Committee 2003; Hussain and Hanjra 2003; Lipton, Litchfield,
and Faurès 2003; UNDP 2006.
14. World Bank 2005a.
15. UNDP 2006.
16. UNDP 2006.
17. DfID 2008. Research in India has shown
that between 1985/86 and 1991/92 government investment in the construction
of latrines increased coverage by 2.2%.
At the same time, a national census
found that access to latrines was much
higher, suggesting that about 8% of rural
households across the country had invested their own time and money in the
construction of latrines (DfID 2008).
18. Narayanan 2005; Winpenny 2003.
Water in a changing world

23. Faurès and Santini 2008.

27. Renwick et al. 2007.
28. Renwick et al. 2007.
29. WHO 2007.
30. Prüss-Üstün et al. 2008.
31. Ejemot et al. 2008; Fewtrell et al. 2005.
32. Luby et al. 2005.
33. Laxminarayan, Chow, and Shahid-Salles
2006.
34. Roll Back Malaria, WHO, and UNICEF
2005.
35. Keiser et al. 2005.
36. MEA 2005.
37. Worldwatch Institute 2007.
38. UNEP 2007.
39. Turpie et al. 1999.
40. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.
41. Lu and Li 2006.

References
APWF (Asia-Pacific Water Forum). 2007.
Asian Water Development Outlook 2007:

Achieving Water Security for Asia. Manila,
Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
Biemans, Hester, Ton Bresser, Henk
van Schaik, and Pavel Kabat. 2006.
Water and Climate Risks: A Plea for
Climate Proofing of Water Development
Strategies and Measures. 4th World
Water Forum, Cooperative Program on
Water and Climate, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. 2007.
Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture. London: Earthscan, and
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
DfID (Department for International
Development). 2005. Why We Need to
Work More Effectively in Fragile States.
London: Department for International
Development.
DfID (Department for International Development) Sanitation Reference Group.
2008. Water Is Life, Sanitation Is Dignity,
Final Draft1. DfID Sanitation Policy Background Paper, Department for International Development, London. www.dfid.
gov.uk/consultations/past-consultations/
water-sanitation-background.pdf.
Ejemot, R., J. Ehiri, M. Meremikwu, and
J. Critchley. 2008. Hand Washing for
Preventing Diarrhoea. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, Issue 3. Art. No:
CD004265. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.
CD004265.pub2.

93

PART

2

Chapter 6

Faurès, J.-M., and G. Santini, ed. 2008.
Water and the Rural Poor – Interventions
for Improving Livelihoods in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
and International Fund for Agricultural
Development.
Fewtrell, L., R. B. Kaufmann, D. Kay, W.
Enanoria, L. Haller, and J. M. Colford.
2005. Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
Interventions to Reduce Diarrhoea in Less
Developed Countries: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Lancet Infectious
Diseases 5 (1): 42-52.
Gichere, Samuel, Richard Davis, and
Rafik Hirji. 2006. Climate Variability and
Water Resources Degradation in Kenya:
Improving Water Resources Development
and Management. World Bank Working
Paper Series 69, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2008. Power point presentation at
session on Infrastructure Platform for
Achieving Water Security 2008. First
African Water Week, Tunis.
GWP (Global Water Partnership) Technical Committee. 2003. TEC Background
Paper 8: Poverty Reduction and IWRM.
Sweden: Global Water Partnership.
Hussain, I., and M. A. Hanjra. 2003. Does
Irrigation Water Matter for Rural Poverty
Alleviation? Evidence from South and
South-East Asia. Water Policy 5 (5-6):
429-42.
Japan Water Forum and World Bank.
2005. A Study on Water Infrastructure
Investment and Its Contribution to
Socioeconomic Development in Modern
Japan. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Keiser, J., B. Singer, and J. Utzinger.
2005. Reducing the Burden of Malaria
in Different Settings with Environmental
Management: A Systematic Review. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases 5 (11): 695708.
Laxminarayan, R., J. Chow, and S. A.
Shahid-Salles. 2006. Intervention
Cost-Effectiveness: Overview and Main
Messages. In Disease Control Priorities in
Developing Countries, 2nd edition, ed. D.
T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham,
G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P.
Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove. Washington, DC: World Bank, and New York:
Oxford University Press.
Lipton, M., J. Litchfield, and J.-M. Faurès.
2003. The Effects of Irrigation on Poverty: A Framework for Analysis. Water
Policy 5 (5-6): 413-27.

Handwashing on Child Health: A Randomised Controlled Trial. Lancet 366
(9481): 225-33.
Margat, J., and V. Andréassian. 2008.
L’eau, les Idées Reçues. Paris: Editions le
Cavalier Bleu.
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems and Human
Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, DC: World Resources
Institute.
Narayanan, Ravi. 2005. Financial Water
Report – Critical Issues to Be Addressed.
Letter. Third World Water Forum and
Water Aid. www.financingwaterforall.
org/fileadmin/Financing_water_for_all/
Stakeholders_responses/Narayanan_
Response_to_Camdessus_Report.pdf.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2008.
Service Delivery in Fragile Situations: Key
Concepts, Findings and Lessons. OECD/
DAC Discussion Paper. Off-print of the
Journal on Development 9 (3). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, Paris. www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/11/8/40581496.pdf.
Poverty-Environment Partnership. 2006.
Linking Poverty Reduction and Water
Management. Poverty-Environment
Partnership. http://esa.un.org/iys/docs/
san_lib_docs/povety%20reduction%20
and%20water.pdf.
Prüss-Üstün, A., and C. Corvalán. 2006.
Preventing Disease through Healthy
Environments. Towards an Estimate of the
Environmental Burden of Disease. Geneva:
World Health Organization. www.who.
int/quantifying_ehimpacts/publications/
preventingdisease/en/index.html.
Prüss-Üstün, A., R. Bos, F. Gore, and J. Bartram. 2008. Safer Water, Better Health:
Costs, Benefits and Sustainability of Interventions to Protect and Promote Health.
Geneva: World Health Organization.

Sullivan, C. A., J. R. Meigh, A. M. Giacomello, T. Fediw, P. Lawrence, M.
Samad, S. Mlote, C. Hutton, J. A. Allan,
R. E. Schulze, D. J. M. Dlamini, W.
Cosgrove, J. Delli Priscoli, P. Gleick, I.
Smout, J. Cobbing, R. Calow, C. Hunt,
A. Hussain, M. C. Acreman, J. King,
S. Malomo, E. L Tate, D. O’Regan,
S. Milner, and I. Steyl. 2003. The Water
Poverty Index: Development and Application at the Community Scale. Natural
Resources 27 (3): 189-99.
Tacoli, Cecilia. 2007. Links between Rural
and Urban Development in Africa and
Asia. Paper presented at United Nations
Expert Group Meeting on Population Distribution, Urbanization, Internal Migration
and Development, United Nations Secretariat, New York, 21-23 January, 2008.
Turpie, J., B. Smith, L. Emerton, and J.
Barnes. 1999. Economic Valuation of the
Zambezi Basin Wetlands. Harare: IUCN–
The World Conservation Union Regional
Office for Southern Africa.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006. Beyond Scarcity: Power,
Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New
York: Palgrave MacMillan.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2007. Global Environment
Outlook GEO 4: Environment for Development. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme.
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human
Settlements Programme). 2006. State
of the World Cities 2006/7. London:
Earthscan.

Renwick, M., D. Joshi, M. Huang, S. Kong,
S. Petrova, G. Bennett, R. Bingham, C.
Fonseca, et al. 2007. Multiple Use Water
Services for the Poor: Assessing the State
of Knowledge. Final Report, Winrock
International, Arlington, VA.

UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2007. Symposium Report on Water Productivity in the
Industry of the Future for Technology
Foresight Summit, 27-29 September
2007, Budapest.

Roll Back Malaria, WHO (World Health
Organization), and UNICEF (United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2005. World
Malaria Report 2005. Geneva: World
Health Organization.

United Nations. 2008. World Economic and
Social Survey 2008: Overcoming Economic Insecurity. New York: Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, United
Nations. www.un.org/esa/policy/wess/
wess2008files/wess08/overview_en.pdf.

Lu Jianbo and Xia Li. 2006. Review of RiceFish Farming Systems in China – One
of the Globally Important Ingenious
Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS).
Aquaculture 260 (2): 106-13.

Smakhtin, V. U., C. Revenga, and P. Döll.
2004. Taking into Account Environmental
Water Requirements in Global-Scale Water
Resources Assessments Comprehensive
Assessment Research Report 2. Colombo,
Sri Lanka: Comprehensive Assessment
Secretariat, International Water Management Institute.

Luby, S. P., M. Agboatwalla, D. R. Feikin,
J. Painter, W. Billhimer, A. Altaf,
and R. M. Hoekstra. 2005. Effect of

Sullivan, C. A. 2002. Calculating a Water
Poverty Index. World Development 30 (7):
1195-210.

94

Sullivan C. A., A. Cohen, J.-M. Faurès, and
G. Santini. Forthcoming. The Rural Water
Livelihoods Index: A Tool to Prioritize Waterrelated Interventions for Poverty Reduction.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and International
Fund for Agricultural Development.

WCD (World Commission on Dams).
2000. Dams and Development. A New
Framework for Decision-Making. London:
Earthscan.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2007.
World Health Statistics 2007. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
———. 2008. The Global Burden of Disease:
2004 Update. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water's many benefits
Winpenny, James. 2003. Financing Water for
All. Report of the World Panel on Financing
Water Infrastructure. Chaired by Michel
Camdessus. Kyoto: World Water Council,
3rd World Water Forum, and Global
Water Partnership.
World Bank. 2005a. India’s Water Economy: Bracing for a Turbulent Future.
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
go.worldbank.org/QPUTPV5530.

Water in a changing world

———. 2005b. Zambezi River Basin, Sustainable Water Resources Development
for Irrigated Agriculture. Draft Report,
TFESSD Africa Poverty and Environment
Program, Environment, Rural and Social
Development Department – AFTS1,
Finance, Private Sector and Infrastructure
Department – AFTU1, Regional Integration and Cooperation Department AFC16, Africa Region, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

2

———. 2007. World Development Report
2008: Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Worldwatch Institute. 2007. State of
the World: Our Urban Future. London
and New York: Norton Institute.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme) Expert Group on Storage.
2008. Summary Paper of Online Discussion on Storage. World Water Assessment
Programme.

95

PART

2

Chapter 7
Evolution of
water use
Authors: Richard Connor, Jean-Marc Faurès, Johan Kuylenstierna,
Jean Margat, Pasquale Steduto, Domitille Vallée and Wim van der Hoek
Contributors: José Aguilar-Manjarrez, Rizaldi Boer, Robert Bos,
Cécile Brugère, Ann Cann, Olivier Dubois, Karen Frenken, Arjen Y. Hoekstra,
Jippe Hoogeveen, John Jorgensen, Jon Lane, Darren Saywell and Stefania Vannuccini
Coordinator: Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO)
Facilitator: Domitille Vallée

Key messages
While most of the old challenges of water supply, sanitation and environmental sustainability remain, new challenges such as adaptation to
climate change, rising food and energy prices, and ageing infrastructure are increasing the complexity and financial burden of water management. Population growth and rapid economic development have led
to accelerated freshwater withdrawals.
Trends in access to domestic water supply indicate substantial improvement in the past decade, putting most countries on track to achieve the
water supply target of the Millennium Development Goals. However,
sanitation is lagging well behind, and most sub-Saharan African countries and many rural areas still show unsatisfactory records for both
water supply and sanitation.
Steadily increasing demand for agricultural products to satisfy the
needs of a growing population continues to be the main driver behind
water use. While world population growth has slowed since the 1970s
and is expected to continue its downward trend, steady economic development, in particular in emerging market economies, has translated
into demand for a more varied diet, including meat and dairy products,
putting additional pressure on water resources.
After agriculture, the two major users of water for development are industry and energy (20% of total water withdrawals), which are transforming
the patterns of water use in emerging market economies. Water and energy
share the same drivers: demographic, economic, social and technological
processes put pressure on both energy and water. The recent acceleration
in the production of biofuels and the impacts of climate change bring new
challenges and add to the pressures on land and water resources.
Freshwater ecosystems provide an extensive array of vital services to
support human well-being. A variety of economic and recreational
activities such as navigation, fisheries and pastoral activities depend
on direct use of water in healthy ecosystems. Yet some environmental
services receive inadequate policy attention and are endangered by the
way development sectors use water.
The previous chapters have demonstrated
the multiple benefits of water: its use as
an economic backbone and an essential
element for industrial and energy production systems, its use in human activities
and its vital importance to the well-being
96

of people and ecosystems. Water plays
a strategic role for both on-stream uses
(navigation, fisheries and freshwater ecosystems) and off-stream ones (productive
sectors, human well-being and terrestrial
ecosystems).
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
of use globally, both within sectors and
across users. Growing uncertainty regarding water resources – particularly linked
to climate change (described in chapter 5)
– is expected to exacerbate water scarcity
trends.

While most of the old challenges of
water supply, sanitation and environmental sustainability remain unsolved,
new ­challenges – including adaptation to
climate change, volatile food and energy
prices and ageing infrastructure – are
adding to the complexity and financial
burden of water management.

A challenge in managing water resources
is our scattered knowledge of patterns of
water use (box 7.1; see also chapter 13).
Monitoring systems and modelling abilities require substantial improvement to
measure progress in addressing challenges
for water uses.

The 2003 and 2006 editions of the World
Water Development Report detailed the
multiple sectoral uses of water for human
well-being and ecosystems. Over the last
three years exhaustive reviews of selected
issues have brought to light additional
information on water supply and sanitation,1 agriculture2 and the environment.3
This chapter summarizes some of the
findings of these studies, focusing on the
main challenges confronting the water
community in the immediate and longterm future.

Water use in the world
Population growth and rapid economic
development have accelerated freshwater
withdrawals (see map 10.1 in chapter 10
on mismatch in distribution of runoff and
population). Our somewhat patchy knowledge of water use shows high variability

Box 7.1

Total global freshwater use is estimated at
about 4,000 cubic kilometres (km3) a year.4
Another 6,400 km3 of rainwater is also
used ‘directly’ in agriculture. Nature is the
most important user of water. An estimated 70,000 km3 of water a year are evaporated from forest, natural (uncultivated)
vegetation and wetlands.5 Evaporation
from human-made reservoirs is difficult to
estimate but is considerable in arid areas
and is estimated to be about 200 km3 a
year. For example, an estimated 10 km3
– about 12% of the total storage in Lake
Nasser, upstream of the High Aswan Dam
at the high storage level – are lost through
evaporation each year.6

How much do we know about water uses?

Our knowledge of water use is as poor as
our knowledge of water resources – perhaps
poorer. Information is largely incomplete –
particularly for agriculture, the largest user –
and is lacking altogether for some countries.
Only limited disaggregated information
exists, and even this shows deficiencies of
validity and homogeneity and provides
extremely poor information on trends.

As an example, the table below shows the
extent of metering of agricultural water
use and self-supplied industries in the six
major French river basins. Only half the
water used in agriculture is effectively

metered by a volumetric device. That
means that water withdrawal figures are a
mix of measurements and estimates (when
no metering is available).

Uncertainty of statistics on water uses: importance of metering agriculture
and industrial withdrawals in France
(Percentage of water withdrawals that is metered unless otherwise indicated)
Use for agriculture
or irrigation

Use for selfsupplied industries

From
surface
water

From
groundwater

From
surface
water

From
groundwater

Total use
(cubic
kilometres
a year)

72

62

82

66

2.30

Artois-Picardie

90

100

95

100

0.67

Loire-Brittany

80

95

40

69

3.62

The quality of information systems varies
with each country, but there are common
difficulties:
•

A challenge
in managing
water resources
is our scattered
knowledge
of patterns of
water use

Statistics on the magnitude of demand
and withdrawal are often estimated
rather than based on data that are
measured or collected from censuses.
The level of uncertainty varies, but is
particularly high for agriculture.

Basin

0

0

90

81

5.05

•

Sectors of use are not defined homogeneously and are not well disaggregated.

Rhone-Mediterranean

30

57

87

86

17.13

Seine-Normandy

75

89

37

91

3.06

•

Adequate historical datasets are rare,
and the dates of available statistics are
not always explicit.

Total

43

74

73

84

31.81

3.39

1.38

2.72

1.48

•

Lack of agreed terminology leads to
discrepancies in data compilation and
analyses.

Water in a changing world

Adour-Garonne

Rhine-Meuse

Total volume (cubic
kilometres a year)
No metering

 Less than 45% of
withdrawals metered

 Less than 75% of
withdrawals metered

Source: IFEN 2006, based on 2001 data from the basin agencies.

97

PART

2

Chapter 7E
But we know only part of what humans use:
only the volume of water used off‑stream
(withdrawn) is generally measured (or estimated), and only a part of what is withdrawn is effectively consumed. Most of the
flow is returned – usually at a lower ­quality
– to the water systems, where it can be
reused. Agriculture is by far the most significant consumer of water, particularly in dry
areas where irrigation has been developed.
The consumptive uses of freshwater from
agriculture, industry and domestic sectors
place the greatest pressures on natural
systems (see table 10.5 in chapter 10), both

Box 7.2

The many realities of water use
Water use is uneven across countries. The 10
largest water users (in volume) are India,
China, the United States, Pakistan, Japan,
Thailand, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Mexico
and the Russian Federation (map 7.1).
Total water use at the country level ranges
from 646 km3 a year (India) to less than

Water withdrawal, demand and consumption

Water use refers to water that is being put
to beneficial use by humans. Detailed
water accounting, however, requires more
precise definition of terms.
Water withdrawal is the gross amount of
water extracted from any source in the
natural environment for human purposes. Differentiating withdrawals by
type of source is useful to understand
the pressure put on different parts of the
system.
Water demand is the volume of water
needed for a given activity. If supply is
unconstrained, water demand is equal to
water withdrawal.
Water consumption or consumptive use refers to that part of water withdrawn that is

Map 7.1

in quantity (withdrawals) and quality
(returns of lower quality; for definitions
of key terms relating to water use, see box
7.2). For this reason these are discussed in
greater detail in the rest of chapter 7 (uses)
and in chapter 8 (impacts).

Consumption by sector
Uses

Consumption of water withdrawn (percent)

Domestic (urban)

10-20

Industry

5-10

Energy (cooling)

1-2

Agriculture (irrigation)
Surface irrigation

50-60

Localized irrigation

90

evaporated, transpired, incorporated into
products or crops, consumed by humans
or livestock, or otherwise removed from
the immediate water environment.

in other sectors (domestic industries; see
table). The return flow may be restored to
the water system either as groundwater
infiltrated through permeable soils or
directly drained into rivers or other freshwater bodies.

Water consumption is high in agriculture,
where water is consumed by evapotranspiration of crops, and typically low

Source: Margat and Andréassian 2008.

Water withdrawals highlight discrepancies between regions and between the largest
and smallest consumers, around 2001

EU/25
248

479

630
169

646
Cubic kilometres a year
More than 100
50-100
10-50
Less than 10

Source: FAO-AQUASTAT.

98

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
30 million cubic metres (m3) a year in some
tropical African countries (Cape Verde and
the Central African Republic). National
averages may hide large discrepancies in
water resources and withdrawals between
and within countries. In large countries
such as China and the United States water
demands are concentrated in limited
parts of the country, in general where
agriculture needs to be irrigated or where
economic development is occurring. In
addition, long-term annual or multiannual
averages mask large temporal differences.
Water withdrawals per person is a better
indicator of the impact of population on water.
Water withdrawals per person range from
20 m3 a year in Uganda to more than
5,000 m3 in Turkmenistan, with a world

Map 7.2

average of 600 m3 (map 7.2). Water withdrawals are highest in arid and semi-arid
areas, where irrigation is most needed for
agricultural production, and are lowest in
tropical countries.
Water use is uneven across sectors. Agriculture is by far the main user of water.
Irrigated agriculture accounts for 70%
of water withdrawals, which can rise to
more than 80% in some regions (table
7.1). Although increasing in urbanized
economies, industrial (including energy)
use accounts for only 20% of total water
use and domestic use for about 10%.7
Water withdrawals for energy generation –
­hydropower and thermo-cooling – are on
the rise, but energy is one of the economic
sectors that consumes the least water and

Annual water withdrawals per person by country, world view, 2000

Cubic metres a year
Less than 100
100-250
250-500
500-1,000
More than 1,000
No data

Source: Based on FAO-AQUASTAT global maps (www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/globalmaps/index.stm).

Table 7.1

Water resources and withdrawals, 2000

(Cubic kilometres per year unless otherwise indicated)
Water withdrawals

Region

Renewable
water
resources

Total
water
withdrawals

Amount

Percent

Withdrawals
as percent of
renewable
resources

4

22

10

5.5

270

11

172

7

20.5

26

10

47

19

1.9

Agriculture

Industry

Amount

Percent

3,936

217

186

86

9

Asia

11,594

2,378

1,936

81

Latin America

13,477

252

178

71

Africa

Caribbean

Amount

Domestic (urban)

Percent

93

13

9

69

1

8

3

23

14.0

North America

6,253

525

203

39

252

48

70

13

8.4

Oceania

1,703

26

18

73

3

12

5

19

1.5

Europe

6,603

418

132

32

223

53

63

15

6.3

World

43,659

3,829

2,663

70

784

20

382

10

8.8

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

Water in a changing world

99

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Around 20% of
total water used
globally is from
groundwater
sources (renewable
or not), and this
share is rising
rapidly, particularly
in dry areas

it returns most of the water withdrawn
back to the water system (about 95%). This
is only a partial picture of sectoral usage as
there are many unaccounted-for uses. Little is known about water use in informal
urban settlements or informal irrigation
systems, both of which are generally unaccounted for in official statistics.

industry and energy – are met by withdrawals from renewable sources, either surface
water or groundwater. Less than 1% (currently estimated at 30 km3 a year) comes
from non-renewable (fossil) aquifers mainly
in three countries – Algeria, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Saudi Arabia – which are
the main source of water in these countries.

Finally, there are numerous on-stream uses
(such as fishing, navigation and ecosystems), which although generally nonconsumptive, depend on a certain level of
flows and water quality to function. Such
uses cannot be measured in volume terms,
and these uses are therefore not reflected
in statistics on water use.

Around 20% of total water used globally
is from groundwater sources (renewable
or not), and this share is rising rapidly,
particularly in dry areas.8 This rise has been
stimulated by the development of low-cost
pumps and by individual investment for irrigation and urban uses. Private investment
in self-supply of groundwater – essentially
uncontrolled and unmonitored – has mushroomed in response to inadequate public
services. As a result, groundwater withdrawals rose fivefold during the 20th century,
leading to a rapid drawdown of aquifers in
some areas, putting at risk the sustainability of the uses that rely on it (see chapter 8).

From a water use perspective the world
can be divided into two groups. In one
group of countries (in Africa, most of Asia,
Oceania, Latin America and the Caribbean) agriculture is by far the main water
user, while in the other group (in Europe
and North America) withdrawals are
related mostly to industry and energy. The
domestic supply is essential to life (drinking, hygiene and bathing) but remains the
smallest water user for both groups.

In areas of scarce freshwater resources,
brackish water and wastewater are often
used to meet water demand. While accounting for less than 5% of global water
use, the potential is substantially greater
(figure 7.1; see also figure 9.3 and box 9.5
in chapter 9).

Most (99%) of the 4,000 km3 a year in offstream water uses – irrigation, domestic,

Figure 7.1

Sources of water use globally and for major sectors, 2000

Withdrawals by supply source
Drinking water use

All uses
Drainage water returns
4.82%
Groundwater
(non-renewable)
0.77%

Wastewater reuse
2.41%

Groundwater
(non- renewable) 2.54%

Desalination 0.34%

Desalination 3.55%

Groundwater
18.25%
Groundwater
45.69%

Surface water
73.42%

Agriculture (irrigation)
Drainage water returns
7.24%
Groundwater
(non-renewable)
0.72%

Surface water
48.22%

Energy and industry
Wastewater reuse
3.62%

Groundwater
12.48%

Groundwater
(non-renewable)
0.25%

Groundwater
17.37%
Surface water
71.06%

Surface water
87.26%

Source: FAO-AQUASTAT.

100

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use

Trends in water use
Recent trends. With rapid population
growth water withdrawals have tripled
over the last 50 years. This trend is
explained largely by the rapid increase
in irrigation development stimulated by
food demand in the 1970s and by the
continued growth of agriculture-based
economies.9
Emerging market economies (such as
China, India and Turkey) still have an
important rural population dependent on
water supply for food production. They
are also experiencing rapid growth in
domestic and industrial demands linked
to urbanization and related changes in
lifestyle. There are hot spots in these countries where rural and urban demands are
in competition. Urbanized and industrial
economies (such as the European Union
and the United States) import increasing
amounts of food and manufactured products, while water use in industrial processes and urban environments has been
declining, thanks to both technological
changes in production processes and pollution mitigation efforts.
Expected trends over the next 50 years. There
is general agreement that population
growth, economic growth, urbanization, technological change and changing consumption patterns are the main
factors influencing water use (see chapter
2). There is still substantial uncertainty,
however, on the scale of future demands.
Between 2000 and 2050 the world’s
population is projected to grow from 6
billion to 9 billion, and demand for food
and other goods will increase significantly. Will water resources be adequate?
How will the level of development affect
demand? How will urbanization influence
changes in diet and lifestyle? Where will
demands be highest? How will societies
address the competition among growing
demands? These are difficult questions for
water managers, who are planning water
development works for future decades,
particularly because of the rapid rate of
global change and the many uncertainties
that lie ahead.
One of the biggest uncertainties is the effect of climate change on water resources,
uses and users (see chapter 5), which calls
for a complete revisiting of past scenarios
(such as the World Water Vision scenarios
of 2000, the Millennium Ecosystem scenarios of 2005, and the Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture of 200710) to explore hypotheses
and options for action.11 At the national
Water in a changing world

level countries are already revising their
long-term plans. The Mediterranean Action Plan is exploring possible futures for
agriculture-based economies that are most
vulnerable to anticipated climate change
effects (figure 7.2).12

With rapid
population growth
water withdrawals
have tripled over
the last 50 years

Water footprints. The concept of a water
footprint helps show the extent and locations of water use in relation to consumption patterns (see chapter 2). The water
footprint is defined as the total volume of
water used in the production of the goods
and services consumed by an individual
or community or produced by a business.
A country’s water footprint is the volume
of water used in the production of all the
goods and services consumed by inhabitants of the country. The United States has
a water footprint of 2,480 m3 per capita a
year; China has a footprint of 700 m3 per
capita a year. The global water footprint is
1,240 m3 per capita a year. The four major
factors determining a country’s water
footprint are volume of consumption,
consumption pattern (for example, high or
low meat consumption), climate (growing conditions) and agricultural practices
(water use efficiency).
A country’s internal water footprint is the
volume of water used from domestic water
resources; its external footprint is the
water used in other countries to produce
the goods it imports (‘virtual water’, discussed in box 2.1 in chapter 2). Whether
water consumed by rainfed agriculture
should be accounted for in calculating
water footprints is a subject of debate.
The ratio of internal to external water

Figure 7.2

Future water demands in Mediterranean
region countries for 2025 in Blue Plan
business as usual scenario (trend scenario)

Cubic kilometres a year
120

2000
2025
2050

100
80
60
40
20
0
Egypt

Italy

Turkey

Spain

France Syrian Morocco Tunisia
Arab
Republic

Israel

Cyprus

Note: Projections for 2025 are based on Blue Plan 2005 scenarios established on the basis
of national planning documents. Projections for 2050 are based on the optimistic assumption that 2050 water demand per inhabitant is similar to that for 2025.
Source: Based on Margat 2008.

101

PART

2

Chapter 7E

externalizing the
water footprint
means increasing
dependence on
foreign water
resources but
also passing on
environmental
impacts

footprints is relevant, because externalizing the water footprint means increasing
dependence on foreign water resources but
also passing on environmental impacts.
With increasing globalization, it is no
longer sufficient to examine water issues
only in a national context. Local decisions
on water use in agriculture and industry
are increasingly driven by decisions outside
the local water domain. For example, the
water footprint of inhabitants of Europe
and North America has been externalized to other parts of the world (map 7.3).
Europe is a large importer of cotton, which
is produced in many water-scarce areas
(and elsewhere) though it is one of the
thirstiest crops. Through the global market
European and U.S. consumption relies on
water resources available outside Europe’s
boundaries, and thus European and North
American consumers influence agricultural
and industrial strategies elsewhere. About
80% of virtual water flows relate to trade in
agricultural products (see box 2.1 in chapter
2).13 Water-scarce countries such as Greece
and Spain use large volumes of water to
produce fruit and oil crops for export. The
rationale for such uses will become increasingly questionable where climate change
leads to reductions in water availability.

Domestic water supply and
sanitation
While rapid progress has recently been
made in water supply in all regions except

Map 7.3

sub-Saharan Africa, sanitation coverage still lags. To highlight the problem,
the UN General Assembly declared 2008
the International Year of Sanitation in
response to the recommendations of the
UN Secretary-General’s Advisory Board on
Water and Sanitation.14 The goal is to raise
awareness and accelerate progress towards
the target set for the Millennium Development Goal of reducing by half the proportion of people without access to basic
sanitation between 1990 and 2015.

Current state of water supply and
sanitation
In 2006, 54% of the world’s population
had a piped connection to their dwelling,
plot or yard, and 33% used other improved
drinking water sources. The remaining
13% (884 million people) relied on unimproved sources. Progress has been greatest
in East Asia, with an increase in coverage
of improved drinking water sources from
68% in 1990 to 88% in 2006.15
Except for sub-Saharan Africa and Oceania, all regions are on track to meet the
Millennium Development Goal drinking
water target. But if current trends continue, 2.4 billion people will still be without
access to basic sanitation.16 Coverage is
much higher in urban than in rural areas
for both water supply (figure 7.3) and sanitation (figure 7.4). Global and regional aggregates for water and sanitation coverage
do not show the large differences between
countries.

Average national water footprint per capita, 1997-2001

Cubic metres a year
per capita
600-800
800-1,000
1,000-1,200
1,200-1,300
1,300-1,500
1,500-1,800
1,800-2,100
2,100-2,500
No data

Source: Hoekstra and Chapagain 2008.

102

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
The forgotten challenge of small towns.
Efforts to increase the number of people benefiting from improved water and
sanitation services have focused on two
areas: rural areas, where the favoured
approach is community-based management of appropriate systems, and urban
centres, where utilities (public or private)
operate a range of services tailored to
customer groups. The grey area between
the two is small towns with populations
of 2,000-50,000, where neither community management nor utility-based
solutions are fully suitable.17 Populations
in these towns account for a large share of
the overall population. Improving services
will therefore require greater attention to
management models, engineering designs,
financing arrangements and professional
support options that offer the demanded
services and that can be expanded incrementally and sustained over the long
term. Other aspects of success include
financial and management autonomy,
transparency and accountability, demand
responsiveness, cost-effective design and
operation, and professional capacity, as
well as elements of competition and the
ability to expand.
Monitoring water supply and sanitation.
Before 2000 coverage data came primarily
from government water and sanitation
agencies. There were no common definitions for access to safe water and basic
sanitation, so data were not comparable.
Since 2000 the Joint Monitoring Programme18 has reported on water supply
and sanitation using population-based
data gathered through household surveys and national censuses (box 7.3). Its
assessments categorize water supply and
sanitation technologies as ‘improved’ or
‘unimproved’.
The Joint Monitoring Programme defines
‘access to drinking water’ as the availability of at least 20 litres of drinking water
per person per day within 1 km of the
dwelling (a 30 minute round-trip journey).
In urban areas the distance to a source
is usually not a problem, and in such
densely populated areas a water-hauling
trip of 30 minutes or less, including queuing time, is a more appropriate indicator
of access. ‘Safe’ drinking water is water
that meets accepted quality standards
and poses no significant health risks. But
determining the microbiological safety
of drinking water in each household is
impractical, and it is therefore assumed
that water is safe if it comes from an
‘improved’ source such as piped water,
a protected well or spring, or rainwater.
Water in a changing world

Figure 7.3

Regional and global water supply coverage,
by urban and rural areas, 1990 and 2006
Urban

1990

Rural

2006

Developed regions
Commonwealth of
Independent States
Eastern Asia
Latin America and
Caribbean
Northern Africa
Oceania
South-Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Western Asia
World

100

75

50

25

0

Percent

0

25

50

75

100

Note: For charting progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, the United
Nations has classified countries into three regions: developed regions, countries in the
Commonwealth of Independent States, and developing regions. The developing regions
are further divided into subregions.
Source: WHO and UNICEF 2008b.

Figure 7.4

Regional and global sanitation coverage, by
urban and rural areas, 1990 and 2006
Urban

1990

Rural

2006

Developed regions
Commonwealth of
Independent States
Eastern Asia
Latin America and
Caribbean
Northern Africa
Oceania
South-Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Western Asia
World

100

75

50

25

0

Percent

0

25

50

75

100

Note: For charting progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, the United
Nations has classified countries into three regions: developed regions, countries in the
Commonwealth of Independent States, and developing regions. The developing regions
are further divided into subregions.
Source: WHO and UNICEF 2008b.

Box 7.3

Rapid assessment of drinking water quality

The World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) have developed the Rapid Assessment of Drinking Water Quality (RADWQ) survey
method, which they pilot-tested in
China, Ethiopia, Jordan, Nicaragua,
Nigeria and Tajikistan. It uses cluster
sampling across a country to select
individual drinking water sources for
testing. The parameters to be tested
depend on the extent of the survey
and on local health hazards. The
output is a snapshot of drinking water

quality for each improved source
tested.
The study in Tajikistan involved 1,620
samples in 53 clusters over a sixmonth period during 2004/05. The
samples were taken from utility piped
supplies and protected springs. Overall, 87% of the sites complied with the
WHO guideline value for microbiological quality and arsenic, fluoride and
nitrate concentrations.
Source: Aliev et al. 2006.

103

PART

2

Despite strong
epidemiological
evidence that
universal access
to improved
sanitation would
dramatically reduce
the global burden
of diarrhoea,
worm infections
and malnutrition,
sanitation receives
substantially
less priority and
funding than water
supply in virtually
every country

Chapter 7E
While the assumption that improved
sources are also safe generally holds with
respect to fæcal contamination, it has
been challenged by the emerging problem
of arsenic and fluoride contamination of
drinking water.
The Joint Monitoring Programme defines
‘access to basic sanitation’ as the proportion of the population (total, urban and
rural) with access to an improved sanitation facility for defecation. Improved
means that human excreta are hygienically separated from human contact or
the immediate environment, essential for
preventing fæcal-oral disease transmission.
Although the formulation of common
definitions was a major step, controversies remain regarding the availability
and quality of data sources. The global
coverage of improved drinking water in
urban areas is estimated at 95%,19 but that
figure seems difficult to reconcile with
the reality of millions of people in slums
in developing countries. These people
might be connected to a piped water supply system and therefore benefit from an
‘improved’ technology according to the
Joint Monitoring Programme criteria. In
reality, however, the piped water supply system might be poorly maintained,
be inoperable many hours of the day or
provide polluted water. This is the controversy of ‘served’ and ‘unserved’. Another
problem is that many people remain
unaccounted for in the data. Again, these
are the poor people living in informal settlements that are not officially recognized
by governments. As a result, millions of
people are probably missing from the
national statistics. 20
Three key issues need to be addressed in
monitoring programmes for water and
sanitation services: access, quality and
sustainability. A challenge is developing
appropriate indicators that can be used in
household surveys to collect information
about disparities in access, affordability,
per capita use and the sustainability and
reliability of services. Also needed are
simple and inexpensive water quality tests
as a cross-check on the safety of improved
drinking water sources and on safety at
point of use.
Monitoring has traditionally focused on
the household, overlooking the fact that
household members are outside the house
for most of the day. Across developing
countries there are 600 million children
of primary school age, and roughly half
attend schools that lack safe drinking

104

water and sanitation. In two of the pilot
countries for the UN-Water Global Annual
Assessment of Sanitation and DrinkingWater (GLAAS): 2008 Pilot Report, average
sanitation coverage is 26% in schools and
75% in hospitals. 21 Sanitation in schools
has indirect benefits as well as health
benefits. In particular, separate facilities
for boys and girls have been shown to
stimulate girls’ school attendance and to
lead to greater attention in class by all
pupils.
Putting sanitation in the spotlight. Despite
strong epidemiological evidence that universal access to improved sanitation would
dramatically reduce the global burden of
diarrhoea, worm infections and malnutrition, sanitation receives substantially less
priority and funding than water supply in
virtually every country.22
Human Development Report 2006 analysed the sanitation problems facing the
world and the reasons why sanitation
lags behind water supply in attention and
resources allocated.23 The main barrier
has been political reluctance. Sanitation
is usually a low-priority item in national
policy-making, planning, budgeting and
implementation. As a result, it is often
delegated to the lowest level of ­governance
– ­struggling municipalities. There are,
however, encouraging signs of change. In
response to findings that in 2006, 62%
of Africans lacked access to an improved
sanitation,24 32 African ministers signed
the eThekwini Declaration in February
2008 pledging to create separate budget
lines for sanitation and hygiene and to
commit at least 0.5% of GDP.25
Significantly, five countries along with
private sector and voluntary sources have
made contributions totalling $60 million
to the Global Sanitation Fund launched
in March 2008 by the Water Supply and
Sanitation Collaborative Council and
its partners – with an annual target of
$100 million – to help meet the Millennium Development Goal sanitation target.

Trends in water and sanitation
provision
Before the 1990s water industries were
national monopolies in many countries.
Since then, major water service reforms
have taken place, mostly from centralized
to decentralized public provision.26 Asian
countries, including Indonesia, Pakistan
and the Philippines, undertook radical
decentralization programmes. In many
Latin American countries (for example,
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Panama and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use
Peru) national monopolies were broken
into hundreds of municipal providers as
part of a wider process of devolution across
all areas of government. Rapid decentralization after the political turnaround in
Eastern Europe and Central Asia devolved
responsibilities to lower tiers of government, but financial means and capacity
remained mainly at the central level. In
Africa the picture is mixed, with many
countries remaining centralized while
some (such as Ethiopia and Tanzania) are
decentralizing rapidly.
Decentralization was not a studied response to the specific problems of the
water sector, but rather a by-product of
wider state reforms. As a result, local
governments often found themselves in
charge of service delivery while lacking
the capacity to fulfil this function. Private
sector participation has proved difficult to
implement. In larger urban centres this has
been primarily for political reasons, while
in smaller cities and rural areas economic
viability is an additional problem. Thus,
the real transition for most water consumers has not been from public to private,
but rather from unregulated centralized
public provision to regulated decentralized
public provision. Today, most urban and
peri-urban areas in the world are served by
publicly owned and managed utilities, a
model that is likely to continue.27
In many developing countries public utilities do not perform well because of low
motivation, poor management, inadequate
cost recovery and political interference.
Public sector reform is one of the most
important avenues for sustaining and
increasing coverage and service. In addition, encouraging public sector utilities to
extend services to informal urban settlements (in partnership with citizens groups
or informal private sector operators) is a
priority in cities where slum populations
account for a large share of the urban
population.
Lessons from the sanitation sector call for
a shift in thinking:
•

Technological solutions are available
to satisfy almost any requirement
within the sector, but technology
interventions are very unlikely to
succeed on an upscalable and sustainable basis without assessment of their
relevance and full local social, political and economic ownership.

•

To succeed, technology interventions
must incorporate carefully considered

Water in a changing world

approaches (‘software’) as well as technologies (‘hardware’). Implicit is the
realization that technologies should be
demand-driven and that demand for
certain technologies can be stimulated
more effectively by using appropriate
approaches – for example, through
social marketing or the development
of entrepreneurial local capacities.
•

Providing the technology is not
enough. The health gains of universal
access to basic sanitation accrue only
if people use the sanitary facilities
properly and practice proper hygiene.
This means that hygiene promotion
and social marketing are always needed along with technology provision.28

•

Household decision-making is crucial.
Because behaviour change is central to
achieving health gains from sanitation, service providers need to focus
on this level. This means that hygiene
promotion is central to any sanitation strategy and that the technology should be appropriate. In simple
terms, it is no good promoting a type
of toilet that people will not use.

•

Change is needed across the entire
community. While household behaviour is critical, individual households
alone may not be able to influence
health outcomes. For the majority of
households in poor rural settings or
overcrowded urban settlements, the
actions of the community as a whole
have great influence. Excreta need to
be removed from the environment in
which children play and adults labour.
For this reason, interventions at the
household level need to be coordinated across the community.

•

Public and private (personal, household) benefits of sanitation need to be
in balance. The public nature of sanitation remains important (primarily
environmental protection and public
health). Despite calls to scale down all
public provision, it is not feasible for
households or local communities to
take responsibility for wider societal
concerns. Governments have to find
pragmatic ways of balancing local and
household needs with wider societal
ones. Linking household service provision with community-level planning
can be vital in creating local mechanisms to achieve this balance.29

2

In many developing
countries public
utilities do not
perform well
because of low
motivation, poor
management,
inadequate
cost recovery
and political
interference

We need to transform the way we look at
wastewater, recognizing it as a resource
105

PART

2

Steadily increasing
demand for
agricultural
products to
satisfy the needs
of a growing
population is
the main driver
behind agricultural
water use

Chapter 7E
rather than a problem, and manage it accordingly. Its various possible uses, such as
farming, aquaculture, gardening and forest planting, need to be planned, and risk
mitigation measures put in place to avoid
the health costs (see chapter 8).
While technically and financially appropriate sanitation services are available,
little is known about community perceptions, demand and acceptability of different sanitation solutions. There are many
taboos surrounding defecation behaviour,
making it difficult to study. Sanitation
services, far more than water supply, must
be adapted to the local situation to ensure
that they are used by men, women and
children. Sociocultural factors are fundamental to sustainability. Women need to
be consulted when toilets are built and
must be allowed to manage their sanitation facilities.
An example of the shift from supplyled to demand-driven approaches is the
community-led total sanitation campaign
in South Asia, which seeks to end open
defecation by highlighting the problems
caused to everyone in the community. It
also ensures that every household either
builds and uses its own low-cost toilet or
has access to a shared toilet. In Bangladesh
the total sanitation campaign was begun
by local non-governmental organizations
and has since been scaled up into a national programme, and in India the Sulabh
Sanitation Movement has successfully
scaled up a non-governmental organization model,30 but elsewhere it has proved
difficult for governments to scale up
similar successes. The 2008 pilot survey of
the UN-Water Global Annual Assessment
of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS)
suggests that there is a need to reinforce
education programmes with actions that
provide better hygiene and sanitation in
schools and hospitals.31

Water use in agriculture
Steadily increasing demand for agricultural products to satisfy the needs of a
growing population is the main driver
behind agricultural water use. Although
population growth has slowed since the
1970s, economic development, in particular in emerging market economies, is
translating into demand for a more varied,
water-intensive diet, including meat and
dairy products (see chapter 2 and box 7.4).
To meet these future food needs, pressure
to develop new supply sources or increase
water allocation to agriculture will continue. This challenge was highlighted in
106

the first two United Nations World Water
Development Reports, and its implication
for an emphasis on water for agriculture
was clearly drawn by the International
Water Management Institute32 and the
World Bank.33 Climate change and the
recent acceleration in biofuel production
bring new challenges to agriculture and
put further pressure on land and water
resources. In a tighter global food market,
where an increasing number of major
agricultural systems are reaching the
limits of their productive capacity, climate
events increasingly influence food prices,
with devastating social and humanitarian
consequences.

Why is so much water needed for
food production?
Agriculture accounts for 70% of freshwater withdrawals from rivers, lakes and
aquifers – up to more than 90% in some
developing countries. Furthermore, unlike
in industrial and domestic uses, where
most of the water returns to rivers after
use, in agriculture a large part of water is
consumed by evapotranspiration. Many
irrigation systems, however, return a large
amount of water to the system after use.
Biomass cannot be produced without
water. The source of all food is photosynthesis, a process by which plants transform
energy captured from the sun, carbon dioxide from the air and minerals from the
ground into biomass. Water, stored in the
soil, is pumped by the roots and transpired
into the atmosphere through the leaves.
Transpiration cools the leaves and enables
mass flows of mineral nutrients and water
from roots.
Biomass is processed through the food
chain, which describes the flow of energy
and feeding relationship between species:
from primary producers (plants) to herbivores to carnivores. Despite substantial
progress in agricultural research, energy
flow efficiency in the food chain remains
extremely low: about 10% for herbivores
and 20% for carnivores. About 10 kilocalories (kcal) of grass are needed to produce
1 kcal of beef (box 7.4).
Rainfed agriculture covers 80% of the
world’s cultivated land, and is responsible for about 60% of crop production.
In rainfed agriculture the soil stores the
rain and releases it slowly to the plants.
Rainwater used in agriculture, part of what
is called ‘green water’, is a characteristic
of the land on which it falls and is not
usually subject to competition from other
sectors.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use

Box 7.4

How much water is needed to produce food for a single day?

We can estimate how much water is
needed to sustain our diets by calculating
the water lost in evapotranspiration based
on crop physiology. Depending on local
climate, varieties and agronomical practices, it takes 400-2,000 litres of evapotranspiration daily to produce 1 kilogram
(kg) of wheat, and 1,000-20,000 litres per

kilogram of meat, depending on the type
of animal, feed and management practices. Based on these values, researchers
have estimated daily water requirements
to support diets, ranging from 2,000 to
5,000 litres of water per person per day.
The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations uses 2,800 kilocalories

(kcal) per person at the national level as
a threshold for food security. As a rule
of thumb, it can therefore be estimated
that 1 litre of water is needed to produce
1 kcal of food. Because of the low energy
efficiency of the food chain, protein-rich
diets require substantially more water than
vegetarian diets.

Value produced from a unit of water for selected commodities
Water productivity
Product

Kilograms per
cubic metre

Dollars per
cubic metre

Protein grams
per cubic metre

Kilocalories per
cubic metre
660-4,000

Cereal
Wheat ($0.2 per kilogram)

0.2-1.2

0.04-0.24

50-150

0.15-1.6

0.05-0.18

12-50

500-2,000

0.30-2.00

0.03-0.22

30-200

1,000-7,000

Lentils ($0.3 per kilogram)

0.3-1.0

0.09-0.30

90-150

1,060-3,500

Fava beans ($0.3 per kilogram)

0.3-0.8

0.09-0.24

100-150

1,260-3,360

Groundnut ($0.8 per kilogram)

0.1-0.4

0.08-0.32

30-120

800-3,200

Rice ($0.31 per kilogram)
Maize ($0.11 per kilogram)
Legumes

Vegetables
Potatoes ($0.1 per kilogram)

3-7

0.3-0.7

50-120

3,000-7,000

Tomatoes ($0.15 per kilogram)

5-20

0.75-3.0

50-200

1,000-4,000

Onions ($0.1 per kilogram)

3-10

0.3-1.0

20-67

1,200-4,000

1.0-5.0

0.8-4.0

Negligible

520-2,600

Fruits
Apples ($0.8 per kilogram)
Olives ($1.0 per kilogram)

1.0-3.0

1.0-3.0

10-30

1,150-3,450

Dates ($2.0 per kilogram)

0.4-0.8

0.8-1.6

8-16

1,120-2,240

Others
Beef ($3.0 per kilogram)

0.03-0.1

0.09-0.3

10-30

60-210

Fish (aquaculturea)

0.05-1.0

0.07-1.35

17-340

85-1,750

a. Includes extensive systems without additional nutritional inputs to superintensive systems.
Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

In irrigation, by contrast, water is extracted from rivers, lakes and ­aquifers (also
called ‘blue water’) and applied on land,
where most of it is consumed by evapotranspiration. Irrigation thus competes
with other sectors (including the environment) for blue water. The importance of
irrigated and rainfed agriculture varies
across regions (map 7.4), for the most part
following climate patterns. While the
contribution of irrigation to total crop
production is modest (about 10%-20%), it
allows crop growth in many permanently
water-scarce or temporarily water-stressed
environments.

productivity has doubled. However, yields
in rainfed agriculture are still far from
their potential (figure 7.5). Opportunities
therefore exist to contain future increases
in water use in agriculture by reducing the
yield gap. In 2005 cereal yields were about
1-1.5 tonnes per hectare in sub-Saharan
Africa, compared with 5 tonnes per hectare in Europe.34 However, where land or
water constrain future development, the
yield gap is closing rapidly, leaving little
prospect for easy improvement. China and
Egypt, for instance, are close to realizing
their maximum potential for major food
crops.

More efficient use of water – higher socioeconomic returns and more crops per
drop – can be obtained primarily through
intensification (improved crop varieties
plus better agronomic practices). Over
the last 40 years major food yields have
increased progressively and crop water

Trends and current situation of
water use in agriculture

Water in a changing world

The last 50 years have seen rapid acceleration in water resources development for
agriculture.35 Development in hydraulic
infrastructure (dams and large-scale public
surface irrigation), as well as private and
107

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Map 7.4

Relative importance of rainfed and irrigated agriculture

Irrigated

780
220

650

Rainfed

235

Global total:
7,130 cubic kilometres
(80% rainfed, 20% irrigated)

1,670

905

1,080
More than half of production from rainfed areas
More than 75% of production from rainfed areas
More than half of production from irrigated areas
More than 75% of production from irrigated areas

1,480
110

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

Figure 7.5

Gaps are large between farmer’s actual yields
and achievable yields for major rainfed cereal
crops

Actual yields as percent of obtainable yields in selected countries, 2005
100
80
60

countries (figure 7.6), a trend that lasted
until very recently. In real terms, food
prices declined, until recently, to their
lowest levels in history, so that consumers
in many countries could eat better while
spending less of their budget on food.
Today, food supply accounts for a very
small part of household income in rich
countries, but it can constitute as much as
80% of income of poor people in developing countries.

40
20

Vi

et
N
Th am
ai
la
nd
In
d
Et ia
hi
op
Za ia
m
bi
a
Sy
ria
K
Bo eny
st a
w
an
a
N
M ige
o
Bu ro r
rk cc
in
a o
F
Ta aso
nz
a
Ug nia
Zi an
m da
ba
bw
Jo e
rd
an
Ira
n
I
Pa raq
ki
st
a
Ye n
m
en

0

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

community schemes (particularly groundwater pumping; see chapter 8), have put
water at the service of populations as part
of the global effort to rapidly increase staple
food production, ensure food self‑sufficiency and avoid famines. As the global
population grew from 2.5 billion in 1950 to
6.5 billion at the beginning of the 21st century, food production growth outstripped
population growth,36 irrigated area doubled
(particularly in Asia), and water withdrawals tripled. Today, irrigated agriculture
covers 275 million hectares – about 20% of
cultivated land – and accounts for 40% of
global food production (map 7.5).
This success in agricultural production led
to a 30-year decline in food prices in most
108

Declining food prices, high agricultural
productivity, improved trade and markets
and progressive reduction in the risk of
food shortage and famines also led to reduced investment in agriculture, particularly in irrigation, resulting in neglect of
maintenance of public irrigation schemes
and a sharp slowdown in the growth of
irrigated agriculture.

Future water demand in agriculture
As population continues to grow and
demand for food intensifies, pressure
on water from agricultural activities are
expected to increase, although at a slower
pace. Agriculture is also facing competition for water from other sectors, and its
allocation is decreasing in water-scarce
areas, especially around urban centres.
Growth in world demand for food will
mirror population growth, progressively
declining from 2.2% a year in the last
decades of the 20th century, to 1.6%
in 2015, 1.4% in 2015-30, and 0.9% in
2030-50.37 However, these global figures
hide extremely large variations, with
developing countries growing faster than
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use

Map 7.5

Percentage of cultivated areas equipped for irrigation, around 2003

Less than 1
1-5
5-10
10-50
More than 50
No data

Source: FAO-AQUASTAT.

developed countries. Niger, the country
with the highest population growth rate,
is expected to grow from 10.7 million in
2000 to 53 million in 2050. Countries
with high population growth rates and
limited agricultural resources will likely
see their food deficit increase, with serious implications for economic and food
security.
The increasing number of areas where
water has become a limiting factor for
irrigated agriculture, associated with
rising claims for releasing water to guarantee or restore environmental services,
has tightened food production in some
regions. The Middle East, for example, can
no longer satisfy its food requirements and
relies increasingly on food imports.
Part of the current pressure on water resources comes from increasing demands
for animal feed (figure 7.7). Meat production requires 8-10 times more water than
cereal production. With the increase
in consumption of dairy products and
meat, the production of feed grains has
expanded rapidly, at the expense of other
crops. With rising living standards and
urbanization, consumption of meat and
dairy products will continue to rise (it
has more than tripled in China over past
decades).
The latest projections available show an
average increase of 0.6% a year in irrigated
land from 1998 until 2030, compared
with 1.5% over the 1950s-1990s. In the
same period (1998-2030), because of continued increases in agricultural productivity, 36% more food will be produced
Water in a changing world

Figure 7.6

As irrigation area expanded, food price fell
for 30 years before starting to rise again

Irrigation (millions of hectares)
Food price index (1990 = 100)
300
250

Annual growth rate
of irrigation (by decade)
1961-1970: 2.1%

1971-1980: 2.2%

Irrigation
1981-1990: 1.6%

200

1991-2000: 1.2%

150
100

Food price index

50
2000–03: 0.1%

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2008

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007;
FAO FAOSTAT.

Figure 7.7

Feed demand drives future demand for grains

Kilograms per person per year
600
500

Food
Feed
Other

400
300
200
100
0
1975 2000 2025 2050

1975 2000 2025 2050

1975 2000 2025 2050

1975 2000 2025 2050

World

Sub-Saharan Africa

East Asia

OECD countries

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

109

PART

2

Recent increases
in the prices of the
main agricultural
commodities have
caused the number
of people suffering
from hunger to rise
from 850 million
to 963 million

Chapter 7E
with 13% more water.38 Crop and animal
breeding and biotechnology have already
resulted in tremendous gains in yields,
along with savings in production costs
and pesticide use through improved resistance of genetically modified crops. Common grains such as wheat, maize and rice,
which achieved significant gains from the
1960s to 1980s, are unlikely to see further
gains.

The implications of food prices for
food security
The old challenge of increasing and securing food supply remains a priority in
many countries as the number of people
suffering from hunger remains desperately high, most of them in rural areas
of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.39
Recent increases in the prices of the main
agricultural commodities have caused the
number of people suffering from hunger
to rise from 850 million to 963 million.
Between September 2007 and March 2008
the price of wheat, corn, rice and other
cereals rose an average of 41% on the
international market. While the increase
in food commodity prices started in 2000,
previous price increases have never been
this rapid. The rising demand for highvalue commodities has also resulted in
surging prices for meat and dairy products.
From the beginning of 2000 to the middle
of 2008, butter and milk prices tripled,
and poultry prices have almost doubled.
The rapid surge in the prices of the main
food and feed commodities in 2007 and
2008 arose from a combination of causes,
including long-term increases in demand
for meat and dairy products in emerging
market economies, a progressive reduction
in the stocks of the main commodities
and unfavourable climate in some of the
largest exporting countries. The effects of
these factors have likely been amplified
by incentives for bioenergy production in
OECD countries and speculation on food
trade.40 Prices have fallen since mid-2008
thanks to good prospects for world food
production, the overall slowdown of the
world economy and reductions in the
price of oil. Future trends in food prices
remain uncertain. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) estimates that in the medium term
tight markets and higher costs of production inputs will keep prices higher and
more volatile than in the past.41 This
situation will hurt both producers and
consumers. In addition, domestic prices
of food in developing countries have not
followed downward trends from the international market, and the prices of major

110

staple commodities remain high in many
places.
The effects of price increases on consumption vary by country and consumer group.
Consumers in low-income countries are
much more responsive and vulnerable
to price changes than are consumers in
high-income countries, because food expenditure can represent 50%-75% of their
income.42 Surges in food prices thus hurt
the poorest populations the most. Should
food prices remain high, investment in
agriculture, including water development
for irrigation, is likely to grow. Higher food
prices may represent an opportunity for
smallholder farmers if the right policies
are adopted.43

How will bioenergy affect
agricultural water use?
Bioenergy is energy derived from biological origins, such as grains, sugar crops, oil
crops, starch, cellulose (grasses and trees)
and organic waste. Liquid biofuel (bio­
ethanol and biodiesel), while representing
only a small percentage of all bioenergy
products, currently dominates the debate
because of its capacity to substitute for
fossil fuel and because most of its source
feedstock can also be used to produce food
(see chapter 3).44
Current and projected trends in bioenergy.
Around 10% of the total energy supply
comes from biomass, and most of that
(80%) comes from the ‘traditional’ biomass
sources of wood, dung and crop residues.
These represent a significant part of the
energy used in many developing countries. Of commercial or ‘modern’ bioenergy, two-thirds is produced from fresh
vegetable material and organic residue
used to produce electricity and heat. About
5% of biomass is used to produce liquid
biofuel for transport, which currently
accounts for less than 2% of transport
energy worldwide.
The quest for greater energy autonomy,
the rise in oil prices until the second half
of 2008 and concerns about the impacts
of greenhouse gas emissions in OECD
countries are behind a recent surge in
transport bioenergy.45 The production of
bioethanol, from sugarcane, corn, sugar
beet, wheat and sorghum, tripled between
2000 and 2007 to an estimated 77 billion
litres in 2008.46 Brazil (using sugarcane)
and the United States (using mostly maize)
are the main producers, accounting for
77% of global supply. Biodiesel production, derived from oil- or tree-seeds such
as rapeseed, sunflower, soybean, palm oil,
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use
coconut or jatropha, increased 11-fold between 2000 and 2007, with 67% produced
in the European Union.
In 2007 approximately 23% of maize
production in the United States was used
to produce ethanol, as was about 54%
of Brazil’s sugarcane crop. In the European Union about 47% of vegetable oil
produced was used in the production of
biodiesel, necessitating higher imports of
vegetable oil to meet domestic consumption needs. In energy equivalence the
2008 ethanol share of the gasoline transport fuel market in these economies was
estimated at 4.5% for the United States,
40.0% for Brazil and 2.2% for the European Union. The biodiesel share of the diesel
transport fuel market was estimated at
0.5% for the United States, 1.1% for Brazil
and 3.0% for the European Union.47
The international policy environment,
national policy support and oil prices will
strongly influence future demand for biofuel. Global ethanol production is projected to increase rapidly to 127 billion litres
in 2017, with production concentrated in
the United States, Brazil and, to a lesser
extent, the European Union and China.
Global biodiesel production is expected to
reach 24 billion litres in 2017.48
The global potential of conventional
biofuel is limited by the availability of
suitable land and water for crops and the
high cost of most conventional technologies. Technically, up to 20 exajoules from
conventional ethanol and biodiesel, meeting 11% of total demand for liquid fuels
in the transport sector, could be possible
by 2050.49 Energy yield is highest for
feedstock grown in tropical conditions, in
particular, sugarcane and palm oil.
Implication of increased crop demands for
land, water and the environment. The potential impact of biofuel production on
land and water resources varies with local
agroclimatic conditions and policies. The
potential impact on freshwater resources
is greatest where agricultural production
depends on irrigation and is practically
negligible where rainfed production is
practiced. Where agriculture requires irrigation, increased production of biofuel
could result in reduced water allocation to
other crop commodities.
Globally, irrigation water allocated to biofuel production is estimated at 44 km3, or
2% of all irrigation water.50 Under current
production conditions it takes an average of roughly 2,500 litres of water (about
Water in a changing world

820 litres of it irrigation water) to produce
1 litre of liquid biofuel (the same amount
needed on average to produce food for one
person for one day). But regional variations
can be substantial, depending primarily
on the relative percentage of irrigation in
biofuel crop production. The share of irrigation water used for biofuel production
is negligible in Brazil and the European
Union and is estimated to be 2% in China
and 3% in the United States.51 In India,
where sugarcane is fully irrigated, nearly
3,500 litres of water are withdrawn for each
litre of ethanol produced. The markets
for biofuel and agricultural products are
strongly meshed. Because of crop substitutability, all crops tend to compete for the
same inputs, land, fertilizers and irrigation
water, and farmers select crops that offer
the best return on their investment.52

2

The international
policy environment,
national policy
support and oil
prices will strongly
influence future
demand for biofuel

Implementing all current national biofuel
policies and plans would take 30 million
hectares of cropland and 180 km3 of additional irrigation water. Although globally
less than a few percentage points of total
area and water use, the impacts could
be large for some countries, including
China and India, and for some regions of
large countries, such as the United States.
There could also be significant implications for water resources, with possible
feedback into global grain markets. The
volume of water and area of land used for
biofuel production depend on the crop
and the agricultural system (table 7.2).
Private investors are showing increasing
interest in land and irrigated schemes in
Africa for agricultural products for biofuel
production.
According to the OECD, growth of the
bioenergy industry is likely to place additional pressure on the environment and
biodiversity.53 The potential of bioenergy
to mitigate climate change is complex
and varies by type of crop and farming system. Among current technologies
only ethanol produced from sugarcane in
Brazil, ethanol produced as a by-product
of cellulose production (as in Sweden
and Switzerland) and biodiesel produced
from animal fats and used cooking oil can
substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions compared with gasoline and mineral
diesel. The study concludes that all other
conventional bioenergy technologies
typically deliver greenhouse gas emissions
reductions of less than 40% compared
with their fossil fuel alternatives. When
impacts such as soil acidification, fertilizer
use, biodiversity loss and the toxicity of
agricultural pesticides are taken into account, the adverse environmental impacts
111

PART

2

Table 7.2

Crop
Sugarcane

Chapter 7E
Different types of biofuel and quantity of water needed to produce them in rainfed or
irrigated conditions
Fuel product (energy density:
biodiesel 35 megajoules
per litre; ethanol 20
megajoules per litre)

Annual
obtainable
yield (litres
per hectare)

Rainfed or
irrigated

Evapotranspiration
(litres per litre
of fuel)

Irrigation water
withdrawn (litres
per litre of fuel)

Ethanol (from sugar)

6,000

Irrigated

2,000

1,000

Sugar beet

Ethanol (from sugar)

7,000

Irrigated

786

571

Cassava

Ethanol (from starch)

4,000

Rainfed

2,250

na

Maize

Ethanol (from starch)

3,500

Irrigated

1,360

857

Oil palm

Biodiesel

5,500

Rainfed

2,360

na

Rapeseed/
mustardseed

Biodiesel

1,200

Rainfed

3,330

na

Soybean

Biodiesel

400

Rainfed

10,000

na

na is not applicable.
Note: Values are indicative only.
Source: Hoogeveen, Faurès, and van de Giesse forthcoming, adapted from Müller et al. 2008.

of ethanol and biodiesel can exceed those
of petrol and mineral diesel. An exception
was biofuel produced from woody biomass, which rated better than gasoline. A
key question is how to ensure that production will be sustainable. One answer being
explored is certification of conformity to a
set of environmental and social standards
on a life-cycle basis.54

More uncertainty for agriculture
under climate change
The issues of agricultural production
are complicated by increasing climate

Box 7.5

Coping with water scarcity and climate
change in agriculture in the Near East

Arid and semi-arid conditions and
widespread water scarcity prevail in
the Near East Region. Agricultural
production is projected to grow more
than 60% between 2003/05 and 2030
and to more than double by 2050 as a
result of increased food demand. Most
of the increase will come from yield increases and higher cropping intensities.
Irrigation is crucial, with about 80% of
production originating from irrigated
agriculture and with irrigated land
accounting for about a third of arable
land. Irrigation water withdrawals
could increase 29% by 2050. Under
pressures of water scarcity water use
efficiency is expected to improve from
52% in 2003/05 to 66% by 2050, as
irrigation water requirements grow
from 64% to 83% of renewable water
resources – all very high values compared with global averages.
The situation may become critical
if the expected impacts of climate

112

change are considered, including the
combined effect of changes in precipitation and evapotranspiration. These
changes will alter current patterns of
soil moisture deficits, groundwater
recharge and runoff. Second-order
impacts on streamflow, groundwater
and lake and dam storage levels will
translate into reduced availability of
water for irrigation and other purposes. Under the Intergovernmental Panel
and Climate Change B2 scenario the
overall availability of renewable water
resources may fall from 416 km3 in
the base situation to 397 km3 in 2050,
while irrigation water withdrawals
would need to raise an additional 20
km3. Total water withdrawals would
represent the equivalent of 92% of the
region’s renewable water resources
– even higher if the leaching requirements of agricultural areas affected by
saltwater intrusion and leakages from
brackish aquifers are considered.
Source: FAO 2008b; IPCC 2000.

uncertainty. The relationship between
agriculture and climate change is complex. Agriculture contributes to global
warming through emissions of methane
and nitrous oxide. Changes in land use
practices (management of cropland and
grazing land) are considered to be the best
mitigation options.55 Agriculture is also
extremely sensitive to climate change, and
it is anticipated that large areas of croplands, in particular in semi-arid zones,
will need to adapt to new conditions with
lower precipitation.
Climate change is expected to alter hydrologic regimes and patterns of freshwater
resource availability (see chapter 5), with
impacts on both rainfed and irrigated
agriculture.56 Projections converge in
indicating a reduction in precipitation
in semi-arid areas, greater variability in
rainfall distribution, greater frequency of
extreme events and rising temperature,
particularly affecting agriculture in low
latitudes. Severe reductions in river runoff
and aquifer recharge (see chapter 11) are
expected in the Mediterranean basin and
in the semi-arid areas of Southern Africa,
Australia and the Americas, affecting water
availability for all uses (box 7.5).
The projected increase in the frequency of
droughts and floods will hurt crop yields
and livestock, with greater impacts coming
earlier than previously predicted.57 While
climate change does not seem to threaten
global food production, it will alter the
distribution of agricultural potential. Most
of the increase in cereal production will be
concentrated in the Northern Hemisphere,
while more frequent and severe droughts
and floods will hurt local production,
especially in subsistence sectors at low
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
latitudes.58 Several densely populated
farming systems in developing countries
are at risk from the impacts of climate
change. A combination of reduced river
base flows, increased flooding and rising
sea levels is expected to impact highly productive irrigated systems that help maintain the stability of cereal production.

Table 7.3

The production risks will be amplified in
alluvial plains dependent on glacier melt
(Colorado, Punjab) and, in particular, in
lowland deltas (the Ganges and Nile). Table
7.3 shows the expected impact of climate
change on some major agricultural systems and analyses their vulnerability and
adaptive capacities.

Typology of climate change impacts on major agricultural systems

System

Current status

Climate change drivers

Vulnerability

Adaptability

Snow melt systems
Indus

Highly developed, water
scarcity emerging.
Sediment and salinity
constraints

Ganges-Brahmaputra

High potential for
groundwater, established
water quality problems.
Low productivity

Northern China

Extreme water scarcity,
high productivity

Red and Mekong Rivers

High productivity, high
flood risk, poor water
quality

Colorado River

Water scarcity, salinity

20-year increasing flows
followed by substantial
reductions in surface
water and groundwater
recharge. Changed
seasonality of runoff
and peak flows. More
rainfall in place of snow.
Increased peak flows
and flooding. Increased
salinity. Declining
productivity in places.

Limited possibility
Very high (run of river), for adaptation (all
medium high (dams)
infrastructure already
built)
High (falling
groundwater tables)

Medium (still
possibilities for
groundwater
development)

High (global
implications, high food
demand with great
influence on prices)

Medium (adaptability
is increasing due to
increasing wealth)

Medium

Medium

Low

Medium, excessive
pressure on resources

Very high (flood,
cyclones)

Poor except salinity

High (population
pressure)

Medium

High

Low

Medium

High, except salinity

High

Medium

High

Low (surface
irrigation); medium
(groundwater
irrigation)

Very high. Declining
yields in rainfed
systems. Increased
volatility of production

Low

High

Low

Deltas

Ganges-Brahmaputra

Densely populated.
Shallow groundwater,
extensively used. Flood
adaptation possible; low
productivity

Nile River

Highly dependent on
runoff and Aswan Storage
– possibly sensitive to
upstream development

Yellow River

Severe weather scarcity

Red River

Currently adapted but
expensive pumped
irrigation and drainage

Mekong River

Adapted groundwater
use in delta; sensitive to
upstream development

Rising sea level.
Storm surges, and
infrastructure damage.
Higher frequency of
cyclones (East and
South-East Asia).
Saline intrusion in
groundwater and
rivers. Increased flood
frequency. Potential
increase in groundwater
recharge.

Semi-arid and arid tropics: limited snow melt and limited groundwater
Monsoonal: Indian
subcontinent

Low productivity.
Overdeveloped basin
(surface water and
groundwater)

Non-monsoonal:
sub-Saharan Africa

Poor soils. Flashy water
systems. Overallocation
of water and population
pressure in places. Widespread food insecurity

Non-monsoonal:
Southern and
Western Australia

Flashy water systems.
Over-allocation of water.
Competition from other
sectors

Increased rainfall.
Increased rainfall
variability. Increased
drought and flooding.
Higher temperature.
Increased rainfall
variability. Increased
frequency of droughts
and flooding.
Lower rainfall,
higher temperature.
Decreasing runoff.

(continued)

Water in a changing world

113

PART

2

Table 7.3

Chapter 7E
Typology of climate change impacts on major agricultural systems (continued)

System

Current status

Climate change drivers

Vulnerability

Adaptability

High

Medium

High

Medium

Medium

Low

High

Low

Low

Low

High

Variable

Humid tropics
Rice: Southeastern Asia

Surface irrigation.
High productivity but
stagnating.

Rice: Southern China

Conjunctive use of surface
water and groundwater.
Low output compared
with Northern China

Increased rainfall.
Marginally increased
temperatures. Increased
rainfall variability and
occurrence of droughts
and floods.

Mediterranean
Southern Europe

Increasing pressure on
water

Northern Africa

High water scarcity

West Asia

Heavy pressure on water

Significantly lower
rainfall and higher
temperatures. Increased
water stress. Decreased
runoff. Loss of
groundwater reserves.

Small islands
Small islands

Fragile ecosystems.
Groundwater depletion

Seawater rise. Saltwater
intrusion. Increased
frequency of cyclones
and hurricanes.

Source: FAO 2008b.

In key food-insecure areas, dominated by
rainfed agriculture (sub-Saharan Africa
and peninsular India, in particular),
anticipated reductions in production may
have multiple impacts, including loss of
livelihoods and displacement of rural
populations. This will accentuate demand

Box 7.6

Impacts of water shortage on rice production
in Indonesia

Many of the extreme climate events
in Indonesia, particularly droughts,
are associated with the el Niño
Southern Oscillation. The end of the
dry season occurs later than normal
during el Niño and earlier during
la Niña years, the onset of the wet
season is delayed during el Niño and
advanced during la Niña years, a
substantial reduction of dry season
rainfalls occur during el Niño and a
substantial increase during la Niña
years, and long dry spells occur during the monsoon period, particularly
in Eastern Indonesia.

amount of rainfall may be higher. This
suggests exposure to higher flood
and drought risks in the future. For
regions north of the Equator, however, the pattern of change will be the
opposite.

Historical data indicate that the
national rice production system is
vulnerable to extreme climate events.
During el Niño years rice production
declined due to drought, with losses
during 1991-2000 averaging three
times greater than during 1980-90.

Changes in rainfall pattern and
length of the rainy season will have
serious implications for the agriculture sector and current cropping
patterns. In most rice-growing areas
of Indonesia two rice crops are
planted each year. The second planting depends heavily on irrigation
water. In years of extreme drought
irrigation water becomes very limited, causing severe production loss.
Under a changing climate, drought
will occur more frequently, and so
retaining this cropping pattern may
expose farmers to more frequent
crop failures.

It is very likely that in Bali and Java
the rainy season may shorten as a
result of climate change, though the

Source: BertJan Heij, co-chair, WWAP
Expert Group on Climate and Water, based
on Government of Indonesia 2007.

114

in global markets and put further pressure
on irrigated production.
Changes in runoff affect water availability
in rivers and aquifers, placing an additional burden on areas where human pressure on water resources is already high. In
addition, rising temperatures and lower
precipitation associated with diminishing
runoff will increase crop water demand
in irrigated areas. The impacts of climate
change on irrigation water requirements
may therefore be substantial.59
In large irrigation systems that rely on
high mountain glaciers for water (Andes,
Himalayas and Rocky Mountains), temperature changes will cause high runoff
periods to shift to earlier in the spring,
when irrigation water demand is still low
(see chapter 12).60 Such changes could
incite demand for new water control infrastructure to compensate for changes in
river runoff. Indonesia shows how climate
change can influence weather variability
and make current farming and cropping
systems unsustainable (box 7.6).

Options for water management in
agriculture
It is possible to produce enough food and
other agricultural products at a global
level to meet demand while reducing
the negative impacts of water use in
agriculture.61 But doing so will require
a change from today’s food production
and environmental trends, which, if
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use
continued, will lead to crises in many
parts of the world. A combination of supply- and demand-side measures is needed
to address the acute water challenges
in the coming 50 years. The difficult
task at hand is to manage the additional
water supply in a way that minimizes the
adverse impacts and – where possible –
enhances ecosystem services and aquatic
food production, while achieving the
necessary gains in food production and
poverty alleviation.

are not necessarily new, expensive or
sophisticated options, but rather ones
that are appropriate to agricultural needs
and demands, the managerial capacity
of system managers and farmers, and the
financial and economic capacity needed to
ensure proper operation and maintenance.
Better design and better matching of technologies, management and institutional
arrangements are needed. Technological
innovation will occur in broadly three
categories:

The Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture scenario
analysis shows opportunities and ­options
– in rainfed, irrigated, livestock and fisheries systems – for preserving, and even
restoring, healthy ecosystems.62 But gains
require major changes in the way water is
managed, especially by farmers. The behaviour of different categories of farmers
is shaped not only by agricultural policies
but also by the capacity to allocate water
according to wider financial restrictions and by local capacity to overcome
pollution and environmental damage
in emerging market economies. China
has succeeded over the last 10 years in
improving its water use efficiency by
around 10% without increasing its water
allocation to agriculture (see box 14.20 in
chapter 14).

•

At the irrigation system level: water
level, flow control and storage management within surface irrigation
systems at all scales.

•

On the farm: storage, reuse, water
lifting (manual and mechanical) and
precision application technologies
such as overhead sprinklers and localized irrigation.

•

Across sectors: multiple-use systems in
rural areas and urban agriculture with
wastewater.

Improved water management in agriculture includes reduced water wastage in
irrigation. Irrigated agriculture is often
seen as inefficient, in both water use and
added value.63 While on average only an
estimated 37% of the water withdrawn
for agriculture is effectively consumed by
plants, a substantial share of the unused
water returns to rivers and aquifers and
is available for downstream uses. The net
loss of water due to irrigation is therefore
substantially less than may be apparent,
and the potential gains from programmes
aimed at increasing water use efficiency
are often overestimated (see chapter 8).
Programmes aimed only at reducing
losses in irrigation are unlikely to have
a substantial impact on water use. Most
large irrigation schemes also serve other
functions, such as providing water for
drinking, bathing, swimming, fishing
and livestock, and water savings may take
water away from these uses. Management
thus needs to focus instead on multipleuse strategies.
Technological improvements can occur at
all levels and affect all types of irrigation
systems (see chapter 3). Better technologies
Water in a changing world

2

Industry puts
pressure on water
resources more
by the impacts
of wastewater
discharges and
their pollution
potential than by
the quantity used
in production

Greater impact on irrigation efficiency
can be expected from external drivers
(see chapter 2) on the evolution of irrigation than from demand management
programmes. The trend and forecast are
for irrigation to serve an increasingly
market-oriented agriculture, with progressive increases in the value of production
and growing use of precision irrigation.
This will lead to the progressive adoption
of pressurized irrigation, thus reducing
losses.64

Water for industry and energy
Water use for industry and energy is growing coincident with rapid development,
transforming the patterns of water use
in emerging market economies. Industry
and energy together account for 20% of
water demand. The actual figure may be
even larger, as many industries self-supply
(these volumes are only partially metered
and reported) or get their water directly
from the urban distribution system (use
that is difficult to separate from domestic
use).

Trends in industrial water use
Water is used by industry in multiple ways:
for cleaning, heating and cooling; for generating steam; for transporting dissolved
substances or particulates; as a raw material; as a solvent; and as a constituent part
of products (as in the beverage industry).
The volume of water used by industry is
115

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Energy and water
are inextricably
linked

low, less than 10% of total water withdrawals, but there are large differences in
efficiency of use. Industry creates more
pressure on water resources from the
impacts of wastewater discharges and their
pollution potential than by the quantity
used in production.
There is no simple relation between a
country’s production index (volume, value
and jobs) and its total industrial demand
for water. Demand depends first on the
composition of the industrial sector, the
processes in use and the degree of recycling that is in place in each sector. Different industries demand different water
quality (the high-technology industry
requires water of a higher quality than
drinking water) and quantities (table 7.4).
The diminishing quality of water supplies,
increasing costs of water purchases and
strict environmental effluent standards are

Table 7.4

Water use per tonne of product produced,
selected industries

(cubic metres per tonne)
Water usea

Product
Paper

80-2,000

Sugar

3-400

Steel

2-350

Petrol

0.1-40

Soap

1-35

Beer

8-25

Source: Margat and Andréassian 2008.

Industrial water productivity varies greatly
across countries

1995 US$ per cubic metre per year, latest year available
150
125
100
75
50
25

116

ga
ria

va

Bu
l

do

an

ia

M
ol

e
m

ra
in

Ro

Uk

tio

n

y
ia

n

Fe
de

ra

ar

nd

ss

la

Hu
ng

s

Ru

Po

at
e

ic
d

St

bl
Un

ec
Cz

ite

ia

a

h

Re
pu

La
tv

ua
ni

th
Li

D

en

m

ar
k

0

Source: Based on UNIDO 2007.

After rising between 1960 and 1980, water
withdrawal for industrial use in developed
countries has stabilized and has even
started to decline in some countries, as industrial output continues to expand while
falling in absolute terms (because of efficiency gains and the energy transition).66
In Eastern Europe demand for water in the
industrial sector fell following advances
in production technology and structural
change.67 In emerging market economies
industrial demand for water is expected
to rise with the region’s rapid growth in
manufacturing output.
Some industries, such as tourism, show
large seasonal variations in water use that
can lead (on coastlines, islands and mountain areas) to supply difficulties in peak
seasons. Around the Mediterranean Sea
seasonal water demands from the tourism
industry increase annual water demand by
an estimated 5%-20% (box 7.7).

a. Amount varies with process used.

Figure 7.8

forcing industries to target greater water
efficiency and report on their progress
(as in the Global Reporting Initiative, for
example65). Industrial water productivity
(ratio of value of water withdrawn to value
of industrial output using the water) is a
general indicator of performance in water
use. The intensity of water use in industry,
in overall terms, is believed to be increasing, as is the value added by industry per
unit of water use. Industrial water use is
only partially linked to a country’s level
of industrialization, as exemplified by
the large difference in water productivity
between two high-income countries: more
than $138 per cubic metre in Denmark
and less than $10 per cubic metre in the
United States (figure 7.8).

Energy and water
Energy and water are inextricably linked.
Water is an integral part of energy resource development and use; it is needed
for cooling and energy production (figure
7.9) but is also consumed passively as
reservoirs built for energy production
and other purposes evaporate substantial amounts of water. Total evaporation
from reservoirs in the 22 countries of
the Mediterranean Action Plan is estimated at around 24 km3 a year – nearly
the water use of Argentina – almost half
of it in Egypt.68 For hydroelectric, wave
or tidal energy production water offers
an ‘active’ medium for transferring kinetic energy into electricity. For cooling
thermal and nuclear plants or producing
bioenergy, water plays a more passive,
though equally important, role. The
demand for energy is therefore a major
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
driver of water and agriculture development, creating pressures that strongly
affect the quantity and quality of freshwater resources.
Energy is important for pumping water,
transporting it, processing it and using it.
Desalination is also an energy-intensive
process. Energy demand is affected by
many of the same drivers that are putting
direct pressure on water resources: demographic, economic, social and technological processes, including changes in
consumption patterns. Energy consumption is also the main driver behind climate
change (see chapter 5), which threatens
the sustainability of water resources.
Growing pressure and efforts to curb
greenhouse gas emissions are leading to
increasing demand for ‘cleaner’ sources of
renewable energy. Hydropower has been
earmarked as one of the most important of
these sources.
Energy requirements of the water sector.
Energy can account for 60%-80% of
water transportation and treatment costs
and 14% of total water utility costs.69 In
2005‑06 water and wastewater companies
in England and Wales spent $632 million
on electric power (7,700 gigawatts), making it the largest non-staff operating cost
item.70 Efficiency and conservation are
therefore not only good for water resources; they are also a means of conserving
energy.
Much of water resources development
during the 20th century took place in a
context of low water and energy prices.
Substantial energy subsidies are still
provided in many parts of the world. The
delivery of subsidized rural electricity
services has boosted agricultural production in existing irrigated areas and introduced irrigation in areas beyond those
with surface water. The energy provided
through electricity and fuel, together
with low-cost technology for pumping,
has generated tremendous changes in agricultural water management. One result
of energy subsidies has been overabstraction of groundwater in many irrigated
agricultural areas. When properly used,
subsidies can fulfil important socioeconomic goals, but the challenge is to find
a balance: to encourage efficiency and
to ensure that subsidies reach intended
beneficiaries.
Energy prices increasingly tend to be
volatile, and it will therefore be important
to consider how future changes in energy
prices and markets will affect water use
Water in a changing world

Box 7.7

Tourism water demand in the Mediterranean
coastal area

With 364 million tourists in 2000 the
Mediterranean region is the world’s
top tourism destination, and by 2025
the number of tourists could reach
637 million.

of a tourist are generally higher than
those of a local resident. Tourism also
creates a demand for seasonal services
and leisure activities that demand a lot
of water, such as golf courses.

Knowledge of the water demands of
tourism is limited because national
statistics rarely distinguish between
domestic water use and water for
tourism. The annual additional
demands from tourism are relatively
modest, at 20% of domestic supply in
Cyprus in 2006, 5% of total water demand in Malta during 1995-2000 and
5% of domestic demand in Tunisia in
2003.

Tourist demands often occur at the
same time as peak demand for agriculture, which is also seasonal, when
resources are at their lowest. Satisfying such peak demands requires oversizing the drinking water production
and distribution system as well as the
wastewater collection and treatment
infrastructure. In many places water
supply for tourism relies on desalination of seawater, a promising option
in places such as Cyprus, the Balearic
Islands, Malta, Tunisia and certain
Greek islands.

Daily demands are generally more
important for planners and managers than annual demands because
they show the timing and volume of
peak demands. The daily demands

Figure 7.9

Source: Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2005,
2007.

Interlinkages between energy and water

Water for energy

Energy for water

Energy and power
production requires water:

Water collection,
processing, distribution
and end-use requires power:

•

Thermoelectric cooling

•

Hydropower

•

Minerals extraction and
mining

•

Fuel production (fossil,
non-fossil and biofuels)

•

Emission controls

Water footprints for
energy development

•

Pumping

•

Transport

•

Treatment

•

Desalination

Energy footprints for
water development

Source: Based on DHI 2008.

and production patterns and costs. Apart
from the effects on production costs,
rising prices are likely to influence investment in areas where the price of energy
is an important factor (from farms to
businesses, impacts are likely to be very
heterogeneous). Rising prices may increase
the willingness to make efficiency-related
investments while reducing overall sector
investments, with possible impacts on
food production. Indirect effects can also
be considerable, such as boosting transport costs.
117

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Hydropower
supplies about
20% of the
world’s electricity

Water use for energy production. Cooling
in the energy sector is one of the main
industrial water uses, with final consumption (evaporation) estimated at around 5%
of withdrawals. Outflows of water used
in cooling nuclear power plants demand
sufficient river flow to reduce the temperature in order to mitigate adverse ecological
impacts. Thus non-directly productive but
substantial flows are required.
Hydropower generation requires large
quantities of water, but unlike in other
major water use sectors (agriculture and
domestic), the nature of the use is nonconsumptive: water is returned to the river
after passing through turbines. However,
substantial losses occur through evaporation from reservoirs, and thus this use is
not entirely non-consumptive.
Water use efficiency in the energy sector
differs with the power generation technology used, as illustrated by an assessment of
19 power generation systems in the United
States (figure 7.10). This suggests considerable potential for improving efficiency.

Figure 7.10

Water consumption for various power
generation technologies in the United States,
2006

Geothermal steam, CL tower
Solar trough, CL tower
Solar tower, CL tower
Gas CCGT, dry

Hydropower development was stimulated
by the oil crisis of the 1970s, fell off for
a few decades and then returned to the
agendas of many countries in response to
the energy demands created by development. Hydropower continues to be the
most important and economic source of
commercial renewable energy worldwide,
and its popularity is increasing with the
surge of interest in clean energy prompted by concerns about climate change.
Hydropower plants, when managed for
multiple uses, should also allow for flow
regulation and flood management, water
for irrigation and drinking water supply
during dry seasons and rapid response
to grid demand fluctuations due to peak
demands.
According to the International Energy
Agency, electricity generation from hydropower and other renewable energy sources
is projected to increase at an average annual rate of 1.7% from 2004 to 2030, for
an overall increase of 60% through 2030
(figure 7.11).

Gas CCGT, CL tower
Gas CCGT, open loop
Natural gas supply
Nuclear, dry
Nuclear, CL pond
Nuclear, CL tower
Nuclear, open loop
Nuclear fuel mining and processing
Coal ICGT
Fossil steam, dry
Fossil steam, CL pond
Fossil steam, CL tower
Fossil steam, open loop
Coal slurry
Coal mining
1

10

100

1,000

10,000 100,000

Gallons per megawatt hours of electricity, log scale
Note: CL is closed loop cooling, CCGT is combined cycle gas turbine, and ICGT is integrated gasification combined-cycle.
Source: US Department of Energy 2006.

118

Current and projected trends in hydropower.
Hydropower supplies about 20% of the
world’s electricity,71 a share that has
remained stable since the 1990s. Hydro­
power stations are spread across the globe
(map 7.6) and have shaped water infrastructure in many parts of the world.
The first large hydropower stations were
developed in Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, the United States, Australia
and New Zealand. The largest hydropower
station in operation is the Itaipu Dam
on the Rio Parana River between Brazil
and Paraguay, with an installed capacity
of more than 14,000 megawatts. Brazil
produces more than 90% of its electricity
from hydropower.

Development of hydropower will be limited by two main factors. The first is the
modest spatial and geophysical potential
for new hydropower installations. In
many developed countries – including
Australia, the United States and most of
Western Europe – most of the suitable
sites for hydropower installations have
already been developed. Other limiting
factors are investment capacity (including
the availability of funds) and the social
and environmental impacts of large dams
and the controversy surrounding them,
which collectively explain why so little
hydroelectric potential has been tapped in
developing countries.
Oil prices and energy choices. Volatile prices
of oil and natural gas, which are expected
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use

Map 7.6

World potential and current hydropower production, 2004

OECD North America
Brazil
Other Latin America
OECD Europe
Transition economies
Russia
Africa
Middle East
India
China
Rest of developing Asia
OECD Pacific

= 500 terawatt hours
Economic potential (terawatt hours a year)
Hydropower production in 2004 (terawatt hours)

Source: IEA 2006.

to persist over the medium term, encourage the use of renewable energy, which is
also attractive for environmental reasons.
Government policies and incentives can
also increase the use of renewable energy
sources even when renewable energy
cannot compete economically with fossil
fuels. Nonetheless, the renewable energy
share of world electricity production is
projected to fall slightly, from 19% in
2004 to 16% in 2030, as growth in the
consumption of coal and natural gas for
electricity generation worldwide exceeds
that in renewable energy sources. The
capital costs of new power plants using
renewable energy remain high compared
with those for coal- or natural gas-fired
plants.
There are complex, and partly competing,
challenges associated with energy production and water resources management.
While average commercial energy use in
high-income countries is about 5,500 kilograms of oil equivalent per capita, it is still
well below 500 kilograms in low-income
countries.72 Thus, energy consumption in
developing countries will need to increase
as part of any development strategy. Yet
major challenges remain for energy development. The pressure to extend hydropower on the basis of its comparative sustainability will continue to stir discussions
Water in a changing world

Figure 7.11

Renewable energy sources are expected
to meet only a small part of total energy
demand to 2030

Global production of electricity by energy source, 1971-2030
(thousands of terawatt hours)
40

Geothermal, solar, tide and wave
Wind
Biomass and waste

30

Hydro
Nuclear

20

Gas
Oil

10

0
1971

Coal

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

Source: IEA 2008.

of its environmental and social impacts,
including the regulation of hydropower
dam releases to optimize downstream uses
and minimize negative impacts on aquatic
ecosystems. Likewise, expansion of thermal power-producing facilities will require
cooling water, with the need to discharge
heated water.
Emerging challenges will affect both the
energy sector and water resources. The
most obvious is climate change. Political
119

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Freshwater
ecosystems provide
an extensive array
of services to
support human
well-being

activities such as fisheries and pastoral
activities also depend on in-stream use of
water. Recreational activities such as tubing and kayaking do not deplete water, but
demand releases of water and maintenance
of minimum flows at times that may not
be compatible with demands by other
users.

pressures are mounting, and there are
likely to be increased calls for action to
deal with greenhouse gas emissions in
coming decades in ways that can alter
the energy production landscape. Yet
the International Energy Agency’s World
Energy Outlook 2007 forecasts that fossil
fuels will continue to provide the major
part of the increased energy demand.73
Nonetheless, the pressure and prospects
for hydropower development may also
increase as part of efforts to mitigate
climate change.

Water for transport

Freshwater ecosystems provide an extensive array of services to support human
well-being, many of them extremely
valuable. Yet some environmental services
continue to receive inadequate policy attention. Shifting attitudes away from considering the environment as a victim of
human uses of water and towards viewing
environmental sustainability as central to
sustainable development remains a significant challenge. (For further discussion, see
chapters 6 and 9.)

The 25 largest cities, the 25 largest production locations, the 25 most prosperous
areas and the 25 most densely populated
areas in the world are all located near
waterfronts, almost all of them by the
sea.74 This has been the case for at least
2,000 years. River navigation was part of
the Indus Valley Civilization in Northwest
India around 3300 BCE. Many major rivers
of the world are used for navigation today.
The development of waterways for transport lies behind many large-scale river
transformations and dam constructions.
Of 230 major world rivers some 60% are
considered to be seriously or moderately
fragmented by dams, dikes and dredging,
with improved river transport often being
an objective.75

Navigation has been critical to development and communication around
the world. A variety of other economic

However, inland shipping remains an
underdeveloped sector on most waterways (map 7.7). China alone has 110,000

In-stream water uses

Map 7.7

Important waterways in the world, 2007

FINLAND 6,675 KM
SWEDEN 2,052 KM

CANADA 3,000 KM

KAZAKHSTAN 3,900 KM

UNITED KINGDOM 3,200 KM
GERMANY 7,500 KM
NETHERLANDS 5,046 KM
BELGIUM 1,570 KM
FRANCE 14,932 KM

UNITED STATES 41,009 KM

RUSSIAN FEDERATION 95,900 KM
POLAND 3,812 KM
UKRAINE 4,499 KM
HUNGARY 1,373 KM
ROMANIA 1,724 KM (1984)

JAPAN 1,770 KM

ITALY 2,400 KM
IRAQ 1,015 KM
EGYPT 3,500 KM

MEXICO 2,900 KM

CHINA 110,000 KM

BANGLADESH 8,046 KM
MYANMAR 3,200 KM
LAO PDR 4,587 KM
THAILAND 4,000 KM
VIET NAM 17,702 KM
CAMBODIA 3,700 KM

INDIA 16,180 KM
NIGERIA 8,575 KM

VENEZUELA 7,100 KM
GUYANA 5,900 KM
COLOMBIA 18,140 KM

SUDAN 5,310 KM

MALAYSIA 7,296 KM

CONGO 15,000 KM
INDONESIA 21,579 KM

BRAZIL 50,000 KM
PERU 8,808 KM
BOLIVIA 10,000 KM

PAPUA NEW GUINEA 10,940 KM

ZAMBIA 2,250 KM
MOZAMBIQUE 3,750 KM
AUSTRALIA 8,368 KM

ARGENTINA 10,950KM

Five longest waterway
networks (kilometres)
1. China
110,000
2. Russia
95,900
3. Europe
51,996
4. United States
41,009
5. Indonesia
21,579

Source: Based on BVB 2008.

120

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Evolution of water use
km of navigable waterways, the longest in the world.76 Inland navigation is
often the most cost-effective and least
polluting means of transport and, with
improved trade and exchange, has contributed to the development of mature
economies.77 Inland waterways can
efficiently convey large volumes of bulk
commodities over long distances. On the
Mississippi River convoys of 30 barges
(equivalent to 30 jumbo rail cars or 110
normal trucks) are common, while on
rivers such as the Danube and the Rhine,
container fleets 23 metres wide by 135
metres long can push convoys consisting
of six barges, each about 64 metres by
270 metres.

Table 7.5

Economy

Contribution of inland and marine fisheries
to exports, daily animal protein supply and
employment in major fish-harvesting economies,
latest year available
Percent of
agricultural
exports

Argentina
Bangladesh

Fisheries and aquaculture
Inland fisheries are an important activity
for many poor people in rural areas79 and
contribute significantly, at least locally, to
economic development, poverty alleviation, increased protein in diets, and food
security80 – even though estimation is difficult, as many fishing activities do not fall
within the economic domain.81
For small-scale fisheries, in particular, data
remain patchy or not adequately disaggregated to allow detailed analysis, but
case study information is available.82 Some
general indicators of the importance of the
sector to national economies have been
compiled (table 7.5).
At national levels inland fisheries contribute to GDP through multiplier effects
and generate tax revenues and foreign
exchange. In Bangladesh benefits from
inland fisheries represented 80% of export
earnings and about 50% of daily animal
protein intake. Most fish exporters have
well established aquaculture industries.83
In Tanzania mainland fisheries generated
$6.9 million in taxes, 97% from export
taxes, and in Uganda the Nile perch from
Lake Victoria accounted for 17% of the
value of exports in 2002.84
Water in a changing world

Percent of
economically
active population

7

4

0.08

76

51

1.90

Brazil

2

4

0.37

Chile

39

9

0.82

Ecuador

31

8

3.29

India

22

13

1.35

3

37

1.07

9

7

0.64

58

16

0.90

Malaysia
Mexico

However, developing rivers for navigation often results in irreversible transformation of river courses, with negative impacts on vulnerable groups and
ecosystems (such as fish mortality from
propeller impact and larvae stranding due
to drawdown). Western Europe’s Rhine
River is perhaps the best-known example
of a river altered by navigation schemes.
To make an 880 km stretch navigable,
some 450 dams and thousands of kilometres of banks were built, meanders were
removed, and the Rhine became 25%
shorter as a result.78

Percent of average
per capita daily
animal proteins

Morocco
Pakistan

12

3

0.52

Peru

62

20

0.68

Philippines

23

41

3.16

Thailand

38

40

0.95

Viet Nam

40

34

2.45

Average

30

20

1.30

Source: Thorpe et al. 2005.

At the household level inland fisheries are central to livelihood strategies,
providing not only direct and indirect
employment for some 100 million people, most in developing countries, but
also a safety net activity for the poor
through catch and trade. Not included
in these estimates are the hundreds of
millions of people engaged in temporary fishing activities, mostly in inland
areas. In Africa men and boys engage in
seasonal fishing along rivers or reservoirs
when agricultural activities are slow.85
In the Tonle Sap Lake area of Cambodia thousands of households split their
time between fishing and cultivating
crops.86 In the floodplain areas of India
occasional fishing by children, elders or
women in male-headed households on
the margins of water bodies or in waterways such as irrigation canals can involve
up to 70%-80% of households during the
flood seasons.87
Fish88 consumption has undergone major
changes over the past four decades. World
fish capture and aquaculture production
have grown fairly steadily (figure 7.12).
Global per capita fish consumption has
risen from an estimated average of 9.9 kg
in the 1960s to about 16.7 kg in 2006.89
However, not all regions have experienced
the same rise. Over the last three decades
121

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Figure 7.12

Global freshwater fish production has grown
rapidly in recent decades

Millions of tonnes
50
40

Aquaculture
Capture

30
20
10
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2006

Source: FAO forthcoming.

Figure 7.13

Inland capture fisheries vary greatly by
region, 2006

Percent of total inland fish capture
Americas
5.9%

Europe
3.5%

Oceania 0.2%

Africa
23.5%
Asia
66.9%

Source: FAO forthcoming.

the per capita fish supply has remained
almost static in sub-Saharan Africa, while
rising dramatically in East Asia (mainly
in China) and in the Near East and North
Africa.
The share of fish in total protein intake
was 7.8% in 2005, about the same as in
the mid-1980s. The contribution of inland
fish to total protein intake grew 6.5%8.5% during 1961-89, before declining
gradually as consumption of other animal
proteins rose. Although consumption in
low-­income, food-deficit countries has increased in the last four decades, especially
since the mid-1990s (1.3% a year since
1993), per capita fish intake remains half
that of industrial countries. Despite the
relatively low level of fish consumption,
122

the contribution of fish to total animal
protein intake in 2005 was about 20%,
and may be higher than indicated by official statistics because of the unrecorded
contribution of subsistence fisheries. Fish
contribute to diets in many regions of the
world, offering a valuable supplement for
a diversified and nutritious diet, including high-value protein and a wide range
of essential micronutrients, minerals and
fatty acids.
Landing more than 10 million tonnes in
2006, inland capture fisheries contributed
11% of global capture fisheries production. Although much lower than marine
fisheries, fish and other aquatic animals
from inland waters remain irreplaceable to the diets of both rural and urban
inhabitants in many parts of the world,
especially in developing countries. For demographic and cultural reasons, however,
levels of exploitation differ considerably
across major geographic regions (figure
7.13). And although statistics are improving in some countries, collecting accurate
information on inland fisheries can be
difficult and costly, and many governments still do not gather such information or assess the status of inland fishery
resources.
The average contribution of aquaculture
to per capita fish available for human
consumption grew from 15% in 1996 to
47% in 2006 and is expected to reach
50% within the next decade. Aquaculture
production has boosted consumption for
several freshwater species, such as tilapia
and catfish, as well as for high-value species such as shrimp, salmon and bivalves.
Since the mid-1980s these species have
shifted from being primarily wild-caught
to being primarily aquaculture-produced,
with a corresponding decline in price and
a strong increase in commercialization.
Aquaculture has also improved food security in several developing countries, particularly in Asia, through the production
of certain low-value freshwater species destined mainly for domestic consumption.
As the demand for fish is price-elastic, and
with stable or declining fish prices, rising
incomes and diversification of diets, there
is a shift towards higher fish consumption
in developing countries. These trends in
fish consumption are expected to continue for the foreseeable future, driven by
population and income growth, urbanization and dietary diversification. However,
aquaculture has also contributed to serious
water pollution when not well managed,
a problem that is likely to intensify with
increased aquaculture activities.90
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use
Capture fisheries and aquaculture are
sustained by aquatic ecosystems (including
rice paddies). If the ecosystem is damaged,
the quantity of fish decreases. Lack of

Notes
1.

UNDP 2006; WHO and UNICEF
2008a.

2.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007;
World Bank 2007.

3.

MEA 2005; UNEP 2007.

4.

Margat and Andréassian 2008.

5.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

6.

Shiklomanov and Rodda 2003.

7.

FAO-AQUASTAT database (www. fao.
org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.
stm).

2

water at a certain flow for critical periods
of fish life can be detrimental. The health
of capture fisheries is therefore a good
indicator of the health of the ecosystem.

out on behalf of the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation by a consortium of
Cranfield University, Aguaconsult and
IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre. Various documents can
be downloaded from www.irc.nl/
page/35947.

59.

IPCC 2007a.

60.

Bennett, Haberle, and Lumley 2000.

61.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

62.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

28.

EHP 2003.

63.

29.

Wright 1997.

30.

UNDP 2006.

31.

UN-Water 2008.

32.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

33.

World Bank 2007.
FAOSTAT database (http://faostat.fao.
org/).

Water can accumulate in the soil
profile through runoff and ground­
water recharge and from irrigation if
the rate of input exceeds the rate of
crop consumption (see chapter 8).
This accumulation can lead to waterlogging (when soil pores are filled
with water and oxygen is lacking) and
salinization (when the rising water in
the soil profile brings diluted salts to
the surface). Worldwide, about 10%
of irrigated land suffers from waterlogging.

64.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

8.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

34.

9.

World Bank 2007.

35.

10.

Cosgrove and Rijsberman 2000; MEA
2005; Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture
2007.

See Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture
2007, chapter 9.

36.

WWAP 2006.

37.

FAO 2006b.

65.

www.globalreporting.org/.

38.

FAO 2006a.

66.

WWAP 2006.

39.

FAO 2006b.

67.

Somlyódy and Varis 2006.

40.

FAO 2008c.

68.

Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2007.

FAO 2008c.

69.

Global Water Intelligence 2007.
Dornbosch and Steenblik 2007.

11.

This is one of the tasks set for the
scenarios process that is under way
by the World Water Assessment Programme, to be reported in the next
World Water Development Report.

41.

12.

Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2005.

42.

Worldwatch Institute 2008.

70.

13.

Hoekstra and Chapagain 2007.

43.

FAO 2008c.

71.

ICOLD 2007.

14.

UNSGAB 2006.

44.

72.

15.

WHO and UNICEF 2008b.

16.

WHO and UNICEF 2008b.

World Development Indicators
database (2005 data; http://ddp-ext.
worldbank.org/ext/ddpreports/).

17.

Pilgrim et al. 2008.

Bioethanol and biodiesel are typically mixed with gasoline and diesel,
respectively, as so-called flex-fuel.
Blends vary between a few percent of
biofuel to nearly 25% in Brazil.

73.

IEA 2007.

18.

The Joint Monitoring Programme for
Water Supply and Sanitation, managed by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), is the UN
mechanism for monitoring progress
towards the Millennium Development
Goal target on access to water supply
and sanitation.

74.

BVB 2008.

75.

WWF 2008.

76.

BVB 2008.

OECD and FAO 2008.

77.

PIANC 2008.

47.

FAO 2008a.

78.

48.

OECD and FAO 2008.

49.

Dornbosch and Steenblik 2007.

WWF website (www.panda.org/
about_wwf/what_we_do/freshwater/problems/infrastructure/
river_navigation/).

50.

De Fraiture, Giodano, and Yongsong
2007.

79.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

51.

De Fraiture, Giodano, and Yongsong
2007.

80.

Béné, Macfayden, and Allison 2007.

81.

This section is based on FAO
forthcoming.

45.

46.

Müller et al. 2008; De Fraiture,
Giodano, and Yongsong 2007; OECD
and FAO 2008.

19.

WHO and UNICEF 2006.

20.

UNDP 2006.

21.

UN-Water 2008.

22.

UN Millennium Project 2005.

52.

Dornbosch and Steenblik 2007.

23.

UNDP 2006.

53.

Dornbosch and Steenblik 2007.

82.

24.

WHO and UNICEF 2008a.

54.

For example, Southern Africa, in
Béné, Macfadyen, and Allison (2007).

25.

AfricanSan +5 Conference on Sanitation and Hygiene 2008.

Zah et al. 2007; Dornbosch and
Steenblik 2007.

83.

Thorpe et al. 2005.

55.

IPCC 2007b.

84.

Wilson 2004.

26.

van Ginneken and Kingdom 2008.

56.

FAO 2008b

85.

Sana 2000.

27.

A comprehensive review of approaches and technologies for water,
sanitation and hygiene was carried

57.

IPCC 2007a.

86.

Ahmed et al. 1998.

58.

IPCC 2007c.

87.

Thompson and Hossain 1998; Hoggarth et al. 1999.

Water in a changing world

123

PART

2

Chapter 7E

88.

Including fish, crustaceans and mollusks, and excluding aquatic mammals and aquatic plants.

89.

FAO forthcoming.

90.

Gowing 2006.

References
AfricaSan + 5 Conference on Sanitation
and Hygiene. 2008. The eThekwini Declaration and AfricaSan Action Plan. WSP
(Water and Sanitation Program) – Africa.
Ahmed, M., H. Navy, L. Vuthy, and M.
Tiongco. 1998. Socio-Economic Assessment of Freshwater Capture Fisheries in
Cambodia. Report 185. Phnom Penh:
Mekong River Commission, Department
of Fisheries and Danida.
Aliev, S., P. Shodmonov, N. Babakhanova,
and O. Schmoll. 2006. Rapid Assessment of Drinking-Water Quality in
the Republic of Tajikistan. Dushanbe,
Ministry of Health of the Republic of
Tajikistan, United Nations Children’s
Fund, World Health Organization.

Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture. London: Earthscan, and
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Cosgrove, W., and F. Rijsberman. 2000.
World Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. London: Earthscan.
De Fraiture, C., M. Giodano, and Yongsong L. 2007. Biofuels: Implications for
Agricultural Water Use: Blue Impact of
Green Energy. Paper presented at the
International Conference Linkages between Energy and Water Management
for Agriculture in Developing Countries,
28-31 January 2007, Hyderabad, India.
DHI. 2008. Linking Water, Energy and
Climate Change. A Proposed Water
and Energy Policy Initiative for the UN
Climate Change Conference, COP15, in
Copenhagen 2009, Draft Concept Note,
Danish Hydrological Institute, Horsholm,
Denmark.

Conference on World Food Security:
The Challenges of Climate Change and
Bioenergy, 3-5 June 2008, Rome.
———. 2008c. Soaring Food Prices: Facts,
Perspectives, Impacts and Actions
Required. Contribution to the High Level
Conference on World Food Security:
The Challenges of Climate Change and
Bioenergy, 3-5 June 2008, Rome.
———. Forthcoming. The State of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture 2008. Rome:
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.
Global Water Intelligence. 2007. Global
Water Market 2008: Opportunities in
Scarcity and Environmental Regulation.
Oxford: Global Water Intelligence.
Government of Indonesia. 2007. Indonesia
Country Report. Climate Variability and
Climate Changes and Their Implications.
Jakarta: Ministry of Environment, Republic of Indonesia. www.undp.or.id/pubs/
docs/Final%20Country%20Report%20
-%20Climate%20Change.pdf.

Béné, C., G. Macfadyen, and E. Allison.
2007. Increasing the Contribution of
Small-Scale Fisheries to Poverty Alleviation and Food Security. FAO Fisheries
Technical Paper 481, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome.

Dornbosch, Richard, and Ronald Steenblik. 2007. Biofuels: Is the Cure Worse
than the Disease? Round Table on
Sustainable Development, 11-12 September 2007, Paris. SG/SD/RT(2007)3,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development. www.foeeurope.
org/publications/2007/OECD_Biofuels_
Cure_Worse_Than_Disease_Sept07.pdf.

Bennett K. D., S. G. Haberle, and S. H.
Lumley. 2000. The Last Glacial-Holocene
Transition in Southern Chile. Science
290 (5490): 325-28. DOI:10.1126/
science.290.5490.325.

EHP (Environmental Health Project).
2003. The Hygiene Improvement Framework: A Comprehensive Approach for Preventing Childhood Diarrhoea. Washington, DC: Environmental Health Project.

Hoekstra, A. Y., and A. K. Chapagain.
2007. Water Footprints of Nations:
Water Use by People as a Function of
Their Consumption Pattern. Water Resources Management 21 (1): 35-48.

Blue Plan, MAP (Mediterranean Action
Plan), and UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2005. The Blue
Plan’s Sustainable Development Outlook
for the Mediterranean. Sophia Antipolis,
France: Blue Plan. www.planbleu.org/
publications/UPM_EN.pdf.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2006a. World
Agriculture towards 2030/2050. Prospects
for Food, Nutrition, Agriculture, and
Major Commodity Groups. Interim Report.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

———. 2008. Globalization of Water: Sharing the Planet’s Freshwater Resources.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

———. 2007. Water Demand Management,
Progress and Policies: Proceedings of the
3rd Regional Workshop on Water and
Sustainable Development in the Mediterranean Zaragoza, Spain, 19-21 March.
MAP Technical Reports Series 168.
Athens: United Nations Environment
Programme.

———. 2006b. The State of Food Insecurity
in the World 2006. Eradicating World
Hunger – Taking Stock Ten Years after the
World Food Summit. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.

BVB (Bureau Voorlichtin Binnenvaart).
2008. The Power of Inland Navigation: The Future of Inland Navigation
on European Scale. Rotterdam: Bureau Voorlichtin Binnenvaart. www.
bureauvoorlichtingbinnenvaart.nl/
images/download/waardevoltransport/
The_power_of_inland_navigation.pdf.
www.inlandshipping.com/
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. 2007.

124

———. 2008a. Report of the Co-Chairs
of the Informal Open-ended Contact
Group. Contribution to the High-Level
Conference on World Food Security:
The Challenges of Climate Change and
Bioenergy, 3-5 June 2008, Rome. ftp://
ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/meeting/013/
k2359e.pdf.
———. 2008b. Climate Change, Water and
Food Security. Technical background
document from the expert consultation held in Rome, 26-28 February
2008. Contribution to the High Level

Gowing, J. 2006. A Review of Experience
with Aquaculture Integration in LargeScale Irrigation Systems. In Integrated Irrigation and Aquaculture in West Africa:
Concepts, Practices and Potential, eds.,
M. Halwart and A. A. van Dam. Rome:
Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations.

Hoggarth, D. D., V. J. Cowan, A. S. Halls,
M. Aeron-Thomas, J. A. McGregor, C.
A. Garaway, A. I. Payne, and R. Welcomme. 1999. Management Guidelines
for Asian Floodplain River Fisheries. Part
1: A Spatial, Hierarchical and Integrated
Strategy for Adaptive Co-management.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, 384/1.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Hoogeveen, J., J.-M. Faurès, and N. van
de Giesse. Forthcoming. Increased
Biofuel Production in the Coming Decade: to What Extent Will It Affect Global
Freshwater Resources? Irrigation and
Drainage Journal.
ICOLD (International Commission on
Large Dams). 2007. Dams and the
World’s Water. An Educational Book that
Explains How Dams Help to Manage the
World’s Water. Paris: International Commission on Large Dams.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use
IEA (International Energy Agency).
2006. World Energy Outlook 2006. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development and International
Energy Agency.
———. 2007. World Energy Outlook 2007.
Paris: Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development and
International Energy Agency.
———. 2008. World Energy Outlook 2008.
Paris: Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development and
International Energy Agency.
IFEN (Institut Français de L’environnement). 2006. L’environnement en
France. Les Syntheses. Octobre 2006
ed. Orléans, France: Institut Français de
L’environnement.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change). 2000. Emissions
Scenarios. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 2007a. Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, eds.,
M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 2007b. Climate Change 2007:
Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 2007c. Climate Change 2007:
Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change.
Margat, J. 2008. Preparatory Documents to
the 5th World Water Forum 2009, 16-22
March, Istanbul. Internal Documents for
Blue Plan/MAP/UNEP.
Margat, J., and V. Andréassian. 2008.
L’Eau, les Idées Reçues. Paris: Editions le
Cavalier Bleu.
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems and Human
Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, DC: World Resources
Institute.
Müller, A., J. Schmidhuber, J. Hoogeveen,
and P. Steduto. 2008. Some Insights
in the Effect of Growing Bio-energy
Demand on Global Food Security and
Natural Resources. Water Policy 10
(Supp.1): 83-94.

Water in a changing world

OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) and FAO
(Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations). 2008. OECD-FAO
Agricultural Outlook 2008-2017. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development/Food and Agriculture
Organisation of the United Nations.
www.fao.org/es/ESC/common/ecg/550/
en/AgOut2017E.pdf.
PIANC (The World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure). 2008.
Guidelines for Environmental Impacts
of Vessels. InCom working group 27.
PIANC.
Pilgrim, N., B. Roche, J. Kalbermatten, C.
Revels, and M. Kariuki. 2008. Principles
of Town Water Supply and Sanitation.
Water Working Note No. 13. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Sana, B. 2000. Systèmes d’Aménagement
Traditionnels des Pêches et Leur Impact
dans le Cadre de la Lutte contre la Pauvreté sur les Petites Pêcheries Lacustres
du Sud-Ouest du Burkina Faso. Report
of the Seminar on Livelihoods and
Inland Fisheries Management in the
Sahelian Zone, Ouagadougou, Burkina
Faso.
Shiklomanov, I. A., and John C. Rodda,
eds. 2003. World Water Resources at the
Beginning of the 21st Century. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Somlyódy, László, and Olli Varis. 2006.
Freshwater under Pressure in Groundwater Management and Policy: Its Future Alternatives. International Review for
Environmental Strategies 6 (2): 181-204.
Thompson, P. M., and M. M. Hossain.
1998. Social and Distributional Issues in
Open Water Fisheries Management in
Bangladesh. In Inland fishery enhancements: Papers Presented at the FAO/DFID
Expert Consultation on Inland Fishery
Enhancement, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 7-11
April 1997, ed., T. Petr. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.
Thorpe, A., C. Reid, R. van Anrooy, and C.
Brugere. 2005. When Fisheries Influence
National Policy-Making: An Analysis of
the National Development Strategies
of Major Fish-Producing Nations in the
Developing World. Marine Policy 29 (3):
211-22.
UN Millennium Project. 2005. Health,
Dignity, and Development: What Will It
Take? Task Force on Water and Sanitation. London: Earthscan.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2006. Human Development
Report 2006: Beyond Scarcity: Power,

2

Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2007. Global Environment
Outlook GEO4: Environment for Development. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme.
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial
Development Organization). 2007.
Symposium Report on Water Productivity in the Industry of the Future for the
Technology Foresight Summit, 27-29
September 2007, Budapest.
UNSGAB (United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory Board on Water and
Sanitation). 2006. Hashimoto Action
Plan (formerly known as The Compendium of Actions). United Nations Secretary
General’s Advisory Board on Water and
Sanitation, New York.
UN-Water. 2008. UN-Water Global Annual
Assessment of Sanitation and DrinkingWater (GLAAS): 2008 Pilot Report – Testing a New Reporting Approach. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
US Department of Energy. 2006. Energy
Demands on Water Resources. Report to
Congress on the Independency of Energy and Water, U.S. National Research
Council, Washington, DC.
van Ginneken, M., and B. Kingdom. 2008.
Key Topics in Public Water Utility Reform.
Water Working Note 17. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
WHO (World Health Organization) and
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s
Fund) Joint Monitoring Programme.
2006. Meeting the MDG Drinking
Water and Sanitation Target: The Urban
and Rural Challenge of the Decade.
New York: United Nations Children’s
Fund, and Geneva: World Health
Organization.
———. 2008a. Progress on Drinking Water
and Sanitation: Special Focus on Sanitation. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund, and Geneva: World Health
Organization.
———. 2008b. A Snapshot of Sanitation in
Africa. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund, and Geneva: World Health
Organization.
Wilson, J. D. K. 2004. Fiscal Arrangements
in the Tanzanian Fisheries Sector. FAO
Fisheries Circular 1000. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization.
World Bank. 2007. World Development
Report 2008: Agriculture for Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Worldwatch Institute. 2008. State of the
World. New York: Norton Institute.

125

PART

2

Chapter 7E

Wright, A. M. 1997. Toward a Strategic
Sanitation Approach: Improving the
Sustainability of Urban Sanitation in
Developing Countries. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006. The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2. Water:
A Shared Responsibility. Paris: United

126

Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, and New York:
Berghahn Books.
WWF. 2008. Infrastructure Problems: River
Navigation Schemes. WWF. www.panda.
org/about_wwf/what_we_do/freshwater/
problems/infrastructure/river_navigation/
index.cfm.

Zah, Rainer, Heinz Böni, Marcel Gauch,
Roland Hischier, Martin Lehmann, and
Patrick Wäger. 2007. Life Cycle Assessment of Energy Products: Environmental Assessment of ­Biofuels – Executive
Summary. Empa, Swiss Federal Institute
for Materials Science and Technology,
Technology and Society Lab, Gallen,
Switzerland.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolution of water use

Chapter 8

2

Impacts of water use
on water systems and
the environment
Authors: Gunilla Björklund, Jake Burke, Stephen Foster,
Walter Rast, Domitille Vallée and Wim van der Hoek
Contributions: Francesca Bernardini, Rudolf Cleveringa, Alasdair Cohen,
Jean-Marc Faurès, Sasha Koo-Oshima, Christopher Kuonqui, Robson
Mutandi, Laurent Stracasto, Ti Le-Huu and James Winpenny
Coordinator: Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO)
Facilitator: Domitille Vallée

Key messages
The pattern and intensity of human activity have disrupted –
through impacts on quantity and quality – the role of water as the
prime environmental agent. In some areas depletion and pollution
of economically important water resources have gone beyond the
point of no-return, and coping with a future without reliable water
resources systems is now a real prospect in parts of the world.
While the intensity of groundwater use, partly encouraged by
subsidized rural electrification, has led to the emergence of many
groundwater-dependent economies, their future is now threatened by aquifer depletion and pollution. Prospects for relaxing
use of these key aquifers, remediating water quality and restoring
groundwater services to ecosystems look remote unless alternative
management approaches are developed.
Our ability to maintain the environmental services we depend on
has improved but remains constrained by an incomplete understanding of the magnitude and impact of pollution, the resilience of
affected ecosystems and the uses and management of water resources
systems. A failure to monitor the negative impacts of water use on
the environment and institutional weaknesses in many developing
countries prevent effective enforcement of regulatory provisions.
Relevant information about pollution loads and changes in water
quality is lacking precisely where water use is most intense – in
densely populated developing countries. As a result, the often serious impacts of polluting activities on the health of people and
ecosystems remain largely unreported. Still, there are signs of
progress in how pollution and the risks of pollution can be mitigated, and trends in environmental degradation reversed.
Progress in mitigating the negative effects
of water development has been slow, while
accelerated economic growth has placed
additional burdens on resources. There is
clear evidence of the degradation of water
quantity and quality: drying rivers, aquifers
and groundwater basins; bioaccumulation
of agrochemicals and heavy metals in fish;
algal blooms from high nutrient loads; and
Water in a changing world

the silting of dams and nutrient loss because of the fragmentation of rivers. Many
of these impacts are caused by cities, industry and agriculture that lack incentives
or obligations to act and report on their
performance on water use and pollution
mitigation. Overexploitation and pollution
are mainly externalities of the activities
of users and polluters: users and polluters
127

PART

2

Chapter 8I

An increasing
number of river
basins lack
sufficient water
to meet all the
demands placed
on them, and
competition
among users
can be intense

seldom directly suffer the consequences
of their actions. Internalizing these effects
thus seems a good way to reduce misuse
and pollution. Examples include providing
incentives through payments for ecosystem
services (such as to local communities for
maintaining the integrity of forested watersheds) and for sustaining benefits provided
to others (see box 14.23 in chapter 14) and
applying the ‘polluter pays’ principle.

How water use affects water
resources
Humans have settled near water bodies for
millennia, and human alteration of coastlines, rivers, lakes and wetlands has gone
hand in hand with social and economic
development. While this has increased
the demand to produce more food, urban
growth and industrial development have
pushed cities to look increasingly farther
for the water they need, often taking water
from, and perhaps hurting, other users –
agriculture and nature.

Disturbing impacts: ecosystems
under stress
Increasing water scarcity. Water scarcity
occurs when so much water is withdrawn
from lakes, rivers or groundwater that
supplies can no longer adequately satisfy
all human and ecosystem requirements,
resulting in more competition among
potential users (map 8.1). An increasing
number of river basins lack sufficient water

Map 8.1

to meet all the demands placed on them,
and competition among users can be intense (see chapter 9).
Available information hides the full reality
of scarcity at local or basin level. This is
particularly problematic in large countries
such as the United States, where average
water use nationally accounts for only 25%
of available resources, but can reach 80%
on a subnational scale.1
Degradation of ecosystems. The Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment has demonstrated
how modifying landscapes to increase
food production and allow development
has resulted in adverse ecological changes
to many ecosystems, with accompanying
loss and degradation of ecosystem services.2 Synergistic and cumulative effects can
make it difficult to attribute changes to a
single cause. Losses have adverse effects
on livelihoods and economic production,3
and some ecosystems have passed thresholds into regime shifts, with a collapse in
ecosystem services, making the cost of
restoration (if possible) very high.
There are many instances where consumptive use and water diversion have
severely degraded downstream wetlands
or closed basins. Examples include the
drastic shrinking Aral Sea in Central Asia
and Lake Chapala in Mexico, the world’s
largest shallow lake. With some of the
largest rivers becoming small streams close

Increasing water scarcity

Little or no water scarcity
Approaching physical water scarcity
Physical water scarcity
Economic water scarcity
Not estimated

Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

128

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
to their mouth (such as the Colorado,
Murray-­Darling, Nile and Yellow), flows
are no longer sufficient to maintain the
health of aquatic ecosystems.
Water regulation and drainage for agricultural development are the main causes
of wetland habitat loss and degradation.4
Although loss and degradation should be
avoided, where they have occurred recovery
can sometimes be quick if the right mechanisms are put in place. An example is the
Mesopotamian Marshlands, which were
deliberately drained but are now being reclaimed (map 8.2). Following over a decade
of decline, more than 20% of the original
marshland area was reflooded in less than a
year between May 2003 and March 2004.5

Double-edged impact: more control,
less resiliency

2005, 270 dams of 60 metres or larger were
planned or under construction.6 The demand for reservoirs of all sizes is expected
to continue to grow, particularly in regions
with high water demands and a need to
cope with the increased variability accompanying climate change (see chapter 11).
Modifications made for water-related
development (dams, irrigation schemes,
urban extension, aquaculture and the
like) have major consequences for the key
ecological components or processes of rivers, lakes, floodplains and groundwater-fed
wetlands. Dams play a major role in altering water regimes. By substantially reducing discharges into oceans, they modify
aquatic habitats and transform flowing
systems (rivers) into still or semi‑still

Figure 8.1

The Living Planet Index, developed by the
United Nations Environment Programme’s
World Conservation Monitoring Centre
and WWF, is based on trends in populations of vertebrate species. The index
shows that on average freshwater species
populations were reduced by half between
1970 and 2005, a sharper decline than for
other biomes (figure 8.1).

Freshwater, temperate and tropical Living Planet Indexes, 1970-2005
1.5
Temperate
1.0
Freshwater

Dams and large interbasin transfers fuelled
the prosperity of many ancient civilizations. Construction of such structures has
continued throughout history. During
the last century the number of such river
modifications increased massively. As of
2000 there were more than 50,000 large
dams in operation. Some 589 large dams
were built in Asia from 1999 to 2001. As of

0.5

Tropical

0.0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Note: The Living Planet Index tracks trends in populations of 1,313 vertebrate species
around the world.
Source: WWF 2008.

Restoration of the Mesopotamian Marshlands in Iraq, March 2003-December 2005

h

Al-Amarah

Al-Amarah

r kh
eh

Ka

f
l-G ha ra

f

1

Al-Nasiriyah

1
3
8

Al-Nasiriyah

Al-Qurnah

s

E uphra te

4

Al-Qurnah

s

IRAN
Ma in Out
fall

r kh
eh

2

2

Dra in (MO
D)

Al-Basrah
tt a l-A rab

al-B

3
Abadan

as r
ah

Khawr
al-Zubair

Umm Qasr

KUWAIT
8 March 2003

Al-Basrah

7
6

ah
Basr
alShatt

S ha tt

S ha

IRAN
Main Outf
all Drain (M
OD)

Karun

l-G ha ra

S ha tt a

Ka

1

E uphra te

ric
ve y
Do

Me y m e h

T

ig
ris

h

ri s

S ha tt a

Water
Dry soil
Wet soil or very shallow water
Dark soil
Light soil
Terrestrial vegetation
Other sparse vegetation
Other medium vegetation
Other dense vegetation
Dense hydrophytes (marsh vegetation)
Medium hydrophytes (marsh vegetation)
Sparse hydrophytes (marsh vegetation)
Non-permanent marsh vegetation
Dry vegetation
Xerophytes

IRAQ

ric
ve y
Do

T

River or canal
Oil flares
Marsh extension 1973

Me y m e h

IRAQ
ig

K a r un

Map 8.2

Biodiversity in freshwater species has declined
by half since 1970

t al-Arab
Shat

Abadan

5
Khawr
al-Zubair

Umm Qasr

KUWAIT
19 December 2005

Source: Based on UNEP 2006.

Water in a changing world

129

PART

2

Chapter 8I
systems (wetlands). Some ecosystems
disappear when rivers are regulated or impounded because of the altered flow and
new barriers to the movement of migratory species. Humans can also suffer from
forced migration and population displacement, two well documented social impacts
of dams.7

Figure 8.2

Effects of river fragmentation and flow
regulation vary by region and biome type, 2005

Effects by region
Percent

Strongly affected

Moderately affected

Australasia
South America
Africa
Asia
North and Central America
Europe
0

25

50

75

100

Effects by biome type
Percent

Strongly affected

Moderately affected

Tundra

Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests
Boreal forests/taiga
Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests
Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests
Temperate coniferous forests
Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannahs and shrublands
Montane grasslands and shrublands
Flooded grasslands and savannahs
Temperate grasslands, savannahs and shrublands
Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests
Deserts and xeric shrublands
Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub
25

50

75

100

Note: The fragmentation and flow indicator was developed by Umea University in Sweden,
in collaboration with the World Resources Institute, for assessing the state of large river
systems. Unaffected river systems have no dams in their catchments but can have dams
in tributaries if flow regulation is less than 2%. A river system is considered ‘affected’ if
there are dams in the main channel but is never classified as ‘strongly affected’ if there are
no dams in the main channel. All river systems with no more than a quarter of their main
channel length left without dams are considered strongly affected.
Source: Based on WWF 2006.

130

Ecosystem change has accelerated in many
areas, and there is concern that large-scale
changes will make some ecosystems more
vulnerable to water-related agricultural
activities. The non-linear dynamics of ecosystems may lead to abrupt changes that
can affect their resilience and capacity to
absorb disturbances.10
Variability and flexibility are needed to
maintain ecosystem resilience. Attempts
to keep systems in some perceived optimal
state, whether for conservation or production, have often reduced long-term resilience, making the system more vulnerable
to change.11 Modifications of landscapes
and reductions of other ecosystem services
have diminished the capacity of ecosystems to cope with larger-scale and more
complex dynamics through reduced ecosystem resilience locally and across scales.12
Water resources development and withdrawals have led to increased turbidity and
salinity of water and soil, making land and
water management more difficult. Siltation
and heavier sediment loads in rivers, due
partially to river regulation and the resulting erosion of river banks and the sides
of reservoirs, have turned reservoirs into
sediment traps and reduced the quantity
of sediment being carried into delta areas.
The Aswan Dam on the Nile River is such
a trap; it stops sediment from reaching
the delta front in the Mediterranean to
compensate for sand lost to coastal erosion
created by waves and currents. It has thus
led to faster erosion of the delta and the
coast from Egypt to Lebanon.13

Mangroves

0

Of the world’s 292 largest river systems in
20058 (accounting for 60% of the world’s
runoff), more than a third (105) were considered to be strongly affected by fragmentation, and 68 moderately affected.9 Wetland ecosystems feel the greatest impact,
but terrestrial ecosystems such as forests
and grasslands are also affected (figure 8.2).

Water can accumulate in the soil profile
through runoff and groundwater recharge
and from irrigation if the rate of input
exceeds the rate of crop consumption. This
accumulation can lead to water-logging
(when soil pores are filled with water and
oxygen is lacking) and salinization (when
the rising water in the soil profile brings
diluted salts to the surface). Worldwide,
about 10% of irrigated land suffers from
water-logging, resulting in a 20% drop in
water-logged areas.14
Although a problem worldwide, salinization is particularly acute in semi-arid areas
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
that are heavily irrigated and are poorly
drained and where salt is never completely
flushed from the land. Such conditions
are found in parts of the Middle East, in
China’s North Plain, in Central Asia and
in the Colorado River basin in the United
States, among others.

Seeking sustainable
management of groundwater
Throughout history groundwater has been
integral to human life and livelihoods and
to stable agricultural production in the
face of hydrologic variability. But groundwater is not evenly distributed around the
world. Of total annual precipitation of
577,000 cubic kilometres (km3) per year
(based on long-term averages), 79% falls
on the oceans, 2% on lakes and 19% on
land.15 Most of this evaporates or runs off
into streams and rivers. Only 2,200 km3,
or 2%, is infiltrated into groundwater.
In many public debates declining groundwater levels or quality are cited as the main
reason for the need for management action,
but resource depletion and degradation are
only part of the problem. Precise data on
the status of groundwater resources are still
not available in sufficient detail to make a
global assessment (see chapters 10 and 13),
and long-term continuous depletion has to
be distinguished from medium-term system disequilibrium.16 A more sobering conclusion drawn from detailed local aquifer
studies is that where groundwater services
are in heavy demand, much of the good
quality groundwater has already been used.
Contemporary recharge to shallow aquifers
has become seriously (perhaps irrevocably)
polluted, and relaxing water abstraction
and pollution pressure on aquifers will take
considerable time.17
The development of the power-driven
pump in the mid-20th century led to the
emergence of many groundwater-dependent economies (figure 8.3)18 and recently
to warnings of the potential adverse
impacts of excessive abstraction and of
aquifer pollution.19
Groundwater development and the response of groundwater systems have not
been uniformly documented. Even in
industrial countries political realization of
the economic and social impact of access
to groundwater has tended to come late
(generally after some damage to groundwater systems has been done), requiring
water resources management agencies
to play ‘catch-up’. Public investment in
groundwater development and protection
Water in a changing world

has been smaller and more dispersed
than for surface water resources. Needed
most are changes in human behaviour,
which requires a much less technocratic
approach.20
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has highlighted the implications
of accelerated climate change for groundwater,21 and changes in excess rainfall
(recharge and runoff patterns) are expected to add to the resource management
burden for both groundwater depletion
and rising water tables, depending on the
region. But these impacts are likely to be
small (and possibly negligible) compared
with the stresses placed on groundwater
systems by current socioeconomic drivers.

where
groundwater
services are in
heavy demand,
much of the
good quality
groundwater has
already been used
and recharge to
shallow aquifers
has become
seriously polluted

Groundwater-use levels, demand
patterns and economic benefits
It is not possible to objectively estimate
the current state of groundwater use
by country, economic sector or aquifer,
though it is evident that some countries
have made strong efforts to manage their
aquifers sustainably and have achieved
good results. The constraints of doing so
have been highlighted for the growing
importance of groundwater in agriculture
through AQUASTAT22 and for domestic
water by the World Bank Groundwater
Management Advisory Team (GW-MATE)
programme.23 There has been little

Figure 8.3

Groundwater use has grown rapidly in some
countries

Cubic kilometres a year, most recent year available
250

200

150

India
United States
China
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Mexico
Saudi Arabia
Russian Federation
Japan
France

100

50

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Note: Countries with multiple lines have different datasets that do not reconcile.
Source: Based on Margat 2008.

131

PART

2

Chapter 8I
systematic updating and collection of data
on national groundwater use and resource
status inventories on a global scale.24 The
situation is improving in Europe, driven
by the monitoring requirements of the
EU Water Framework Directive and a joint
information system for sharing data, the
European Environment Information and
Observation Network (EIONET). Map 8.3
presents the state of knowledge on renewable and fossil aquifer withdrawals.
Irrigated agriculture is the principal user
of the major sedimentary aquifers of the
Middle East, North Africa, North America

Map 8.3

and the Asian alluvial plains of the Punjab and Terai (map 8.4). Less evident is
the conjunctive use associated with the
concentration of irrigated agriculture and
urban development in many alluvial fan
and delta environments (such as those of
the Chao Praya, Ganges-Brahmaputra, Godavari, Indus, Krishna, Mekong, Narmada,
Nile, Mississippi, Po, Yangtze and Yellow
Rivers). Reducing stress on these groundwater systems involves more than groundwater resources management. It requires
reducing land-based pollution, rehabilitating degraded habitats and conserving
water resources.

Annual withdrawals of renewable groundwater sources and non-renewable fossil
aquifers, most recent year available, 1995-2004

Renewable groundwater sources on a national basis

Annual withdrawals
(cubic kilometres)
0-5
5-20
20-100
More than 100
No data

Non-renewable fossil aquifers in North Africa and the Middle East

Aquifer mining (annual
withdrawals, cubic kilometres)
7

Note: National averages can mask the true situation, which can vary dramatically on a local scale.
Source: Based on Margat 2008.

132

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment

Map 8.4

2

Groundwater use for irrigation on a country basis, most recent year available, 1995-2005

Annual withdrawals
(cubic kilometres)
0-5
5-25
25-50
50-200
No data

Source: Based on Margat 2008.

Socioeconomic drivers of groundwater
development show substantial geographic
differences unrelated to resource availability. Agricultural demand for groundwater
has often been spurred by both explicit
and hidden subsidies for rural electrification, irrigation equipment and occasionally water well construction. In South Asia,
for instance, subsidized rural electrification
to meet irrigation demands has been a key
driver of groundwater use, especially in dryland areas with no surface water services.
The concentration of drilling, pumping
and water well maintenance services has
progressively reduced the cost of groundwater exploitation. The flat-rate electrical
energy policy in parts of South Asia (and
subsidized rural electricity elsewhere) is
not the major cause of groundwater resource overexploitation, but it has allowed
grossly inefficient use of energy in pumping groundwater from shallow, low-storage
aquifers in hard-rock terrains, effectively
bankrupting state electricity providers.25
While the rate of agricultural growth
has generally slowed over the past 25
years, the progressive adoption of precision agriculture (requiring on-demand,
just-in-time irrigation) has considerably
intensified groundwater use and boosted
its productivity. For the most part, pumping by farmers has been determined less
by groundwater management and more by
the prices of basic commodities and cash
crops compared with the costs of production, including energy for pumping.
Groundwater is a major source of urban
water supply around the world (map 8.5),
Water in a changing world

not just in megacities but also in thousands of medium-size towns. Some cities
(for example, Beijing, Dhaka, Lima, Lusaka
and Mexico City) are located on or near
major aquifers, and urban water utilities
have drawn heavily on groundwater for
their supply. In other cities (for example,
Bangkok, Buenos Aires and Jakarta), the
share of water derived from groundwater
has fallen considerably as a result of aquifer depletion, saline intrusion or groundwater pollution.
These trends have tended to obscure
mushrooming growth over the past 10-15
years in private self-supply from groundwater by residential, commercial and
industrial users in Latin America and
South and South-East Asia. The scale of
exploitation is generally determined by
the cost of access (existence of shallow
aquifers rather than their yield). The
initial impetus for private urban groundwater use is the inadequacy of the main
utility service level, but once investments
in private wells have been made, water
use tends to continue because, for those
who can afford them, wells usually offer
a less expensive supply of water than
most water utilities, with larger users
paying more because of cross-subsidized
tariffs. As a result, groundwater accounts
for more than 30% of urban water supply (and a higher proportion by number
of consumers), even in many cities and
towns far from major known aquifers.
Heavy private use of groundwater in
urban areas complicates the finance and
operation of water utility services – both
water supply and sewerage. Increasingly,
133

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Map 8.5

Groundwater use for drinking water on a country basis, most recent year available, 1995-2005

Annual withdrawals
(cubic kilometres)
0-1
1-5
5-10
10-30
No data

Source: Based on Margat 2008.

African cities are using boreholes to improve water security, with the aim of easing pressure on water facilities in densely
populated suburbs.

Social, economic and environmental
risks
Three aquifer characteristics determine
whether groundwater services will ultimately prove sustainable:
•

Vulnerability to pollution under
contaminant pressure from the land
surface.

•

Susceptibility to irreversible degradation from excessive exploitation.

•

Renewability of storage reserves under
current and future climate regimes.

These characteristics vary widely by
aquifer type and hydro­geologic setting.
Vulnerability to pollution is generally
linked to an aquifer’s accessibility. Aquifers that are shallow and ‘open’ to regular
and dependable recharge are more likely
to suffer pollution from agrochemicals and
urbanization (in particular, from low-cost
wastewater disposal and careless disposal
of industrial chemicals). Aquifer development and effluent disposal for urban water
supply have far-reaching implications for
public health, municipal planning and
resource sustainability. The presence of
groundwater initially relieves financial
pressure on urban water service utilities,
but often at the cost of degrading shallow
aquifers and complicating public health
134

emergencies. In Europe land use zoning is
now used to protect vulnerable key aquifers that provide municipal water supply,
or deeper confined groundwater sources
are developed that are naturally protected
from urban pollution.
A recent study of the water economics of
the Middle East and North Africa region
estimates that groundwater resource depletion has substantially reduced GDP in
some countries – Jordan by 2.1%, Yemen
1.5%, Egypt 1.3% and Tunisia 1.2%.26 Reductions in groundwater stocks (whether
renewable or non-renewable) appear to
have been translated into reduced economic productivity of water. More difficult
to assess are the positive economic impacts
of groundwater abstraction and where
access to and use of groundwater results
in economic liberation. Oman, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
for example, rely almost exclusively on
non-renewable groundwater and desalination for water supply. In all such calculations, however, it should be kept in mind
that values for groundwater ‘reserves’ or
‘stocks’ and ‘sustainable yield’ are not
precise, while the partition between ‘renewable’ and ‘non-renewable’ is a further
complication.27
Sharp points of competition over groundwater resources between urban and rural
users are now becoming more apparent.
Expanding municipalities and expanding
light industrial and commercial activities in peri-urban and linked rural areas
are competing with agriculture over
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
groundwater quantity and quality. Even
if agriculture is, within certain limits,
indifferent to groundwater quality, precision agriculture is likely to be located near
urban areas, and it uses high quantities of
chemical fertilizers, pesticides and fungicides, which contaminate shallow groundwater. While relatively benign organic
alternatives to persistent chemical compounds exist, the impacts of large-scale
commercial farming near cities on what
may be key strategic groundwater reserves
should not be underestimated. Municipalities, water and environmental regulators
and agricultural agencies are all implicated, with the evidence pointing to an
enormous disconnect between water and
land use regulations. Effective measures
for groundwater quality protection require
that the two be considered together.

Complex management
Groundwater recharge processes are extremely complex, and there is still considerable uncertainty about their relationship
with natural vegetation, land management
and groundwater use. While many specific
local-scale recharge studies are available,
knowledge of the range of recharge modes
across large river basins and their linked
aquifers rarely comes together to form a
systemic overview. For example, in the
complex Ganges-Brahmaputra and Indus
aquifers, snow and glacier melt determine
indirect recharge, but shallow and deep
groundwater circulation emerges in the
piedmont fans and deep alluvial basins,
with re-emergent flows, water-logging and
salinization as a result of surface water and
groundwater interactions perturbed by irrigation. These systems are at risk but have
not had the same detailed hydrogeological
evaluation as has the similarly complex
Chalk Aquifer of Northwest Europe28 or
the large regional groundflow systems of
the United States.29
For many heavily exploited aquifers
groundwater abstraction and use are still
poorly quantified, and dedicated groundwater monitoring networks have not
been established (see chapter 13). Instead,
periodic head observations are made of
pumped wells, which give only an approximate measure and are completely inadequate for detecting response to recharge
events. Many cities are working ‘blind’
when they distribute water supplied from
groundwater sources. There are reported
cases of drops in drinking water production, subsidence due to excess pumping
(see box 12.4 in chapter 12), leakages
from drinking water supply systems into
shallow aquifers and even contamination
Water in a changing world

(leaks from sanitation networks or leachates from wastes).
Much is expected of water harvesting and
managed aquifer recharge – and many
assumptions are made about the potential for recharge. In some hydrogeologic
settings it is difficult to improve on the
efficiency of natural recharge processes,
while in others the economically feasible proportion of recharge enhancement
over natural recharge is very limited,
although the techniques can help solve
local problems and improve groundwater
quality. The highest management priority,
though, will always be to protect the main
recharge zones.

Resource prospects and future
management needs
Population and income growth projections
and associated increases in water demand
will place unprecedented demands on aquifer systems. Further depletion and degradation of aquifers should be anticipated
unless there is much more investment in
effective governance and management
practices. In addition, climate change will
place some key aquifers under additional
pressure.

2

Municipalities,
water and
environmental
regulators and
agricultural
agencies are all
implicated in the
failure to manage
groundwater
resources, with the
evidence pointing
to an enormous
disconnect
between water
and land use
regulations

In heavily populated areas with large
numbers of irrigation systems using
groundwater, communities will need to
self-regulate resource use. Approaches
pioneered in Tunisia are now being put
forward in South Asia. Resource management institutions need to better understand the socioeconomic drivers to which
irrigated agricultural users respond. Social
marketing of basic groundwater information to farmers can have a positive
impact, as in the case of Andhra Pradesh
farmer-managed groundwater systems
in India.30 It is important to identify the
kind of information that will catalyse selfregulation. Demand-side approaches that
focus on obtaining consensus on aquifer
use may have more success in the long run
than technical supply-side or hardware-led
approaches.
In and around large urban areas economic
competition for water is forcing agriculture to adapt – by boosting its productivity and minimizing its environmental
impact – or to disappear. Demand for
precision agriculture will be unrelenting,
and further concentration of agricultural
activity can be expected as market chains
are reinforced (cold storage, niche global
markets and the like), along with further
adoption of agronomy advances such
as deficit irrigation and subsurface drip.
135

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Information
about pollution
loads and water
quality changes
is lacking in many
countries because
of inadequate
monitoring systems

While the trend towards more precision
agriculture will boost overall groundwater
productivity, it will not necessarily relieve
abstraction pressure on aquifers because it
will potentially improve the feasibility of
abstraction by larger pumping lifts.
The tension between private and public
services derived from aquifers remains.
More convergent and sustainable resource
use will be achieved only through substantial investment in management operations
on the ground, working primarily through
community consultation and crosssectoral policy dialogue. Such dialogue is
supported by shared knowledge and common understanding of the current situation and future options, as illustrated in
the country policy support programmes of
the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage that have been tested in
river basins in China (Jiaodong Peninsula
and Qiantang River) and India (Brahmani
and Sabarmati). Dialogue on these basins
was supported by a user-friendly model for
investigating risks and adaptation strategies using a scenario approach for looking
at supply and demand and quantity and
quality for different sectors of use.

Growing risks: pollution and
degradation of water quality
Despite improvements in some regions,
water pollution is on the rise globally.
And unless substantial progress is made in
regulation and enforcement, pollution is
expected to increase as a result of economic development driven by urbanization, industries and intensive agriculture

Box 8.1

Asian ‘Tigers’ and the hidden tip of the
pollution iceberg

Industrial and economic development in Asia, especially among rapidly
growing ‘Asian Tiger’ economies, has
in many cases come at the expense of
water resources. Rapid urbanization
across Asia and the Pacific will continue
to shape the parameters of water use
trends, which affect prospects for water
scarcity. Although rural populations in
Asia are projected to remain stable over
the next 20 years, urban populations
are likely to increase by 60% before
2025. While attention focuses on the
multiple challenges of mega­cities,
smaller urban areas, with few financial
and technical resources due to their
weak political clout, are set to continue
current trends of poor wastewater management, posing graver threats to water
resources than physical scarcity does.

136

Current strategies for economic
development have propelled river
degradation to the top of the water
use agenda. Malaysia, for example,
recently witnessed an increase in the
number of rivers deemed slightly polluted and a decline in the number of
rivers considered clean. As recognition
of the problem grows, more efforts
are being directed towards river
rehabilitation.
Source: Le-Huu Ti, Chief, Water Security
Section, United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
based on information from the Asian River
Restoration Network and the fresh and
coastal waters session at the 3rd Southeast
Asia Water Forum Regional Workshop, 23
October 2007, Kuala Lumpur.

systems. Many industries – some of them
known to be heavily polluting (such as
leather and chemicals) – are moving from
high-income countries to emerging market
economies (box 8.1), where they benefit
from various incentives, a lower-cost workforce and, in some cases, less stringent
environmental regulations.
Information about pollution loads and
water quality changes is lacking in many
countries because of inadequate monitoring systems. As a result, the often-serious
impacts of polluting activities on human
and ecosystem health remain unreported
or underreported.

An overview of water quality issues:
the increasing threat from pollution
Pollution’s increasing threat to water quality.
Human-generated water pollution is a
serious threat to human and ecosystem
health, but its impact is hard to quantify.
Despite monitoring inadequacies, there are
local signs that the declining quality of
domestic water supply sources is becoming
a major concern in many countries.
Pollution typically refers to chemicals or
other substances in concentrations greater
than would occur under natural conditions. Major water pollutants include
microbes, nutrients, heavy metals, organic
chemicals, oil and sediments; heat, which
raises the temperature of the receiving
water, can also be a pollutant. Pollutants
are typically the cause of major water quality degradation around the world. Virtually all goods-producing activities generate
pollutants as unwanted by-products (see
chapter 10).
Water pollutants are categorized as point or
non-point according to their primary sources (table 8.1). Point sources are pollutants
from pipelines and other readily identifiable
sources. Non-point sources are pollutants
mobilized by precipitation as it flows over
the land and infiltrates the soil. Non-point
source pollutant loads in a drainage basin
are a function of precipitation patterns and
the range of human activities in the basin
(especially agriculture). The ecological footprint of consumption31 shows where human
activities to meet a population’s needs are
well above the respective region’s biocapacity (map 8.6), implying that such regions are
running an ecological deficit and depend
increasingly on the natural wealth and
resources of other countries.
The most important water contaminants
created by human activities are microbial
pathogens, nutrients, oxygen-consuming
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment

Table 8.1

2

Comparison of point and non-point sources of water pollution

Point sources

Non-point sources

Fairly steady volume and quality

Highly dynamic; occurs at random intervals closely related to
hydrologic cycle

Variability of values typically less than one order of magnitude

Variability of values can range across several orders of magnitude

Most severe water quality impacts typically occur during low-flow
summer periods

Most severe water quality impacts occur during or after storm
events

Enters receiving waters at identifiable points, usually through
pipelines or channel sources

Entry point to receiving waters usually cannot be identified;
typically arises from extensive land areas

Can be quantified with traditional hydraulic techniques

Difficult to quantify with traditional techniques

Primary water quality parameters are organic water pollutants
(biological oxygen demand), dissolved oxygen, nutrients, suspended
solids and sometimes heavy metals and synthetic organic chemicals

Primary water quality parameters are sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, synthetic organics, acidity and dissolved oxygen

Control programmes typically applied by government agencies

Control programmes involve individuals not normally considered
in pollution control programmes (such as farmers and urban
homeowners)

Source: Thornton et al. 1999.

Map 8.6

Ecological footprints and biocapacity, 2000

Ecological footprints on a country basis

Hectares per capita
0-1.5
1.5-3.0
3.0-4.5
4.5-6.0
More than 6.0
No data

Biocapacity on a country basis

Hectares per capita
0-1.5
1.5-3.0
3.0-4.5
4.5-6.0
6.0-9.0
More than 9.0
No data
Note: Ecological footprint is a measure of the area needed to support a population’s lifestyle. This includes the consumption of food, fuel, wood and fibres.
Pollution, such as carbon dioxide emissions, is also counted as part of the footprint. Biocapacity measures how biologically productive land is. It is measured in ‘global hectares’ – a hectare with the world average biocapacity. Biologically productive land includes cropland, pasture, forests and fisheries.
Source: Ewing et al. 2008.

Water in a changing world

137

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Globally, the most
prevalent water
quality problem
is eutrophication

materials, heavy metals and persistent
organic matter, as well as suspended sediments, nutrients, pesticides and oxygenconsuming substances, much of it from
non-point sources. The most important
pollutant affecting human health is microbial contamination. Inadequate sanitation
facilities, improper wastewater disposal
and animal wastes are the major sources
of microbial pollution. In at least 8 of the
United Nations Environment Programme’s
13 Regional Seas Programme regions, over
50% of the wastewater discharged into
freshwater and coastal areas is untreated,
rising to over 80% in 5 regions.32

Pollution-causing activities
Globally, the most prevalent water quality problem is eutrophication, a result of

Box 8.2

Addressing eutrophication and its effects in
the Baltic Sea

In 1998 approximately 90% of the
coastal and marine biotopes in the
Baltic Sea were threatened by loss
of area or reduction in quality from
eutrophication, contamination,
fisheries and settlements. Agriculture,
urbanization and atmospheric deposition were considered the root causes
of eutrophication. For agriculture the
primary causes were mainly inadequate adoption of modern agricultural technology and inadequate
integration of environmental and agricultural practices. The causes of pollution from urban sources were lack
of investment in wastewater facilities
and high growth rates. Atmospheric
pollution was caused by energy production and transport in response to

Figure 8.4

population growth and urbanization,
increased sea and road traffic, ineffective laws and regulations to control
emissions and inadequate transport
policy.
Environmental protection legislation and several new measures in
the region have resulted in some
improvement, as reported in the Helsinki Commission 2003 assessment.
Phosphorus inputs have decreased
considerably following measures taken
by the Baltic Sea riparian countries,
but eutrophication still remains an
urgent problem in most coastal areas.
Source: Helsinki Commission 2007; Lääne,
Kraav, and Titova 2005.

Increasing frequency of harmful algal blooms
in East China Sea associated with increasing
fertilizer use

Algal blooms per year

Area covered (thousands of square kilometres)

100

25

80

20

60

15

40

10

20

5

0

0
1993

Source: UNEP/GIWA 2006.

138

2000 2001 2002 2003

high-nutrient loads (mainly phosphorus
and nitrogen), which substantially impairs
beneficial uses of water (see the example of
the Baltic Sea in box 8.2). Major nutrient
sources include agricultural runoff, domestic sewage (also a source of microbial
pollution), industrial effluents and atmospheric inputs from fossil fuel burning and
bush fires. Lakes and reservoirs are particularly susceptible to the negative impacts
of eutrophication because of their complex
dynamics, relatively longer water residence
times and their role as an integrating sink
for pollutants from their drainage basins.33
Nitrogen concentrations exceeding 5 milligrams per litre of water often indicate
pollution from human and animal waste
or fertilizer runoff from agricultural areas.
Excessive nutrient inputs can also cause
harmful algal blooms. Cyanobacteria, also
known as blue-green algae, have increased
in freshwater and coastal systems such
as the East China Sea in recent decades
(figure 8.4). The toxins produced by the
excessive algal blooms are concentrated
by filter-feeding bivalves, fish and other
marine organisms and can cause fish and
shellfish poisoning. In people they can
cause acute poisoning, skin irritation and
gastrointestinal illnesses. There are global
warming implications associated with this
phenomenon, as cyanobacteria have a
competitive advantage over other types of
algae at higher temperatures.
Organic materials, particularly from domestic wastewater treatment plants, foodprocessing discharges and algal blooms,
are decomposed by oxygen-consuming
microbes in water bodies, as measured
by biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
Thermal stratification in nutrient-enriched
lakes with high BOD levels can produce
chemical conditions allowing nutrients
and heavy metals in lake bottom sediments to re-enter the water column. Lake
Erie’s oxygen-depleted bottom zone, for
example, has expanded since 1998, with
harmful environmental impacts on the
lake’s fisheries. The eastern and southern
coasts of North America, the southern
coasts of China and Japan and large areas
around Europe have also undergone
oxygen depletion.34 One of the world’s
largest ‘dead zones’ has appeared off the
mouth of the Mississippi River in the Gulf
of Mexico, attributed to excessive nitrogen
loads from the river, with harmful impacts
on biodiversity and fisheries.35 Projected
food production needs and increasing
wastewater effluents associated with an
increasing population over the next three
decades suggest a 10%-15% increase in the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
river input of nitrogen loads into coastal
ecosystems, continuing the trend observed
during 1970-95.36
Heavy metals can accumulate in the tissues of humans and other organisms. An
example is the serious human health impacts of the high natural concentrations of
arsenic in groundwater in parts of Bangladesh and adjacent parts of India (box 8.3).
Mercury and lead from industrial activities, commercial and artisanal mining and
landfill leachates also threaten human
and ecosystem health in some areas, with
emissions from coal-fired power plants
being a major source of the mercury accumulating in the tissues of fish at the top
of fish trophic levels.
An emerging water quality concern is
the impact of personal care products and
pharmaceuticals, such as birth control
pills, painkillers and antibiotics, on
aquatic ecosystems. Little is known about
their long-term human or ecosystem
impacts, although some are believed to
mimic natural hormones in humans and
other species.
The level of pollution is a function of the
structure of a country’s economy and its
institutional and legal capacity to address
it. Groundwater systems are very vulnerable freshwater resources, since once
contaminated, they are difficult and costly
to clean – when cleaning is technically
feasible at all. Pollutants from non-point
sources, such as leaching of excess nitrates
or pesticides used on agricultural lands or
heavy metals in mines, can take decades to
reach the aquifers and once they do it may
be too late or too expensive to act. With
an increasing load of chemical substances
being discharged into water systems and
onto agricultural lands, uncertainties persist about the long-term effects on human
and ecosystem health. A recent study on
drinking water in France estimated that
more than 3 million people (5.8% of the
population) were exposed to water quality
that does not conform to World Health Organization (WHO) standards (for nitrates,
non-conformity was found in 97% of
groundwater samples).37
Storm-generated runoff from agricultural
and urban areas is the most important
non-point pollutant source (such as
leached nitrates in runoff and its accumulation in rivers) in most countries.
Further, as point sources (such as urban
sewage discharge) are becoming more
controlled, non-point pollutant loads are
becoming an increasing concern. The US
Water in a changing world

Box 8.3

2

The arsenic crisis: as yet no solution

Some 10 years have passed since
the extent of the arsenic poisoning
disaster in Bangladesh became widely
known. High levels of arsenic were
found in tubewells constructed for
drinking water. Today, up to 70 million
people in Bangladesh are exposed
to water that contains more than the
World Health Organization threshold
value of 10 micrograms of arsenic
per litre. Up to half the estimated 10
million tubewells in Bangladesh might
be contaminated with arsenic. Large

amounts of arsenic-contaminated
groundwater have also been used for
irrigation, leading to the appearance
of arsenic in the food chain. Natural
arsenic pollution of drinking water,
although originally linked to Bangladesh and the state of West Bengal
in India, is now considered a global
threat with as many as 140 million
people affected in 70 countries on all
continents.
Source: Bagchi 2007; Fry et al. 2007.

Environmental Protection Agency, for
example, notes that agricultural activities
contribute the largest quantity of pollutants to water bodies in the United States,
and the situation is probably similar in
many other countries.38
Localized pollution occurs frequently with
mining activities. If no mitigation measures are in place, the pollution can lead to
serious environmental degradation and
water contamination. Negative impacts
include lowering of the water table – with
negative consequences for vegetation,
ecosystems and farming – and groundwater contamination with heavy metals in
water drained from mines and waste (mine
tailings) affecting downstream ecosystems
and drinking water.
Problems with heavy metals go beyond the
drinking water supply, also affecting food
quality (as with the preferential accumulation of cadmium in rice grain when effluent from zinc mines is used for irrigation).
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe finds that mining activities
have had severe impacts on water and the
environment in Eastern Europe, SouthEast Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia.39 In some river basins (for example,
in Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan) the
mining industry is a major past or current
pollution source, with numerous storage
facilities (such as tailing dams for mining wastes) presenting substantial risks
(box 8.4).

Progress in mitigating pollution
There are signs of progress in addressing
pollution and pollution risks in different
sectors. There is well documented evidence that the costs of inaction are high
and that some impacts may be irreversible
or nearly so (contamination of groundwater drinking water, ecosystem losses).40
Polluted water has a high human health
139

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Most countries
have legislation to
protect their water
resources, but
implementation
often lags because
responsibilities are
dispersed and the
costs are high

treats and monitors performance. However, investments for such approaches
are lacking at all levels (from household
sanitation and industrial processes to
city waste treatment plants). Experience
from high-income countries shows that
a combination of incentives, including
more stringent regulation, enforcement
and targeted subsidies (where justified),
can boost investments in water pollution
prevention and treatment. Sanitation
systems and sewage treatment (preferably with industrial discharges separated
from domestic sewage) can reduce the risk
of discharge into natural systems. Such
practices increase production costs for
water services, and effective cost-recovery
systems are needed to ensure that pollution control remains sustainable.

cost. One-tenth of the global burden of
disease (measured in disability-adjusted
life years) can be attributed to water, sanitation and hygiene, and water and environmental factors.41 Other pollution costs
include clean-up, additional treatment
and damage to fisheries, ecosystems and
recreation. Most countries have introduced
legislation to protect their water resources,
but implementation often lags because responsibilities are dispersed across multiple
institutions and the costs of control and
monitoring are high.
There are examples, mostly in develped
countries, where the ‘polluter pays’ principle has stimulated changes in attitudes
towards pollution and led to recycling
and reuse, clean processes for industry,
organic farming and so on or collect
and treat effluents with an ‘end of the
pipe’ approach that collects, controls,

Box 8.4

Long-term impacts of mining on ecosystems in transition economies

While pollution-abatement technologies
exist for hazardous substances, their use
in economies in transition is limited to
a small number of economically viable
industrial plants.

Hazardous industrial sites, water pollution and mining hotspots in the
Balkans, 2007
1

Krsko

ZAGREB

ROMANIA
Novi Sad

Republic of Srpska

Brcko
Ugljevik

Doboj

Jajce

SARAJEVO

Lucani Cacak

SERBIA

Pb-Zn mine &

Suplja

Tivat

I

C

ITALY
Hazardous
industrial site

2

S

Djakovic

Cu mine &
beneficiation complex

Rubik

Kosovo

Kumanovo
Tetovo
Gostivar

Mining industry
hot spots

Nuclear power
generation site

Serious water pollution

Fier

National capital

Autonomous boundary

1 to 5 million inhabitants

Inter-entity boundary line

100,000 to 1 million

Vlore

Cr & Sb mine &
beneficiation mill

Pb-Zn mine

Bucim
Radovis
Negotino

Kavadarci

Ohrid
Elbasan

SOFIA
Pernik

Kriva Feja

MACEDONIA

TIRANA

Smelter complex Ferrochromium, Fe
(steel) & Ni smelters

Waste disposal site

Leskovac

Kriva
Pb-Zn
Lojane Palanka
tailings dam
Sasa
Probistip Zletovo
Kocani
SKOPJE
Cu mine & mill
Veles

Kicevo

Sharra

Durres

Badovac

Gnjilan
Jegunovce

Furshe-Kruje

Mining site

Republic boundary

Nis

Zvecan
Tuneli i Pare
Kosovska Mitrovica
Trepca
Pristina
Berane Rudnik

Fushe-Arrez

A

6

Cu mining, concentration,
smelting, refinery, alloying, etc...

Rozaje

PODGORICA
Cetinje
Shkoder

E

Prahovo
Cerovo
Veliki Krivelj
Bor
Kozloduy

Leposavic

Mojkovac and
Brskovo

Niksic
Kotor

T

Majdanpek

BULGARIA

MONTENEGRO
A

Cu mine & mill

Pljevlja

Electrolytic Zn
smelter & refinery

I

BELGRADE

Kragujevac

Pb-Zn mine & mill

Konjic

Gacko

R

Pancevo

Sabac

Lukavac
Zajaca Pb-Zn mine
Maglaj
& mill
Tuzla
Smederevo
Birac Zvornick
Kostolac
Krupanj
Lazarevac
Vares
Veliki
Kolubara
Madjan
Pb-Zn mine
Zenica
Lignite
mine
& mill
Kakanj
Srebrenica
& ash deposits

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
Federation of
Bosnia and
Herzegovina

D

The map shows the multiple pollution hot
spots around mining sites in the Balkans
– the result of a long history of mining

Vojvodina

CROATIA

A

On 29 August 2003 the Sasa lead and
zinc mine in northeastern FYR Macedonia
released some 486,000 tonnes of mine
tailings into the Kamenicka River. Deposits
of large quantities of toxic heavy metal
(including arsenic, cadmium, copper,
lead, manganese, nickel and zinc) and the
release of acidic drainage to surface and
groundwater led to acidification, degradation of water resources, accumulation of
metals in sediments and bioaccumulation,
with severe ecological impacts. This industrial pollution accident contaminated the
water source that supplies irrigation water
for 25,000 hectares of farmland, reducing
economic, environmental and agricultural
viability.

Subotica

(Slovenia)

In January 2000 a dam holding tailings
from gold extraction overflowed in Baia
Mare in Romania, releasing about 100,000
cubic metres (m3) of waste, including
about 70 tonnes of cyanide and other
heavy metals. The spill affected local rivers,
interrupting the drinking water supply for
about 24 communities and killing several
thousand tonnes of fish. Following this
accident, several EU directives and national
laws were enacted to improve the safety of
mining facilities, and most mining companies are now using improved technology.

140

Urban settlements are the main source
of point-source pollution. In contrast,

Suvodol
Bitola

Fe-Ni & Sb mine(s)
& ferronickel smelter

ALBANIA
Ballsh
Patos

GREECE

Source: Based on UNEP/GRID Arendal 2007.

and industries with limited pollution
prevention.

Source: UNEP/OCHA 2000; UNEP/GRID Arendal
2007; Koo 2003.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
economic recession can reduce pollution
(box 8.5).

Urban sewage treatment still limited
mainly to high-income countries
To achieve pollution mitigation objectives
for the environment and human health,
improved sanitation must be accompanied
by sewage treatment. Sewage treatment
is the removal of physical, chemical and
biological contaminants from wastewater,
both surface drainage and domestic, using
physical, chemical and biological processes. The objective is to produce a treated
waste stream (or treated effluent) and solid
waste or sludge suitable for discharge or
reuse back into the environment.42 Data
on the rates and levels of collection and
treatment of sewage are limited and often
difficult to compare.
Sewage: a problem to manage? More than
80% of sewage in developing countries
is discharged untreated, polluting rivers,
lakes and coastal areas.43 Even in some
developed countries treatment of urban
wastewater is far from satisfactory. The
OECD online environmental compendium
finds a broad range of applications of tertiary waste treatment, from 3.6% in Turkey
to 90% in Germany.44
In most low- and middle-income countries wastewater is discharged directly
into the sea or rivers without treatment.
Urban wastewater constitutes a significant
pollution load and is particularly hazardous when mixed with untreated industrial
waste – a common practice. Many large
cities still have no treatment plants or
plants quickly become undersized as urban
population growth outpaces investments.
A nationwide survey in Pakistan found
that only 2% of cities with a population of
more than 10,000 had wastewater treatment facilities and that less than 30% of
wastewater receives treatment in these
cities.45 Some 36% of wastewater is used in
agriculture (2.4 million m3 a day directly
for irrigation and 400,000 m3 a day is
disposed of in irrigation canals), and 64%
is disposed of in rivers or the Arabian Sea.
In many developing countries waterborne
sanitation systems and pollution mitigation facilities may not be the most sustainable option; other improved facilities
may be more suitable (for example, using
lagoons for collective units and ecosanitation units for rural households; see
box 8.6).
In developed countries wastewater is progressively coming under control. Over the
last 20 years Europe’s Urban Wastewater
Water in a changing world

Box 8.5

Impact of economic recession on pollution in
Eastern Europe

With the economic recession of
the 1990s and a decline in highly
polluting industries, the amount of
wastewater and pollutants discharged
in Eastern European countries fell
considerably. Although many of these
economies have since recovered and
their industrial activity has increased,
the structure of their industrial sectors
has shifted towards less-polluting
industries, especially in the new EU
member states. In compliance with
strict EU legislation, these countries
have also constructed new wastewater
treatment plants, further reducing
pollution.
There has also been a marked reduction in pesticide and fertilizer use in

Box 8.6

agriculture, and river quality has consequently improved in many places.
Water abstractions also declined, falling 70% in industry and agriculture in
the new EU member states and 74%
in agriculture and 50% in industry in
Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central
Asia compared with 1990.
However, the economic recession also
resulted in a breakdown of essential
systems of water supply and wastewater treatment in the region. Thus,
many rivers and drinking water supplies, especially downstream from cities and industrial and mining regions,
are heavily polluted.
Source: EEA 2003.

A wastewater river

The Musi River runs through Hyderabad, one of India’s fastest growing
cities, with a population of 6.8 million
in 2005 and expected to exceed 10
million in 2015. The mostly untreated
domestic and industrial wastewater
from the city fills the dry riverbed,
converting it into a perennial wastewater river. The wastewater provides
livelihoods to low-income groups of
urban dwellers and migrants from
rural areas in a hidden economy, neither recognized nor supported by the
local government. Downstream of the
city, Musi water is retained in large and
small reservoirs with the help of weirs

and then diverted into irrigation canals
and village tanks to be used by farmers
for crop production, mainly rice.
A clear improvement in river water appearance and smell can be observed
with increased distance from the city,
and surveys have confirmed quality improvements. Infection rates of
farmers with intestinal nematodes are
significantly higher close to Hyderabad than further downstream.
Source: Ensink, Mahmood, and Dalsgaard
2007; Buechler and Devi 2003; van Rooijen,
Turral, and Bigg 2005.

Water from the Musi River sampled at 0, 5, 10, 14, 18, 20, 30 and
40 km downstream of Hyderabad

Photo credit: Jeroen Ensink

Treatment Directive has resulted in significant improvements in treatment capacity,
with more advanced wastewater treatment
becoming increasingly common (box 8.7
and figure 8.5). Continuous progress is
being made. Belgium, for example, put in
operation a mega-treatment plant, which
has improved its situation since 2006,
which figure 8.5 reflects.
141

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Box 8.7

Setting target for pollution mitigation and
limits for reuse – the example of Europe

The Urban Wastewater Treatment
Directive of the European Union
prescribes the level of treatment
required before discharge. Collecting
systems must be provided for agglomerations of more than 2,000 people,
and secondary treatment (biological treatment) must be provided for
agglomerations of more than 2,000
people discharging into freshwater and
estuaries and agglomerations of more
than 10,000 people discharging into
coastal waters. Special requirements
are placed on five determinants of
treatment performance.

Figure 8.5

For smaller agglomerations and those
equipped with a collecting system,
treatment must be appropriate,
meaning that the discharge allows the
receiving waters to meet relevant quality objectives. The European AQUAREC
project proposes seven categories of
water quality for different types of reuse
and compiles microbial and chemical
limits for each category. The limits are
based on recently published guidelines
and risk estimates, including the most
important microbial parameters.
Source: www.eea.europa.eu; Salgot et al. 2006.

Levels and types of wastewater treatment in OECD
countries and selected European countries, 2006

Percent of population
100

Primary
Secondary
Tertiary

80
60
40
20

Un Ne
ite the
d rla
K n
Sw ing ds
d
Lu itze om
xe rla
m nd
b
G ou
er rg
m
an
Sp y
A ain
D ustr
en ia
m
S a
Ko we rk
re de
a, n
R
Fi ep.
nl
a
N
ew Fr nd
a
Ze nc
al e
N an
Cz or d
ec wa
h y
Un C Rep
ite ana .
d da
St
a
Ire tes
la
n
Ja d
pa
n
It
Po aly
Hu lan
ng d
Ic ary
el
a
G nd
r
Be eec
lg e
Po ium
rtu
g
Tu al
rk
ey

0

Sewage: a resource to use? Increasingly, sewage is being seen as a resource. A European
Commission–funded project, AQUAREC
(Integrated Concepts for Reuse of Upgraded Wastewater), identifies several uses
for treated sewage: agricultural irrigation,
urban landscaping and recreational uses,
industrial cooling and processing and indirect potable water production (through
groundwater recharge, for example).47
Wastewater is already being reused in
water-stressed countries (figure 8.6). Farmers in peri-urban areas use streams for
agriculture and aquaculture as in the past,
but now increasingly also use wastewater
and the nutrients in it. Wastewater flows
are typically more reliable than freshwater
sources and are rich in nutrients for the
cultivation of high-value crops. Authorities
are concerned about the practice because
of the potential human health risks and
because it presents obstacles to installing
wastewater treatment plants. Enforcement
of water quality standards is often complicated by ambiguous lines of authority; for
example, should standards be enforced by
health, agricultural or water supply and
sanitation agencies?
There are no reliable figures on the extent
of wastewater use in agriculture at the
global level, but it is estimated that some
20 million hectares of agricultural land is
irrigated by untreated, partially treated or
wastewater-polluted river water.48

Source: Based on OECD 2008a.

Figure 8.6

air. Some 60% of the sludge produced by
treatment plants in France is used as fertilizer in agricultural areas after undergoing
additional treatment, though convincing people to use the sludge remains a
struggle.46

High level of wastewater reuse in
water-stressed countries, various years

Water reuse practice
Israel

Mature

Canary Islands (Spain)
Balearic Islands (Spain)
Spain

In expansion
Netherlands

Limited
Sweden

No reuse

UK
Slovenia

Greece

Lithuania
Estonia
Hungary
Austria
Romania
Slovak Rep.
Ireland, Finland & Latvia

Low

France
Portugal Turkey

10%

Malta
Cyprus

Italy
Belgium
Germany

Poland
Denmark
Czech Rep.
Bulgaria

Moderate

20

High

40

Severe

Water stress index
Source: Based on Wintgens and Hochstrat 2006.

As more wastewater is treated, cities must
also deal with increasing volumes of
sludge. Dumping and incineration can
transfer pollution from water to soil or
142

Restricting the crops that can be grown
with wastewater is difficult because farmers grow crops that have high demand
in the local market and that are thus the
most profitable to cultivate. Municipal officers in Pakistan, where untreated wastewater is used in 80% of cities, indicated
that enforcement was futile as farmers
would reopen wastewater inlets within
hours of their closure.49 Courts in Pakistan
have found in favour of farmers, ruling
that access to irrigation water is a fundamental right and that the loss of livelihood overrides potential health risks.
WHO recently revised its Guidelines for the
Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater in Agriculture and Aquaculture.50 The
third edition of the WHO guidelines allows for risk assessment and management
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
along the entire chain, from wastewater
generation to food consumption; wastewater treatment is considered one possible component in a cumulative and
integrated risk management approach.
The guidelines are based on actual risk
(using the cost-effective quantitative
microbial risk assessment approach) and
therefore avoid needlessly strict and expensive treatment technologies to achieve
standards. The high investment costs for
wastewater treatment are hard to justify in
many developing countries where the national burden of disease from wastewater
irrigation is just a fraction of that resulting from continuing poor access to safe
drinking water and adequate sanitation,
and poor hygiene standards. Also, the
cumulative risk management approach
ensures maximum conservation of nutrients in the waste­water, reducing the need
for poor peri-urban farmers to purchase
commercial fertilizer.
The long-term goal of integrated wastewater management will always be to move
from the unregulated use of untreated
wastewater to the regulated use of wastewater that has been treated to some extent.
Depending on local possibilities, the level
of treatment can vary if a complementary
health risk reduction strategy is in place,
as explained in the WHO guidelines. This
flexibility will be necessary in low-income
countries so long as the provision of sanitation infrastructure lags behind urbanization rates. Options to develop Wastewater
Safety Plans, following the principles of
Water Safety Plans, are currently being
studied.
But even where no wastewater treatment is
available, health risks can still be significantly reduced. Studies in Ghana show
how cessation of irrigation before harvest
and inexpensive and easily adoptable
wastewater irrigation methods can reduce
fæcal contamination of crops.51 And studies in Africa and Asia suggest that a major
source of cross-contamination of food is
unhygienic handling of produce at the
market and in the kitchen. Thus, improving hygiene is a cost-effective way to
protect public health even before investing
in wastewater treatment.52
In Asia, in particular, wastewater is used
in aquaculture. Producing fish and aquatic
plants in wastewater-fed ponds provides
income, employment and food for poor
households living in peri-urban areas and
also provides an important supply of affordable and nutritious food for the urban
population.53
Water in a changing world

The risk of parasitic diseases associated
with such wastewater-fed aquaculture has
been well described.54 Less information is
available on the health effects of chemical pollutants. The chemistry of toxic
chemicals such as heavy metals in aquatic
environments is complex. However,
concentrations of heavy metals reported
in fish raised in aquaculture do not usually exceed levels recommended by the
Codex Alimentarius Commission, even in
fish harvested from highly polluted water
with high metal concentrations.55 A study
on toxic element accumulation in fish
from wastewater-fed fish ponds in Hanoi,
Viet Nam, found generally low levels of
arsenic, cadmium and lead concentrations
– for many samples, below the detection
limit.56

2

Improving hygiene
is a cost-effective
way to protect
public health even
before investing
in wastewater
treatment

In Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City and Phnom
Phenh the most important health problem farmers associated with wastewater
exposure was skin disease.57 Epidemiological studies confirmed that contact with
wastewater was an important risk factor
for dermatitis among farmers engaged in
peri-urban wastewater-fed aquatic food
production.58 Water spinach cultivated
in wetlands that receive wastewater from
Phnom Penh was highly contaminated
with fæcal bacteria. However, natural
biological and physical processes in the
lake reduced bacterial numbers almost to
WHO guideline levels for irrigation water,
as shown by differences in bacterial counts
at wastewater entry and exit points.59

Industrial pollution control is
improving
Industries based on organic raw materials are the largest contributors of organic
pollution, while oil, steel and mining
industries represent the major risk for
heavy metal release.60 Measures of BOD
per year in industrial wastewater have stabilized over the past 20 years in industrial
countries, or even decreased slightly, as in
Eastern Europe (see box 8.6).
Industrial pollution is expected to increase
in emerging market economies with economic and industrial development. More
than half of China’s 21,000 chemical companies have factories along the country’s
two major river basins – the Yangtze and
the Yellow – which supply drinking water
for tens of million of people.61 This means
that industrial accidents could have disastrous consequences in these regions.
In the early years following the widespread introduction of environmental
regulations, firms tended to invest in end143

PART

2

Chapter 8I

Non-point
pollution from
agriculture and
urban areas
often constitutes
a greater total
pollutant load than
industrial pointsource pollution

Figure 8.7

of‑pipe technologies, such as membrane
technologies, which reduce wastewater
effluent following production to restore
water quality to appropriate standards. But
much industrial wastewater is discharged
without treatment to open watercourses,
reducing the quality of larger volumes of
water and sometimes infiltrating aquifers
and contaminating groundwater resources.

environmental management systems to
increase environmental performance, thus
contributing to the globalization of better
corporate practices.64 But recent accidents
involving large multinationals from OECD
countries and the weak environmental
performance of enterprises from emerging
market economies underline the need for
continued vigilance.

The OECD reports evidence of changing
production processes through investments in clean production technologies
for industries.62 There has been a steady
growth in companies seeking certification through ISO 14001, the international
standard for environmental management
administered by the International Organization for Standardization. By the end
of 2002 nearly 50,000 companies in 118
countries had received ISO 14001 certification; Japan and China have the largest
number of certified companies (figure
8.7).63 Many multinational enterprises
apply high environmental standards to
their activities worldwide, introducing

Mitigation of non-point source
pollution needs to focus on the source

The number of companies with a certified
system of environmental management varied
considerably by country in 2006

Japan
China
Spain
Italy
United Kingdom
Korea, Rep.
United States
Germany
Sweden
France
Brazil
Czech Rep.
Switzerland
India
Australia
Canada
Turkey
Thailand
Hungary
Netherlands
Denmark
Finland
Argentina
Poland
Singapore
Malaysia
Mexico

Rivers that drain major catchment areas
in intensive agriculture areas (such as the
Danube, Ebro, Mississippi, Nile, Po and
Yellow) are major vectors for transmitting nutrients to the sea, where they often
cause severe eutrophication. It is estimated
that the nitrate load in the 80 main rivers
flowing into the Mediterranean Sea doubled between 1975 and 1995.65 Non-point
pollution from agriculture and urban
areas often constitutes a greater total pollutant load than industrial point-source
pollution and is more difficult to control
when leached into aquifers. Certain types
of agricultural monoculture and in-situ
sanitation may be incompatible with
maintaining groundwater quality. More
balanced agricultural land use and alternative sanitation measures will be required
in these priority areas.
Pesticides tend to migrate throughout the
environment, ending up in fatty tissues
(fish) and sediments, creating adverse environmental effects. Pesticide contamination has increased rapidly since the 1970s,
particularly in freshwater in developing
countries, despite increased regulation
of the use of these bioaccumulating and
highly persistent substances.

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

Commercial fertilizer consumption in
some high-income countries has stabilized, or even declined, since the 1990s,
after a period of high growth during
1960-90.66 In other countries fertilizer use
is still growing rapidly (4% a year in Syria
and 2% in Turkey) and could increase as
much as 50%-70% by 2025 in Turkey.67
There is less information on pesticide
consumption, although data for France
(the world’s second biggest user) indicate
that consumption has stabilized. Data on
consumption provide only indirect information on the discharge of pollutants into
the environment.

Number of enterprises and organizations
Note: Data are based on the ISO 14001 certification of the International Organization for
Standardization and registration under the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) of
the European Commission.
Source: ISO 2007.

144

To improve environmental performance,
intervention is needed for non-point
source activities such as agriculture to
limit the use of nutrients and change production processes. Interest in sustainable
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
farming is growing, including conservation agriculture, integrated plant protection and plant nutrition management.
The contribution of phosphorus to algae
growth stabilized after its use in washing detergents was restricted in many
locations.

Financing pollution mitigation and
risk management
While the concept of charging polluters
for the damage they impose on the environment is now widely accepted, this ‘polluter pays’ principle has had only a slight
impact on behaviour, because the charges
are rarely set high enough and because the
authorities have difficulty setting the level
of charges. To ensure effective pollution
control, pollution charges – a source of
revenue that can be earmarked for environmental funds and programmes – need
to be combined with regulatory measures.
An alternative form of pollution control
is a trading system for water pollution
quotas. Authorities can begin by setting
overall limits on the emissions of pollutants into specific water bodies, progressively reducing the limits over time to
improve water quality. Emissions quotas
would be allocated to polluters based on
current or recent practices or auctioned to
polluters, thereby raising revenue for public authorities. Polluters who are able to
reduce emissions would sell their quotas to
those less able to do so. All polluters would
have an incentive to reduce emissions, and
most abatement would be carried out by
those who could do it most efficiently and
affordably. Trading schemes must be set up
to respect land zoning and must be monitored and controlled to protect ‘invisible’
water sources, in particular.
In practice, trading schemes for water pollution quotas are rare and difficult to apply
successfully. They are especially difficult
to apply to farmers – agriculture being
an important source of non-point water
contamination.68

Progress in achieving
environmental sustainability
Our capacity to achieve environmental
sustainability has improved but remains
constrained by an incomplete understanding of the impact of pollution and the
resilience of ecosystems, inadequate monitoring of the negative impacts of water
use on the environment and institutional
weaknesses that prevent effective implementation of legal instruments in many
developing countries. There are some
Water in a changing world

promising developments, however, and
they are discussed briefly below.
Instruments implemented at a national level.
The importance of the services provided
by nature is now widely acknowledged,
although the economic valuation of such
environmental services and estimates of
environmental flows69 and benefits remain
problematic (box 8.8). Implementation
relies on multistakeholder dialogue and
negotiations based on recognition of
the value of environmental services (see
chapter 14).

2

The importance
of the services
provided by nature
is now widely
acknowledged

But evidence of effective implementation
of environmental flows is still limited.
Lessons from places where environmental
flows have gained ground indicate that
political support may be the most crucial
element. Strong community interest, pressures from a river basin critically degraded
because of overallocation, and donordriven or -instigated overdevelopment all
motivated implementation of the concept.
Adoption and implementation of environmental flows have been particularly strong
where national legislation and policies
assign it a priority within an integrated
water resources management framework
and integrate it into natural resource management plans at the basin scale.
Examples abound, however, of cases where
interest in environmental flows fails to be
converted into legislative action. The chief
reason for failure is lack of understanding
of the socioeconomic benefits of environmental flows, of political will to support
implementation and of appropriate legal,

Box 8.8

Environmental flow assessment in Asia – from
concept to reality

Environmental flows refers to a water
regime within a river, wetland or
coastal zone necessary for maintaining
ecosystems and their services where
there are competing water uses.
The concept emphasizes how water
management strategies may influence
water and is intended as a tool for
ending the disconnect of ecosystems
from livelihoods.
Research in Asia and the Pacific shows
that 23 of 48 countries are undertaking some activity on environmental
flows (funded by Australia, Japan and
New Zealand). These countries are
moving towards implementing and
integrating an environmental flows
approach into local, regional and
state planning processes and national

legislation and policies. Cambodia,
China, India, the Republic of Korea,
Lao PDR, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Thailand and Viet Nam have all adopted the approach, and some of them
have even incorporated it in national
legislation. Explicit consideration of environmental flows in the national water
accounts is a further step towards
recognition of environmental water
demands. Interest in adopting an
environmental flows approach is also
spreading in Bangladesh, Indonesia,
Iran, the Philippines and Sri Lanka, as
well as in a number of Central Asian
countries.
Source: Adapted by UNESCAP from China
Ministry of Water Resources 2005; IWMI
2005; Illaszewicz et al. 2005.

145

PART

2

Chapter 8I
institutional and monitoring arrangements. In Asia and the Pacific large
transboundary river basins are a special
challenge. With 21 of 38 major watersheds
shared between two or more countries,
cross-border collaboration is needed to address environmental flows in river restoration and other projects.
International instruments for ecosystem
protection and pollution mitigation. At the
international level multiple frameworks
(often adopted after a major crisis) support
the protection of water systems and the
mitigation of impacts (see appendix 2).
The OECD monitors the level of commitment to these instruments by its member

Notes
1.

US Department of Energy 2006.

2.

MEA 2005.

3.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

4.

Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

5.

www.grid.unep.ch/activities/
sustainable/tigris/index.php.

6.

WWAP 2006.

7.

WWAP 2006.

8.

A large river system is one with a river
channel section with a virgin mean
annual discharge (discharge before any
significant direct human manipulations)
of at least 350 cubic metres per second
anywhere in the catchment (Dynesius
and Nilsson 1994, as cited in WWAP
2006, p. 176).

9.

WWAP 2006.

10. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.
11. Holling and Meffe 1996.
12. Gunderson and Holling 2002.
13. WWAP 2006.
14. Muir 2007.
15. Shiklomanov 2002.
16. Custodio and Llamas 2003.
17. Margat 2008.
18. Burke and Moench 2000; Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture 2007.
19. Foster and Chilton 2003. And contemporary groundwater issues and
management options are discussed on
the Websites and publications of the
World Bank-Groundwater Management Advisory Team GW-MATE (www.
worldbank.org/gwmate) and UNESCO’s
Groundwater Resources Assessment
under the Pressures of Humanity and
Climate Change (GRAPHIC) programme

146

countries70 as does the European Commission for its directives.71
There are also specific regulations on pollution control and water rights and allocation at regional and national levels. Such
instruments for the regulation of use and
systems are discussed in chapter 14. In the
European Union member states have to
comply with European Commission directives focused on water issues, including the
EU Water Framework Directive (2000) and
the EU Urban Waste Treatment Directive
(1991), and deadlines for implementation.
Few countries are yet in full conformity
with those directives, and less than 50% of
the urban waste load is treated.72

(www.unesco.org/water/ihp/graphic).
A partnership led by UNESCO and the
International Association of Hydrogeologists implements the Internationally
Shared Aquifer Resources Management initiative, a multiagency effort to
improve understanding of scientific,
socioeconomic, legal, institutional and
environmental issues related to the
management of transboundary aquifers
(www.isarm.net/).
20. Darnault 2008.
21. IPCC 2007.
22. Burke 2003.
23. www.worldbank.org/gwmate.
24. Some work has been done by Robert
Dijon for the United Nations (197690) and by Jean Margat for UNESCO
(2008).

solids, but no ammonium. Secondary
treatment (biological treatment) uses
aerobic or anaerobic micro-organisms
to decompose most of the organic
matter and retain some of the nutrients (around 20%-30%) and removes
around 75% of the ammonium. Tertiary
treatment (or advanced treatment
technology) removes the organic matter
even more efficiently than secondary treatment. It generally includes
phosphorus retention and in some cases
nitrogen removal.
43. Scott, Faruqui, and Raschid-Sally 2004.
44. OECD 2008a.
45. IWMI 2003.
46. IFEN 2006.
47. Wintgens and Hochstrat 2006.

25. Shah, Singh, and Mukherji 2006.

48. Scott, Faruqui, and Raschild-Sally 2004;
Keraita et al. 2007a.

26. World Bank 2007.

49. Ensink et al. 2004.

27. Foster and Loucks 2006.

50. WHO 2006.

28. Downing, Price, and Jones 1993.

51. Keraita et al. 2007b.

29. Alley 1993.
30. www.apfamgs.org.

52. Ensink, Mahmood, and Dalsgaurd
2007.

31. WWF 2006.

53. Leschen, Little, and Bunting 2005.

32. UNEP/GPA 2006.

54. WHO 2006.

33. ILEC 2005; Lääne, Kraav, and Titova
2005.

55. WHO 2006.

34. WWAP 2006.

57. Anh, van der Hoek, Cam et al. 2007.

35. MEA 2005.

58. Anh, van der Hoek, Ersbøll et al. 2007.

36. MEA 2005.

59. Anh, Tram et al. 2007.

37. France, Ministry of Health 2007.

60. WWAP 2003.

38. US EPA 2007.
39. UNECE 2007.

61. www.minesandcommunities.org/
Action/press973.htm.

40. OECD 2008b.

62. OECD 2008c.

41. Fewtrell et al. 2007.

63. IFEN 2006.

42. There are three main types of waste­
water treatment systems. Primary treatment (mechanical treatment technology) removes part of the suspended

64. WBCSD 2005.

56. Marcussen et al. 2008.

65. Benoit and Comeau 2005.
66. FAO-AQUASTAT database (www.fao.
org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm).
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
67. Benoit and Comeau 2005.
68. Kraemer et al. 2003.
69. See, for example, Dyson, Bergkamp,
and Scanlon 2003 and the International
Water Management Institute’s Global
Environmental Flow Calculator (GEFC)
available at www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Tools_
And_Resources/ Models_and_Software/
GEFC/index.aspx.
70. OECD 2008a.
71. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
water/water-framework/.
72. Wintgens and Hochstrat 2006.

References
Alley, W. M., ed. 1993. Regional Groundwater Quality. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Anh, V. T., N. T. Tram, L. T. Klank, P. D.
Cam, and A. Dalsgaard. 2007. Faecal
and Protozoan Parasite Contamination
of Water Spinach (Ipomoea Aquatica)
Cultivated in Urban Wastewater in
Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Tropical Medicine and International Health 12 (S2):
73-81.
Anh, V. T., W. van der Hoek, P. D. Cam,
and A. Dalsgaard. 2007. Perceived
Health Problems among Users of Wastewater for Aquaculture in Southeast Asian
Cities. Urban Water Journal 4: 269-74.
Anh, V. T., W. van der Hoek, A. K. Ersbøll,
N. V. Thuong, N. D. Tuan, P. D. Cam,
and A. Dalsgaard. 2007. Dermatitis
among Farmers Engaged in Peri-Urban
Aquatic Food Production in Hanoi, Vietnam. Tropical Medicine and International
Health 12 (S2): 59-65.
Bagchi, S. 2007. Arsenic Threat Reaching
Global Dimensions. Canadian Medical Association Journal 177 (11): 1344-45.
Benoit, G., and A. Comeau, eds. 2005. A
Sustainable Future for the Mediterranean:
The Blue Plan’s Environment and Development Outlook. London: Earthscan.
Bixio, D., C. Thoeye, T. Wintgens, R. Hochstrat, T. Melin, H. Chikurel, A. Aharoni,
and B. Durham. 2006. Wastewater
Reclamation and Reuse in the European
Union and Israel: Status Quo and Future
Prospects. International Review for Environmental Strategies 6 (2).
Buechler, S., and G. Devi. 2003. Household Food Security and Wastewater
Dependent Livelihood Activities along
the Musi River in Andhra Pradesh,
India. International Water Management Institute, Colombo. www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/wastewater/
gwwufoodsecurity.pdf.
Burke, J. J. 2003. Groundwater for Irrigation: Productivity Gains and the Need to
Manage Hydro-Environmental Risk. In
Intensive Use of Groundwater: Challenges
and Opportunities, ed., E. Custodio and
Water in a changing world

M. R. Llamas. Lisse, The Netherlands: A.
A. Balkema Publishers.
Burke, J. J., and M. Moench. 2000. Groundwater and Society – Resources, Tensions
and Opportunities. New York: United
Nations, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs.
China, Ministry of Water Resources. 2005.
Strategic Planning and Management of
Water Resources in the Haihe and Huaihe
River Basins of China. Beijing: Government of China.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. 2007.
Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture. London: Earthscan, and
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Custodio, E., and M. R. Llamas. 2003. Intensive Use of Groundwater: Introductory
Considerations. In Intensive Use of Groundwater: Challenges and Opportunities, ed.,
E. Custodio and M. R. Llamas. Lisse, The
Netherlands: A. A. Balkema Publishers.
Darnault, Christophe, ed. 2008. Overexploitation and Contamination of Shared
Groundwater Resources Management,
(Bio)Technological, and Political Approaches to Avoid Conflicts. NATO Science for
Peace and Security Series C: Environmental Security. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Springer.
Downing, R. A., M. Price, and G. P. Jones.
1993. The Hydrogeology of the Chalk of
North-West Europe. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Dyson, M., G. Bergkamp, and J. Scanlon, ed. 2003. Flow: The Essentials of
Environmental Flows. Gland, Switzerland:
International Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources.
EEA (European Environment Agency).
2003. Europe’s Environment – The Third
Assessment. State of the Environment
Report 1/2003. Luxembourg: Office for
Official Publications of the European
Communities.
Ensink, J. H. J., T. Mahmood, and A.
Dalsgaard. 2007. Wastewater-Irrigated
Vegetables: Market Handling versus Irrigation Water Quality. Tropical Medicine
& International Health 12 (2): 2-7.
Ensink, J. H. J., T. Mahmood, W. van der
Hoek, and L. Raschid-Salty. 2004. A
Nationwide Assessment of Wastewater
Use in Pakistan: An Obscure Activity or
a Vitally Important One? Water Policy 6
(2004): 197-206.
Ewing B., S. Goldfinger, M. Wackernagel,
M. Stechbart, S. Rizk, A. Reed, and J.
Kitzes. 2008. The Ecological Footprint
Atlas 2008. Oakland, CA: Global Footprint Network.
Fewtrell, L., A. Prüss-Üstün, R. Bos, F.
Gore, and J. Bartram. 2007. Water,

2

Sanitation and Hygiene: Quantifying the
Health Impact at National and Local Levels
in Countries with Incomplete Water Supply
and Sanitation Coverage. Geneva: World
Health Organization.
Foster, S. S. D., and P. J. Chilton. 2003.
Groundwater – the Process and Global
Significance of Aquifer Degradation.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society London B 358 (1440): 1957-72.
Foster, S. S. D., and D. P. Loucks. 2006.
Non-Renewable Groundwater Resources.
A Guidebook on Socially-Sustainable Management for Water Policy Makers. Paris:
United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization.
France, Ministry of Health. 2007. L’eau
potable en France, 2002-2004. Eau et
sante, Guide technique. Paris: Ministere de
la Santé et des Solidarités.
Fry, R. C., P. Navasumrit, C. Valiathan,
J. P. Svensson, B. J. Hogan, M. Luo,
S. Bhattacharya, K. Kandjanapa, S.
Soontararuks, S. Nookabkaew, C.
Mahidol, M. Ruchirawat, and L. D.
Samson. 2007. Activation of Inflammation/NF-κB Signaling in Infants Born to
Arsenic-Exposed Mothers. PLoS Genetics
3 (11): e207.
Gunderson, L. H., and C. S. Holling, ed.
2002. Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Helsinki Commission. 2007. HELCOM Releases Annual Report on
2007 Activities. Press release, 24
June, Helsiniki Commission. www.
helcom.fi/press_office/news_helcom/
en_GB/2007AnnualReport/.
Holling, C. S., and G. K. Meffe. 1996.
Command and Control and the Pathology of Natural Resource Management.
Conservation Biology 10 (2): 328-37.
IFEN (Institut Français de l’Environnement). 2006. L’environnement en
France. Les Syntheses. October 2006
ed. Orléans, France: Institut Français de
l’Environnement.
ILEC (International Lake Environment
Committee Foundation). 2005. Managing Lakes and Their Basins for Sustainable
Use: A Report for Lake Basin Managers and
Stakeholders. Kusatsu, Japan: International Lake Environment Committee
Foundation.
Illaszewicz, J., R. Tharme, V. Smakhtin,
and J. Dore, eds. 2005. Environmental
Flows: Rapid Environmental Flow Assessment for the Huong River Basin, Central
Vietnam. Gland Switzerland: International
Union for Conservation of Nature.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007. Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed.,

147

PART

2

Chapter 8I

M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
ISO (International Organization for
Standardization). 2007. The ISO Survey
of Certifications 2006. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization.
IWMI (International Water Management Institute). 2003. Confronting
the Realities of Wastewater Use in
Agriculture. Water Policy Briefing Issue
9. International Water Management
Institute, Colombo. www.iwmi.cgiar.org/
Publications/Water_Policy_Briefs/PDF/
wpb09.pdf.
———. 2005. Environmental Flows: Environment Perspectives on River Basin Management in Asia 2 (1). www.eflownet.org/
download_documents/EnvFlowsNL_
Vol_2_Issue_1.pdf.
Keraita, B., F. Konradsen, P. Drechsel, and
R. C. Abaidoo. 2007a. Effect of LowCost Irrigation Methods on Microbial
Contamination of Lettuce Irrigated with
Untreated Wastewater. Tropical Medicine
and International Health 12 (S2): 15-22.
———. 2007b. Reducing Microbial Contamination on Wastewater-Irrigated Lettuce
by Cessation of Irrigation before Harvesting. Tropical Medicine and International
Health 12 (S2): 8-14.
Koo, Sasha. 2003. Preliminary Remedial Investigation of the Potential Impact of an
Environmental Accident on Agriculture
and Irrigation in the Affected Region.
Macedonia Mission Report, 27-31 October, Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, Rome.
Kraemer, R. A., Z. G. Castro, R. Seroa da
Motta, and C. Russell. 2003. Economic
Instruments for Water Management: Experiences from Europe and Implications for
Latin America and the Caribbean. Regional
Policy Dialogue Study Series. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development
Bank.
Lääne, A., Kraav, E. and G. Titova. 2005.
Global International Waters Assessment.
Baltic Sea, GIWA Regional Assessment
17. Sweden: University of Kalmar, Global
International Water Assessments.
Leschen, W., D. Little, and S. Bunting.
2005. Urban Aquatic Production. Urban
Agriculture Magazine 14: 1-7.
Marcussen, H., K. Joergensen, P. E. Holm,
D. Brocca, R. W. Simmons, and A.
Dalsgaard. 2008. Element Contents and
Food Safety of Water Spinach (Ipomoea
aquatica Forssk) Cultivated with Wastewater in Hanoi, Vietnam. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 139 (1-3): 77-91.

Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
Molle, F., and J. Berkoff. 2006. Cities versus
Agriculture: Revisiting Intersectoral Water
Transfers, Potential Gains and Conflicts.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture Research
Report 10. Colombo: Comprehensive
Assessment Secretariat.
Muir, P. S. 2007. Human Impacts on Ecosystems. Online Study Book for Students,
Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2008a.
OECD Environmental Data Compendium.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. www.oecd.
org/document/49/0,3343,en_2649_
34283_39011377_1_1_1_1,00.html.
———. 2008b. Service Delivery in Fragile
Situations: Key Concepts, Findings and Lessons. OECD/DAC Discussion Paper. Offprint of the Journal on Development 9 (3).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development, Paris.
———. 2008c. OECD Environment Outlook to
2030. Paris: Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
Salgot, M., E. Huertas, S. Weber, W. Dott,
and J. Hollender. 2006. Waste Water
Reuse and Risks Definition of Key Objectives. Desalination 187 (1-3): 29-40.
Scott, C. A., N. I. Faruqui, and L. RaschidSally, ed. 2004. Wastewater Use in Irrigated Agriculture: Confronting the Livelihood
and Environmental Realities. Wallingford,
UK: Cabi Publishing.
Shah, T., O. P. Singh, and A. Mukherji.
2006. Some Aspects of South Asia’s
Groundwater Irrigation Economy:
Analyses from a Survey in India, Pakistan,
Nepal and Bangladesh. Hydrogeology
Journal 14 (3): 286-309.
Shiklomanov, I. A., ed. 2002. Comprehensive Assessment of Freshwater Resources
of the World: An Assessment of Water
Resources and Water Availability in the
World. Stockholm: Stockholm Environment Institute.
Thornton, J. A., W. Rast, M. M. Holland,
G. Jolankai, and S.-O. Ryding, ed.
1999. Assessment and Control of Nonpoint
Source Pollution of Aquatic Ecosystems.
Man and the Biosphere Series, Volume
23. Paris: United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization.

Margat, Jean. 2008. Les eaux souterraines
dans le monde. Orléans, France: Editions
BRGM.

UNECE (United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe). 2007. Our
Waters: Joining Hands across Orders. First
Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes
and Groundwaters. Geneva and New
York: United Nations. www.unece.org/
env/water/publications/assessment/
assessmentweb_full.pdf.

MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment).
2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being:

UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2006. Iraq Marshlands

148

Observation System. United Nations Environment Programme, Division of Early
Warning and Assessment/GRID-Europe,
Geneva. www.grid.unep.ch/activities/
sustainable/tigris/mmos.php.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme)/GIWA (Global International
Waters Assessment). 2006. Challenges
to International Waters: Regional Assessments in a Global Perspective. Global
International Waters Assessment Final
Report. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Programme. www.giwa.net/
publications/finalreport/.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme)/GPA (Global Programme
of Action for the Protection of the
Marine Environment from LandBased Activities). 2006. The State of
the Marine Environment: Trends and
Processes. The Hague: United Nations Environment Programme/Global
Programme of Action for the Protection
of the Marine Environment from LandBased Activities.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme)/Global Resource Information Database Arendal. 2007. Balkan
Vital Graphics: Environment without
Borders. United Nations Environment
Programme/Global Resource Information
Database Arendal, Arendal, Norway.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme)/OCHA (Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs).
2000. Cyanide Spill at Baia Mare. Spill of
Liquid and Suspended Waste at the Aurul
S.A. Retreatment Plant in Baia Mare.
Assessment Mission Romania, Hungary,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, United
Nations Environment Programme,
Geneva.
United Nations. 1976. Groundwater in the
Western Hemisphere. Natural Resources/
Water Series No. 4. New York: United
Nations Department of Technical Cooperation for Development.
———. 1982. Groundwater in the Eastern
Mediterranean and Western Asia. Natural
Resources/Water Series No. 9. New York:
United Nations Department of Technical
Cooperation for Development.
———. 1983. Groundwater in the Pacific
Region. Natural Resources/Water Series
No.12. New York: United Nations Department of Technical Cooperation for
Development.
———. 1986. Groundwater in Continental
Asia. Natural Resources/Water Series
No.15. New York: United Nations Department of Technical Cooperation for
Development.
———. 1988a. Groundwater in North and
West Africa. Natural Resources/Water
Series No.18. New York: United Nations.
———. 1988b. Groundwater in Eastern,
Central, and Southern Africa. Natural
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Impacts of water use on water systems and the environment
Resources/Water Series No.19. New York:
United Nations Department of Technical
Cooperation for Development.
———. 1990. Groundwater in Eastern and
Northern Europe. Natural Resources/
Water Series No.24. New York: United
Nations Department of Technical Cooperation for Development.
US Department of Energy. 2006. Energy
Demands on Water Resources: Report
to Congress on the Interdependency of
Energy and Water. US Department of
Energy, Washington, DC.
US EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 2007. National Water Quality Inventory Report to Congress: 2002 Reporting
Cycle. Office of Water. Washington, DC:
US Environmental Protection Agency.
www.epa.gov/305b/2002report/
report2002305b.pdf.

Water in a changing world

2

van Rooijen, D. J., H. Turral, and T. W.
Bigg. 2005. Sponge City: Water Balance
of Mega-City Water Use and Wastewater
Use in Hyderabad, India. Irrigation and
Drainage 54 (S1): S81-S91.

World Bank. 2007. Making the Most of
Scarcity: Accountability for Better Water
Management Results in the Middle East
and North Africa. MENA Development
Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 2005. Water
Facts and Trends. World Business Council
on Sustainable Development, Washington, DC.

WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. Water for People, Water
for Life. The World Water Development Report 1. Paris: United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization, and
New York: Berghahn Books.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2006.
WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Geneva:
World Health Organization.
Wintgens T., and R. Hochstrat, eds. 2006.
AQUAREC Integrated Concepts for Reuse
of Upgraded Wastewater: Report on
Integrated Water Reuse Concepts. EVK1CT-2002-00130, Deliverable D19, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

———. 2006. The United Nations World Water
Development Report 2. Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, and New York: Berghahn Books.
WWF. 2006. Living Planet Report 2006.
Gland, Switzerland: WWF.
———. 2008. Living Planet Report 2008.
Gland, Switzerland.

149

PART

2

Chapter 9
Managing
competition for water
and the pressure
on ecosystems
Author: François Molle and Domitille Vallée
Contributors: Cécile Brugère, Thierry Facon, Jean Margat,
Léna Salamé, Ti Le-Huu and Jon Martin Trondalen
Coordinator: Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO)
Facilitator: Domitille Vallée

Key messages
Competition for water and shortcomings in managing it to meet
the needs of society and the environment call for enhanced societal responses through improved management, better legislation
and more effective and transparent allocation mechanisms.
Challenges include wise planning for water resources, evaluation
of availability and needs in watersheds, possible reallocation or
storage expansion in existing reservoirs, more emphasis on water
demand management, better balance between equity and efficiency in water use, inadequate legislative and institutional frameworks and the rising financial burden of ageing infrastructure.
Water management choices should emerge from informed consultation and negotiation on the costs and benefits of all options after considering basin interconnectedness, relationships
between land and water resources, and the consistency and coherence of decisions with other government policies.

150

Competition for water exists at all levels
and is forecast to increase with demands
for water in almost all countries. In 2030,
47% of world population will be living in
areas of high water stress.1 Water management around the world is deficient in
performance, efficiency and equity. Water
use efficiency, pollution mitigation and
implementation of environmental measures fall short in most sectors. Access to
basic water services – for drinking, sanitation and food production – remains insufficient across developing regions, and more
than 5 billion people – 67% of the world
population – may still be without access to
adequate sanitation in 2030.2

include wise planning for water resources;
evaluation of availability and needs in
watersheds; possible needs for reallocation
or additional storage; the need to balance
equity, efficiency and ecosystem services
in water use; the inadequacy of legislative
and institutional frameworks and the increasing financial burden of ageing infrastructure. Substantial efforts are needed in
regulation, mitigation and management,
primarily through community consultation and cross-sectoral policy involving
the private sector.

Increased competition for water and shortcomings in its management to meet the
needs of society and the environment call
for enhanced societal responses through
improved water management. Challenges

Competition among uses and users is
increasing in almost all countries, as are
the links connecting them, calling for
more effective negotiation and allocation
mechanisms.

Type, extent and effect of
competition for water

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems

Basin closure and interconnectedness
Abstraction of water has approached and
in some cases exceeded the threshold of
renewability of water resources in many
river basins, leading to widespread damage to ecosystems. Demand for water is
often highest when availability is lowest,
and water shortages and conflicts have
increased accordingly. This trend has been
paralleled by degradation in the quality of
surface water and groundwater from the
combined effluents of cities, industries and
agricultural activities. This has exacerbated economic water scarcity by rendering water unfit for certain uses and has
harmed human and ecosystem health.
Hydrology, ecology and society are all connected. Water resources are increasingly
diverted, controlled and used as countries
develop. Water flowing out of sub-basins
is often committed to other downstream
uses, including several often overlooked
functions: flushing-out sediments, diluting
polluted water, controlling salinity intrusion and sustaining estuarine and coastal
ecosystems. As water in a basin is increasingly allocated and river discharges fall
short of meeting such commitments some
or all of the time, basins (or sub-­basins)
are said to be closing or closed.3 Water no
longer flows out from the basin – as is happening in the Jordan River (box 9.1).
Perturbations of the hydrologic cycle in
one location may affect another. This is
most clearly illustrated by the common
upstream-downstream effect, but can take
diverse, often less visible, forms. Figure 9.1
provides examples of the water quantity,

Box 9.1

quality, timing and sediment load of
upstream-downstream impacts.
Water also connects aquatic ecosystems.
Relationships among land, water and biota
are complex, and cross-impacts may not
be evident immediately. Groundwater
abstraction generally reduces flows from
underground aquifers back to the surface,
drying up springs and wetlands. In Azraq,
Jordan, for example, groundwater use for
cities and agriculture has resulted in the
desiccation of a Ramsar-designated wetland associated with high biodiversity and
migratory birds. Dams, through their impacts on flood-pulse regimes, have altered
complex ecosystems that were providing
valuable services and supporting livelihoods (such as fisheries, receding agriculture, pastures, reeds and medicinal plants).
Examples include the Senegal Valley and
the Hadejia-Jama’are plains in northern
Nigeria.4

Conflicts around
water can occur
at all scales

Competition and conflict for water
Conflicts about water can occur at all
scales. Local-level conflicts are commonplace in irrigation systems, where farmers vie for limited resources. In Northern
Thailand, for example, low flows in the
dry season are diverted by upland farmers to irrigate their orchards, where use of
pesticides sometimes leads to the pollution
of streams. Conflicts also occur at the scale
of large national river basins (multistate
Indian rivers such as the Cauvery and the
Krishna) or transnational river basins (the
Jordan and the Nile). While conflict resolution mechanisms and adequate modes
of governance will differ with scale, the

The closure of the lower Jordan River basin

The lower Jordan River, downstream of
Lake Tiberias, flows through the Jordan
rift valley before emptying into the Dead
Sea. Because of Israel’s redirection of the
upper course, the river now receives water
mostly from the Yarmouk River, a tributary
originating in Syria, and from a few lateral
wadis that incise the two mountain ranges
that run parallel to the valley on each side.
Most of the population and cities, together with the bulk of the country’s rain-fed
agriculture and increasing groundwaterbased irrigation, are concentrated in these
highlands. In the east bank of the valley
some 23,000 hectares of irrigated land
have been developed as a result of diversion of the Yarmouk and side wadis.
The lower Jordan River basin has undergone a drastic squeeze, with 83% of its
flow consumed before it reaches the Dead

Water in a changing world

Sea because of diversions in Israel and Syria,
45,000 hectares of irrigated land, mushrooming cities swollen by waves of refugees
from Palestine and Iraq and immigrants
from the Gulf countries, and the new Wehdah Dam reservoir on the Yarmouk River.

declining Dead Sea that now receives
less than 250 million cubic metres of
water).
•

A surge in costly supply augmentation projects aimed at tapping distant
aquifers, transferring water from the
Red Sea to the Dead Sea or desalinating saline water.

•

Increased irregularity and uncertainty
in water supply for irrigation in the valley, the residual user.

•

A more politicized and contested water
policy, with costs and benefits apportioned across social and ethnic groups
and subregions, yielding different
levels of power.

The consequences of this squeeze are
broad, and some are dire:
•

Limited (though still desirable) scope
for efficiency improvement.

•

Increased recycling and use of treated
wastewater for irrigation.

•

Reallocation of water from the valley
(irrigation) to the highlands (cities).

•

Environmental degradation (overdraft
of aquifers in the Azraq oasis and a

Source: Courcier, Venot, and Molle 2005.

151

PART

2

Chapter 9

Figure 9.1

Examples of hydrologic interactions in river basins – upstream-downstream impacts

Upstream
	Downstream
Variable

Upstream
diversion scheme
on downstream
irrigation area

Water harvesting
(or small tanks) on a
downstream dam

Cities on irrigation
wells (out-pumping)

Wells on qanatsa;
deep wells on
shallow wells

Quality

Cities or industries on
irrigated agriculture

Diffuse pollution
of agriculture on
city supplies

Cities on
groundwater used in
pumping irrigation
(contaminating)

Diffuse agricultural
pollution on village
groundwaterbased water supply

Timing

Hydropower
generation on large
irrigation schemes
or fisheries

Small tanks on onset
of wet season flows
(delays) and on
biological cues

Hydropower
generation on
wetland ecosystems

Water harvesting
on runoff/flood and
downstream groundwater
recharge (reduced)

Large-scale
deforestation
on reservoirs

Overgrazing, or
erosion in smallholder
agriculture on
reservoir (siltation)

Dam retaining silt
on fertilization
of downstream
floodplains

Diffuse
deforestation
on silt load and
delta fanning

Quantity

Sediment load

a. Qanat is an ancient system of tunnels and wells built to capture water
in a mountain and channel it to a lower level.
Source: Based on Molle 2008.

Point, large-scale user
or intervention

nested nature of these scales also means
that the modes of governance will have to
be consistent and interrelated.
Sectoral conflicts. Sectoral conflicts oppose
users from different sectors (domestic, hydropower, irrigation, industries, recreation
and so on), including ecosystems, whose
sustainability depends on environmental
flows. These conflicts are both economic
(the return per cubic metre differs greatly
across these uses) and political (the social
importance and the political clout of each
sector also varies). Box 9.2 illustrates the
case of conflict between agriculture and
industry in Orissa, India.

Box 9.2

Perhaps the most common conflict is
between agriculture and cities. Half the
world lives in cities – and this share is
increasing – while agriculture is generally the largest user of water. Moving
water from agriculture to uses with higher
economic value is frequently proposed, for
several reasons. Agriculture gets by far the
largest share of diverted water resources
and also consumes the most water through
plant evapotranspiration. Cities are also
thirsty. The value-added of water in nonagricultural sectors is usually far higher
than in agriculture. This apparent misallocation is often attributed to government
failure to allocate water rationally.5

Conflict between agriculture and industry over water in Orissa, India

The Hirakud Dam in Orissa, India, was the
first multipurpose dam to become operational after India’s independence in 1947.
Built across the Mahanadi River, it is the
longest and largest earthen dam in the
world, and its reservoir is the largest artificial
lake in Asia. The dam helps control floods
in the Mahanadi, provides irrigation to
155,600 hectares of land and generates up
to 307.5 megawatts of electricity through
its two power plants. Thanks to irrigation
provided by the dam, Sambalpur District is
referred to as the rice bowl of Orissa.
With new state development policies
based on industrialization, the reservoir
started supplying water to industrial plants

152

Diffuse, scattered users
or interventions.

pumping from the reservoir. In 2006 the
state government signed memorandums
of understanding with 17 companies to
provide them water from the reservoir.
Meanwhile, 50 years after the dam’s construction, many downstream areas had yet
to receive irrigation water, and tension was
building between reservoir authorities on
one side and local governments and farmers
associations on the other on water releases
from the dam. In June 2006, 25,000 farmers, fearing that diversion of water could
deprive more than 20,000 hectares of irrigation water, formed an 18 kilometre-long
human chain near Sambalpur to protest the
provision of water to industries. Five months
later, in November 2007, 30,000 farmers

gathered at the reservoir to protest. This
large turnout surprised even the protest
organizers and demonstrated the desperation of farmers over their water supply. Both
events were covered by the media. Under
pressure by the opposition party, Orissa’s
chief minister assured farmers’ representatives that not a single drop of the farmers’
share would be diverted to industries and
announced a 20 billion rupees package for
canal repair work in the Hirakud area.
Source: Thierry Facon, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Bangkok
regional office, adapted from Kalinga Times 2007
and South Asia Network on Dams, Rivers and
People 2006.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems
Another common intersectoral conflict is
between hydropower and other sectors,
especially agriculture and fisheries. Because
the energy production of hydropower
plants follows consumer demand, the dams
may release water when downstream irrigators do not need it. Real-time management
of stored water can result in better outcomes
because it enables water to be released when
needed for multiple users. Dams may also
harm fisheries by impeding fish migration
and reducing productivity by altering the
water regime. Famous conflicts have occurred on the Columbia River, in the northwestern United States, where intensive river
damming has affected salmon and other
species. Some dams have been decommissioned to restore ecosystem connectivity.
Conflict is looming between dams planned
or under construction in the Mekong River
basin and the river-abundant fisheries. It is
feared that the cumulative effects of these
dams, notably those planned on the mainstream river, will have a deleterious impact
on Tonle Sap, Cambodia’s great lake, and on
the fisheries that provide 60% of the basin
population’s protein intake.
Dams, irrigation schemes and cities consume water or change flow pathways. The
poor and the environment, the residual user,
bear a disproportionate share of the negative
consequences. Massive upstream diversions
have typically affected downstream lakes
or deltas, such as in the Colorado and the
Indus basins (box 9.3; see also figure 10.2
in chapter 10 and box 11.1 in chapter 11).
Diversion of the lower Ganges River by the
Farraka Dam damaged the ecology of the
Sunderbands wetlands, and the project for
interlinking northern and southern rivers in India could dramatically compound
these impacts on the Ganges-Brahmaputra
delta. Excess use of groundwater in many
large coastal cities (such as Chennai, Jakarta,
Lima and Tel Aviv) has led to the depletion
of local aquifers and allowed seawater to
intrude and salinize the aquifers.
Meeting water needs during dry seasons
and ensuring security of supply require
water storage. Climate change will intensify
climate irregularity, so that more storage
will be needed to ensure the same level of
security. More water will have to be kept in
reservoirs as reserves for dry spells, leaving less water for use on average. And this
increased need for storage is occurring at
a time when pressure from users is forcing
water managers to take risks and reduce carryover stocks. In many regions of the world
the need for more storage is not taken into
account, resulting in a growing frequency
of local crises during extreme drought.
Water in a changing world

2

Integrated management of reservoirs in a
river basin is a realistic solution. Part 4 illustrates possible responses and approaches.
Transboundary competition. When a river
or aquifer crosses a political boundary and
there is competition between sectors or
countries, problems become more complex

Box 9.3

Competition for water and downstream
impacts in the Indus River basin

Degradation of the Indus delta environment, in the downstream reaches
of the Indus River basin, has a long and
complex history. Gradual increases
in irrigation demands and cultivated
areas throughout the basin, punctuated by years of drought and the construction of reservoirs, have resulted
in progressive reductions in freshwater
flows to the delta over the last 40 years
and contention over water diversions.
This environmental degradation is
widely acknowledged as stemming
from both local threats, such as
unsustainable fisheries exploitation
and industrial and urban pollution
from nearby Karachi, and external
threats related to competition for
upstream irrigation diversions and
storage water management (ineffective drainage, low irrigation efficiency

Box 9.4

and inadequate farming practices, and
reduced freshwater flows).
The poor are bearing the brunt of the
consequences, including water-logging
and increased salinization of land,
aquifers and surface water as reduced
freshwater flows are unable to prevent
seawater intrusion and land erosion,
and reductions in their livelihood
assets and opportunities as a result of
declining fisheries, deteriorating grazing grounds and reduced agricultural
outputs and related revenues. Drinking
water shortages have led to an increase
in water-related diseases, forcing
households to purchase water from
tankers at great expense and women
and children to spend more time fetching water from sources farther away.
Source: Brugère and Facon 2007.

Fisheries and hydropower competing in the
Mekong River basin

After years of being undisturbed by
humans, the Mekong River basin has
undergone rapid change in recent
years. Populations have been displaced by dams in Thailand, and there
has been protracted conflict over the
impact of the Pak Mun Dam on fisheries. In Cambodia the loss of lives due
to the release of water from dams on
the upper Se San in Viet Nam have
stirred public awareness of the social
and environmental costs of conventional infrastructure development.
A major challenge for the basin is
to design hydropower facilities with
minimum impact on fisheries. Mekong
fisheries account for 17% of the world
freshwater fish catch, and numerous
studies have shown the importance
of fish to the diets and incomes of
populations in the basin.
Recent announcements of bilateral
agreements between Lao PDR and
Thailand and between Lao PDR and
Viet Nam for dams on the main stem

of the river together with numerous private contracts agreed by
Cambodia, Lao PDR and Viet Nam
(mostly with companies in China and
South-East Asia) have raised concerns
about whether these new projects
will benefit from the lessons learned
from past mistakes. The marginalization of regional international players
(such as the Asian Development Bank,
the Mekong River Commission and
the World Bank), the lack of transparency of the planning processes and
the abruptness of official declarations
about the signed agreements have
left little room for discussion of the
economic soundness and impacts
of the projects. The central concern
remains the fate of fisheries as new
dams are planned on the main stream,
an issue on which specialists at the
Mekong River Commission, the World
Fish Centre and elsewhere have issued
severe warnings.
Source: Molle, Foran, and Käkönen forthcoming; Mekong River Commission 2008.

153

PART

2

Chapter 9

Figure 9.2

Three types of response to water scarcity and
competition

Con

se

state

Tap
g

gate

es
er

local

rv

in
l lining, improved da
Cana
mm
g
ana
awareness campaign
g
e
s, vo
me
l um
nt
,w
etr
ic
wa ater
te
rp
Adopt microirrigati
on,
im
ge cropping t
pr
ech
chan
ov
niq
ue
m
s
r
t
o
rage
s
on-fa
, re
du
c

Responses
to basin
closure

r,
roundwate

loc

al

sta

te

small drains,

intr
use
oduc
e conjunctive

ing

te
sta

eo
fc
ro
equ
ps
ity;
o
co
nfl
brib
ic
ery
;g

or
a

m

at

al

Chan
g

d

ements for great
er
rang
; ar
ies
ter grabbing,
a
iet
n; w
ar
atio
rv
tig
i
l
ase water)
rele
ts,
p(
eu
iv

ent
em
ag
,
n
dars
a
len
m
ca
e
d
ow
fl
n
an
tur
re
e

loc

Se
ct

an

Managing competition
through supply and demand
management and reallocation

c
ghts
lo
ater ri
s, w
Al
ota
ns
qu
titutio
n,
l ins
tio
ev e
ca
n-l
asi
ll o
,b
ea
l r kets
ar

es,
c t ic
pra
t
en
ons
em
u ti
ag nstit
i
an
,
m ing
ric

d

n

r

R

i
as
vo
iv
sb te
n
ir
er
a
a
bu
sio
tr
w
ild
d,
n,
al
ing
ate
tu
wa
r
g
i
,
s
grou
v
ste
g,
drain
ndwate
wa
r abstraction,
di n
te r
see
treat
ment, desalination, cloud

There are many shortcomings in how water
is managed today in a context of increased
scarcity: low efficiency, environmental degradation, and inequity. Despite some improvements competition is increasing and
water use efficiency remains low in most
sectors. But the answer is not just more
efficient allocation mechanisms and more
emphasis on greater yields and productivity, because these alone may lead to further
losses in equity and environmental sustainability. Rather, a combination of supply and
demand management measures is needed.

Three common responses to
competition

and can lead to conflict. The Mekong River
basin has been an exception, with concerns
around water arising only recently. Partly
because of conflicts unrelated to water the
river has long-remained undisturbed, but
dam development to meet the growing
need for energy in most of the riparian
countries is putting other downstream uses
at risk – particularly fisheries (box 9.4).

The responses to increased competition for
water are supply augmentation, conservation and reallocation (figure 9.2). The most
conventional response is to develop new
resources. For the state this typically means
building new reservoirs or desalination
plants or interbasin transfer. For users this
means more wells or farm ponds or gating
drains to store water. Conserving water
includes increasing the efficiency of use
by reducing losses. Changes in allocation,
to ease competition or to maximize water
use, are based on economic, social, environmental or other criteria. Augmentation
is a supply management strategy, while
conservation and reallocation are demand
management strategies, roughly defined as
‘doing better with what we have’.9

Despite competing demands and conflict,
however, there is little historic evidence
that water itself has led to international
warfare or that a war over water would
make strategic, hydrographic or economic
sense.6 At the international level water appears to provide reasons for trans­boundary
cooperation rather than war, often preventing instead of causing escalation.7
Many multilateral treaties on freshwater resources have stressed multiple ­objectives –
economic development, joint management
and water quality – rather than just water
quantity and hydropower (see appendix
2).8 The way Mexico and the United States
resolved their dispute over the allocation
of water from the Rio Grande River, which
included a cost-sharing arrangement for
water conservation measures, offers interesting lessons for the peaceful resolution
of water disputes (see box 15.22 in chapter

Supply augmentation is typically constrained by the availability of storage sites,
the social and environmental costs and the
rising financial cost of water. With needs
outstripping available stocks in many basins, transfers between basins have become
more frequent. Amman, Athens, Bangkok,
Kathmandu, Los Angeles and Mexico City
are procuring water further afield. The
massive transfer of water now under way
in China (from the Yangtze River to the
Yellow River) is being emulated in Brazil,
India, Jordan and Thailand. While this
trend is likely to continue, its potential will
gradually be exhausted and its costs will
spiral upwards. Other small-scale options,
such as farm ponds in Asia or wells, have
also been widely developed. Desalination
is an option in specific locations (islands
and coastal cities), but its cost is likely to
remain high (though it is declining) and its

Developing
Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

154

15). A recent shift in emphasis from water
sharing to benefit sharing promises greater
transboundary cooperation.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems
The untapped potential of marginal-quality water

Installed capacity (cubic kilometres a year)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

n
ai
hr

Ba

a

r ia

in

ge
Al

n

re

a,

D

Ch

ly

Ir a

ar

It a

l

at
Q

.

ae

ep

Isr

em

.R

ir i
ah

m
Ja
an

Li

by

Ko

ab
Ar

Ar

d
te
ni

ya

n

t

pa

ai

Ja

n

w
Ku

s
te

ai
Sp

ir a

ab

Em

d
te
ni

ud

iA

St

ra

at

bi

es

a

0.0

U

Urban wastewater use in agriculture remains
limited, except in a few countries with very
meagre water resources (40% of uses in the
Gaza Strip, 15% in Israel and 16% in Egypt with
the reuse of drainage water). Elsewhere, even
where water is scarce, wastewater use accounts
for less than 4% of all uses (2.3% in Cyprus,
2.2% in Syria, 1.1% in Spain and 1.0% in
Tunisia). The use of urban wastewater – treated
or not – is growing, particularly for farming
around cities, often because higher quality
water resources are not available.

Figure 1 Desalination capacity in selected countries, 2002

U

Non-conventional water resources, especially
marginal-quality water (urban wastewater, agricultural drainage water and saline surface water
or groundwater), are an important source of
water that is still undervalued.

Sa

Box 9.5

Source: Based on Maurel 2006.

Desalination based on brackish water sources
(48%) and seawater (52%) is increasingly affordable as a result of new membrane technology ($0.60-$0.80 per cubic metre). It is used
mostly for drinking water (24%) and industrial
supplies (9%) in countries that have reached
the limits of their renewable water resources
(such as Cyprus, Israel, Malta and Saudi Arabia;
figure 1). Little is used for agriculture (1%), but
its use for high-value crops in greenhouses is
gradually increasing. Desalination accounted
for only 0.4% of water use in 2004 (nearly 14
cubic kilometres a year; figure 2), but production should double by 2025.
Source: Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2007.

use limited to urban supply. Other nonconventional sources of supply include
wastewater, secondary sources (such as
treated irrigation drainage) and the mining
of fossil (non-renewable) aquifers (box 9.5).
Figure 9.3 shows the relative importance of
these sources in selected Middle East and
Mediterranean region countries.
Because of reuse of water in basins and
users’ adjustments to scarcity, fully developed basins or aquifers tend to have much
less ‘slack’ than is often thought, and the
potential for net water savings at the basin
level is often overstated. When limits
are reached and improved efficiency and
demand management possibilities are exhausted, there are often no win-win solutions to meet additional demands. Rather,
resources must be reallocated from one
source to another. These demand management options are discussed in more detail
in the following section.
Countries rarely resort to all three options
at once unless pressure over the resource
is severe, as in Tunisia (see chapter 15).
Water in a changing world

Figure 2 Rapid growth of global installed capacity for desalination,
1966-2004
Installed capacity (cubic kilometres a year)
15
12
9
6
3
0
1966 1970 1980 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
Source: Based on Maurel 2006.

Figure 9.3

Importance of non-conventional sources
of water for selected Middle East and
Mediterranean region countries, 2000-06

Desalination
Wastewater treatment and reuse
Withdrawals on secondary resources (drainage from irrigation)
Withdrawals on non-renewable resources (mining fossil aquifers)
Withdrawals on primary resources (renewable resources)
Percent
100
80
60
40
20
0
Saudi Cyprus Egypt United Israel
Arabia
Arab
Emirates

Jordan Libyan Malta
Arab
Jamahiriya

Oman Tunisia

Source: FAO-AQUASTAT; Benoit and Comeau 2005.

155

PART

2

Large
improvements
are expected
from demand
management,
with savings in
water, energy and
money through
increased efficiency

Chapter 9
Mechanisms are needed to make optimal
choices along the spectrum of options.
Optimal choices should emerge from
informed processes of consultation and negotiation that assess the costs and benefits
of all options, while considering basin
interconnectedness, relationships between
land and water resources and environmental sustainability. Decisions should be
coherent with other government policies.

Scope for improving demand
management
Large improvements are expected from demand management, with savings in water,
energy and money through increased
efficiency. Among the strategies that have
contributed to improved water demand
management are:
• Technological improvements. These include
reducing leakage in urban networks,
changing equipment and shifting to
micro-irrigation, biotechnology and
other water-conserving agricultural techniques. Attention must be directed to impacts on flow pathways to properly assess
overall water savings (see chapter 3).
• Management approaches. Examples
include cropping-pattern change, water
reuse through sequential uses in irrigation schemes or urban processes, reuse
in closed-loop systems (industry and
energy sectors) and reallocation across
sectors.
• Economic incentives. Using water pricing,
taxes and fees for demand management
and allocation of water has proved
effective in domestic and industrial sectors, but these measures are not a workable option for most irrigation schemes
in developing countries.10 Payment for
environmental services has been found
to be a useful economic restraint in
some cases (see chapters 4 and 14).
• Legal and regulatory approaches. ‘Polluter
pays’ and ‘user pays’ principles have
reduced both water use and pollution
in industry, and participatory management has increased user participation
by controlling individual water demands (see chapter 4).
Urban distribution networks and irrigation schemes lose large amounts of water
through leakage and percolation. Among
the 23 countries of the Mediterranean Action Plan, in a region where water stakes
are high, an estimated 25% of water is lost
in urban networks and 20% in irrigation
canals (map 9.1). Realistically, only part of

156

the water lost can effectively be recovered
technically and at a reasonable cost. Cities
such as Rabat and Tunis have cut their
losses to 10%.11 Even when the water is
returned to the water system, these losses
and leakages constitute a failure of the supply infrastructure as they result in significant financial costs (for producing drinking water and pumping and transporting
water) and additional environmental and
health risks. Technology (canal lining,
micro-­irrigation) can often solve part of
the problem, but a large part of the losses
are due to management or regulatory flaws.
While irrigation losses and inefficiency
appear high, with only a third of the
water supplied reaching plant roots, most
of the losses become return flows, which
are tapped by other users elsewhere in the
basin or serve important environmental
functions. There may be little water to be
saved in fully developed basins, and conservation interventions can often end up
as reallocation.12
Localized irrigation (micro-irrigation), for
example, has a limited impact on water
depleted by evapotranspiration in the fields
and chiefly reduces return flows. Thus water
‘saved’ by upstream irrigators can come at
the expense of downstream users, allowing upstream irrigators to expand their
cultivation. This may be desirable from the
perspective of the upstream farmer, but the
result is increased water depletion.
Price-based regulation was emphasized in
the 1990s for limiting water use, but its
benefits have failed to materialize, most
notably in the irrigation sector.13 Water
can also be saved by changing b
­ ehaviours
– through awareness campaigns, quotas or
water pricing (box 9.6).
In the industrial sector a combination of
subsidies, higher water prices and environmental regulations have encouraged
industries to improve processes and reduce
withdrawals (see chapter 7). It is hard to get
a consolidated picture of how industries
manage water worldwide, but there are global indications that the business community
is devoting growing attention to water management,14 as a result of increased efforts to
improve water management. Industries can
realize major savings in natural and financial resources by raising awareness through
environmental audits and by investing modest amounts. In agricultural and emerging
market economies the scope for progress
through clean processes is even greater,
since production processes are generally
well below world standards. Multi‑national
World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems

Map 9.1

Difference between water withdrawn and water effectively used in Mediterranean
region countries, all uses, 2000-05

0.1

3.7

Hundreds of cubic
kilometres a year
0.025-7
8-14
15-21
22-28
29-35
36-42

0.15
0.3

15.6
1.1
16.3

0.025
1.3
3.2

16.5

0.09

12.2
0.08

1.2
4.5

0.7
0.1
0.4

1.8
1.5

42.0

Source: Jean Margat, adapted from Benoit and Comeau 2005; Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2007.

companies can play a key role. In some
countries public intervention through
subsidies or more stringent enforcement are
necessary. The international competitiveness of companies in the global market is
enhanced by a commitment to best environmental practices, which reduce pollution
and improve the efficiency of water use.
At the national level a growing number of
companies are introducing clean production processes – often for pollution
reduction – that result in substantial water
savings. These efforts are supported by
various UN programmes (United Nations
Environment Programme, United Nations
Industrial Development Organization)
through a network of cleaner production
centres in 27 countries.
Chapters 14 and 15 present several examples of approaches to demand management.

Reallocation, efficiency and equity
issues
Water, like any resource, when it is scarce
or requires scarce resources to supply
Water in a changing world

Box 9.6

Signs of progress in urban areas: examples in
Asia and Australia

Water withdrawals increased in Asia
and Australia in all sectors until the
1980s, when withdrawals for agriculture declined and growth in overall
water withdrawals slowed. There is still
considerable potential for improvement. Some recent efforts have been
stimulated by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific, which has promoted
the concept of eco-efficiency of water
use and water infrastructure development, and by complementary research.
Implementation of demand management measures has been uneven
across the region, but interest in
improving water use efficiency is
growing in many countries. Singapore
has reduced urban domestic water
demand from 176 litres per person a
day in 1994 to 157 litres in 2007 as a
result of additional and targeted public expenditure for improved demand
management.

In Bangkok and Manila leak detection
programmes have lowered estimated
unaccounted-for water and allowed
postponing the development of new
infrastructure. Effluent charges have
been an important instrument for stimulating efficient water uses in households and commercial establishments.
In 2008 Sydney Water in Australia
began providing homes in the Hoxton
Park area with two water supplies –
­recycled water and drinking water
(dual reticulation). Recycled water
is to be used for gardens and other
outdoor needs, toilet flushing and potentially as cold water in washing machines and for certain non-­residential
purposes. The recycled water taps,
pipes and plumbing are coloured purple to distinguish recycled water from
drinking water.
Source: www.sydneywater.com.au;
UNESCAP 1997, 2004; Kiang 2008.

157

PART

2

Once basic human
and environmental
water needs
have been met,
the remainder
should ideally go
to where water
has the highest
value to society

Chapter 9
it, rises in economic value. Once basic
human and environmental water needs
have been met, the remainder should
ideally go to where water has the highest
value to society. Since much water is used
for productive or ‘lifestyle’ purposes, it is
appropriate to apply economic criteria to
its allocation. But water pricing alone will
not produce the necessary reallocation,
since prices in many sectors do not reflect
underlying economic values, and there are
many cases of market or service failure. In
several Eastern European countries price
increases resulted in reductions in urban
water consumption to half the level of two
decades ago.15 Flow reductions can lead
to secondary water quality problems in
supply networks (increase of water residence time), odour problems in sewerage
systems and added burdens at wastewater
treatment plants, which become hydraulically underloaded and have to treat much
denser raw wastewater than before.
Reallocation from lower- to higher-value
uses can be achieved by enabling the
traditional markets as well as by applying
administrative measures, creating water
markets or trading water rights. In each
case society should set appropriate limits
on transfers to protect third parties, the
environment and wider social interest.
Subject to these conditions, competition
for water can be healthy.
In countries that recognize water trading
rights, many cities have met their growing water needs by purchasing farms or
properties with water rights and taking
over the rights. Some non-governmental
organizations ‘compete’ on behalf of the
environment by purchasing the rights
to a certain volume of water in a river
or lake, which they then leave in the
water body. These are examples of oneoff transactions. But in certain regions
(Chile, parts of Australia, some western
states of the United States) the conditions

have been created for regular water trading (see box 4.2 in chapter 4). There,
water markets are commonly used by
farmers wanting supplementary water for
valuable crops during drought conditions
or by cities to create reserves in anticipation of impending droughts. Prices set in
these markets signal the marginal values
of water in these different uses, which
are usually much higher than average
values.16
These ‘efficiency’ criteria need to be
reconciled with society’s desire for equity
(the satisfaction of basic needs) and environmental sustainability. Such balancing of water needs can be achieved by a
combination of administrative allocation,
tariff structures with adequate provisions
to protect the poor and other relevant
measures. There is a role for subsidies in
water services, but they should be carefully targeted to specific functions. Poor
people and other disadvantaged groups
without sustainable access to safe water
and adequate sanitation are usually
willing to pay within their means for
reliable access to service because improving access (through standpipes or household connections) yields large financial
dividends.
The Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture argues for
reforms to enable more efficient use of
water.17 Policy-makers need to recognize
the incentives and resource constraints
confronting small farmers, but it would
be a mistake to assume that farmers do
not respond to market incentives (food
prices have an impact on cropping patterns). Farmers will invest in inputs and
irrigation technology (meaning higher
water costs) if they believe that they will
achieve higher returns. There is no reason
for efficiency, equity and environmental
sustainability to be out of alignment in
that case.

Notes

8.

Wolf, Yoffe, and Giordano 2003.

16. Winpenny 1994; Molle and Berkoff 2005.

1.

OECD 2008.

9.

Winpenny 1994.

2.

OECD 2008.

10. Molle and Berkoff 2008.

17. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture 2007.

3.

Molle, Wester, and Hirsch 2007.

11. Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2007.

4.

Barreteau, Bousquet, and Attonaty
2001; Barbier and Thompson 1998;
Neiland et al. 2000.

12. Molle, Berkoff, and Barker 2005; Molle,
Wester, and Hirsch 2007; Molle et al.
2008.

5.

Molle and Berkoff 2005.

13. Molle and Berkoff 2008.

6.

Wolf, Yoffe, and Giordano 2003; Gleick
2008.

14. WBCSD n.d.; World Economic Forum
2008.

7.

van der Molen and Hildering 2005.

15. Somlyódy and Varis 2006.

158

References
Barbier, E. B., and J. R. Thompson. 1998.
The Value of Water: Floodplain versus
Large-Scale Irrigation Benefits in Northern Nigeria. Ambio 27 (6): 434-40.
Barreteau O., F. Bousquet, and J.-M. Attonaty. 2001. Role-Playing Games for

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Managing competition for water and the pressure on ecosystems
Opening the Black Box of Multi-Agent
Systems: Method and Lessons of Its Application to Senegal River Valley Irrigated
Systems. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation 4 (2).

Maurel, A. 2006. Dessalement de L’eau de
Mer et des Eaux Saumâtres: et Autres
Procédés Non Conventionneles d’approvisionnement en Eau Douce. 2eme édition.
Cachan, France: Tec & Doc Lavoisier.

Benoit, G., and A. Comeau, eds. 2005. A
Sustainable Future for the Mediterranean:
The Blue Plan’s Environment and Development Outlook. London: Earthscan.

Mekong River Commission. 2008.
Hydrological, Environmental and SocioEconomic Modelling Tools for the Lower
Mekong Basin Impact Assessment. Water
Utilisation Programme Final Report Part
2: Research Findings and Recommendations. Helsinki and Espoo, Finland:
Finnish Environment Institute, Environmental Impact Assessment Centre of
Finland Ltd., and Helsinki University of
Technology.

Blue Plan, MAP (Mediterranean Action
Plan), and UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme). 2007. Water
Demand Management, Progress and
Policies: Proceedings of the3rd Regional
Workshop on Water and Sustainable
Development in the Mediterranean Zaragoza, Spain, 19-21 March. MAP Technical Reports Series 168. Athens: United
Nations Environment Programme.
Brugère, C., and T. Facon. 2007. Doomed
Delta? Challenges to Improved Governance, Planning and Mitigation Measures
in the Indus Delta. Paper presented at
the International Delta 2007 Conference
on Managing the Coastal Land-Water
Interface in Tropical Delta Systems, 7-9
November, Bang Sean, Thailand.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. 2007.
Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture. London: Earthscan, and
Colombo: International Water Management Institute.
Courcier, R., J. P. Venot, and F. Molle.
2005. Historical Transformations of the
Lower Jordan River Basin: Changes in
Water Use and Projections (1950 – 2025).
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture Research Report 9.
Colombo: Comprehensive Assessment
Secretariat, International Water Management Institute.
Gleick, P. H. 2008. Water Conflict Chronology. Pacific Institute, Oakland, CA. www.
worldwater.org/conflictchronology.pdf.
Kalinga Times. 2007. Stop Corporate
Control over Water: Farmers Warn Govt.
www.kalingatimes.com/orissa_news/
news/20070111_farmers_warn_govt.htm.
Kiang, Tay Teck. 2008. Singapore’s Experience in Water Demand Management.
Paper presented at the 13th International
Water Resources Association World Water
Congress, 1-4 September, Montpellier,
France.

Water in a changing world

Molle, F. 2008. Why Enough Is Never
Enough: The Societal Determinants of
River Basin Closure. International Journal
of Water Resources Development 24 (2):
217-26.
Molle, F., and J. Berkoff. 2005. Cities versus
Agriculture: Revisiting Intersectoral Water
Transfers, Potential Gains and Conflicts.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture Research Report 10.
Colombo: Comprehensive Assessment
Secretariat.
———, eds. 2008. Irrigation Water Pricing:
The Gap between Theory and Practice.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture Series 4.
Wallingford, UK: Centre for Agricultural
Bioscience International.
Molle, F., J. Berkoff, and R. Barker. 2005.
Irrigation Water Pricing in Context:
Exploring the Gap between Theory
and Practice. Paper presented at the
workshop Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture, International Water Management Institute,
Montpelier, France, 6-10 June 2005.
Molle, F., T. Foran, and M. Käkönen, eds.
Forthcoming. Contested Waterscapes
in the Mekong Region: Hydropower,
Livelihoods and Governance. London:
Earthscan.
Molle, F., P. Jayakody, R. Ariyaratne, and
H. S. Somatilake. 2008. Irrigation vs. Hydropower: Sectoral Conflicts in Southern
Sri Lanka. Water Policy 10 (S1): 37-50.
Molle, F., P. Wester, and P. Hirsch. 2007.
River Basin Development and Management. In Water for Food, Water for Life:
A Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. London:

2

Earthscan, and Colombo: International
Water Management Institute.
Neiland A. E., J. Weeks, S. P. Madakan,
and B. M. B. Ladu. 2000. Inland Fisheries of North East Nigeria Including the
Upper River Benue, Lake Chad and the
Nguru–Gashua Wetlands II: Fisheries
Management at Village Level. Fisheries
Research 48 (3): 245-61.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2008.
OECD Environment Outlook to 2030. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Somlyódy, László, and Olli Varis. 2006.
Freshwater Under Pressure in Groundwater Mangement and Policy: Its Future
Alternatives. International Review for
Environmental Strategies 6 (2): 181-204.
South Asia Network on Dams, Rivers and
People. 2006. Protest against Diversion
of Hirakud Water. Dams, Rivers and People
4 (9-10): 8.
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific). 1997. Guidelines for the Establishment of Pricing Policies and Structure for Urban and Rural Water Supply.
ST/ESCAP/1738. Manila: United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific.
———. 2004. Guidelines on Strategic
Planning and Management of Water
Resources. ST/ESCAP/2346. New York:
United Nations.
van der Molen, I., and A. Hildering. 2005.
Water: Cause for Conflict or Co-operation? ISYP Journal on Science and World
Affairs 1 (2): 133-43.
WBCSD (World Business Council for
Sustainable Development). n.d. Global
Water Tool. Geneva. www.wbcsd.org/
templates/TemplateWBCSD5/layout.asp?
type=p&MenuId=MTUxNQ&doOpen=1
&ClickMenu=LeftMenu.
Winpenny, James. 1994. Managing Water as
an Economic Resource. London and New
York: Routledge.
Wolf A. T., S. B. Yoffe, and M. Giordano.
2003. International Waters: Identifying
Basins at Risk. Water Policy 5 (1): 29-60.
World Economic Forum. 2008. Water as
Critical as Climate Change. Press Release,
23 January. Davos, Switzerland. www.
weforum.org/en/media/Latest%20
Press%20Releases/WaterCritical.

159

Chapter
10

The Earth’s natural water cycles

11

Changes in the global water cycle

12

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities

13

Bridging the observational gap

3

PART

State of the resource

Chapters 10-12
Coordinator
Andras SzöllösiNagy (UNESCO),
with the support
of Anil Mishra
(UNESCO) and
Siegfried Demuth
(UNESCO)
Facilitator
Denis Hughes
Chapter 13
Coordinator
Andras SzöllösiNagy (UNESCO)
Associate
coordinator
Wolfgang Grabs
(WMO)
Facilitator
Denis Hughes

PART

Author: Denis Hughes

Part 3 of the Report highlights the key
issues associated with the Earth’s natural water cycles (chapter 10) and identifies the changes occurring in the water
cycle (chapter 11) and how they affect
hazards and opportunities for using
water resources (chapter 12). It concludes with a discussion of the available
information – and the information that
is lacking – to quantify the resource
and patterns of change (chapter 13).
Water resources are made up of many
components associated with water in
its three physical states (liquid, solid
and gas). Under natural conditions
water results from complex interactions
between atmospheric, land surface and
subsurface processes that affect its distribution and quality. The components
of the water cycle (rainfall, evaporation,
runoff, groundwater, storage and others) therefore all differ in their chemical
and biochemical qualities, spatial and
temporal variability, resilience, vulnerability to pressures (including land use
and climate change), susceptibility to
pollution and capacity to provide useful
services and to be used sustainably. A
consequence of this variability is that
while human pressures have resulted in
large modifications to the global cycle,
the directions and degrees of change
are complex and difficult to ascertain.
The uneven distribution over time and
space of water resources and their

modification through human use and
abuse are sources of water crises in
many parts of the world. Broad overviews at the global scale are difficult because of the spatial and temporal complexity arising from the conjunction of
land, water and atmospheric elements
– made worse by incomplete monitoring
and fragmented availability of data to
quantify the resource and its changes.
The main components of water have
come to be designated as blue, green
and white water:
•

Blue water is liquid water moving
above and below the ground and
includes surface water and groundwater. As blue water moves through
the landscape, it can be reused until
it reaches the sea.

•

Green water is soil moisture
­generated from rainfall that infiltrates the soil and is available
for uptake by plants and evapotranspiration. Green water is nonproductive if evaporated from soil
and open water.

•

White water (sometimes considered
the non-productive part of green
water) is water that evaporates directly into the atmosphere without
having been used productively and
includes losses from open water and
soil surfaces.

3

PART

3

In addition, grey and black water refer
to the quality of the resource.
•

Grey water, usually wastewater,
may be poor in quality, but usable
for some purposes.

•

Black water is so heavily polluted (usually with microbes) as to
be harmful (to humans and ecosystems) or at least economically
unusable.

About 60% of total global water fluxes
(flows, movements and transfers between physical states) are attributable
to green water flow, the component
of the water cycle most susceptible to
land use and land cover changes, and
to changes in atmospheric conditions
that control evaporative demand, such
as temperature, solar radiation and
atmospheric vapour pressure deficit.
In addition, there is the Earth’s ‘solid’
water, the contribution that snow and
ice make to the global resource and
how these components may be affected
by changes in climate conditions.
Detecting and quantifying changes
involve separating natural variability in
climate and hydrologic processes from
the variability and trends caused by
other factors that influence the hydrologic landscape and then measuring
and quantifying this variability. This
hydrologic landscape has already been

highly modified by land use changes,
which can both accelerate (for example,
through urbanization and vegetation
degradation) and dampen (for example, through afforestation) hydrologic
responses. It is also modified by engineered systems, including in-stream effects (such as dams, direct abstractions,
return flows and interbasin transfers)
and off-stream effects (such as irrigation). Climate change is being superimposed on an already complex hydrologic landscape, making its signal difficult
to isolate, and yet making its influence
felt throughout the water supply, demand and buffering system. There are
already detectable changes in some
parts of the world in the first-­order
climate parameters of temperature and
rainfall. But this signal is not yet discernable in many parts of the world in
second-order parameters of importance
to water resources managers, such as
changes in runoff and groundwater.
Chapter 11 reviews the scientific evidence of change in the components
of the water cycle, focusing on impacts related to climate change. While
trends in precipitation have been noted
in some parts of the world, in other
areas precipitation patterns have remained about the same within the
period of observed data. There is evidence of changes in seasonality and
frequency of heavy precipitation events
in some areas. Despite the evidence of

PART

3

temperature changes, there is little evidence of detectable changes in evaporation and evapotranspiration. Part of the
reason may stem from decreased solar
radiation due to increased aerosol use
or cloud cover, but difficulties in obtaining representative measurements could
be obscuring any trends. Similarly,
detecting trends in soil moisture is constrained by limited observations, while
model studies are subject to uncertainties about the model and data input
assumptions.
Despite the limitations of global datasets, many studies have shown changes
in runoff and streamflow. Many have
focused on low (drought) or high (flood)
extremes (chapter 12). Except in regions
with flows affected by glacier meltwater, the general conclusion is that global trends are not present or cannot be
detected at this stage, although climate
change–related trends are evident in
some regions. Many rivers have been
altered by engineered systems, including dams, diversions, return flows
and interbasin transfers and by land
use modifications. The same is true of
groundwater resources, which have
been heavily used for human supply
and agriculture for many years. While
many groundwater abstraction schemes
access fossil water (water unrelated to
current conditions), renewable groundwater resources depend on highly
variable recharge volumes. It is thus

realistic to expect future recharge
regimes to reflect changes in the driving hydrologic processes (such as precipitation and evapotranspiration) that
might result from anticipated climate
changes. That these are not yet detectable could be related to the buffering
capacity of groundwater (slower processes), as well as to the lack of a suitably integrated global database. While
changes have been observed in natural
lakes and wetlands in recent decades in
many parts of the world, the primary
factors driving these changes are region specific.
The strongest evidence for the effects
of climate change on water resources
comes from areas where the rate at
which the solid phase of water (snow
and ice) is converted into liquid is important. In permafrost regions changes
have been detected in the depth of
frozen ground and in the duration,
thickness and areal extent of the seasonal freeze and thaw within seasonally frozen regions. Potential impacts
include surface settlement, swamping,
landslides and greater sediment loads.
More than 15% of the world’s population live where water resources availability depends heavily on snowmelt
from ephemeral snowpacks or perennial glaciers. Changes have been observed in snow cover extent and snow
water equivalent and in the frequency
with which precipitation falls as snow.

PART

3

Despite observations that the snow
cover season has shortened and that
this change appears to have accelerated
in recent decades, some inconsistencies
remain in the data sources. There is
considerable evidence to suggest that
glaciers have retreated globally since
the mid-19th century and that this
retreat has accelerated since the mid1970s in response to rising air temperature and changes in the amount and
kind of precipitation.
Among the consequences of a changing hydrologic cycle is its interaction
with the terrestrial carbon cycle, because of positive feedbacks to climate
change. The terrestrial biosphere is
thought to have taken up roughly 25%
of anthropogenic carbon emissions
during the last century, and how long
this can continue is unclear. Observations suggest that the rate of carbon
uptake depends on hydrologic and
climate conditions, as well as land use.
But long-term observations are sparse,
making trend detection difficult.
Most climate scientists agree that global warming will result in an intensification, acceleration or enhancement of
the global hydrologic cycle, and there
is some observational evidence that this
is happening already. Data limitations
in length of record, continuity and spatial coverage contribute to the uncertainty, while natural climate variability

and multiyear variability associated
with large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns influence the interpretation of many trends in ways that are
not yet fully understood. Improving
data collection and reducing the uncertainties associated with modelling
studies are important for future impact
assessments.
Hazards (chapter 12) can result from
too much water (floods, erosion, landslides and so on) or too little (droughts
and loss of wetlands or habitat) and
from the effects of chemical and biological pollution on water quality and
in-stream ecosystems. Water-related
hazards can be naturally occurring
or anthropogenic. The chapter states
that the natural variability of water
resources and changes, whatever the
cause, can also provide positive opportunities – with careful management. In
many areas hydrologic extremes have
increased. Deaths and material damage from extreme floods can be high,
and more intense droughts, affecting
increasing numbers of people, have
been observed in the 21st century. Such
droughts have been linked to higher
temperatures and decreased precipitation, but are also frequently a consequence of resource mismanagement.
Changes in cultivation and interruptions in sediment delivery through
the construction of dams can lead to

PART

3

changes in erosion and sediment transport. In some developing countries rapidly expanding population has driven
land clearing and rapid expansion of
cultivated land. The water quality and
ecology of many of the world’s rivers
have been altered partly by changes
in flow and partly by inputs of chemical and biological waste from human
activities. Global warming is expected
to lead to changes in water temperature, with substantial effects on energy
flows and matter recycling, resulting in
algal blooms, increases in toxic cyano­
bacteria bloom and reductions in biodiversity, among other impacts.
The increased exposure to potential
climate change hazards has led to more
awareness of water resources management. The response of management
strategies to potential climate change
threats is an opportunity to implement
more resource-sustainable policies
and practices. For example, in areas of
increasing water stress, groundwater
is often an important buffer resource,
capable of responding to increased
water demands or compensating for
the declining availability of surface
water. There are significant opportunities for both mitigation and adaptation
strategies, such as stronger observation
networks (chapter 13), increased integration of groundwater and surface water
supplies (including artificial recharge),
improved early warning and forecasting

systems for hazardous events, improved
risk-based approaches to management
and greater community awareness of
sustainable water resources use.
Management of global water resources
requires reliable information about
the state of the resource and how it is
changing in response to all the drivers
that affect it. Worldwide, water observation networks are inadequate for current and future management needs and
risk further decline (chapter 13). There
are insufficient data to understand and
predict the current and future quantity
and quality of the resource. Political
protocols and imperatives for sharing
data are also inadequate. While new
technologies in satellite remote sensing
and modelling present opportunities,
their value is limited by our inability
to ground truth and validate much of
the simulated information. To improve
monitoring and to use data more effectively and efficiently, countries need to
place observations and continual assessments of water resources higher on
the political and development agendas.
The financial and human resources
that countries can commit to achieving
these improvements will differ greatly.
But unless a worldwide effort is made
to improve our knowledge and understanding of changes in the global water
resource, future management will
be undertaken in an environment of
greater uncertainty and high risk.

PART

3

Chapter 10
The Earth’s natural
water cycles
Author: Charles J. Vörösmarty
Contributors: Daniel Conley, Petra Döll, John Harrison, Peter Letitre,
Emilio Mayorga, John Milliman, Sybil Seitzinger, Jac van der Gun and Wil Wollheim
Coordinator: Andras Szöllösi-Nagy (UNESCO)
Facilitator: Denis Hughes

Key messages
The uneven distribution of water resources over time and space
and the way human activity is affecting that distribution today
are fundamental sources of water crises in many parts of the
world.
Climate change is superimposed on the complex hydrologic
landscape, making its signal difficult to isolate and its influence felt throughout the water supply, demand and buffering
system.
The contemporary water cycle – and so
freshwater resources – is defined by the
interaction of natural and human factors. This chapter highlights key components of the global water cycle most
directly relevant to the state of the water
resources base. Such components include
the land-based water system and the
world’s oceans, circulation of water in the
atmosphere, surface and subsurface water
associated with the continental land mass,
accessible and virtual water and people’s
role in stabilizing and redirecting this
resource – and limiting it through mismanagement, including overabstraction
and pollution.

Overview of the global
hydrologic cycle
Water unifies the climate, biosphere and
chemo-lithosphere of the planet. The
physical state of water and its transformations are linked to energy exchanges
called atmospheric teleconnections (such as
El Niño) and to feedbacks in the climate
system. Water movement is the largest
flow of any kind through the biosphere
and is the primary vehicle for erosion
and dissolution of continents. Freshwater
strongly determines the productivity of
biomass and supports critical habitats and
166

biodiversity. Humans struggle to stabilize
and make available adequate water, despite
an unforgiving climate, failed governance
and mismanagement, which lead to depletion and pollution.

Components of the global water cycle
– defining the water resources base
The land-based hydrologic cycle is the
fundamental building block of water resources. Freshwater is but a small fraction
– about 2.5% – of the total water on Earth,
the ‘blue planet’. All human enterprise
requires water. It is required for food production, industry, drinking water, inland
water transport systems, waste dilution
and healthy ecosystems.
Water links Earth’s atmosphere, land
mass and oceans through the global water
cycle – circulating through each of these
domains, changing phase between solid,
liquid and gas; supporting the biosphere
and humans; wearing away the continents
and nourishing coastal zones. Water also
serves as a conveyance system for bioactive
chemicals (including poisons) that eventually find their way from continental source
areas into the world’s oceans.
Precipitation is the ultimate source of
freshwater. After losing water back to the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

The Earth’s natural water cycles
atmosphere through evaporation and
evapotranspiration, precipitation recharges
groundwater and provides surface and
subsurface runoff. This runoff ultimately
flows downstream through river corridors and into groundwater aquifers and
constitutes an important regional source
of water (table 10.1). Variation in precipitation and atmospheric demand for evapotranspiration thus geophysically limit
water availability. Globally, about twothirds of precipitation is returned to the
atmosphere.
Latin America is the most water-rich
region, with about a third of global
runoff. Asia is next, with a quarter of
global runoff, followed by the countries
of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (mainly
North America, Western Europe and Australasia) (20%), and sub-Saharan Africa
and Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and
Central Asia, each with about 10%. The
Middle East and North Africa is the most
water-limited region, with only 1% of
global runoff. Over 85% of precipitation
is evaporated or transpired. In regions
where runoff is scarce or ill-timed, rainwater is an important component of the
resource picture.
Table 10.2 describes the land-based water
cycle as it relates to water resources systems. A substantial portion of the water
associated with the renewable land-based
hydrologic cycle is inaccessible to humans

Table 10.1

due to remoteness or an inability to store
seasonal flows.1 Accessibility is also affected by political preferences and unequal
distribution of wealth and technological
resources, which can prevent the delivery
of water even when its physical presence
is confirmed (the concept of economic
water scarcity). Further, some groundwater
stocks are accessible but not renewable,
such as ancient aquifers in regions that
today lack a replenishment source. An appropriate conceptual framework is thus required that combines physical and human
dimensions. Map 10.1 contrasts the two
perspectives and shows the portion of
the global water cycle that is accessible to
humans. Some additional supplies can be
made available through non-conventional
means, such as desalination, often at
substantial cost in infrastructure and
operations.

Globally, about
two-thirds of
precipitation is
returned to the
atmosphere

Spatial and temporal variability
Map 10.1 clearly shows an uneven spatial
distribution of water supply. Variations
in seasonality and the episodic nature of
rainfall, snowfall, snowmelt and evapotranspiration all contribute to temporal incongruities that show up as flooding, seasonal low flows and longer-term drought,
challenging water managers to forecast
conditions and specify water allocations
under a cloud of uncertainty.
Major interconnections are established
through circulation patterns in the
global atmosphere, which lead to the

Estimates of renewable water supplies, access to renewable supplies and population served
by freshwater, 2000

Indicator

Asia

Eastern
Europe, the
Caucasus and
Central Asia

Area (millions of square
kilometres)

20.9

21.9

20.7

11.8

24.3

33.8

133.0

Total precipitation (thousands of
cubic kilometres a year)

21.6

9.2

30.6

1.8

19.9

22.4

106.0

Evaporative returns to atmosphere
(percent of precipitation)

Latin
America

Middle
East and
North
Africa

SubSaharan
Africa

OECD

Global
total

55

27

27

86

78

64

63

Total renewable water supply
(blue water flows; thousands of
cubic kilometres a year) [% of
global runoff]

9.8
[25]

4.0
[10]

13.2
[33]

0.25
[1]

4.4
[11]

8.1
[20]

39.6
[100]

Renewable water supply (blue
water flows accessible to humans;
thousands of cubic kilometres a
year) [percent of total renewable
water supply]

9.3
[95]

1.8
[45]

8.7
[66]

0.24
[96]

4.1
[93]

5.6
[69]

29.7
[75]

Note: Means computed based on methods in Vörösmarty, Leveque, and Revenga (2005). Estimates are based on climate data for 1950-96, computed
using estimates of population living downstream of renewable supplies in 2000.
Source: Fekete, Vörösmarty, and Grabs 2002.

Water in a changing world

167

PART

3

Table 10.2

Chapter 10T
Definitions of key components of the land-based hydrologic cycle and examples of their
reconfiguration by humans

Water system
element

Space and time
variability

Typical roles in water
resources systems

Management challenges, vulnerabilities and
opportunities

Green water
• Soil moisture (nonproductive green
water is evaporated
from soil and open
water surfaces)

•

•

•

Very high
over both
dimensions

Direct support to rainfed
cropping systems

•

•

•
•
Blue water (natural
and altered)
• Net of local
groundwater
recharge and surface
runoff, streamflow

•

High over both
dimensions

•

•

Farm ponds and check dams
augment green water in
rainfed cropping systems
Source waters and entrained
constituents delivered
downstream within
watersheds

•

•
•
•
•

•

Inland water
systems (lakes,
rivers, wetlands)

•

Decreased
variability with
increased size

•

•

•

•

Ground water
(shallow)

Fossil groundwater
(deep)

•

•

Moderate
over both
dimensions;
links to streams

•

Extremely
stable

•

Key resource over district,
national, and multinational
domains
Important role in transport,
waste management, and
domestic, industrial and
agricultural sectors

•

Locally distributed shallow
well systems serving
drinking water and irrigation
needs

•

Critical (and often sole)
source of water in arid and
semi-arid regions

•

•
•
•

•
•

•

•
Blue water
(engineered)
• Diversions, including
reservoirs and
interbasin transfers
• Reused waters

•

Stable to very
stable

•

•

•

•

Critical (and often sole)
source of water in arid and
semi-arid regions
Altered blue water balance
as flows stabilized or
redirected from water-rich
times and places to water
poor times and places
Multiple uses: hydropower,
irrigation, domestic,
industrial, recreational, flood
control
Secondary reuse as effluents
in irrigation

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Highly sensitive to climate variability (both
drought and flood); limited capacity to control
Can be augmented by rainfall-harvesting
techniques (many traditional and widely
adopted)
Weather and climate forecasts help in scheduling
planting, harvest, supplemental irrigation and
other activities
Performance improved or compromised by land
management
Selection of improved crop strains for climateproofing
Highly sensitive to climate variability (both
drought and flood) and ultimately climate
change
Some capacity to control
Habitat management highly localized
Many small engineering works can propagate
strong cumulative downstream effects
Poor land management heightens possiblities of
flash flooding followed by dry streambeds
Water losses through net evaporation occur
naturally and through human use
Legacy of upstream management survives
downstream (e.g., irrigation losses, pollution)
Multiple sector management objectives may be
difficult to attain simultaneously
Potential upstream-downstream conflicts
(human to human; human to nature), including
international
Intimate connection to weather and climate
means water yields subject to precipitation
extremes
Easily polluted
Easily overused, resulting in temporary depletion;
some loss of regional importance to oceans
Large repositories of water but with limited
recharge potential
Use typically non-sustainable, leading to
declining water levels and pressure, increasing
extraction costs
Low replenishment rates mean pollution often
effectively becomes permanent
Large quantities of water with high recharge
potential
Modified flow regime, with positive and negative
impacts on humans and ecosystems
Can destroy river fish habitat while creating lake
fisheries by fragmenting habitat
Natural ecosystem ‘cues’ for breeding and
migration removed
Water supplies stabilized for use when needed
most by society
Sediment trapping, leading to downstream
inland waterway, coastal zone problems
Potential for introduction of exotic species
Greenhouse gas emission from stagnant water
Health problems (e.g., schistosomiasis) from
stagnant water
Social instability due to forced resettlement
(continued)

168

World Water Development Report 3

PART

The Earth’s natural water cycles

Table 10.2

3

Definitions of key components of the land-based hydrologic cycle and examples of their
reconfiguration by humans (continued)

Water system
element

Space and time
variability

Typical roles in water
resources systems

Management challenges, vulnerabilities and
opportunities

Virtual water (not
an additional water
system element)

•

•

Water embodied in
production of goods and
services, typically with crops
traded on the international
market
Not explicitly recognized
as a water resources
management tool until
recently

•

Augmentation in waterscarce areas

•

Stable, but
linked to
fluctuations
in global
economy

•

Desalination

•

Stable

•

•

Can implicitly off-load water use requirements
from more water-poor to more water-rich
locations
Particularly important where rainfed agriculture
is restricted and irrigation relies on rapidly
depleting fossil groundwater sources

Costly, special use water supply; technologies
rapidly developing for cost-effectiveness

Source: Author’s compilation.

Map 10.1

Contrasts between geophysical and human-dimension perspectives on water, most
recent year available

Runoff
(millimetres a year)
Less than 0
0-10
10-50
50-100
100-250
250-500
500-750
750-1,000
More than 1,000

Population served by
source area runoff
(thousands per grid area)
0-10
10-50
50-100
100-500
500-1,000
More than 1,000
No people or no runoff

Note: The top map shows runoff-producing areas in absolute terms, with darker blue indicating areas that generate intense local-scale runoff. This is the traditional view of the global distribution of the renewable water resources base. The bottom map shows the importance of all of the world’s runoff-producing
areas, as measured by the human population served. Thus, runoff produced across a relatively unpopulated region like Amazonia, while a globally significant
source of water to the world’s oceans, is much less critical to the global water resources base than runoff produced across a region like South Asia.
Source: Vörösmarty, Leveque, and Revenga (2005), updated from Fekete, Vörösmarty, and Grabs (2002).

Water in a changing world

169

PART

3

Chapter 10T

The global
distribution of
freshwater must
be considered
together with
its accessibility

redistribution of water to oceans and
land masses. The position of mountain
ranges across the continents can be used
to divide the Earth into two domains –
exorheic zones, where water flows to the
oceans, and internally draining endorheic zones, many in the ‘rain shadow’
of the world’s main precipitation belts
(figure 10.1). Much of the endorheic land
is positioned mid-continent and distant
from the ocean, resulting in a characteristically dry environment. Here, 10%-15%
of the global land mass generates only 2%
of global renewable freshwater resources.
Mountain systems are important as the
world’s ‘water towers’ and generate a substantial share of the global water resources base for the billions of people who live
downstream. By contrast, the margins of
the continents (exorheic plains), because
of their intimate connection with oceanderived moisture, generate about half of
all renewable freshwater resources, collectively greater than all mountain water
towers. There are many concerns about
the impact of climate change on this
geography of precipitation and runoffproducing areas. 2
The global distribution of freshwater must
be considered together with its accessibility. With about 75% of total annual runoff
accessible to humans (see table 10.1) and
with slightly more than 80% of the world’s
population (4.9 billion people) served by
renewable and accessible water,3 almost
20% of people are unserved by naturally
occurring renewable resources and must

Figure 10.1

take their supply from ancient aquifers
(aquifer mining), interbasin transfers
and desalinized seawater. Except in the
exorheic mountain regions, where water is
relatively abundant, most of the population has only a small share of the global
freshwater resource. Using high resolution global maps of population and water
supply, a study showed that 85% of the
world’s population resides in the drier half
of the Earth.4 More than 1 billion people
living in arid and semi-arid parts of the
world have access to little or no renewable
water resources. However, there is still
uncertainty surrounding estimates of the
renewable supply, water use and derived
statistics (table 10.3; see also chapter 7).
There is great variation in flow reliability, with variability greatest in regions
with the lowest levels of runoff (the drier
regions; map 10.2). Patterns of reliable
monthly river flows also confirm the
sensitivity of arid and semi-arid regions,
defined from a hydrologic (local runoff
and river corridor supplies) rather than
a climatic (rainfall variability alone) perspective.5 This variability reduces projections of average annual GDP growth rates
by as much as 38%, and even a single
drought event within a 12-year period
can reduce growth rates over the period
by 10%. Flooding can also have devastating effects, particularly in areas with high
population density and without adequate
early warning and emergency response
systems (map 10.3). During 1992-2001
floods accounted for 43% of recorded

Distribution of global runoff to the oceans (exorheic) or internal receiving waters
(endorheic) and the corresponding distribution of contemporary population served

Exorheic

Endorheic

37,200 cubic kilometres a year

940 cubic kilometres a year
Mountains

Oceans

Plains

Hills

Plateaus

Plateaus

Hills

Area
(millions of square
kilometres)

63

11

14

28

6

Depth change
(millimetres a year)

293

445

153

424

86

Total resources
(thousands of cubic
kilometres a year)
Population served
(bilions)

2.5
38

0.4
102

Plains

9
35

18.4

4.9

2.1

11.8

0.5

0.09

0.04

0.3

3.3

0.8

0.4

1.5

0.2

0.03

0.02

0.2

Source: Updated from Vörösmarty and Meybeck (2004); land form categories from Meybeck, Green, and Vörösmarty (2001).

170

World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

The Earth’s natural water cycles
disasters and affected more than 1.2 billion people.6
People have responded to such variability
in the water cycle with investments in
engineered water stabilization, such as
reservoirs, interbasin transfers and deep
groundwater pumping. These stabilization arrangements bring new patterns of
hydrograph variability (see box 11.1 in
chapter 11). Figure 10.2 shows an example
of a typical effect of a series of river flow
regulations. While such changes may
stabilize flows and thus optimize water
availability for a variety of human uses,
they also create substantial distortions in
flows that stress downstream aquatic biota
(see chapter 9).7
A more stable and reliable source of
freshwater resides below ground. Groundwater reservoirs are recharged directly by
surplus rainfall percolating through soil
or indirectly by surface water losses to
the subsurface and infiltration of excess
irrigation water or water from other
uses. Approximately 90% of the world’s
groundwater discharge feeds into streams,
accounting for almost 30% of global
runoff.8 Most groundwater systems have
large storage volumes and high storage
to throughput ratios (known as residence
time, or average time that inflow volumes remain in storage). Because of these
characteristics, groundwater resources are

Map 10.2

Table 10.3

Indicative range of uncertainty in recent
assessments of renewable water supply, most
recent year available

Region
Asia
Former Soviet Union

Renewable water
supply (cubic
kilometres a year)

Mean water
crowding (people
per million cubic
metres a year)

7,850-9,700

320-384

3,900-5,900

48-74

11,160-18,900

25-42

300-367

920-1,300

Sub-Saharan Africa

3,500-4,815

115-160

Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development

7,900-12,100

114-129

38,600-42,600

133-150

Latin America
North Africa and Middle East

Global total

Note: Supply here refers to global total renewable runoff, both accessible and remote from
human population and croplands.
Source: The ranges reported here are from three global-scale water resources models,
two of which were used in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment: Vörösmarty, Federer, and
Schloss (1998); Fekete, Vörösmarty, and Grabs (2002) and Federer, Vörösmarty, and Fekete
(2003) for the Condition and Trends Working Group assessment and Alcamo et al. (2003)
and Döll, Kaspar, and Lehner (2003) for the Scenarios Working Group. A third model from
Dirmeyer, Gao, and Oki (2002) and Oki et al. (2003) was also compared.

much less affected by short-term fluctuations in climate than are surface water
resources (table 10.4). Groundwater reservoirs thus add persistency and stability
to the terrestrial hydrologic system and
enable humans, fauna and flora to survive
extended dry periods. This underlines the
potential of groundwater for coping with

Global variations in the relationship between low flows and mean flows (percentage
deviation of 1 in 10 year low flows relative to mean flows measured over 1961-90)

Percent
0-10
10-20
20-30
30-50
50-90
More than 90
No data

Source: Based on Döll, Kaspar, and Lehner 2003.

Water in a changing world

171

PART

3

Map 10.3

Chapter 10T
Impact of flood losses (comparative losses based on national GDP)

Risk deciles
1st-4th (low)
5th-7th (medium)
8th-10th (high)

Note: Deciles refer to the level of risk, normalized for comparing 10 categories.
Source: Based on Dilley et al. 2005.

Figure 10.2

Impact of the Davis Dam on the Colorado
River hydrograph

Cubic kilometres per second
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1 Jan 1906

2 Apr 1906

2 Jul 1906

1 Oct 1906

31 Dec 1906

2 Apr 1956

2 Jul 1956

1 Oct 1956

31 Dec 1956

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1 Jan 1956
120
100
80
60

20
2 Apr 2006

2 Jul 2006

1 Oct 2006

31 Dec 2006

Note: The dam was completed in 1950, has a maximum capacity of 2 cubic kilometres and
residence time change (average time that inflows remain in storage) of about 0.5 year.
Source: US Geological Survey station records.

172

Recent estimates put the mean renewable groundwater resource at 2,091 cubic
metres per person a year, or about a
third of total renewable resources per
capita.9 Although groundwater systems
are often highly localized, groundwater
clearly makes a substantial contribution
to the water resources base, constituting
20%-50% of municipal water supply.10 As
much as 60% of groundwater withdrawal
is used to irrigate crops in arid and semiarid regions. Information on groundwater
storage is scarce and not very accurate
because of the enormous effort and cost
required to explore and assess groundwater reservoirs. The geographic distribution of long-term average diffuse groundwater recharge and of the known larger
groundwater reservoirs are in maps 10.4
and 10.5.

Relationship of water to global
biogeochemical cycles

40

0
1 Jan 2006

increasing water scarcity due to climate
change. At the same time, because of the
strong interdependence between groundwater and surface water, the overall resource is difficult to quantify, and there is
a risk of double counting available water
resources.

A growing body of evidence indicates that
human activities are affecting river water
chemistry on a global scale. It is estimated
that less than 20% of the world’s drainage basins exhibit nearly pristine water
quality and that the riverine transport of
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

The Earth’s natural water cycles
inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus has
increased severalfold over the last 150200 years.11 Monitoring and analysis are
needed to understand the effects of these
changes on water resources, but observed
information is lacking (see chapter 13),
and much of our understanding is based
on modelling and inferences.

Water as the conveyor for
particulates and dissolved materials,
linking land, ocean and atmosphere
Water mobilizes and transports materials
essential for life in terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. For example, nitrogen, phosphorus and silica are important nutrients
that limit maximum plant and algal biomass, while organic carbon from land is an
important energy source in downstream
freshwater and marine systems. Water also
transports natural materials that directly
influence the health of organisms (for example, through conductivity and pH) and
habitat structure (for example, through
sediments). Under natural conditions these
materials originate in atmospheric transport and deposition, biologic activity and
erosion or weathering from bedrock and
soils. Multiple human activities lead to
additional sources of such elements (figure
10.3) as well as to material not naturally
present in water, such as pesticides and
synthetic chemicals that can mimic or
block hormones and their natural functions (‘endocrine disrupters’) (see section on water pollution as a constraint to
supply).

Map 10.4

Table 10.4

Estimated mean residence times (storage to
throughput) and stored water volumes of the
main components of the Earth’s hydrosphere
Total water
stored
(thousands
of cubic
kilometres)

Freshwater
stored
(thousands
of cubic
kilometres)

Component

Mean
residence
time

Permafrost zone,
ground ice

10,000 years

300

300

Polar ice

9,700 years

24,023

24,023

1,338,000

Oceans

2,500 years

Mountain glaciers

1,600 years

Groundwater (excluding
Antarctica)

1,400 years

Lakes

17 years

40.6
23,400
176.4

na
40.6
10,530
91.0

Swamps

5 years

11.5

11.5

Soil moisture

1 year

16.5

16.5

Streams

16 days

2.1

2.1

Atmosphere

8 days

12.9

12.9

Biosphere

Several hours

11.2

11.2

Total

1,385,985

35,029

na is not applicable.
Note: Components may not sum to total because of rounding. Reservoirs of water that respond slowly to change have long residence times. The atmosphere exhibits huge variability,
its dynamics changing over very short space and time scales, whereas permafrost is sluggish
and would be expected to respond slowly to forced changes such as those associated with
global warming. Residence time also has an enormous impact on water quality. Streams and
river waters, with their generally short residence times, are able to respond relatively quickly
to pollution control measures, whereas groundwater can remain polluted – and taken out of
the resource supply pool – for centuries unless costly remediation measures are applied.
Source: Based on Shiklomanov and Rodda 2003.

Rivers have traditionally been considered
simple transporters of materials, but it is
increasingly acknowledged that chemical

Patterns of long-term average diffuse groundwater recharge, 1961-90

Millimetres a year
0-2
2-20
20-100
100-300
300-1,000

Source: Based on Döll and Fiedler 2007.

Water in a changing world

173

PART

3

Chapter 10T

Map 10.5

Global groundwater recharge, most recent year available

Millimetres a year
In major groundwater basins
More than 300
100-300
20-100
2-20
Less than 2
In areas with complex
hydrogeological structure
More than 300
100-300
20-100
Less than 20
In areas with local and shallow aquifers
More than 100
Less than 100
No data

Source: Based on WHYMAP 2008.

Figure 10.3

Human activities are sources for dissolved inorganic nitrogen, organic nitrogen,
inorganic phosphorus and organic phosphorus in coastal zones

Inorganic nitrogen

Organic nitrogen
Anthropogenic
point sources 2%

Natural
nitrogen
fixation
36%

Anthropogenic
diffuse sources
62%

Anthropogenic
point sources 3%
Anthropogenic
diffuse sources
11%

Non-anthropogenic sources
86%

Inorganic phosphorus

Organic phosphorus
Anthropogenic
point sources 2%

Anthropogenic
diffuse sources
4%

Anthropogenic
diffuse sources
17%
Phosphorus
weathering
35%

Anthropogenic
point sources
61%

Non-anthropogenic sources
81%

Note: Human activity dominates among the inorganic source terms.
Source: Seitzinger et al. 2005.

and biochemical transformations occurring during water transit through basins
can have important influences on materials transport and pollutant loads.12 The
quantity and timing of water flows influence the mobility of pollutant sources and
their dilution potential.
174

Spatial heterogeneity in global
patterns of water quality
Making broad statements about water
quality is difficult because of spatial and
temporal biogeochemical complexity as
well as definitional problems and incomplete monitoring (see chapter 13). The
World Water Development Report 3

PART

The Earth’s natural water cycles
multiple factors that influence material
fluxes through aquatic systems (sources,
hydrology, geomorphology and biology)
suggest an inherent complexity in characterizing water quality at regional and
global scales. Uncertainties are associated
with each factor.
The situation is exacerbated by the uneven
distribution over space and time of field
observations of material fluxes and water
quality. The European Union and the
United States have relatively high densities of water quality measurement stations,
while the rest of the world has a much
sparser set of stations, with low frequency
of sampling and observations over shorter
periods.
Observations over short periods can fail
to capture changes in human activities across the multiple time scales over
which hydrologic variability occurs – from
individual storms to seasonal, annual
and multidecadal cycles. This variability
is also expressed spatially, influencing
the development of source and reactivity
hot spots (such as erosion and wetland
development). This interaction can make it
difficult to attribute changes to anthropogenic or natural phenomena.

Humans are accelerating – and
decelerating – the constituent cycles
Human pressures have greatly modified
the behaviour of both hydrology and
constituent transports, particularly over
the last century.13 This will likely remain
true well into the future, but the direction
of the evolution of these transports, and so
the quality of inland water, is a complex
function of four major changes that must
be considered simultaneously:
•

Human activities have greatly accelerated the biogeochemical cycles
and the global transfer of materials,
including sediment from increased
erosion associated with poor land
management, construction and other
activities.

•

Fluvial system filters have been greatly
modified and in the case of artificial
impoundments have increased in
importance.

•

River water discharge to oceans is
controlled and reduced by water engineering and irrigation, with irretrievable losses on the order of 200 cubic
kilometres (km3) a year for reservoir
evaporation and 2,000 km3 a year for
agriculture.14

Water in a changing world

•

New and esoteric engineered compounds, many long-lived, are appearing in waterways. We have simultaneously increased and decreased the
levels of various constituents in our
waterways, but the exact nature of the
acceleration or deceleration is complex
and ambiguous.

Human population and economic growth
lead to increased demand for land and
commodities for food production, housing
and fuel (see chapters 2 and 4). The natural capacity for land to support human
populations is insufficient, so people
enhance food production with fertilizer
and intensive agriculture.15 Agricultural
activities are also accelerating the elemental cycles of nitrogen and phosphorus,
since more must be added to the landscape
in biologically usable forms. Globally,
nitrogen inputs have more than doubled,
with similar increases in transport to the
ocean.16 Similar results have been documented for phosphorus.17

3

Human pressures
have greatly
modified the
behaviour of
both hydrology
and constituent
transports,
particularly over
the last century

Changes in hydrologic factors associated
with human activity have unintentionally
exacerbated other changes related to land
use. Erosion associated with changes in
land use is increasing sediment delivery to
aquatic systems, but much of this material
is captured by increased reservoir capacity,
with only a small net change at the basin
mouth.18 A third of sediment destined for
coastal zones no longer arrives because of
sediment trapping and water diversion,19
resulting in a net increase in erosion of
deltas and other sensitive coastal settings
that require a steady supply of land-derived sediment.20 Reservoir construction
appears to have attenuated silica, nitrogen
and phosphorus fluxes, though the role appears to be less than for sediments.21
Net increases in nutrient loads (particularly nitrogen and phosphorus) have
resulted in the eutrophication (excessive
plant growth and decay) of lakes, rivers
and receiving coastal waters and subsequent degradation of ecosystems, fisheries
and human health. Anoxic dead zones
result from excess nutrient inputs from
agriculture, as from the Mississippi River
basin into the Gulf of Mexico22 and from
the Yangtze River plume.23 Alterations
to inputs and ‘fluvial filters’ of nutrients
(nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon) are changing elemental ratios in freshwater and
downstream coastal waters. In addition, as
different nutrient forms (such as organic
and inorganic nitrogen) are shown to have
contrasting watershed sources and human
pressures, ratios among nutrient forms
175

PART

3

Chapter 10T

New modelling
approaches
now include
mechanisms that
hold promise
for predicting
global patterns
of water quality

Figure 10.4

may also be changing.24 Shifting nutrient
ratios alter the composition of biological assemblages in freshwater and coastal
systems, including the occurrence and
recurrence of harmful algal blooms.25

Recent progress in describing
patterns in global water quality
Despite limitations in characterizing
human processes that determine the
chemical characteristics of freshwater
resources, syntheses of river observations
and process studies have substantially advanced our ability to quantify the transformation of watershed-derived inputs
into river loads and exports to coastal
zones.26 Recent models predict mean annual nutrient status based on geospatial
datasets defining watershed inputs (natural and human), hydrologic and physical
properties and biological processing potentials within rivers. They rely on global
calibration of basin-scale parameters with
river mouth observations to provide a
consistent, spatially explicit picture of
worldwide nutrient exports to coastal
zones. Submodels of Global-NEWS (Nutrient Export from Watersheds), organized
under the United Nations Educational,

The spatial distribution of surface area and
nitrogen inputs and removal by types of
water bodies differ by latitude, most recent
year available

Surface area (thousands of square kilometers)
200
Lake

150
100
50

Large river
Small river

Reservoir

0
-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

80

Latitude
Flux (millions of kilograms a year)
3,200
Aquatic N load

2,400
1,600
Large river

800
0
-60

-40

-20

0

20
Latitude

Source: Based on Wollheim et al. 2008.

176

40

60

Recently developed spatially distributed,
mechanistic models of nutrient fluxes
through river systems have been applied
to numerous basins and are important for
understanding the mechanisms controlling material fluxes.28 Such efforts have
also been applied globally to integrate spatially distributed controlling mechanisms.
For example, global terrestrial nitrogen
models now account for within-basin patterns of nitrogen loading, hydrologic conditions, land surface characteristics and
ecosystem processes to predict nitrogen
export fluxes.29
Recently, a spatially distributed modelling approach was applied to global inland
aquatic systems to estimate the relative
importance of small rivers, large rivers,
lakes and reservoirs in the global aquatic
nitrogen cycle by integrating the spatial
distribution of inputs from land, discharge
conditions, network geomorphology,
position of various water bodies and rates
of biological activity (figure 10.4). The relative importance of different types of water
bodies varies with latitude because of the
distribution of channel bottom surface
area relative to the position of nitrogen
inputs, which are increasingly determined
by human inputs of fertilizers, sewage and
animal wastes and by atmospheric deposition.30 These approaches now include
key mechanisms that hold promise for
predicting global patterns of water quality
and thus of water supply compromised by
pollution, changes in runoff and streamflow, runoff variability, temperature and
hydraulic modification.

Water pollution as a constraint on
water supply

Lake

Small river

Reservoir

Scientific and Cultural Organization’s
Intergovernmental Oceanic Commission,
apply a consistent framework and datasets
to calculate river exports of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus (dissolved and particulate, inorganic and organic), enabling
an integrated assessment of impacts of a
range of human pressures on receiving
waters.27 But such models are static and
have limited process representation, so
they are unable to account for variability
over relatively short time scales (less than
1 month), which is critical in characterizing water quality.

80

Good water quality is important to human
health and the health of aquatic ecosystems. Increasing pressures from development lead to deteriorating surface water
and groundwater quality (table 10.5),
rising human health challenges, growing requirements for water treatment and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

The Earth’s natural water cycles
greater likelihood of deteriorating ecosystem function.31 Pollutants (including
excess nutrients) may be retained in soils,
aquifers and aquatic sediments for extended periods. This persistence can lead to
continued mobilization long after human
inputs have been suppressed or when affected sediments are later disturbed.32
Humans have long relied on dilution and
transport by aquatic systems to manage
pollution – and the water quality of freshwater resources. In some cases aquatic
systems permanently remove pollutants to
the atmosphere, as in the denitrification
of excess nitrogen. These are important
ecosystem services that depend on characteristics of the water cycle. Changes in
the water cycle will lead to changes in the
capacity of natural ecosystems to provide
these services.33 Because aquatic systems
are highly connected, local changes in
aquatic ecosystem services often cause
impacts far downstream (see chapter 8).
Pollutants can be categorized as those that
directly affect human health and those
that affect ecosystems. Pollutants affecting human health include fæcal coliform

Table 10.5

contamination, residual pesticides and
metals. Examples include contamination
of groundwater by arsenic in Bangladesh34
(see box 8.3 in chapter 8) and by mercury
in the northeastern United States35 and
nitrogen in drinking water supplies (see
chapter 6).36

Good water quality
is important to
human health
and the health of
aquatic ecosystems

In developed countries many pollution issues have been addressed and ameliorated
over the last 40 years, especially those pertaining to point sources. But in developing
countries pollution remains among the
most important water resources problems.
These include lack of sewage treatment
and point source controls and contamination with pathogens, combined with poor
access to clean water.37 In developed countries non-point-source pollution remains a
critical issue, in part because management
requires multijurisdictional approaches
that make implementation difficult. But
successful policies addressing acidification
of surface water by atmospheric deposition
in Europe and North America are leading
to the recovery of many surface waters
from acidification, providing a hopeful
model for multijurisdictional landscape
management.38

Principal symptoms of human-river system interactions and human pressures on water use

Symptoms

Land use
change

Organic matter
Salts

Mining and
smelting

Industrial
transformation

Urbanization

Reservoirs

Irrigation

Other water
management

+

+++

+––

–

+

+++

+

+

+

+++

++

+

+

++

++

++–
+

Acids
Direct inputs
Atmospheric changes
Metal
Direct inputs

++

++

+

Atmospheric
inputs changes

+++

++

+

Historical

+++

+

+

–––

++

+

+

–––

-

+

++

––

+–

+++

+

+

––

Total suspended solids

+++

Nutrients

+++

Water-borne diseases

+–

–––

+

Persistent organic pollutants
Direct inputs
Atmospheric inputs

++

++

++

+

+

+

+++

++

–

+

–

–––

×

×××

×

×

××

×××

×

×××

Historical
Mean runoff

+–

Flow regime

×

Aquatic habitat changes

×

××

Note: Amplitude of change ranges from + to + + + (increase) and – to – – – (decrease). The × symbols refer to magnitude of change without an indication
of direction.
Source: From Meybeck 2003.

Water in a changing world

177

PART

3

Chapter 10T

Notes

References

1.

Postel, Daily, and Ehrlich 1996.

2.

IPCC 2007.

3.

Vörösmarty, Leveque, and Revenga
2005.

4.

Vörösmarty, Leveque, and Revenga
2005.

Alcamo, J., P. Döll, T. Henrichs, F. Kaspar,
B. Lehner, T. Rösche, and S. Siebert.
2003. Global Estimates of Water Withdrawals and Availability under Current
and Future ‘‘Business-As-Usual’’ Conditions. Hydrological Sciences Journal 48 (3):
339-48.

5.

Vörösmarty et al. 2005.

6.

CRED 2002.

7.

Olden and Poff 2003.

8.

Margat 2008.

9.

Döll and Fiedler 2007; Vörösmarty,
Leveque, and Revenga 2005.

10. Morris et al. 2003; Zekster and Margat
2003.
11. Vörösmarty and Meybeck 2004.
12. Seitzinger et al. 2006; Cole et al. 2007;
Battin et al. 2008.
13. Meybeck and Vörösmarty 2005.
14. Shiklomanov and Rodda 2003.
15. Imhoff et al. 2004; Haberl et al. 2007.
16. Green et al. 2004; Bouwman et al. 2005.
17. Harrison, Caraco, and Seitzinger 2005;
Seitzinger et al., 2005.
18. Syvitski et al. 2005.
19. Vörösmarty et al. 2003.
20. Ericson et al. 2006.
21. Dumont et al. 2005; Harrison et al.
2005.
22. Rabalais et al. 2007.
23. Wang 2006.
24. Seitzinger et al. 2005.
25. Wang 2006.
26. Seitzinger et al. 2006; Seitzinger et al.
2005; Cole et al. 2007; Green et al.
2004; Boyer et al. 2006; Smith et al.
2003; Wollheim et al. 2008.
27. See Seitzinger et al. 2005 and recent
special issue of Global Biogeochemical
Cycles.
28. Ball and Trudgill 1995; Lunn et al. 1996;
Alexander et al. 2002.
29. Bouwman et al. 2005.
30. Wollheim et al. 2008.
31. MEA 2005.
32. Meybeck 2003; Meybeck and Vörösmarty 2005.
33. Hinga and Batchelor 2005.
34. Mukherjee et al. 2006.
35. Driscoll et al. 2007.
36. Townsend et al. 2003.
37. WHO/UNICEF 2004.
38. Driscoll et al. 2003; Warby, Johnson,
and Driscoll 2005.

178

Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 4
(6): 4069–4124.
Döll, P., F. Kaspar, and B. Lehner. 2003. A
Global Hydrological Model for Deriving
Water Availability Indicators: Model Tuning and Validation. Journal of Hydrology
270 (1): 105–134.

Alexander, R. B, P. J. Johnes, E. W. Boyer,
and R. A. Smith. 2002. A Comparison of
Models for Estimating the Riverine Export
of Nitrogen from Large Watersheds.
Biogeochemistry 57/58: 295-339.

Driscoll, C. T., Y. J. Han, C. Y. Chen, D. C.
Evers, K. F. Lambert, T. M. Holsen, N.
C. Kamman, and R. K. Munson. 2007.
Mercury Contamination in Forest and
Freshwater Ecosystems in the Northeastern United States. BioScience 57 (1):
17-28.

Ball, J., and S. T. Trudgill. 1995. Overview
of Solute Modeling. In Solute Modelling
in Catchment Systems, ed. S. T. Trudgill.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Battin, T. J., L. A. Kaplan, S. Findlay, C. S.
Hopkinson, E. Marti, A. I. Packman,
J. D. Newbold, and F. Sabater. 2008.
Biophysical Controls on Organic Carbon
Fluxes in Fluvial Networks. Nature Geosciences 1 (2): 95-100.

Dumont, E., J. A. Harrison, C. Kroeze, E.
J. Bakker, and S. P. Seitzinger. 2005.
Global Distribution and Sources of
Dissolved Inorganic Nitrogen Export
to the Coastal Zone: Results from a
Spatially Explicit, Global Model. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles 19, GB4S02,
doi:10.1029/2005GB002488.

Bouwman, A. F., G. Van Drecht, J. M.
Knoop, A. H. W. Beusen, and C. R. Meinardi. 2005. Exploring Changes in River
Nitrogen Export to the World’s Oceans.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 19, GB1002,
doi:10.1029/2004GB002314.

Ericson, J. P., C. J. Vörösmarty, S. L. Dingman, L. G. Ward, and M. Meybeck.
2006. Effective Sea-Level Rise in Deltas:
Causes of Change and Human-Dimension Implications. Global & Planetary
Change 50 (1): 63-82.

Boyer, E. W., R. W. Howarth, J. N. Galloway, F. J. Dentener, P. A. Green, and C.
J. Vörösmarty. 2006. Riverine Nitrogen Export from the Continents to the
Coasts. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 20,
GB1S91, doi:10.1029/2005GB002537.
Cole, J. J., Y. T. Prairie, N. F. Caraco, W. H.
McDowell, L. J. Tranvik, R. G. Striegl, C.
M. Duarte, P. Kortelainen, J. A. Downing, J. J. Middelburg, and J. Melack.
2007. Plumbing the Global Carbon
Cycle: Integrating Inland Waters into the
Terrestrial Carbon Budget. Ecosystems 10
(1): 171-84.
CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters). 2002. EM-DAT:
Emergency Events Database. www.cred.
be/emdat.
Dilley, M., R. S. Chen, U. Deichmann, A. L.
Lerner-Lam, M. Arnold, with J. Agwes,
P. Buys, O. Kjekstad, B. Lyon, and G.
Yetman. 2005. Natural Disaster Hotspots:
A Global Risk Analysis: Synthesis Report.
New York: Columbia University.
Dirmeyer, P., X. Gao, and T. Oki. 2002.
GSWP-2: The Second Global Soil Wetness
Project Science and Implementation Plan.
IGPO Publication Series No. 37, International GEWEX (Global Energy and Water
Cycle Experiment) Project Office.
Döll, P., and K. Fiedler. 2007. Global-Scale
Modelling of Groundwater Recharge.

Driscoll, C. T., K. M. Driscoll, K. M. Roy,
and M. J. Mitchell. 2003. Chemical
Response of Lakes in the Adirondack
Region of New York to Declines in Acidic
Deposition. Environmental Science and
Technology 37: 2036-42.

Federer, C. A., C. J. Vörösmarty, and B.
Fekete. 2003. Sensitivity of Annual
Evaporation to Soil and Root Properties
in Two Models of Contrasting Complexity. Journal of Hydrometeorology 4 (1):
1276-90.
Fekete, B. M., C. J. Vörösmarty, and W.
Grabs. 2002. High Resolution Fields
of Global Runoff Combining Observed
River Discharge and Simulated Water Balances. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 6 (3),
doi:10.1029/1999GB001254.
Green, P. A., C. J. Vörösmarty, M. Meybeck, J. N. Galloway, B. J. Peterson,
and E. W. Boyer. 2004. Pre-Industrial
and Contemporary Fluxes of Nitrogen
through Rivers: A Global Assessment
Based on Typology. Biogeochemistry 68
(1): 71-105.
Haberl, H., K. H. Erb, F. Krausmann, V.
Gaube, A. Bondeau, C. Plutzar, S.
Gingrich, W. Lucht, and M. FischerKowalski. 2007. Quantifying and Mapping the Human Appropriation of Net
Primary Production in Earth’s Terrestrial
Ecosystems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 104:12942-45.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

The Earth’s natural water cycles

Harrison, J. A., N. Caraco, and S. P.
Seitzinger. 2005. Global Patterns and
Sources of Dissolved Organic Matter
Export to the Coastal Zone: Results
from a Spatially Explicit Global Model.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 19, doi
10.1029/2005gb002480.
Harrison, J. A., S. P. Seitzinger, A. F.
Bouwman, N. F. Caraco, A. H. W.
Beusen, and C. J. Vörösmarty. 2005.
Dissolved Inorganic Phosphorus Export
to the Coastal Zone: Results from a
Spatially Explicit, Global Model. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles 19, GB4S03,
doi:10.1029/2004GB002357.
Hinga, K. R., and A. Batchelor. 2005. Waste
Detoxification. In Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, Volume 1: Conditions and
Trends Working Group Report, ed., R. Hassan, R. Scholes, and N. Ash. Washington,
DC: Island Press.
Imhoff, M. L., L. Bounoua, T. Ricketts, C.
Loucks, R. Harriss, and W. T. Lawrence. 2004. Global Patterns in Human
Consumption of Net Primary Production.
Nature 429 (6994): 870-73.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007. Climate Change
2007: The Physical Science Basis. Summary
for Policymakers. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, ed., S. Solomon, D.
Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. L. Miller.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Lunn, R. J., R. Adams, R. Mackay, and S.
M. Dunn. 1996. Development and Application of a Nitrogen Modeling System
for Large Catchments. Journal of Hydrology 174 (1): 285-304.
Margat, J. 2008. Les Eaux Souterraines: Une
Richesse Mondial. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment).
2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being:
Wetlands and Water Synthesis. Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.
Meybeck, M. 2003. Global Analysis of River
Systems: From Earth System Controls to
Anthropocene Syndromes. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B 358: 1,935-55.
Meybeck, M., P. Green, and C. J. Vörösmarty. 2001. A New Typology for
Mountains and Other Relief Classes: An
Application to Global Continental Water
Resources and Population Distribution.
Mountain Research and Development 21
(1): 34-45.

Water in a changing world

Meybeck, M., and C. J. Vörösmarty. 2005.
Fluvial Filtering of Land-to-Ocean Fluxes:
From Natural Holocene Variations to Anthropocene. Comptes Rendus Geoscience
337: 107-23.
Morris, B. L, A. R. Lawrence, P. J. Chilton,
B. Adams, R. Calow, and B. A. Klinck.
2003. Groundwater and Its Susceptibility
to Degradation: A Global Assessment of
the Problem and Options for Management. Early Warning and Assessment
Reports Series, RS.03–3, United Nations
Environment Programme, Nairobi,
Kenya.
Mukherjee, A., M. K. Sengupta, M. A.
Hossain, S. Ahamed, B. Das, B. Nayak,
D. Lodh, M. M. Rahman, and D.
Chakraborti. 2006. Arsenic Contamination in Groundwater: A Global Perspective with Emphasis on the Asian Scenario.
Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition
24 (2): 142-63.
Oki, T., Y. Agata, S. Kanae, T. Saruhashi,
and T. Musiake. 2003. Global Water
Resources Assessment under Climatic
Change in 2050 Using TRIP. IAHS Publication 280: 124–33.
Olden, J. D., and N. L. Poff. 2003. Redundancy and the Choice of Hydrologic
Indices for Characterizing Streamflow
Regimes. River Research and Applications
19: 101-21.
Postel, S. L, G. C. Daily, and P. R. Ehrlich.
1996. Human Appropriation of Renewable Fresh Water. Science 271: 785-88.
Rabalais, N. N., R. E. Turner, B. K. Sen
Gupta, E. Platon, and M. L. Parsons.
2007. Sediments Tell the History of
Eutro­phication and Hypoxia in the
Northern Gulf of Mexico. Ecological Applications 17: S129-S143.
Seitzinger, S., J. A. Harrison, J. K. Bohlke,
A. F. Bouwman, R. Lowrance, B. J.
Peterson, C. R. Tobias, and G. van
Drecht. 2006. Denitrification across
Landscapes and Waterscapes: A Synthesis. Ecological Applications 6: 1051-76.
Seitzinger, S. P., J. A. Harrison, E. Dumont,
A. H. W. Beusen, and A. F. Bouwman.
2005. Sources and Delivery of Carbon,
Nitrogen, and Phosphorus to the Coastal
Zone: An Overview of Global Nutrient Export from Watersheds (NEWS)
models and their application. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles 19: GB4S01,
doi:10.1029/2005GB002606.
Shiklomanov, I. A., and J. Rodda, eds.
2003. World Water Resources at the Beginning of the 21st Century. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, S.V., D. Swaney, L. TalaueMcManus, J. Bartley, P. Sandhei, C.

3

McLacghlin, V. Dupra, C. Crossland,
R. Buddemeier, B. Maxwell, and F.
Wulff. 2003. Humans, Hydrology, and
the Distribution of Inorganic Nutrient
Loading to the Ocean. BioScience 53
(3): 235-45.
Syvitski, J. P. M., C. J. Vörösmarty, A. J.
Kettner, and P. Green. 2005. Impact
of Humans on the Flux of Terrestrial
Sediment to the Global Coastal Ocean.
Science 308 (5720): 376-80.
Townsend, A. R., R. W. Howarth, F. A. Bazzaz, M. S. Booth, C. C. Cleveland, S. K.
Collinge, A. P. Dobson, P. R. Epstein,
D. R. Keeney, M. A. Mallin, C. A. Rogers, P. Wayne, and A. H. Wolfe. 2003.
Human Health Effects of a Changing
Global Nitrogen Cycle. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 1: 240-46.
Vörösmarty, C. J., E. M. Douglas, P. A.
Green, and C. Revenga. 2005. Geospatial Indicators of Emerging Water Stress:
An Application to Africa. Ambio 34:
230-36.
Vörösmarty, C. J., C. A. Federer, and A.
Schloss. 1998. Potential Evaporation
Functions Compared on U.S. Watersheds: Implications for Global-Scale
Water Balance and Terrestrial Ecosystem
Modeling. Journal of Hydrology 207 (3-4):
147-69.
Vörösmarty, C. J., C. Leveque, and C. Revenga. 2005. Fresh Water. In Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, Volume 1, Conditions and Trends Working Group Report.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
Vörösmarty, C. J., M. Meybeck, B. Fekete,
K. Sharma, P. Green, and J. Syvitski. 2003. Anthropogenic Sediment
Retention: Major Global Impact from
Registered Impoundments. Global and
Planetary Change 39 (1-2): 169-190.
Vörösmarty, C. J., and M. Meybeck.
2004. Responses of Continental Aquatic
Systems at the Global Scale: New
Paradigms, New Methods. In Vegetation,
Water, Humans and the Climate, ed., P.
Kabat, M. Claussen, P. A. Dirmeyer, J. H.
C. Gash, L. Bravo de Guenni, M. Meybeck, R. A. Pielke Sr., C. J. Vörösmarty, R.
W. A. Hutjes, and S. Lutkemeier. Berlin:
Springer.
Wang, B. D. 2006. Cultural Eutrophication in the Changjiang (Yangtze
River) Plume: History and Perspective.
Estuarine Coastal and Shelf Science 69:
471-77.
Warby, R. A. F., C. E. Johnson, and C.
T. Driscoll. 2005. Chemical Recovery
of Surface Waters across the Northeastern United States from Reduced
Inputs of Acidic Deposition: 1984-2001.

179

PART

3

Chapter 10T

Environmental Science & Technology 39
(17): 6,548-54.
WHO (World Health Organization)/
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s
Fund). 2004. Meeting the MDG Drinking
Water and Sanitation Target: A Mid-term
Assessment of Progress. Geneva: World
Health Organization and New York:
United Nations Children’s Fund.

180

WHYMAP. 2008. Groundwater Resources
of the World. Hannover: BRG and Paris:
United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization.
Wollheim, W. M., C. J. Vörösmarty, A.
F. Bouwman, P. A. Green, J. Harrison, E. Linder, B. J. Peterson, S.
Seitzinger, and J. P. M. Syvitski.
2008. Global N Removal by Freshwater Aquatic Systems: A Spatially

Distributed, within-Basin Approach. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 22, GB2026,
doi:10.1029/2007GB002963.
Zektser, I., and J. Margat. 2003.
Groundwater Resources of the World
and Their Use. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization–­International Hydrological Programme.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

The Earth’s natural water cycles

Chapter 11

3

Changes in the
global water cycle
Author: Dennis P. Lettenmaier
Contributors: Vladimir Aizen, Abou Amani, Theodore Bohn, Filippo Giorgi, Stephan Harrison,
Tom Huntington, Rick Lawford, Peter Letitre, Harry Lins, Jun Magomi, Gi-Kyun Park, Igor
Severskiy, W. James Shuttleworth, Pratap Singh, Soroosh Sorooshian, Willi Struckmeier,
Kuni Takeuchi, Lena Tallaksen, Charles Vörösmarty, Tandorig Yan and Tinjun Zhang
Coordinator: Andras Szöllösi-Nagy (UNESCO)
Facilitator: Denis Hughes

Key messages
Among the consequences of a changing hydrologic cycle is its
interaction with the terrestrial carbon cycle. The terrestrial biosphere may have taken up roughly 25% of anthropogenic carbon emissions during the last century; it is unclear how long
this can continue.
Most climate scientists agree that global warming will result in
an intensification, acceleration or enhancement of the global
hydrologic cycle, and there is some observational evidence that
this is already happening.
It is increasingly clear that the assumption of statistical stationarity is no longer a defensible basis for water planning.
Water is essential to life, sustainable
economic growth and the functioning
of ecosystems. These are all affected by
variations in water storage and fluxes at
the land surface – storage in soil moisture
and groundwater, snow, and surface water
in lakes, wetlands and reservoirs – and
precipitation, runoff and evaporative
fluxes to and from the land surface. Water
planners have generally seen these key
elements in the land surface water cycle as
at least approximately statistically stationary, their challenge being to characterize
and buffer against natural variability. Over
the last several decades, however, studies
of changes in streamflow, snowpack and
evapotranspiration have made it increasingly clear that the assumption of statistical stationarity is no longer defensible.
Arguing that ‘stationarity is dead’, at least
for water planning, some researchers are
making the case for a new initiative in
water management to deal with non­stationarity problems.1 Meeting this challenge requires understanding the nature of
observed changes in the land surface water
cycle – the objective of this chapter.
Water in a changing world

Changes in the water cycle
This section reviews current knowledge
about changes in the land surface water
cycle, both in surface fluxes (precipitation
and evapotranspiration) and storage (soil
moisture, groundwater, and lakes and reservoirs). It also discusses interactions between
the water and carbon cycles as well as some
aspects of current hydrologic observations.

Observed trends in precipitation
Contributors: Filippo Giorgi with Abou Amani
Precipitation is a key component of the
Earth’s hydrologic cycle and one of the most
difficult to observe and model accurately. It
is determined by large-scale processes (such
as the location of major storm tracks) as well
as local processes (such as topographical
uplift) and therefore exhibits pronounced
variability at a wide range of spatial and
temporal scales. In addition, the mode of
precipitation – its frequency, intensity and
occurrence in liquid or solid form – is often
more important than the total amount
in affecting the hydrologic cycle and the
181

PART

3

Chapter 11C

observations
of precipitation
do not show a
continuous trend
throughout the
century but rather
variable trends at
multidecadal scales

human and natural systems that depend on
it (see chapter 7 for the implications of climate change and changes in the hydrologic
cycle on uncertainty in agriculture).
Another critical problem is that precipitation observations can be subject to
considerable measurement error. Measurement station densities in many mountainous regions and remote areas are low and
uneven, precluding proper estimates of
regionally averaged values. While remotely
sensed measurements offer a global and
regularly spaced picture, they are based on
uncertain conversions of radiometric data
into precipitation rates. Furthermore, precipitation variability at multidecadal scales
can mask long-term trends. Because this
variability increases as the spatial scale
decreases, identifying regional and local
trends is especially difficult.2
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change recently completed a thorough

Map 11.1

assessment of observed precipitation trends
in the 20th century at global and regional
scales based on six station and satellite observation datasets.3 Over global land areas
precipitation shows an increasing trend
superimposed on large interdecadal oscillations from the beginning of the century
to the 1950s.4 This is followed by a decreasing trend until the end of the century,
still superimposed on large interdecadal
variability. In other words, observations
of precipitation do not show a continuous
trend throughout the century but rather
variable trends at multidecadal scales.
Map 11.1 shows the geographic distribution of annual precipitation for 1901-2005
and 1979-2005. During the second period
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions
are estimated to be dominant in determining global warming.5 The two precipitation patterns differ greatly due to the
large multidecadal variability of regional
precipitation.

Trend in annual precipitation rate, 1901-2005 and 1979-2005

Trend in annual
precipitation, 1901-2005
(percent per century)
-100 to -80
-80 to -60
-60 to -40
-40 to -20
-20 to -5
-5 to 5
5 to 20
20 to 40
40 to 60
60 to 100
No data

Trend in annual
precipitation, 1979-2005
(percent per decade)
-100 to -60
-60 to -45
-45 to -30
-30 to -15
-15 to -3
-3 to 3
3 to 15
15 to 30
30 to 45
No data

+ is a trend that is statistically significant at the 5% level.
Source: IPCC 2007, chapter 3.

182

World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

Changes in the global water cycle
The most striking example of this difference is the Sahel region in Africa, where
the 1901-2005 trend is negative, but the
1979-2005 trend is positive. One study
finds large multidecadal fluctuations in
annual rainfall anomalies for the Sahel for
1895-2000, with largely positive anomalies
for 1925-70 and pronounced drought conditions for 1970-2000.6 In addition, while
the precipitation trend between 1901
and 2000 is negative, after about 1985 it
becomes positive. This example illustrates
the difficulty of identifying long-term
changes in precipitation trends, especially
at the regional scale.
During 1901-2005 there were positive
precipitation trends over eastern North
America, southern South America, Northern Europe, Central Asia and Western
Australia and negative trends over the
Sahel, Southern Africa, the Mediterranean
and Southern Asia (see map 11.1). During 1979-2005 additional negative trends

Map 11.2

emerged, such as over portions of the western United States, northwestern India and
Pakistan; however, the precipitation trends
are generally noisy.
Variables that integrate components of the
hydrologic cycle may be more indicative
for identifying precipitation trends. An
example is the Palmer Drought Severity
Index (PDSI), an index of drought that
measures the cumulative deficit in soil
moisture derived from precipitation and
temperature budgets. Positive values imply
more severe drought conditions. Map 11.2
shows that the PDSI has increased globally
during the 20th century but that geographic variability in the PDSI trend became more pronounced. Areas increasingly
subject to more severe drought conditions
include the Sahel and West Africa, Southern Africa, the Mediterranean, Central
America, South and South-East Asia, Eastern Australia, North and Northeast China,
Southeastern Brazil and the Northern

Variables that
integrate
components of
the hydrologic
cycle may be
more indicative
for identifying
precipitation
trends

Geographic distribution of the trend in the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) and
annual variations in the globally averaged PDSI, 1900-2000

PDSI
Less than -4
-4 to -3
-3 to -2
-2 to -1
-1 to 1
1 to 2
2 to 3
3 to 4
More than 4
No data

PDSI
3
2
1
0
-1
Trend line for decadal variations
-2
-3
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Note: The PDSI is a measure of drought severity based on precipitation and temperature information. Positive values imply more severe drought conditions.
Source: Based on IPCC 2007, chapter 3.

Water in a changing world

183

PART

3

Current methods
of measuring
evaporation are
either too recent or
too inaccurate to
be used in analyses
of long-term
gradual change
in evaporation

Chapter 11C
Territories of North America. Areas with
reduced drought trends include southern
South America, the eastern United States,
Northeastern Europe and the Ethiopian
highlands.
Several similarities are evident when these
20th century trends in the PDSI are compared with projections of annual precipitation change from 22 coupled atmosphereocean general circulation models at the
end of the 21st century prepared for IPCC
scenario A1B (in the middle of the IPCC
scenario range).7 The Mediterranean Basin,
Central America, Southern Africa, Southeastern Brazil and Eastern Australia, where
the PDSI trend shows increased drought
conditions, are projected to receive substantially less precipitation. These areas
thus appear most at risk of water stress,
presumably due to anthropogenic climate
change. West Africa and the Sahel, where
the positive PSDI trend is at a maximum,
are not projected to be affected by large
precipitation changes. This might be an
indication that the Sahel drought of the
last part of the 20th century was a natural
climate fluctuation not directly tied to
global warming. Similarly, areas of Central and East Asia where the PDSI trend
was positive in the 20th century show
increased precipitation in the 21st century
model projections.
As mentioned, the mode of precipitation
may be more important than average precipitation in determining hydrologic impacts. Widespread increases in heavy precipitation events have been observed in
some places where total precipitation has
decreased, and more precipitation now
falls as rain rather than snow in northern
regions.8 At the same time, the length, frequency and intensity of heat waves have
increased widely. Consistent with a warmer
atmosphere with a greater water-holding
capacity, these changes are also found in
IPCC climate projections under different
greenhouse gas emission scenarios.9

Changes in evaporation and
evapotranspiration
Contributor: W. James Shuttleworth
Actual evaporation can be measured either
by integrating the water transferred into
the atmosphere using micrometeorological techniques or by measuring the liquid
water loss from representative sample
volumes of the soil-atmosphere interface.10
All available methods, however, are either
too recent or too inaccurate to be used
in analyses of long-term gradual change
in evaporation.11 Consequently, there are
184

little or no direct plot scale data on actual
evaporation that are long-term or accurate
enough.
In the absence of sufficient data, alternative methods have been used. Some studies have diagnosed changes as the residual
in the area-average water balance,12 but
most studies have used the measured rate
of evaporation from evaporation pans,
rates calculated using estimation equations, or both. Because many of these studies used the language of early evaporation
theory instead of that of the physics and
physiology of evaporation, confusion has
resulted, generating much controversy.13
Two main explanations have been advanced for observed reductions in pan
evaporation. The first is that open water
evaporation has decreased because the net
radiation available to support evaporation
at the ground has declined, whether because of higher concentrations of atmospheric aerosols, increasing cloud cover,
climate change or a combination of these.
If a decline in net radiation were the only
reason for the reduction in pan evaporation, and if all other meteorological, soil
moisture and plant physiology influences
on actual evaporation had remained
unchanged, that would indicate an associated reduction in area-average actual
evapotranspiration.14
Enhancement of the hydrologic cycle is
an important feature of climate change
projections, not only because water vapour
is the most important greenhouse gas but
also because the additional water in the
atmosphere may alter cloud cover and thus
affect surface solar radiation. The extent
to which cloud cover may increase is not
yet clear. Some observational studies have
calculated reductions in solar radiation of
a few percent per decade based on calculated changes in open water and reference
crop evaporation using historical data on
hours of sunshine, implying cloud cover
may be increasing in some regions.15
Meanwhile, studies reporting significant
changes in observed solar radiation have
confidently ascribed them to local or
regional changes in atmospheric aerosol
concentration.16 Regionally varying, but
nonetheless widespread, impacts of increasing atmospheric aerosols and associated reductions in surface solar radiation
are now well documented17 and modelled
in general circulation models.18 One study
estimates reductions in solar radiation of
about 2.75% a decade,19 while the IPCC
estimates the change in global radiative
forcing due to sulphate aerosols since 1750
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
at between -0.2 and -0.8 watts per square
metre (m2).20
Thus, the evidence is now strong of a real
but regionally dependent reduction in
surface solar radiation over the last few
decades, a result of either increasing cloud
cover or increased aerosol concentration.
This is likely to be at least one contributory factor in the observed reduction in
pan evaporation. Recently, however, a
study has used a physically based model of
pan evaporation in the semi-arid climates
of Australia to demonstrate that decreased
wind speed is the dominant cause of reduced pan evaporation there.21
A second widely reported explanation for
reduced pan evaporation is that the average near-surface vapour pressure deficit
has shrunk or that the average near-surface
wind speed has slowed, or a combination
of the two. Most discussion of this potential mechanism has assumed the validity of the hypothetical complementary
relationship between actual and potential
evaporation proposed by Bouchet.22 Modelling studies, however, do not support the
numerical accuracy of this complementary relationship.23 Nonetheless, the basic
mechanism for a shrinking of the vapour
pressure deficit through atmospheric
conditioning by enhanced regional actual
evaporation is plausible, and it has been
shown that, when surface-atmosphere coupling processes are considered, Bouchet’s
complementary relationship is approximately correct.24
In fact, there is substantial evidence that
open water evaporation and reference crop
evapotranspiration rates are increasing
and that there are regional changes in the
vapour pressure deficit and wind speed.25
In addition, some studies have used
historical climate data to investigate the
relative importance of the meteorological controls on open water and reference
crop evapotranspiration.26 These studies
offer no clear evidence that change in
surface radiation or regional wind speed is
consistently the dominant – let alone the
sole – cause of observed changes in pan
evaporation and some evidence of regional
difference in the relative importance of
various meteorological variables. In addition, several studies provide evidence
that on average for large areas of Asia and
North America actual evapotranspiration
is increasing, even though pan evaporation is decreasing.27
Interpreting observed pan evaporation data
in terms of actual regional evaporation is
Water in a changing world

therefore complex. One study argues that
two distinct influences are involved: type A
processes related to large-scale changes in
atmospheric concentrations and circulation, which modify surface evaporation
rates in the same direction, and type B processes related to coupling between the surface and the atmospheric boundary layer
at landscape scale, which usually modify
area-average evaporation and pan evaporation in different directions.28 Evidence suggests that both influences are present, with
their relative strengths depending on the
regional climate aridity. In semi-arid and
arid regions the effect of decreased wind
speed, higher aerosol concentrations and
increasing cloud cover may be the dominant cause of the observed reduction in
pan evaporation. However, because actual
evaporation is so strongly determined by
available precipitation in these regions,
it does not necessarily follow that time­average actual evapotranspiration is decreasing. In humid regions evidence suggests that actual evaporation has increased
despite an aerosol- or cloud-cover-induced
decrease in solar radiation.

3

there is substantial
evidence that open
water evaporation
and reference crop
evapotranspiration
rates are increasing
and that there are
regional changes
in the vapour
pressure deficit
and wind speed

Soil moisture
Contributors: Soroosh Sorooshian
with Jialun Li and Gi-Kyun Park
Understanding and predicting variations
in the water cycle require knowledge of
soil moisture variations. These can be
investigated using direct measurement,
remote-sensing, meteorological-based
methods and model simulations. Each
method has shortcomings. In-situ soil
moisture measurements are too sparse to
draw conclusions about multidecadal soil
moisture trends at a global scale. Satellite
sensors are suboptimal in microwave frequency, and record lengths are too short
to provide meaningful trend information.
Physically based model reconstructions
using precipitation and temperature to
estimate soil wetness provide the best current insights into long-term soil moisture
trends, but studies using these methods
are not comprehensive enough to fully
explain the uncertainties and to generate
unambiguous results.
In-situ measurements are crucial for
climatological analysis, model evaluation
and ground truthing remote sensing data.
Ground observations are limited at both
spatial and temporal scales and can represent only a small portion of the Earth’s
land surface. Gravimetric soil moisture
content has been measured in the Russian Federation and Ukraine for about 40
years and in China for about 20 years.
185

PART

3

Inconsistencies in
national hydrologic
monitoring
networks, data
access and data
quality prevent
systematic and
comprehensive
global assessments
of trends in runoff
and streamflow

Chapter 11C
Advanced soil moisture sensors such as
neutron probes, time domain reflectrometry, frequency domain reflectometry and
tensiometers provide more continuous
measurements. The Soil Climate Analysis
Network of the US Department of Agriculture National Resources Conservation
Service reports real-time soil moisture
observations using meteor burst communication, with some records going back to
the early 1990s.29
Gravimetrically observed soil moisture
data for the Russian Federation and
Ukraine for about 40 years show that summer soil moisture increased significantly
from 1958 to the mid-1990s. Researchers
suggest that solar dimming, a decrease in
evaporation and an increase in carbon dioxide could be responsible, although contrary to model predictions based on global
warming related to greenhouse gases.30
A study found strong correlations between
the PDSI for 1870-2002 based on global
gridded precipitation and surface temperature records and observed soil moisture
content to 1 metre in depth during warm
season months in China, Mongolia, the
former Soviet Union and the United States
(Illinois).31 The study found that global
land areas in both very dry (PDSI less than
-3.0) and very wet (PDSI more than +3.0)
conditions have increased from approximately 20% to 38% since 1972, suggesting
surface warming as the primary cause after
the mid-1980s.
Land surface models are a more sophisticated method than the PDSI for
reconstructing long-term soil moisture
variations. While the ability of models to
faithfully reproduce observations is always
an issue, studies using observations over
Illinois32 and a transect over Eurasia33
found that the variable infiltration capacity model accurately reproduced observed
interseasonal and interannual variability.
Another study used the variable infiltration
capacity model to reconstruct soil moisture globally for 1950-2000 and found a
small wetting trend at a global scale in the
reconstructed soil moisture.34 The study
attributes the wetting trend primarily to
increasing precipitation. The reconstructed
trend in soil wetness in the United States is
consistent with other studies.35
An alternative to land service models
(which use observed records of surface climate variables) is coupled land-atmosphere
model reanalysis output and coupled
model climate reconstructions. These are
reconstructions of a past period using

186

a fixed version of a numerical weather
prediction model, with assimilation of
atmospheric and other data as though
the model were being run in real time.
Analyses of the variability in soil moisture
in output from several recent global reanalyses found no long-term linear trends at
the global scale.36 An analysis of output
from climate simulations of 25 general
circulation models found that the models
were unable to reproduce observed trends
in soil moisture over the Russian Federation and Ukraine in the second half of the
20th century.37
Remote sensing estimates of soil moisture
offer another alternative to in-situ observations. Surface soil moisture can be retrieved
from low-frequency microwave satellite
data. Current satellite-based estimates of
soil moisture (using mostly shorter wavelength sensors) reflect the water content of
only the upper 1-2 centimetres of the soil
column, because vegetation can mask the
signature of the soil below. Data from the
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
(GRACE) satellite have been used to represent terrestrial water storage variability in
several studies since its launch in 2002. 38
Major drawbacks to GRACE data are the low
spatial resolution (hundreds of kilometres)
and a wide ‘visual’ field that encompasses
the total signature of variations in moisture
storage from the centre of the Earth to the
top of the atmosphere, so that sources of
variations other than soil moisture (such as
atmospheric moisture, snow water storage,
groundwater, lakes and reservoirs) must be
removed to analyse soil moisture trends
and variability.

Runoff and streamflow trends
Contributors: Harry Lins with Lena Tallaksen
Inconsistencies in national hydrologic
monitoring networks, data access and data
quality prevent systematic and comprehensive global assessments of trends in
runoff and streamflow (see chapter 13).
Sparse stream gauge networks in developing countries, often coupled with national
data policies that restrict dissemination
to regional or international data centres,
limit the comprehensiveness of worldwide trend assessments.39 Several studies
of trends in streamflow have nevertheless been published. Most used stream
gauge records that are ‘climate sensitive’,
meaning that the data are from stations
thought to be minimally affected by such
confounding anthropogenic influences as
upstream regulation, diversions, groundwater extractions and land use change.
As a result, the trends reported in these
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
studies are most directly attributable to
variability or change in climate.
This synthesis of streamflow trends draws
largely on national and continental
analyses, especially for Europe and North
America, where the most comprehensive
work has been done. Few studies have
been published for Australia or for countries in Asia (outside of Siberia), Africa
or South America. However, results of a
global synthesis that includes some trend
information for these continents are included at the end of this section.40
A study for Canada found that annual
mean streamflow generally decreased
between 1947 and 1996, with significant
decreases in the southern part of the
country, particularly southern Alberta and
British Columbia.41 The study also found
reduced monthly mean streamflow except
in March and April, when significant increases were observed. In southern Canada
significant decreases were also observed in
all percentiles of daily flow, along with the
annual mean. Over northern British Columbia and the Yukon Territory, however,
significant increases were identified in the
lower flow percentiles.
In the United States the most extensive
studies of trends analysed long-term
streamflow records for 395 stations across
the continental United States with continuous daily records for 1944-93 (updated
to 435 stations for 1940-99).42 The study
found a preponderance of upward trends
in all but the highest flows, which were
less numerous and for which upward and
downward trends were about equal. Another study, working with a similar dataset, found that the streamflow increases
appeared as a step change around 1970
rather than as a gradual trend.43 A step
change implies that the climate system has
shifted to a new regime that may remain
stable until a new shift occurs, whereas a
gradual trend is likely to continue into the
future.
In Europe much of the published work on
streamflow trends has focused on flooding. A study evaluating high-flow and
flood records in a network of climate­sensitive catchments in the United
Kingdom applied trend tests to indicators
of flood magnitude and frequency and
of high-flow magnitude (10- and 30-day
maximums) and duration (prevalence
of high flows).44 Over the 30- to 40-year
period ending in 2003 positive trends were
identified in all indicators. The trends
were found primarily in upland maritimeWater in a changing world

influenced catchments in northern and
western areas of the United Kingdom. The
results suggest a trend towards more protracted high flows in northern and western areas, but trends in flood magnitude
were less prevalent. Only a few trends were
found in the English lowlands, and these
were influenced by a sequence of notable
flood events through the exceptionally wet
winter of 2000/01. The study shows that
the recent increases in northern and western catchments were probably caused by
a shift towards a more prevalent positive
phase in the North Atlantic Oscillation
since the 1960s. Moreover, fluctuations in
the records suggest that recent trends may
be influenced by multidecadal variability.

3

Few studies
of streamflow
trends have
been published
for Australia or
for countries in
Asia (outside of
Siberia), Africa or
South America

An analysis of systematic flood records
for winter and summer in Central Europe
since the middle of the 19th century and
longer-term historical records of major
floods since the 16th century found a decrease in winter flooding on the Elbe and
Oder Rivers in Germany over an 80- to
150-year period and no trend in summer
flooding.45 The study attributed the winter
decrease in part to a decline in strong
freezing events that reduce late winter ice
jamming and consequent higher flood
peaks. The study also detected long-term
changes in flood frequency between the
16th and 19th centuries but concluded
that reductions in river length, construction of reservoirs and deforestation had
minor influences. These results are consistent with findings for the Elbe and Vltava
Rivers in the Czech Republic of reduced
frequency and intensity of flooding during
the 20th century.46
Analysis of annual runoff volumes and
annual and seasonal flood peaks in Sweden found that average runoff increased
5% over the 20th century and even more
during the 19th century, when temperatures were lower.47 In Switzerland a study
of annual streamflow found a general
increase over the same time period, due
mostly to increases in winter, spring and
autumn runoff.48 Winter increases were
observed across the entire flow distribution but were especially marked for
maximum flows. Increases in spring and
autumn runoff were concentrated primarily in moderate and low-flow percentiles.
Farther southeast, in Turkey, analysis of
monthly mean streamflow records for
26 basins for 1964-94 found that streamflow had generally decreased in western
and southern Turkey, while not changing
significantly in eastern Turkey.49 A study of
a pan-European dataset of more than 600
daily streamflow records covering 1962-90,
187

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Groundwater is an
often neglected
part of the global
water cycle,
partly because
it is invisible
and difficult to
monitor and partly
because the data
for understanding
groundwater
flows are limited

1962-95, 1930-95 and 1911-95 tested for
trends in hydrologic drought and detected
no significant changes for most stations.50
The study concluded that there was no evidence that drought conditions had become
more severe or frequent.
Several recent studies have investigated
trends in Siberian river discharge. Annual
discharge from the six largest Russian
Arctic rivers (Kolyma, Lena, Ob, Pechora,
Severnaya and Yenisei) increased 7% over
1936-99, mostly in winter.51 These observations indicate a general increase in
freshwater flux to the Arctic Ocean. There
is concern that this increase may influence
the global climate system, through both
ocean circulation and the carbon cycle
(see next section). Another study found
significant positive trends in minimum
flows in many smaller rivers across European and Siberian Russian Federation,
suggesting an increasing contribution of
groundwater to the hydrologic cycle of
northern Eurasia.52
Two recent studies assessed global high
and low flow trends by analysing trends
in annual maximum flow and in peaks
over threshold and annual low flows. One
study analysed records from 195 stations
on six continents, most of them (92%)
in North America, Europe and Australia
(table 11.1). The records for 70% of the
stations showed no trend in the annual
maximum flow, 14% an increasing trend
and 16% a decreasing trend (box 11.1).
The trends for each continent were generally consistent with the aggregate totals.
Using a much smaller sample of stations
(21), another study found a mixed pattern
of trends in peaks over threshold, with
approximately 30% of stations exhibiting
a trend and with more downward than upward trends.53 A very different pattern was

Table 11.1

Region
Africa

apparent in low flows, with about 52% of
stations exhibiting statistically significant
trends in seven‑day low flows, all of them
increasing. This implies a reduction in the
incidence of hydrologic drought, consistent with the results of a study of global
trends in soil moisture and drought.54
These two broad-scale results are generally
consistent with those from regionally specific investigations, and both studies conclude that the results do not support the
hypothesis that global warming has as yet
caused an increase in hydrologic extremes
– more floods or hydrologic droughts.

Groundwater trends
Contributors: Willi Struckmeier
with Peter Letitre
Groundwater is an often neglected part
of the global water cycle, partly because
it is invisible and difficult to monitor and
partly because the data for understanding groundwater flows are limited. Thus,
despite its importance for river baseflow
and wetlands, groundwater is frequently
ignored in water balance calculations and
in water resources planning and management. As long as groundwater levels are
roughly stable – or the annual variations
lie within certain intervals – the groundwater resource is regarded as constant.
However, for longer-term evaluations of
global change, trends in groundwater
resources are crucial, since groundwater
has a buffer function in short-term climate
variations and is a key element of adaptation strategies.
Groundwater flow processes are usually
much slower than atmospheric or surface
water processes, often by two or three
orders of magnitude. In large aquifer
systems containing most of their groundwater in stock, sometimes more than 90%

Trends in annual maximum streamflow, by continent, for 195 stream gauging stations
worldwide, various years
Stations with
increasing trend

Stations with
no trend

Stations with
decreasing trend

Number of
stations

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

4

1

25

1

25

2

50

Asia

8

0

0

5

63

3

38

South America

3

0

0

3

100

0

0

North America

70

14

20

44

63

12

17

Australia-Pacific

40

1

3

34

85

5

13

Europe
Total

70

11

16

50

71

9

13

195

27

14

137

70

31

16

Note: The analysis was based on the Mann-Kendall test (two-sided, significance level 10%). Values may not sum to 100% because of rounding.
Source: Kundzewicz et al. 2004.

188

World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

Changes in the global water cycle
predict the effects of climate and climate change on groundwater systems is
nowhere near as advanced as for surface
water systems.’56 An examination of the
sensitivity of the Ellensburg, Washington,
groundwater basin to climate and land
cover change found that the sensitivities of groundwater recharge and crop
water use to climate change were closely
intertwined.57 In particular, for the native
grassland vegetation groundwater recharge was projected to increase, whereas
for the mostly irrigated pasture vegetation, recharge was projected to decrease.
Seasonal patterns of evapotranspiration
are substantially different for natural vegetation and for irrigated crops.

of groundwater resources are made up of
‘dead storage’ formed in times when rainfall and recharge conditions were more
favourable. While not part of the current
water cycle, it is an extremely valuable
asset, chiefly in arid and semi-arid regions
such as the deserts of North Africa, the
Arabian Peninsula, Central Asia and Australia. These fossil groundwater resources
are increasingly used for agricultural,
industrial and domestic water supplies,
although they are almost never recharged
and will be depleted one day. In many
areas fossil groundwater is the only reliable
water resource.55
Observed groundwater levels indicate that
recharge volumes may vary considerably
from year to year in response to climate
variations. It is therefore realistic to expect changes in groundwater recharge as
a consequence of climate change. However, a recent US Climate Change Science
Program report notes that ‘the ability to

Box 11.1

Observed
groundwater
levels indicate
that recharge
volumes may
vary considerably
from year to year
in response to
climate variations

Another study evaluated the sensitivity
of two unconfined aquifers in northwestern North America to climate change,
one in a humid area west of the Cascade
Mountains and the other in a much drier
climate east of the Cascades.58 For the

Changes in discharge of major global rivers

Although considerable attention has been
given to trends in discharge of unregulated rivers, most studies find that there
are considerably more rivers with no
statistically significant trends that could be
attributed to long-term climate variations
and change than rivers with significant
trends.
For instance, at the 10% significance level,
70% of the records analysed showed no
statistically significant change. However,
the discharge of many large rivers has
indisputably been affected by water
management, especially dam construction but also within-basin diversions for
other beneficial uses such as irrigation and
municipal and industrial water supply, as
well as trans­basin diversions.
The figure shows the observed flow of
the Columbia River after construction of
large reservoirs in Canada and the United
States (totalling about 30% of the mean
annual discharge), as well as ‘naturalized’
discharge (the discharge that would have
occurred in the absence of the dams) and
projected effects of climate change on
the naturalized flows by 2050 (the orange
band reflects the range of climate model
projections). Although the projected effects of climate change are substantial,
they are much less than the observed effects of water management (see chapter 9).
The figure shows other observed effects of
water management globally. Since construction of the High Aswan Dam almost all the
Nile River’s discharge is now either diverted

Water in a changing world

Changes in the flow of major global rivers associated with water management
Nile River at the Aswan Dam, Egypt
Discharge (cubic kilometres a second)
12
10
8
6
4

Columbia River at The Dalles, Oregon, United States
River flow (thousands of cubic feet a second)
600
500
400
300
200

0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Syr Darya River at Tyumen Aryk,
Kazakhstan
Discharge (cubic kilometres a second)
12

Historical naturalized flow
Estimated range
of naturalized flow
with 2040s warming

10
8
6
4

Regulated flow

2
0

100
0

2

Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Burntwood River near Thomson,
Manitoba, Canada
Discharge (cubic kilometres a second)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

Source: Based on GWSP 2005.

for irrigation or lost to reservoir evaporation.
Flows of the Syr Darya River have declined
greatly because of irrigation diversions
upstream (the Syr Darya is one of the major
tributaries of the Aral Sea, whose declining
levels are closely related to reductions in the
river’s flows). In contrast, the flow of the

Burntwood River increased by a factor of
almost four following an upstream diversion
into the river basin in the 1970s for hydropower production.
Source: Lins and Slack 2005; Kundzewicz et al.
2005; GWSP 2005.

189

PART

3

By current
estimates there
are more than
50,000 large
dams, 100,000
smaller dams and
1 million small
dams worldwide

Chapter 11C
aquifer in the humid region recharge was
closely related to projected changes in
precipitation and its seasonal pattern, and
for the particular climate scenario examined groundwater levels were predicted to
decline slightly. For the aquifer in the drier
climate river discharge dominated aquifer
variations. Projected changes in groundwater level therefore closely followed projected changes in river discharge, which
were higher in winter and early spring and
lower in summer and fall.
A modelling study of two sites in Australia,
one with a Mediterranean climate and
one with a subtropical climate, found that
in the Mediterranean climate changes
in evaporative demand related to rising
temperatures dominated the hydrologic response, whereas in the subtropical climate
changes in rainfall characteristics dominated.59 A spatially distributed hydrologic
simulation model – used to evaluate the
combined effects of projected increases in
precipitation, temperature and potential
evapotranspiration in a future climate –
predicted that groundwater recharge and
subsurface storage and discharge would
increase in sandy soils but remain relatively unchanged in clay soils.60 These and
other studies suggest that the sensitivity
of groundwater recharge – and hence the
availability of groundwater resources – to
climate change will depend on a balance
between changes in precipitation and
evaporative demand, and site-specific
vadose zone and aquifer characteristics.61
Much more work is needed to understand
groundwater resources sensitivities to climate change globally.

Trends in reservoir, lake and wetland
storage
Contributors: Kuni Takeuchi with Jun Magomi
By current estimates there are more than
50,000 large dams (more than 15 metres
high or 3 million m3 storage capacity),
100,000 smaller dams (more than 0.1
million m3 storage) and 1 million small
dams (less than 0.1 million m3 storage)
worldwide. Total reservoir storage capacity of these dams is estimated at about
7,000 km3, and the total water surface of
reservoirs is about 500,000 square kilometres (km2). Although there are a huge
number of reservoirs, 95% of total reservoir
capacity is accounted for by about 5,000
large reservoirs (dams more than 60 metres
high), and more than 80% are used for
hydropower generation (see chapter 7).62
Reservoirs. In the past 100 years, but
mainly during 1950-90, many reservoirs
190

were constructed in North America, the
southeast coast of South America, Australia, China and the Russian Federation.
About 350 large reservoirs are currently
under construction in China, India, Iran
and Turkey and countries in the Middle
East and South-East Asia.63 Since the late
20th century reservoirs have experienced
various changes, such as dam removals
in the United States; conflicts over reservoir water use between upstream and
downstream countries along the Euphrates, Mekong and Syr Darya Rivers; and
reservoir sedimentation. More than 25%
of global suspended sediment discharge
is thought to be trapped by reservoirs.64
Although storage of impounded water is
known to have increased greatly over the
main period of dam construction during
the 20th century, trends in global reservoir
storage over the last 20 years of reduced
dam construction are less clear. One study
suggests only a modest change in reservoir
storage over the last decade,65 and there
have been suggestions that a prevalence
of drought in key areas of the world may
have reduced global reservoir storage over
the last decade.
Lakes. Several studies have provided
extensive global data on natural lakes.66
Lakes store the largest volume of fresh surface water (about 90,000 km3), more than
40 times that in rivers and streams and
about 7 times that in wetlands. Together
with reservoirs, they cover an estimated
2.7 million km2, or about 2% of surface
area outside the polar regions.67 Most
lakes are small, but the 145 largest lakes
are estimated to contain more than 95%
of lake freshwater. Lake Baikal (Russian
Federation), the world’s largest, deepest
and oldest lake, alone contains 27% of all
lake freshwater. Lake water serves commerce, fishing, recreation and transport,
and supplies water for much of the world’s
population.
While changes in lake coverage over the
past few decades have been observed in
many parts of the world, the primary
factors driving these changes are specific
to each region. The surface area of Lake
Chad shrank from 23,000 km2 in 1963
to less than 2,000 km2 by the mid-1980s,
due largely to drought. The Aral Sea has
also shrunk dramatically, and the volume
of water in the basin has plummeted 75%
since 1960 – changes attributable primarily to diversions of inflows for irrigation.
The level of the Caspian Sea fell 3 metres
between 1929 and 1977 but then rose 3
metres by 1995.68 In Siberia changes in
total lake area over the last three decades
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
of the 20th century have been correlated
with the state of the underlying permafrost. Total lake area has increased in the
continuous permafrost zone (12% in western Siberia69 and 14.7% in eastern Siberia),70 while decreasing in the discontinuous (-13%), sporadic (-12%) and isolated
(-11%) permafrost areas of western Siberia
(map 11.3).71 The changes in Siberian lake
extent are seen as symptomatic of permafrost degradation and have important consequences for global climate through their
influence on the carbon cycle (see section

Map 11.3

3

titled ‘Links between the terrestrial carbon
and water cycles’).
Wetlands. Water-saturated environments,
wetlands are commonly characterized as
swamps, bogs, marshes, mires and lagoons. Although they contain only 10%
of the water in lakes and other surface
waters, wetlands cover an area about 3-4
times greater than do the world’s lakes72
and play important roles in flood protection, groundwater recharge, food production, water quality, wildlife habitat and

Example of decline in lake abundance and total lake area in the discontinuous
permafrost zone of western Siberia, 1973-97

Note: Changes such as those in this map are thought to be symptomatic of permafrost degradation. Net increases in lake abundance and area have occurred
in continuous permafrost, suggesting an initial but ephemeral increase in surface ponding. Decadal scale variations in lake, wetland and reservoir storage are
natural characteristics of the dynamics of these water bodies and cannot necessarily be ascribed to climate, land cover or other anthropogenic causes.
Source: Based on Smith, Sheng, et al. 2005.

Water in a changing world

191

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Both current
measurements
and climate model
projections show
that climate
changes in coldland regions
are among the
largest changes
over the entire
globe and will
continue to be so

biogeochemical cycling.73 During the last
century numerous wetlands were destroyed. Currently, extensive work is being
done through the ‘Wise Use’ campaigns
sponsored by Ramsar, WWF and the
United Nations Environment Programme
to maintain critical services in water and
related livelihood and food production
areas of wetlands. Roughly half of the
world’s wetlands occur in high latitudes,
and many of these owe their existence
at least in part to the drainage impedance of permafrost. There is concern that
permafrost degradation may cause some
of these wetlands to drain and be replaced
by grasslands, with serious implications
for the global carbon cycle and possible
feedbacks to global climate change.

Permafrost trends
Contributors: Tinjun Zhang
with Vladimir Aizen
Frozen ground includes soils affected by
short-term freeze-thaw cycles, seasonally
frozen ground and permafrost. Permafrost regions occupy approximately 24%
of the exposed land area of the Northern
Hemisphere, while the long-term average
maximum area extent covered by seasonally frozen ground (including the active
layer over permafrost) is about 51% of the

Map 11.4

Circumpolar permafrost extent, 2000
Permafrost extent
Continuous
Discontinuous
Sporadic
Isolated
Relict permafrost
Subsea permafrost limit
Glaciers

Note: Permafrost occupies the entire area of the continuous permafrost zone (except beneath
large rivers and deep lakes) and underlies 10%-90% of the surface in the discontinuous permafrost zone. In the isolated permafrost zone permafrost occupies less than 10% of the area.
Source: Based on Brown et al. 1997.

192

Northern Hemisphere land area.74 Permafrost exists mainly in high latitudes and
high elevation regions (map 11.4). Permafrost in Eurasia occurs over the entire
Arctic and boreal forest areas and includes
the mountainous regions of Central Asia
(Tien Shan and Pamir), the Tibetan Plateau
and high elevated areas of the Himalayas.
Over North America permafrost is distributed mainly over Alaska and the Canadian
Arctic, with the southern boundary of the
latitudinal permafrost varying from 50oN
to 57oN.75 Due to the effect of the Rocky
Mountains, mountain permafrost can
extend as far south as 37oN.
Changes in the regime of ground ice in
permafrost directly regulate the hydrologic cycle of cold regions over the short
and long term. Using information from
the Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and
Ground Ice Conditions,76 a study estimated that the volume of excess ground ice
in the Northern Hemisphere ranges from
10,800 km3 to 35,460 km3, or about 2.7-8.8
metres sea-level equivalent.77 Assuming
the average porosity of permafrost soil to
be about 40%, the total volume of ground
ice (both pore and excess ground ice)
varies from 54,000 km3 to 177,000 km3.
Under global warming scenarios permafrost is expected to degrade rapidly in the
21st century.78 As a result melt-water of
excess ground ice may participate directly
in the hydrologic cycle, while melt-water
of pore ground ice may become a significant groundwater resource in cold regions.
Seasonal and interannual variations of soil
water storage within the active layer and
seasonally frozen layer in non-permafrost
regions can be substantial and have a significant impact on the hydrologic cycle in
cold seasons and cold regions.
Both current measurements and climate
model projections show that climate
changes in cold-land regions are among
the largest changes over the entire globe
and will continue to be so. The most important changes that affect permafrost are
increases in air temperatures and intensification of the hydrologic cycle. These
climate changes inevitably change the
energy and mass fluxes at the land surface
and the near-surface and subsurface physical conditions in cold-land regions. These
changes in the physical environment are
forcing changes in permafrost conditions
and permafrost degradation: increase in
permafrost temperature, thickening of the
active layer, thermokarst and talik development, decrease in permafrost area and
eventually complete disappearance of permafrost at local, regional and global scales.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
Permafrost degradation is initiating
many natural processes that will intensify changes in the cold-land regions and
through these changes will affect the entire Earth system. Some of these processes
could be fast developing and very destructive for the northern and high-altitude
ecosystems and infrastructure. Examples
include surface settlement, swamping,
changes in the extent of thaw lakes, landslides and slope failures, thermal erosion
of river banks and deep gully formation,
dramatic increase in river sediment loads
and desertification. The release of carbon
stored in thawing permafrost soils may
have significant consequences for global
climate (see section titled ‘Links between
the terrestrial carbon and water cycles’).
Observations of changes in permafrost
conditions include mainly increased
permafrost temperatures, thickening of
the active layer and thermokarst and talik
development (including changes in the
extent of thaw lakes) over the Northern
Hemisphere permafrost regions. Groundbased measurements indicate that permafrost temperature increases are greatest
in continuous permafrost regions and are
lower (or there is no change) in discontinuous and sporadic permafrost regions.
For example, permafrost temperature in
northern Alaska increased about 4°-7°C
during the 20th century, almost half of
it during the last 20 years.79 Increases in
permafrost temperatures in the Alaskan
interior have ranged from about 0.5°C to
1.5°C since the 1980s.80 Data from the
northern Mackenzie Valley in the continuous permafrost zone of Canada show a
1°C increase in permafrost temperatures
at depths of 20-30 metres since the 1990s,
with smaller changes in the central Mackenzie Valley and no trend in the southern
Mackenzie Valley where permafrost is very
thin.81
Field measurements in the northern
European part of the Russian Federation
show that temperature increase was greatest within the continuous permafrost
zone for the last 20 years at 1.6°-2.8°C,
at a depth of 6 metres,82 while within
the discontinuous permafrost zone the
increase was 1.2°C during 1970-95.83 In
the continuous permafrost zone over the
Lena River basin of Siberia permafrost
temperature has increased more than
3°C since the early 1960s, while in the
discontinuous permafrost zone over the
Yenesei River basin the rate of temperature increase has fallen substantially. In
most other discontinuous permafrost
zones over the past 30 years, such as in
Water in a changing world

Central Mongolia,84 the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau85 and the Swiss Alps,86 the
increase in permafrost temperature was
less than 1°C. Changes in air temperature
alone cannot account for the increase in
permafrost temperature in continuous
permafrost zones, but changes in the insulation provided by snow may be partly
responsible.87 The smaller change and the
absence of a trend in discontinuous and
sporadic permafrost zones are likely due
to the absorption of latent heat required
to melt ice.

3

The estimated
maximum area
of seasonally
frozen ground has
decreased by about
7% in the Northern
Hemisphere during
the 20th century

Changes in seasonally frozen ground have
occurred mainly in the timing, duration,
thickness and area of seasonal soil freeze
and thaw. Based on soil temperature measurements in the active layer and upper
permafrost up to 3.2 metres from 31 hydrometeorological stations in the Russian
Federation, the active layer exhibited a
statistically significant deepening of about
0.25 metre from the early 1960s to 1998.88
The International Permafrost Association
started a network of Circumpolar Active
Layer Monitoring (CALM) stations in the
1990s to monitor the response of the active layer and upper permafrost to climate
change that currently incorporates more
than 125 sites in the Arctic, the Antarctic
and several mid-latitude mountain ranges.89 The results from northern high-latitude sites in North America demonstrate
substantial interannual and interdecadal
fluctuations, but with no significant trend
in active layer thickness in response to air
temperature variations. Evidence from the
CALM European monitoring sites indicates
that active layer thickness was greatest in
the summers of 2002 and 2003.90 Active
layer thickness has increased by up to 1.0
metre over the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau
since the early 1980s.91
The thickness of seasonally frozen ground
in non-permafrost regions has decreased
more than 0.34 metre across the Russian
Federation since the middle of the 1950s92
and up to 0.2 metre over the northern Tibetan Plateau from 1967 through
1997.93 The main driving forces for the
decrease are significant winter warming
and changes in snow cover. The duration
of seasonally frozen ground decreased by
more than 20 days during 1967-97 over
the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, due mainly
to the earlier onset of the spring thaw.94
The estimated maximum area of seasonally frozen ground has decreased by about
7% in the Northern Hemisphere during
the 20th century. Evidence from satellite remote sensing data shows that the
onset of the spring thaw and autumn
193

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Most studies
suggest that over
the Northern
Hemisphere the
snow cover season
has shortened
and spring melt
has occurred
earlier in the last
50-100 years

freeze advanced 5-7 days in Eurasia over
1988-2002, leading to an earlier start to
the growing season but no changes in its
length.95 Over North America the onset
of the autumn freeze was delayed 5 days,
which was partly responsible for lengthening the growing season 8 days over 19882001.96

Snow trends
Contributors: Stephan Harrison
with Dennis P. Lettenmaier
More than one-sixth of the world’s population lives in areas where surface water is
derived mainly from snowmelt, either
seasonally ephemeral snowpacks or perennial glaciers.97 These areas also account
for more than a quarter of global gross
domestic product. Changes in the seasonal
patterns of runoff or permanent changes
in runoff volume resulting from changes
in snow cover (map 11.5) are therefore of
great concern.
Most studies suggest that over the
Northern Hemisphere the snow cover
season has shortened and spring melt
has occurred earlier in the last 50-100
years. Some studies suggest that these
changes may have accelerated in the last
several decades, but inconsistencies in
data sources complicate the picture. The
mountainous areas of North America have
exhibited downward trends in snow water
equivalent that seem related primarily to
increased temperature. At some high-latitude locations, however, mid-winter snow
water equivalent has increased, possibly
in response to increased precipitation in

Map 11.5

Changes in the duration of spring snowcover,
1978-2006
Days per
decade
3

-3

Source: US National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) from the US National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration weekly snow cover maps.

194

some generally cold continental interior
climates.
Analyses of long-term changes in snow
cover extent and snow water equivalent
over parts of the Northern Hemisphere
have used station data, available in some
cases since early in the 20th century, and
satellite estimates of snow cover extent,
available for almost 40 years. Using reconstructed snow cover extent for much
of the Northern Hemisphere, one study
found that winter snow water equivalent increased about 4% per decade, as
did winter snow depth over the Russia
Federation.98 In contrast, over Eurasia and
North America spring snow cover extent
and snow water equivalent decreased
substantially beginning about 1980. A
study using the more recent period of
satellite data found substantial declines
in snow cover extent over the Northern
Hemisphere during 1972-2006, especially
in spring.99 Spring declines appeared to
be amplified poleward and were larger
for North America than Eurasia. Another study using the same satellite data
inferred trends of about 3-5 days per
decade earlier snow melt and about the
same increase in length of the snow-free
season over the Northern Hemisphere.100
A study using reconstructed snow cover
records for North America reached similar
conclusions.101
A number of regional studies have also
been conducted. One analysed manual
observations of snow depth and newly
fallen snow over the Swiss Alps during
1931-99 and found that both the number
of days of continuous snow cover and the
number of days with snowfall increased
gradually until about 1980 and declined
thereafter.102 Trends were progressively
more pronounced with decreasing elevation. Increased temperature was the main
cause of reductions in the number of days
with snow on the ground at low elevation
in the Swiss Alps.103 Analysis of Russian
Federation snow depth data for 1936-83
from 119 stations showed a statistically
significant increasing trend in winter
snow depth.104 While annual snow cover
duration over southern Canada generally
has not changed, winter snow cover has
increased and spring snow cover has decreased, although changes in snow cover
were modest.105 Snowfall over Canada
north of 55°N increased about 20% during 1950-90, associated primarily with
increased winter precipitation.106 Snowfall
changes in southern Canada are highly
correlated with winter temperature, with
snowfall decreasing in the warmer areas
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
and increasing in colder areas, and overall
annual precipitation increasing.
Several recent studies have analysed
long-term changes in snow-related variables over the Western United States. One
analysed 230 snow water equivalent time
series in the Pacific Northwest for 19502000 and found a strong preponderance
of downward trends, especially in the
Cascade Mountains, where winter temperatures generally are higher than elsewhere
in the region.107 The declines in snow
water equivalent were generally larger in
absolute values at lower elevations. An
expansion of the analysis to the Western
United States and to 1915-2003 found
generally similar results.108 Analysis of
changes in the timing of spring snowmelt
runoff across the Western United States
for 1948-2002 found that for snowmelt­dominated (mostly mountainous) river basins the centroid of the annual hydrograph
was consistently shifting to an earlier
date but that for coastal basins without a
substantial snowmelt component, the date
changed little or runoff was later.109
Other studies have analysed changes in
snow-related variables elsewhere in the
United States, mostly in the northeast.
One report, based on data for 1952-2005
in the Catskill region of New York State,
found that peak snowmelt generally
shifted 1-2 weeks earlier, apparently due to
an increasing trend in maximum March
air temperature.110 Similar studies for New
England found 1-2 week advances of the
centre of the volume of runoff.111 Analysis of the ratio of snow to precipitation
for Historical Climatology Network sites
in New England found a general decline
in the ratio and decreasing snowfall
amounts.112 And 18 of 23 snow course sites
in and near Maine with records spanning
at least 50 years had decreases in snowpack
depth or increases in snowpack density.113

Trends in glaciers
Contributors: Vladimir Aizen with
Stephan Harrison, Xin Li, Igor Severskiy,
Pratap Singh and Tandong Yao
Glaciers cover 11% of the Earth’s land surface and store about 75% of its freshwater.
Alpine glaciers supply water and generate
river flow vital to the millions of people
living downstream and to forestry, agriculture, industry and urban areas in adjacent
lowlands. Glacier meltwater is particularly
important when the lower water courses
flow through semi-arid and arid regions
with high evaporation and high demands
for irrigation water during the vegetation
Water in a changing world

period. Glaciers integrate climate variations over a wide range of time scales,
preserving past climatic signatures and
making them natural sensors of climate
variability. Climate change is having a
significant impact on the snow and ice glacier water resources and river water supply
in mountain regions.
There is considerable evidence that glaciers
have retreated globally since the middle
of the 19th century, after the ‘little ice
age’,114 with the rate of retreat accelerating
from the mid-1970s in response to rapid
increases in air temperature and changes
in the amount of precipitation and its
composition (rain or snow).115 Tropical
glaciers are more sensitive than glaciers at
higher latitudes to changes in climate. In
the tropical Andes the trend in air temperatures has been about a 0.1°C gain per
decade since 1939, and the rate has tripled
over the last 25 years. The Andes contain
99% of the world’s tropical glaciers, most
of which are undergoing considerable
recession, with many reduced in volume
by 30% since 1980.116 The development
of glaciers is also limited by the low levels
of precipitation and continuous rise in air
temperatures. In the tropical Andes runoff
during the dry season (May-September) is
often fed solely by glaciers, so that glacier
retreat has major implications for seasonal
water supplies.117

3

Climate change
is having a
significant impact
on the snow and
ice glacier water
resources and river
water supply in
mountain regions

Changes in air temperature and precipitation may have different impacts in different mountain regions at macro- and mesoscales and even in small catchments. In
arid regions of western Argentina, central
and northern Chile and much of western
Peru climate change has resulted in warming and decreasing precipitation during
the 20th century, and the glaciers have
retreated much faster in South America
than in Central Asia.
The coexistence of elevated cold and arid
areas creates unique climate and hydrologic regimes not only in the tropical Andes
but also at mid-latitudes of Central Asia
and the Tibetan Plateau. The large AralCaspian and Tarim closed-drainage basins
and the great Asian rivers, such as the
Ob, Yenisei, Huang He, Yangtze, Mekong
and Brahmaputra, are fed by glaciers in
the Altai, Pamir, Tibetan and Tien Shan
Plateaus. Central Asia glaciers cover 81,500
km2 and contain approximately 8,000 km3
of freshwater.118
Changes in global and regional air temperature and the frequency of major atmospheric circulation processes regulating
195

PART

3

Interactions
between a
changing
hydrologic cycle
and a changing
terrestrial carbon
cycle can be
correlated with
climate change

Chapter 11C
moisture flow over Central Asia are major
driving forces of glacier mass balance and
variability in river discharge. Glaciologic
observations conducted on the Tibetan
Plateau revealed that between the 1950s
and 1960s 50% of glaciers retreated, 30%
advanced and 20% were stable. During
the 1970s glaciers were relatively stable,
but since then recessions have accelerated,
and in the 1990s up to 95% of 620 glaciers
studied were retreating. The recession rate
was 4 metres a year at the north Tibetan
Plateau, intensifying up to 65 metres a
year to the southeast.119 The total glacier
area of the Tibetan Plateau has shrunk
5.5% in the last 45 years.120
Altai Mountain ridges define the northern
periphery of the Central Asian mountains
and the southern periphery of the Asian
Arctic Basin. Altai glaciers cover 2,040 km2
in southern Siberia, Mongolia and northwestern China. The Pamir glacier, which
extends to the most western periphery of
the Central Asian mountains (Tajikistan
and northwestern China), covered 12,100
km2 in the late 1970s. In the last half
century annual precipitation increased
by 3.2 millimetres (mm) a year in Altai,
notably in spring and summer months,
while no significant change in precipitation occurred in the adjacent lowlands.
In the northwestern and central Pamir
at elevations above 3,000 metres annual
precipitation increased 8.1 mm a year over
the last 17 years.121 Despite the increase in
precipitation, glacier recession occurred in
Altai and Pamir due to increases (0.03°C a
year) in spring and summer air temperatures,122 which have intensified snow and
glacier melt and increased discharge to the
Ob and Yenisei Rivers by 7% and to the
Pamir River by 13.5%. The Altai glacier
area shrank 7.2% on average between 1952
and 2006.123
The glacier area of the Tien Shan, a mountain range in Central Asia, has decreased
by 1,620 km2 (10.1%) during the last 30
years. The rate of glacier recession varied
between 3.5% in central Tien Shan, with
large high-elevated glacier massifs, and
14.1% in the low western Tien Shan, with
small sparse glaciers. The rate of recession was three times faster during 19772003 than during 1943-77. The surface of
some glaciers dropped 100 metres during
1977-2000 (map 11.6).124 Annual runoff
of the major Tien Shan rivers averages
67 km3 a year, including glacial melt of
about 14 km3 a year, or 20%. During
droughts the proportion of glacial runoff
increases to 30%. The duration of snow
melt (from maximum snow cover to its

196

disappearance) declined from 168 days
to 138 days in 2007. The area of seasonal
snow cover decreased 15% (by 120,000
km2), and the date of maximum snow
cover has come later. Further decline may
be accelerated by increased rainfall instead
of snowfall in the early spring at high
elevations and, consequently, a lesser heat
expenditure for the snowmelt.
Mathematical simulations of the current
state of the Tien Shan glacier area and forecasts of the potential impact of global and
regional climate change on the glaciers and
glacier river runoff in the Tien Shan estimate that an increase in air temperature of
1°C at equilibrium line elevation must be
compensated for by a 100 mm increase in
precipitation to maintain glaciers in their
current state. Glaciers are predicted to decline to 94% of their current number, 69%
of current covered area and 75% of current
volume. Glacier runoff is predicted to be
75% of its current value.125
While the Tien Shan glacier area has been
continuously declining, the annual river
discharge has been growing over the last
decade due mainly to increased precipitation. One of the main predictors of the
current year’s river discharge in Tien Shan
is the volume of river runoff the previous year, which could be replenished by
groundwater. The possible sharp change in
river runoff indicates the non-linear system response caused mainly by the nonlinear response of evapotranspiration to
changes in temperature and precipitation.
Thus, a precipitation surplus accelerates
evapotranspiration when air temperature
rises, while a precipitation deficit slows
this process even with rising air temperature, which increases the albedo of glacier
surface in summer and reduces potential
snow and ice melt. Current glacier recession, while initially boosting river flows,
eventually causes runoff to decrease.
Glaciers in the Himalayas and European
Alps are receding and disappearing faster
than glaciers in Central Asia.126 Recent
studies revealed that large Himalayan glaciers are retreating at a rate of more than
30 metres a year, resulting in a 21% reduction in glacier area since the 1980s.127

Links between the terrestrial
carbon and water cycles
Contributors: Theodore Bohn with Dennis
P. Lettenmaier and Charles Vörösmarty
Interactions between a changing hydrologic cycle and a changing terrestrial
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle

Map 11.6

3

Tien Shan, Akshiirak glacier massif

Glacier area recessions, 1943-2003

Glacier surface degradation, 1977-2000

Note: Top maps are aerial photogrammetry and Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) images. Bottom map is
aerial photogrammetry and Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) data.
Source: Based on Aizen et al. 2006.

Water in a changing world

197

PART

3

Chapter 11C

estimated net
primary biomass
productivity
increased
significantly over
25% of the global
vegetated area
and decreased
significantly over
7% of the area

carbon cycle can be correlated with climate change. The terrestrial biosphere
plays an important role in the global
climate system, having taken up roughly
25% of anthropogenic carbon emissions
during the last century.128 It is not clear
how long the biosphere can continue to
absorb atmospheric carbon at this rate.
Observations suggest that the rate of
carbon uptake depends on hydrologic and
climate conditions as well as land use.
However, long-term observations are much
sparser for terrestrial carbon storage and
flux, especially over large scales, than for
the hydrologic cycle, making it difficult
to discern the relationships of trends in
global or regional carbon budgets with
climate and hydrologic factors. Nonetheless, some of these relationships have
become apparent, while in other cases the
strong relationships between shorter-term
hydrologic variability and carbon fluxes
have important implications for observed
hydrologic trends.
Because water plays different roles in each
stage of the terrestrial carbon cycle, it is
useful to consider each stage separately.
The vast majority of terrestrial carbon
is stored in soil, litter and above-ground
vegetative biomass. Carbon enters these
environmental compartments primarily
through plant photosynthesis (productivity). Carbon may leave these compartments

Map 11.7

through respiration (by plants or through
decomposition in the soil), export of
carbon into lakes and stream networks
and disturbances such as fire (or changes
in land use). Some of these stages lend
themselves to large-scale monitoring more
easily than others.
Productivity exhibits the tightest coupling
between the hydrologic and terrestrial
carbon cycles, in the link between photosynthesis and transpiration. Accordingly,
productivity is subject to many of the
same climate limitations as evaporation,
including soil moisture, temperature, incident solar radiation and humidity. Attribution of changes in productivity to trends
in climate factors is not entirely straightforward, in part because more than one of
these factors can be colimiting. Nonetheless, because of its manifestation in the
form of biomass, productivity (equivalent
to photosynthesis minus plant respiration,
or ‘net productivity’) lends itself more easily to large-scale measurement than other
carbon fluxes and is often estimated on
global scales using satellite-based data.129
An analysis of global trends in net primary
biomass productivity (map 11.7) by the
geographic distribution of climate factors
limiting productivity and trends in those
factors during 1982-99 found that estimated net primary productivity increased

Interplay of climate factors and net primary productivity

Trends in estimated net primary productivity, 1982-99

Annual
percentage change
1.5

0

-1.5

Source: Based on Nemani et al. 2003.

198

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
significantly over 25% of the global vegetated area and decreased significantly over
7% of the area, for a net global increase of
6.17% (3.42 petagrams of carbon). Trends
in these climate factors were estimated to
explain roughly 40% of the trends in net
primary productivity, with the remainder
attributed to changes in vegetation (for
example, land use changes). Trends in net
primary productivity over regions where
productivity is limited or colimited by
solar radiation, such as the Amazon Basin
and the northern and southern fringes of
tropical Africa and South-East Asia, correlated strongly with trends in cloudiness.
Increases in growing season precipitation over water-limited areas such as the
Sahel, Southern Africa and Northern and
Western Australia led to increases in net
primary productivity, while decreases in
growing season precipitation in waterlimited areas such as Northern Mexico
and Central Australia led to decreases in
net primary productivity. Temperaturelimited areas such as northwest North
America and Siberia experienced increased
or decreased net primary productivity in
accordance with trends in average temperature over the growing season.
Smaller-scale analyses of China130 and
North America131 agree for the most part
with these general conclusions. Both studies cite lengthening of the growing season
(essentially a function of temperature) as
the primary driver behind increases in net
primary productivity over most of their
respective domains. However, the North
America study found that increased summer precipitation was primarily responsible for the increases in net primary productivity in the central plains, while land
use changes may have been responsible for
increases over the southeast.
Complicating matters is the seasonal
interplay among climate factors. While
increased air temperatures in late spring
have led to the earlier onset of the growing
season in some areas such as the western
United States, the lack of a concomitant
increase in summer precipitation can
result in an earlier exhaustion of soil moisture and reduced productivity in autumn,
at least partially negating the gains from
increased annual temperature.132 Thus,
it is possible that as temperatures rise,
productivity in these regions will become
more water-limited and increasingly correlated with annual precipitation.
Hydrology also exerts a strong influence
on carbon fluxes out of terrestrial eco­
systems. Soil respiration is the largest
Water in a changing world

efflux, approximately equal annually
to productivity on a global scale. Field
studies have shown that soil respiration
has a complex dependence on hydroclimate factors, such as soil temperature
and moisture, as well as biogeochemical
factors; in particular, soil moisture determines the proportions of carbon released
to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide and
methane.133

3

Hydrology also
exerts a strong
influence on
carbon fluxes
out of terrestrial
ecosystems

While strong global correlations between
trends in soil respiration and trends
in hydro­climate factors have not been
found,134 some hydrologic trends are
expected to have serious implications for
soil respiration. One example is permafrost
degradation, and the associated changes in
lake extent in Siberia (see discussion earlier
in this chapter). Much of the permafrost
in Siberia contains tremendous reservoirs
of carbon-rich soil, termed yedoma (500
gigatons of carbon, or roughly the carbon content of the atmosphere), which
has been protected from respiration by
frozen conditions since the last ice age.135
In the continuous permafrost zone many
lakes have expanded over the last few
decades,136 actively thawing the surrounding and underlying yedoma. Because the
newly thawed soil around and under the
lakes is saturated with water, respiration
of the carbon produces methane, a much
stronger greenhouse gas than carbon
dioxide. Strong methane emissions were
observed from the active margins of thaw
lakes in eastern Siberia, and the recent
expansion of these thaw lakes (estimated
at 14.7% in area between 1974 and 2000)
may have resulted in a 58% increase in
methane emissions, or 1.4 million metric
tonnes a year. Because the recent expansion of these thaw lakes is a result of permafrost degradation, there is concern that
methane emissions from the lakes could
exacerbate climate warming.
Fires constitute another large carbon efflux, but their sporadic occurrences have
made precise measurements of long-term
carbon budgets for small areas difficult to
attain. Long-term trends can be assessed
for large regions, however, through satellite imagery, which captures trends in fire
frequency. Similar to productivity, fire
frequency exhibits a dependence on multiple climate factors, including temperature,
precipitation and soil moisture. One study
found that annual wildfire frequencies in
the Western United States increased significantly during 1970-2003.137 Fire frequency
over this period exhibited high correlations with both the timing of spring snow
melt and average summer temperatures (to
199

PART

3

There is a
consensus
among climate
scientists that
climate warming
will intensify,
accelerate or
enhance the global
hydrologic cycle

Chapter 11C
which snow melt timing is sensitive). Conversely, several studies have found strong
negative correlations between trends in fire
frequency and summer storm frequency.138
As mentioned, warmer summers and
earlier snow melts tend to result in earlier
exhaustion of soil moisture and onset of
water limited conditions, while more frequent summer storms would be expected
to delay the onset of water-limitation.
Thus, two major carbon fluxes, productivity and fires, depend strongly on the annual
duration of water limitation.
The final major efflux of carbon from terrestrial ecosystems is the export of carbon
from soils to aquatic systems as particulate organic carbon (POC) and dissolved
organic carbon (DOC). Because much of
this carbon can be subsequently respired
and returned to the atmosphere, either
in streams or the ocean, this flux is an
important loss term in the terrestrial carbon budget. A substantial amount of POC
consists of organic carbon sorbed onto
soil sediment particles, entering streams
through erosion and mass wasting (see section on erosion and sediment transport),
so trends in sediment transport would be
expected to have strongly correlated with
trends in POC export (although other
factors such as soil carbon content and
in-stream chemistry would also exert an
influence on POC export). One study estimated that, globally, 0.4-1.2 petragrams
of carbon are transported to the oceans as
POC each year. However, no global trends
in POC export have yet been assessed.139
Several studies have observed marked
increases in the annual fluxes of DOC
in many temperate and boreal streams
around the world. While it has been difficult to attribute all the observed trends
to a single cause,140 hydrology appears to
play a role in some cases, through changes
in groundwater drainage. For example,
in the Arctic, several studies have found
strong correlations between daily river
discharge and DOC concentrations.141 In
this context, the increases in the annual
discharge of the six major rivers of the
Russian Federation Arctic142 and especially
the recently discovered increase in minimum flows across Northern Eurasian panArctic143 discussed in the section on runoff
and streamflow trends may have important consequences for the carbon cycle.
Because minimum flows generally reflect
the influence of groundwater, the cause
of these trends has been speculated to be
a reduction in the intensity of seasonal
soil freezing, allowing more connectivity

200

in subsurface drainage networks. If this
process is indeed occurring, it is conceivable that the increased flushing of the soils
by groundwater, accompanied by longer
growing seasons and greater microbial
activity during seasons in which the soils
historically have been frozen, could lead
to greater mobility and loss of soil carbon.
Establishing a link between these phenomena will require further research. In addition, the thawing of permafrost in Siberia
may release large amounts of soil carbon
into streams in the future,144 but this is
based on a space-for-time substitution
rather than a direct observation of a trend.
In summary, while hydrologic processes
are important in all stages of the carbon
cycle, trends in the carbon cycle are only
sometimes strongly correlated with trends
in the hydrologic cycle – namely, when
water availability is the dominant limiting factor. For some ecosystems water
availability may become a limiting factor
as other climate factors change. Direct
observations of carbon fluxes and storages
have rarely been made over a long enough
time period or a large enough region
for significant trends to be detected, but
strong evidence can still exist to indicate
potential impacts of hydrologic trends on
the carbon cycle.

Is the hydrologic cycle
accelerating?
Contributor: Tom Huntington
There is a consensus among climate scientists that climate warming will intensify,
accelerate or enhance the global hydrologic cycle.145 Intensification could be
evidenced or caused by increasing rates of
evaporation, evapotranspiration, precipitation and streamflow (in some areas).
Associated changes in atmospheric water
content, soil moisture, ocean salinity
and glacier mass balance (seasonal) may
also be implicated. The mechanism most
often cited is that warmer air temperatures
result in higher saturation vapour pressure (about 7% higher per degree Kelvin)
and hence atmospheric water vapour
content.146 Some argue that recent satellite observations do not support subdued
sensitivity, and report increases in water
vapour content, precipitation and evaporation of about 6% per degree Kelvin.147 The
intensification response to future warming
remains a critical question in assessing
hydrologic response to climate warming.
The IPCC has found global average increases in surface air temperatures over
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
land of 0.74°C ± 0.18°C for 1906–2005.148
There are fewer long-term, continuous
and quality-assured records for precipitation than for air temperature and spatial
heterogeneity. Trends in precipitation
have been more variable spatially and
temporally than trends in temperature
(see section on precipitation trends), but
increases have been noted in most of
North America, southern South America,
northern Eurasia and western Australia
and decreases in western Africa and the
Sahel and Chile during 1901-2005. Current estimates of global average longterm trends in precipitation do not show
significantly increasing precipitation over
the period of observation as earlier assessments found,149 possibly because of recent
decreases and different methodologies and
observations. There is also some evidence
that snowfall has increased in northern
high latitudes150 and over mountain and
subpolar glaciers.151
Recent studies or assessments have reviewed various components of the hydrologic system and have concluded that the
evidence supports an ongoing intensification of the hydrologic cycle,152 though
with substantial variability across regions
and time. One frequent concern is that
data are usually incomplete both temporally and spatially.
Evapotranspiration cannot be directly
measured over large land areas, but indirect measurements from long-term river
basin water balance studies provide reasonable estimates based on precipitation
minus runoff (assuming no net change in
storage). Increases in precipitation were
substantially higher than increases in
runoff, suggesting that during the 20th
century evapotranspiration had increased
in the Mississippi River basin, other large
and smaller river basins in the continental
United States and the La Plata River basin
in South America.153 In most of Canada
streamflow has been stable or decreasing
(see section on runoff and streamflow
trends), but precipitation has been increasing.154 Together, these observations
suggest that evapotranspiration has been
increasing.155
As discussed in the section on ‘Changes
in evaporation and evapotranspiration’,
pan evaporation has decreased over much
of the continental United States and the
former Soviet Union, despite indications
of increased actual evapotranspiration.
Although the apparent difference in
direction of trends in pan and actual
evapotranspiration has been termed the
Water in a changing world

‘evaporation paradox’,156 the reasons
are likely to be more straightforward.
In arid regions increasing actual evapotranspiration may result from increasing
precipitation because evaporative demand
greatly exceeds supply. In humid areas
increasing actual evapotranspiration may
result from decreases in net radiation
and surface humidity, and perhaps some
change in surface wind.
Atmospheric water vapour content (specific humidity) has increased in recent
decades because warmer air can hold more
moisture.157 This aspect of an intensifying
hydrologic cycle is profoundly important
because water vapour is also a radiatively
active gas.158 Because accumulation of
other radiatively active gases induces
climate warming, this feedback mechanism increasing atmospheric water vapour
content will amplify the warming.

3

An accelerated
global water
cycle associated
with global
warming could
have important
consequences
for the world’s
water resources

As summarized earlier, analysis of streamflow trends in northern temperate and
high latitudes and in southern temperate
latitudes shows more upward than downward trends, while parts of West Africa,
Southern Europe and southernmost South
America have seen decreased runoff.159
River basins in the continental United
States show trends towards increasing
mean and low flows but no clear evidence
of trend direction in high flows.160 Most
rivers draining to the Arctic Ocean show
increasing flow, although the cause of
these trends, which are mostly in winter
discharge, remain unclear.161
On balance, there is some observational
evidence that surface air temperature
warming has intensified the global hydrologic cycle. Data limitations in length
of record, continuity and spatial coverage
contribute uncertainty to this broad conclusion, and especially for changes in hydrologic extremes (such as floods). Natural
climatic and multiyear variability associated with large-scale atmospheric circulation patterns such as the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation
and the North Atlantic Oscillation influence many of the observed trends in ways
not yet fully understood.

Assessing future impacts of
climate change
Contributor: Rick Lawford
An accelerated global water cycle associated with global warming could have
important consequences for the world’s
water resources. Focusing on projected
201

PART

3

many of the more
indirect impacts of
climate change on
surface water are
not fully known

Chapter 11C
future changes, this section considers the
consequences for water management as
well as adaptation strategies for coping.
The latest IPCC report describes water
cycle effects associated with projected
global warming ranging from a warmer
atmosphere that holds more water vapour
to more severe regional water shortages
in semi-arid and arid regions.162 These
projections result mostly from general
circulation models of the coupled landatmosphere-ocean climate system. These
models represent the climatic forcings and
response of the Earth’s systems to these
forcings and to anthropogenic changes in
the composition of the atmosphere, typically at spatial resolutions of 2°-4° latitude
by longitude. Although the reliability of
these projections is improving, a number
of inherent uncertainties remain because
of poorly defined initial conditions, natural and human processes and feedbacks,
inadequate process representation in climate models, scale mismatches, extremes
of climate and long-term climate variability, among other reasons. Furthermore,
accurate projections of future changes in
land hydrologic processes based on general
circulation model simulations are complicated by subgrid spatial heterogeneity and
the highly non-linear nature of the processes. Projected changes based on these
simulations are generally more accurate
at large scales and less so at the regional
scales where mitigation and adaptation
must take place.
Due to the localized response of water
resources to large-scale forcings, global
projections from climate models are of
limited value for water resources applications unless accompanied by downscaling.
Hydrologic models are a central component of the tools used to assess the possible implications of a change in climate
for the hydrology of a location or a basin.
Climate projections must be transformed
into values at points or for small areas for
use in impact assessments. Downscaling
can be conducted by statistical methods
or dynamic regional climate models.163
Regional models can use global model
outputs as their boundary conditions to
provide much higher resolution outputs
that account more fully for topography
and more accurately represent critical
physical processes. Statistical downscaling methods are easier to apply and hence
more widely used; they involve ‘training’
a statistical model that relates large-scale
climate model output to local conditions using historical observations (for
example, of physical climate variables like

202

precipitation and temperature) and historical general circulation models, and then
applying the same relationships to general
circulation model simulations of future
large-scale conditions.
Hydrologic impact studies assess the
effects of climate change on individual
processes to infer how the process may
change with a shifting climate. They typically use deterministic hydrologic models
to estimate changes in water availability
and related impacts. Hydrologic sensitivity
studies involve running models with and
without a particular process to determine
its contributions.
Ensemble simulations provide another
technique for assessing the uncertainty
in impact of changes due to climate and
other factors. On a global basis and for the
Colorado River basin the nature of runoff
changes is projected by a suite of general
circulation models using this ensemble
information to estimate uncertainty in
projections of future hydrologic change.164
Approaches to incorporating climate
change information in decision-making
can be either direct or indirect. Direct
approaches incorporate climate change
information directly into decision-making
– for example, climate scientists interacting with partnering utilities to find space
and time scales appropriate for adaptations
to reduce the risk of climate extremes.
Indirect approaches involve potentially
affected people in studies of the readiness
of societies to adapt to climate change.
Although the indirect approach has
dominated to date, as water managers
and decision-makers become more serious about adaptation to climate change,
the direct approach will likely begin to
predominate.

Summary
Table 11.2 summarizes the key findings of
a literature review of ongoing changes in
the land surface water cycle. The picture is
incomplete – both because a brief summary such as this cannot be exhaustive and
because the most comprehensive studies
have been conducted where the highestquality and lengthiest datasets are available, resulting in non-uniform coverage
globally. Furthermore, while confidence in
projections of the thermal aspects of climate change is growing, many of the more
indirect impacts of climate change on
surface water are not fully known. Improving this knowledge by acquiring better
and more comprehensive data is critical
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle

Table 11.2

3

Summary of key findings relative to trends in land surface water cycle components

Hydrologic variable

Key findings

Precipitation

The mode of precipitation may be more important than the average precipitation in determining
hydrologic impacts. Widespread increases in heavy precipitation events have been observed in some places
where total precipitation has decreased. At the same time the length, frequency and intensity of heat
waves have widely increased. In addition, more precipitation now falls as rain rather than snow in northern
regions. All these changes are consistent with a warmer atmosphere with a greater water-holding capacity.

Evaporation and
evapotranspiration

Several studies provide evidence that on average for large areas of Asia and North America, actual
evapotranspiration is increasing, even though pan evaporation is decreasing.

Soil moisture

In-situ soil moisture measurements are too sparse to draw conclusions about multidecadal soil moisture
trends at the global scale, and current satellite sensors are suboptimal in terms of microwave frequency
and have record lengths that are too short to provide meaningful information about trends. Studies using
physically based model reconstructions with precipitation and temperature to estimate soil wetness are
not comprehensive enough to fully understand the uncertainties and generate unambiguous results.

Runoff and streamflow

Two recent studies that assess high and low flow trends on a worldwide basis concluded that their
results do not support the hypothesis that global warming has, to date, caused an increase in hydrologic
extremes, such as more floods and (hydrologic) droughts. Where long streamflow records support
century-scale trend analysis, there is evidence of increases in low flows and mean annual flows, but not
floods. These changes appear to be generally consistent with observed precipitation increases over the
same period.

Groundwater

A recent US Climate Change Science Program report states that ‘. . . the ability to predict the effects of
climate and climate change on groundwater systems is nowhere near as advanced as for surface water
systems.’ Much more work is needed to understand the sensitivity of this critical resource to climate
change globally.

Reservoir, lake and
wetland storage

Changes in lake extent have been observed in many parts of the world over the past few decades, but the
primary factors behind these changes are regionally specific. Decadal scale variations in lake, wetland and
reservoir storage are natural characteristics of the dynamics of these water bodies and cannot necessarily
be ascribed to climate, land cover or other anthropogenic causes.

Permafrost

Changes in the physical climate at high latitudes, primarily increasing air temperature, are forcing changes
in permafrost conditions and permafrost degradation. These include increased permafrost temperatures,
thickening of the active layer, and thermokarst and talik development (including changes in the extent
of thaw lakes) over the Northern Hemisphere permafrost regions. Ground-based measurements indicate
that the magnitude of permafrost temperature increase is greatest in continuous permafrost regions and
transitions to no change in discontinuous and sporadic permafrost regions.

Snow

Most studies suggest that over the Northern Hemisphere the length of the snow cover season has
decreased and spring melt has occurred earlier, over the last 50-100 years. Some studies suggest that
these changes may have accelerated in the last several decades; however inconsistencies in data sources
complicate such a conclusion.

Glaciers

There is strong evidence that glaciers have retreated globally since the middle of the 19th century, after
the ‘little ice age’, and this retreat has accelerated from the mid-1970s as a response to rapid increases in
air temperature, and changes in precipitation amount and rain and snow partitioning. Although there is
evidence of glacier retreat globally, tropical glaciers are more sensitive than those at higher latitudes, and
have shown the most rapid changes.

to adapting water management to global
change. In addition to these requirements,
an end-to-end analysis (from data through
models to decision-making) is needed to
identify the most significant sources of
uncertainty and misunderstanding.
A deficiency of this review is that the published literature is heavily biased towards
the ‘old world’ because these countries
are much more likely to have long-term
hydrologic observations that support rigorous statistical trend analyses. In almost
all cases the hydrologic time series that
are the basis for the studies summarized
in this chapter are in-situ observations.
Ongoing efforts, such as the International

Water in a changing world

Hydrological Programme’s Flow Regimes
from International Experimental Network
and Data (FRIEND), are helping rebuild
hydrologic networks in developing countries but have not existed long enough
to provide stable multidecadal record
lengths for trend analysis. This should
also be alleviated as satellite records of
key hydrologic variables become long
enough to support trend analyses, and as
methods of merging multisatellite data
sources are improved. The Global Earth
Observation System of Systems (GEOSS)
effort, fostered by the Group on Earth
Observations, has improvement of Earth,
and specifically hydro­logic observations,
as a central goal.

203

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Notes
Milly et al. 2008.

40. Kundzewicz et al. 2005; Svensson,
Kundzewicz, and Maurer 2005.

87. Zhang 2005.

1.
2.

Giorgi 2002.

41. Zhang et al. 2001.

89. Brown, Hinkel, and Nelson 2000.

3.

IPCC 2007.

42. Lins and Slack 1999, 2005.

90. Harris et al. 2003.

4.

IPCC 2007, figure 3.12.

43. McCabe and Wolock 2002.

91. Zhao et al. 2004.

5.

IPCC 2007.

44. Hannaford and Marsh 2007.

92. Frauenfeld et al. 2004.

6.

L’hote et al. 2002.

45. Mudelsee et al. 2003.

93. Zhao et al. 2004.

7.

IPCC 2007, chapter 10.

46. Yiou et al. 2006.

94. Zhao et al. 2004.

8.

IPCC 2007, chapter 3.

47. Lindstrom and Bergstrom 2004.

95. Smith, Saatchi, and Randerson 2004.

9.

IPCC 2007, chapter 9.

48. Birsan et al. 2005.

96. McDonald et al. 2004.

10. Shuttleworth 2008.

49. Kahya and Kalayci 2004.

97. Barnett, Adam, and Lettenmaier 2005.

11. Farahani et al. 2007. An exception is
accurate-weighing lysimeters, which are
very expensive and are mainly used in
short-term research studies to measure
evapotranspiration.

50. Hisdal et al. 2001.

98. Brown 2000.

51. Peterson et al. 2002.

99. Déry and Brown 2007.

52. Smith et al. 2007.

100. Dye 2002.

53. Svensson, Kvndzewicz, and Maurer
2005.

101. Frei, Robinson, and Hughes 1999.

12. Gedney et al. 2006.
13. See, for example, Brutsaert and Parlange
1998; Ohmura and Wild 2002; and Roderick and Farquhar 2002, 2004, 2005.
14. Shuttleworth et al. forthcoming.

54. Sheffield and Wood 2008.
55. Foster and Loucks 2006.
56. Backlund, Janetos, and Schimel 2008,
p. 145.

15. For example, Chattopadhyay and Hume
1997; Thomas 2000; Shenbin, Yvnfeng,
and Thomas 2006; Xu et al. 2006.

57. Vaccaro 1992.

16. For example, Askoy 1997; Omran 1998;
Cohen, Ianetz, and Stanhill 2002.

60. van Roosmalen, Christensen, and Sonnenborg 2007.

17. Stanhill and Cohen 2001.

61. Backlund, Janetos, and Schimel 2008.

18. IPCC 2007.

62. ICOLD 2003; Lempérière 2006.

19. Stanhill and Cohen 2001.

63. Lempérière 2006.

20. IPCC 2007.

64. Vörösmarty et al. 1997.

21. Roderick et al. 2007.

65. Chao, Wu, and Li 2008.

22. Bouchet 1963.

66. Meybeck 1995; Shiklomanov and Rodda
2003; Lehner and Döll 2004.

23. De Bruin 1983, 1989; McNaughton and
Spriggs 1986, 1989.

58. Scibek and Allen 2006.
59. Green et al. 2007.

67. Lehner and Döll 2004.

24. Shuttleworth et al. forthcoming.

68. www.caspage.citg.tudelft.nl.

25. Chattopadhyay and Hume 1997;
Thomas 2000; Xu et al. 2006; Shenbin,
Yunfeng, and Thomas 2006.

69. Smith, Sheng et al. 2005.

26. Chattopadhyay and Hume 1997; Thomas 2000; Xu et al. 2006.

70. Walter et al. 2006.
71. Smith, Sheng et al. 2005.
72. Lehner and Döll 2004.

88. Zhang et al. 2005.

102. Laternser and Schneebeli 2003.
103. Scherrer and Appenzeller 2004.
104. Ye 2000.
105. Brown and Goodison 1996.
106. Groisman and Easterling 1994.
107. Mote 2003.
108. Mote et al. 2005.
109. Stewart, Cayan, and Dettinger
2005.
110. Burns, Klaus, and McHale 2007.
111. Hodgkins, Dudley, and Huntington
2003; Hodgkins and Dudley 2006a.
112. Huntington et al. 2004.
113. Hodgkins and Dudley 2006b.
114. Mayewski and Jeschke 1979.
115. Liu et al. 2006; Aizen et al. 2006.
116. Francou et al. 2003.
117. Juen, Kaser, and Georges 2007.
118. Shi 2005.
119. Yao et al. 2004; Yao et al. 2007.
120. Kang et al. 2004.
121. Finaev 2007.
122. Aizen et al. 2005; Finaev 2007.

27. Lawrimore and Peterson 2000; Golubev
et al. 2001; Hobbins and Ramirez 2004.

73. Mitsch and Gosselink 2000.
74. Zhang et al. 1999, 2003.

123. Surazakov, Aizen, and Nikitin 2007.

28. Shuttleworth et al. 2009.

75. Brown and Goodison 1996, Zhang et
al 1999.

125. Aizen, Aizen, and Kuzmichenot 2007.

29. www.wcc.nrcs.usda.gov/scan/.

124. Aizen et al. 2006.

30. Robock et al. 2005; Li, Robock, and Wild
2007.

76. Brown and Goodison 1996.

126. Ageta et al. 2001; Paul et al. 2004.

77. Zhang et al. 1999.

31. Dai, Trenberthy, and Qian 2004.

78. Lawrence and Slater 2005.

127. Srivastava, Gupta, and Mukerji 2003;
Kulkarni et al. 2007.

32. Maurer et al. 2002.
33. Nijssen, Schnur, and Lettenmaier 2001.

79. Lachenbruch and Marshall 1986; Osterkamp 2005.

34. Sheffield and Wood 2008.

80. Osterkamp 2005.

35. Groisman et al. 2004; Andreadis and
Lettenmaier 2006.

81. Smith, Burgess et al. 2005.

129. Net primary productivity is generally estimated using satellite-derived
a normalized difference vegetation
index (NDVI).

82. Pavlov 1996.

36. Lu et al. 2005 and Li et al. 2005.

130. Fang et al. 2003.

83. Oberman and Mazhitova 2001.

37. Li, Robock, and Wild 2007.

131. Hicke et al. 2002.

84. Sharkhuu 2003.

38. Tapley et al. 2004; Rodell et al. 2006;
Yeh et al. 2006; Swenson and Wahr
2006; Syed et al. 2005.

85. Wu and Zhang 2008.

132. Baldocchi et al. 2001; Nemani et al.
2003.

86. Vonder Muhll et al. 2004.

133. See, for example, Dise et al. 1993.

39. Lins 2008.

204

128. IPCC 2007.

134. Kirschbaum 2006.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
135. Walter et al. 2006.
136. Smith, Sheng et al. 2005; Walter et al.
2006.
137. Westerling et al. 2006.
138. Holden et al. 2007; Knapp and Soule
2007.
139. Stallard 1998.
140. Worrall and Burt 2007.
141. Holmes et al. 2008; Raymond et al.
2007.
142. Peterson et al. 2002.
143. Smith et al. 2007.
144. Frey and Smith 2005.
145. Del Genio, Lacis, and Ruedy 1991;
Loaiciga et al. 1996; Trenberth 1999;
Held and Soden 2000; Arnell and Liu
2001.
146. Allen and Ingram 2002.
147. Wentz et al. 2007.
148. Trenberth et al. 2007.
149. Dai, Fung, and Del Genio 1997; New
et al. 2001.
150. Trenberth et al. 2007.
151. Dyurgerov 2003; see also the section
on trends for glaciers.
152. Dai 2006; Held and Soden 2006;
Huntington 2006; Dirmeyer and
Brubaker 2006; Holland et al. 2007;
Trenberth et al. 2007.
153. Milly and Dunne 2001; Walter et al.
2004; Szilagyi, Katul, and Parlange
2002; Berbery and Barros 2002.
154. Zhang et al. 2000.
155. Fernandes, Korolevych, and Wang
2007.
156. Bouchet 1963.
157. Dai 2006; Willett et al. 2007; Wentz et
al. 2007; Allen and Ingram 2002; Held
and Soden 2006.
158. Held and Soden 2000.
159. Milly et al. 2005.
160. Lins and Slack 1999, 2005.
161. Peterson et al. 2002; Adam and Lettenmaier 2008.
162. IPCC 2007.
163. See, for example, Wood et al. 2004 for
a comparison.
164. Milly, Dunne, and Vecchia 2005.

References
Adam, J. C., and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2008.
Application of New Precipitation and
Reconstructed Streamflow Products to
Streamflow Trend Attribution in Northern Eurasia. Journal of Climate 21 (8):
1807-28.
Ageta, Y., N. Naito, M. Nakawo, K. Fujita,
K. Shankar, A. P. Pokhrel, and D.
Wangda. 2001. Study Project on the

Water in a changing world

Recent Rapid Shrinkage of SummerAccumulation Type Glaciers in the Himalayas, 1997-1999. Bulletin of Glaciological
Research 18: 45-9.
Aizen, V. B., E. M. Aizen, K. Fujita, S. Nikitin, K. Kreutz, and N. Takeuchi. 2005.
Stable-Isotope Time Series and Precipitation Origin from Firn Cores and Snow
Samples, Altai Glaciers, Siberia. Journal of
Glaciology 51 (175): 637-54.
Aizen, V. B., E. M. Aizen, and V. A.
Kuzmichenok. 2007. Glaciers and
Hydrological Changes in the Tien Shan:
Simulation and Prediction. Environmental
Research Letters 2 (October-December):
1-10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/17489326/2/4/045019.
Aizen, V. B., E. M. Aizen, A. B. Surazakov,
and V. A. Kuzmichenok. 2006. Assessment of Glacial Area and Volume Change
in Tien Shan (Central Asia) During the
Last 150 Years Using Geodetic, Aerial
Photo, ASTER and SRTM Data. Annals of
Glaciology 43: 202-13.
Allen, M. R., and W. J. Ingram. 2002. Constraints on Future Changes in Climate
and the Hydrologic Cycle. Nature 418
(6903): 224-32.
Andreadis, K., and D. Lettenmaier. 2006.
Trends on 20th Century Drought over
the Continental United States. Geophysical Research Letters 33: L10403.
doi:10.1029/2006GL025711.
Arnell, N. W., and Liu C. 2001. Hydrology
and Water Resources. In Climate Change
2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, eds. J. J. McCarthy, O. F. Canziani, N.
A. Leary, D. J. Dokken, and K. S. White.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Askoy, B. 1997. Variations and Trends in
Global Solar Radiation for Turkey. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 58 (3-4):
71-7.
Backlund, P., A. Janetos, and D. Schimel,
eds. 2008. The Effects of Climate Change
on Agriculture, Land Resources, Water
Resources, and Biodiversity in the United
States. Washington, DC: U.S. Climate
Change Science Program.
Baldocchi, D., E. Falge, Gu L., R. Olson,
D. Hollinger, S. Running, P. Anthoni,
C. Bernhofer, K. Davis, R. Evans, J.
Fuentes, A. Goldstein, G. Katul, B. Law,
Lee X., Y. Malhi, T. Meyers, W. Munger,
W. Oechel, K.T. Paw U, K. Pilegaard,
H.P. Schmid, R. Valentini, S. Verma,
T. Vesala, K. Wilson, and S. Wofsy.
2001. FLUXNET: A New Tool to Study
the Temporal and Spatial Variability of
Ecosystem-Scale Carbon Dioxide, Water
Vapour, and Energy Flux Densities. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society
82 (11): 2415-34.

3

Barnett T. P., J. C. Adam, and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2005. Potential Impacts of a
Warming Climate on Water Availability
in Snow-Dominated Regions. Nature 438
(7066): 303-9.
Berbery, E. G., and V. R. Barros. 2002. The
Hydrologic Cycle of the La Plata Basin in
South America. Journal of Hydrometeorology 3 (6): 630-45.
Birsan, M.-V., P. Molnar, P. Burlando, and
M. Pfaundler. 2005. Streamflow Trends
in Switzerland. Journal of Hydrology 314:
312-29.
Bouchet, R. J. 1963. Evapotranspiration
Reele, Evapotranspiration Potentielle, et
Production Agricole. Annals of Agronomy
14: 543-824.
Brown, J., O. J. J. Ferrians, J. A. Heginbottom, and E. S. Melnikov. 1997.
International Permafrost Association
Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and
Ground Ice Conditions. US Geological
Survey Circum-Pacific Map Series Map
CP-45. Boulder, CO: National Snow and
Ice Data Center and World Data Center
for Glaciology.
Brown, R. D. 2000. Northern Hemisphere
Snow Cover Variability and Change,
1915–97. Journal of Climate 13: 2339-55.
Brown, R. D., and B. E. Goodison. 1996.
Interannual Variability in Reconstructed
Canadian Snow Cover, 1915-1992. Journal of Climate 9 (6): 1299-1318.
Brown, J. K., M. Hinkel, and F. E. Nelson.
2000. The Circumpolar Active Layer
Monitoring (CALM) Program: Research
Design and Initial Results. Polar Geography 24 (3): 166-258.
Brutsaert, W., and M. P. Parlange. 1998.
Hydrological Cycle Explains the Evaporation Paradox. Nature 396 (5): 284-5.
Burns, D. A., J. Klaus, and M. R. McHale.
2007. Recent Climate Trends and Implications for Water Resources in the Catskill
Mountain Region, New York, USA. Journal of Hydrology 336 (1-2): 155-170.
Chao B. F., Wu Y. H., and Li Y. S. 2008.
Impact of Artificial Reservoir Water Impoundment on Global Sea Level. Science
320 (5873): 212-14.
Chattopadhyay, N., and M. Hume. 1997.
Evaporation and Potential Evaporation
in India under Conditions of Recent and
Future Climate Change. Agricultural and
Forest Meteorology 87: 55-73.
Cohen, S., A. Ianetz, and G. Stanhill.
2002. Evaporative Climate Changes at
Bet Dagan, Israel, 1964-1998. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 111: 83-91.
Dai, A. 2006. Recent Climatology, Variability, and Trends in Global Surface Humidity. Journal of Climate 19 (15): 3589-606.

205

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Dai, A., I. Y. Fung, and A. D. Del Genio.
1997. Surface Observed Global Land
Precipitation Variations during 1900-88.
Journal of Climate 10: 2943-62.
Dai, A., K. Trenberth, and T. Qian. 2004. A
Global Dataset of Palmer Drought Severity Index for 1870-2002: Relationship
with Soil Moisture and Effects of Surface
Warming. Journal of Hydrometeorology 5
(6): 1117-30.
De Bruin, H. A. R. 1983. A Model of the
Priestley-Taylor Parameter, α. Journal of
Applied Meteorology 22: 572-8.
———. 1989. Physical Aspects of the
Planetary Boundary Layer. In Estimation
of Areal Evaporation, eds. T. A. Black, D.
L. Spittlehouse, M. D. Novak, and D. T.
Price. Wallingford, UK: International Association of Hydrological Sciences .
Del Genio, A. D., A. A. Lacis, and R. A.
Ruedy. 1991. Simulations of the Effect
of a Warmer Climate on Atmospheric
Humidity. Nature 351: 382-5.
Déry, S. J., and R. D. Brown. 2007. Recent
Northern Hemisphere Snow Cover
Extent Trends and Implications for
the Snow-Albedo Feedback. Geophysical Research Letters 34: L22504.
doi:10.1029/2007GL031474.
Dirmeyer, P. A., and K. L. Brubaker.
2006. Evidence for Trends in the
Northern Hemisphere Water Cycle.
Geophysical Research Letters 33: L14712.
doi:14710.11029/12006GL026359.
Dise, N. B., E. Gorham, and E. S. Verry.
1993. Environmental Factors Controlling
Methane Emissions from Peatands in
Northern Minnesota. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 98 (D6):
10583-94.
Dye, D. G. 2002. Variability and Trends in
the Annual Snow-Cover Cycle in Northern Hemisphere Land Areas, 1972–2000.
Hydrological Processes 16: 3065-77.
Dyurgerov, M. 2003. Mountain and
Subpolar Glaciers Show an Increase
in Sensitivity to Climate Warming and
Intensification of the Water Cycle. Journal
of Hydrology 282: 164-76.
Fang J. Y., Piao S., C. B Field, Pan Y., Guo
Q., Zhou L., Peng C., and Tao S. 2003.
Increasing Net Primary Production in
China from 1982 to 1999. Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment 1 (6): 29397.
Farahani, H. J., T. A. Howell, W. J. Shuttleworth, and W. C. Bausch. 2007. Evapotranspiration: Progress in Measurement
and Modeling in Agriculture. Transactions
of the American Society of Agricultural and
Biological Engineers 50(5): 1627-38.
Fernandes, R., V. Korolevych, and
S. Wang. 2007. Trends in Land

206

Dioxide–Altered Climates on Groundwater Recharge. Vadose Zone Journal 6:
597-609. doi:10.2136/vzj2006.0099.

Evapotranspiration over Canada for
the Period 1960-2000 Based on in Situ
Climate Observations and a Land Surface
Model. Journal of Hydrometeorology 8:
1016-30.

Groisman, P. Y., and D. R. Easterling.
1994. Variability and Trends in Total Precipitation and Snowfall over the United
States and Canada. Journal of Climate 7:
184-205.

Finaev, A. F. 2007. Impact of Climate and
Water Resources Changes on Land Degradation in Tajikistan. Proceedings of the
NASA LCLUC Workshop, 16-21 September 2007, Urumqi, China.
Foster, S., and D. P. Loucks, eds. 2006.
Non-Renewable Groundwater Resources.
A Guidebook on Socially-Sustainable
Management for Water-Policy Makers. IHPVI, Series on Groundwater No.10. Paris:
United Nations Children’s Fund.
Francou, B., M. Vuille, P. Wagnon, J.
Mendoza, and J.-E. Sicart. 2003.
Tropical Climate Change Recorded by a
Glacier in the Central Andes during the
Last Decades of the Twentieth Century:
Chacaltaya, Bolivia, 16S. Journal of
Geophysical Research 108 (D5): 4154.
doi:10.1029/2002JD002959.
Frauenfeld, O., Zhang T., Roger G. Barry,
and David G. Gilichinsky. 2004. Interdecadal Changes in Seasonal Freeze
and Thaw Depths in Russia. Journal of
Geophysical Research 109: D05101.
doi:10.1029/2003JD004245.
Frei, A., D. A. Robinson, and M. G.
Hughes. 1999. North American Snow
Extent: 1900-1994, International Journal
of Climatology 19: 1517-34.
Frey, K. E., and L. C. Smith. 2005. Amplified Carbon Release from Vast West
Siberian Peatlands by 2100. Geophysical
Research Letters 32 (9).
Garcia, N. O., and C. R. Mechoso. 2005.
Variability in the Discharge of South
American Rivers and in Climate. Hydrological Sciences Journal 50: 459-78.
Gedney, N., P. M. Cox, R. A. Betts, O.
Boucher, C. Huntingford, and P. A.
Stott. 2006. Detection of a Direct Carbon Dioxide Effect in Continental River
Runoff Records. Nature 439 (16): 835-7.
doi:10.1038.
Giorgi, F. 2002. Dependence of Surface
Climate Interannual Variability on Spatial
Scale. Geophysical Research Letters 29:
2101.
Golubev, V. S., J. H. Lawrimore, P. Y.
Groisman, N. A. Speranskaya, S. A.
Zhuravin, M. J. Menne, T. C. Peterson,
and R. W. Malone. 2001. Evaporation
Changes over the Contiguous United
States and the Former USSR: a Reassessment. Geophysical Research Letters 28
(13): 2665-68.
Green, T. R., B. C. Bates, S. P. Charles, and
P. M. Fleming. 2007. Physically Based
Simulation of Potential Effects of Carbon

Groisman, P., R. Knight, T. Karl, D. Easterling, B. Sun, and J. Lawrimore. 2004.
Contemporary Changes of the Hydrological Cycle over the Contiguous United
States: Trends Derived from In-Situ
Observations. Journal of Hydrometeorology 5: 64-85.
GWSP (Global Water System Project).
2005. The Global Water System Project
Science Framework and Implementation Activities. Earth System Science
Partnership Report No. 3. www.gwsp.
org/fileadmin/downloads/GWSP_Report_
No_1_Internetversion_01.pdf.
Hannaford, J., and T. J. Marsh. 2007. HighFlow and Flood Trends in a Network of
Undisturbed Catchments in the U.K.
International Journal of Climatology 27.
doi:10.10002.joc.1643.
Harris, C., D. Vonder Muhll, K. Isaksen, W.
Haeberli, J. L. Sollide, L. King, P. Holmlund, F. Dramis, M. Guglielmin, and
D. Palacios. 2003. Warming Permafrost
in European Mountains. Global Planet
Change 39: 215-25.
Held, I. M., and B. J. Soden. 2000. Water
Vapour Feedback and Global Warming.
Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 25: 441-75.
———. 2006. Robust Responses of the
Hydrological Cycle to Global Warming.
Journal of Climate 19: 5686-99.
Hicke, J. A., G. P. Asner, J. T. Randerson, C. Tucker, S. Los R. Birdsey, J. C.
Jenkins, and C. Field. 2002. Trends in
North American Net Primary Productivity Derived from Satellite Observations,
1982-1998. Global Biogeochemical Cycles
16 (2).
Hisdal, H., K. Stahl, L. M. Tallaksen, and
S. Demuth. 2001. Have Streamflow
Droughts in Europe Become More Severe
or Frequent? International Journal of
Climatology 21 (1): 317-33.
Hobbins, M. T., and J. A. Ramirez.
2004. Trends in Pan Evaporation
and Actual Evapotranspiration across
the Conterminous U.S.: Paradoxical or Complementary? Geophysical
Research Letters 31: L3503. doi:10,
1029/2004GL019846.
Hodgkins, G. A., and R. W. Dudley. 2006a.
Changes in Late-Winter Snowpack
Depth, Water Equivalent, and Density in
Maine, 1926-2004. Hydrological Processes
20: 741-51.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
———. 2006b. Changes in the Timing of
Winter-Spring Streamflows in Eastern
North America, 1913–2002. Geophysical Research Letters 33: L06402.
doi:10.1029/2005GL025593.
Hodgkins, G. A., R. W. Dudley, and T. G.
Huntington. 2003. Changes in the Timing of High River Flows in New England
over the 20th Century. Journal of Hydrology 278: 244-52.
Holden, Z. A., P. Morgan, M. A. Crimmins,
R. K. Steinhorst, and A. M. S. Smith.
2007. Fire Season Precipitation Variability
Influences Fire Extent and Severity in a
Large Southwestern Wilderness Area,
United States. Geophysical Research Letters 34 (16).
Holland, M. M., J. Finnis, A. P. Barrett, and
M. C. Serreze. 2007. Projected Changes
in Arctic Ocean Freshwater Budgets. Journal of Geophysical Research 112: G04S55.
doi:10.1029/2006JG000354.
Holmes, R. M., J. W. McClelland, P. A.
Raymond, B. B. Frazer, B. J. Peterson,
and M. Stieglitz. 2008. Lability of DOC
Transported by Alaskan Rivers to the
Arctic Ocean. Geophysical Research Letters
35 (3). doi: 10.1029/2007GL032837.
Hu C., Liu C., Zhou Z., and R. Jayakumar.
2008. Changes in Water and Sediment
Loads of Rivers in China. International
Research and Training Center on Erosion
and Sedimentation, Beijing.
Huntington, T. G. 2006. Evidence for
Intensification of the Global Water Cycle:
Review and Synthesis. Journal of Hydrology 319: 83-95.
Huntington, T. G., G. A. Hodgkins, B. D.
Keim, and R. W. Dudley. 2004. Changes
in the Proportion of Precipitation Occurring as Snow in New England (1949 to
2000). Journal of Climate 17: 2626-36.
ICOLD (International Commission of
Large Dams). 2003. World Register of
Dams 2003. Paris: International Commission of Large Dams.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007. Climate Change
2007: The Physical Science Basis. Summary
for Policymakers. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. http://ipccwg1.ucar.edu/wg1/wg1-report.html.
Juen, I., G. Kaser, and C. Georges. 2007.
Modelling Observed and Future Runoff
from a Glacierized Tropical Catchment
(Cordillera Blanca, Perú). Global and
Planetary Change 59: 37-48.
Kahya, E., and S. Kalayci. 2004. Trend
Analysis of Streamflow in Turkey. Journal
of Hydrology 289: 128-44.

Water in a changing world

Kang E.-S., Shen Y.-P., Li X., Liu C.-H., Xie
Z.-C., Li P.-J., Wang J., Che T., and Wu
L.-Z. 2004. Assessment of the Glacier
and Snow Water Resources in China, a
Report to the Ministry of Water Resources of China. CAREERI/CAS, Lanzhou.
Kirschbaum, M. U. F. 2006. The Temperature Dependence of Organic-Matter
Decomposition – Still a Topic of Debate.
Soil Biology and Biochemistry 38: 2510-18.
Knapp, P. A., and P. T. Soule. 2007. Trends
in Midlatitude Cyclone Frequency and
Occurrence during Fire Season in the
Northern Rockies: 1900-2004. Geophysical Research Letters 34: L20707.
doi:10.1029/2007GL031216.
Kundzewicz, Z. W., D. Graczyk, T. Maurer,
I. Pinskwar, M. Radziejewski, C. Svensson, and M. Szwed. 2004. Detection of
Change in World-Wide Hydrological Time
Series of Maximum Annual Flow. GRDC Report Series Report 32. Koblenz, Germany:
Global Runoff Data Centre.
———. 2005. Trend Detection in River Flow
Series: 1. Annual maximum flow. Hydrological Science Journal 50 (5): 797-810.
Kulkarni, A. V., I. M Bahuguna, B. P.
Rathore, S. K. Singh, S. S. Randhawa,
R. K. Sood, and S. Dhar. 2007. Glacial
Retreat in Himalaya Using Indian Remote
Sensing Satellite Data. Current Science 92
(1): 1-10.
Lachenbruch, A. H., and B. V. Marshall.
1986. Changing Climate: Geothermal
Evidence from Permafrost in the Alaskan
Arctic. Science 234: 689-96.
Lal, R., M. Griffin, J. Apt, L. Lave, and N.
Granger Morgan. 2004. Managing Soil
Carbon. Science 304 (5669): 393.
Laternser, M., and M. Schneebeli. 2003.
Long-Term Snow Climate Trends of the
Swiss Alps (1931–99). International Journal of Climatology 23: 733-50.
Lawrence, D. M., and A. G. Slater. 2005.
A Projection of Severe Near-Surface
Permafrost Degradation during the 21st
Century. Geophysical Research Letters 32:
L24401. doi:10.1029/2005GL025080.
Lawrimore, J. H., and T. C. Peterson.
2000. Pan Evaporation Trends in Dry and
Humid Regions of the United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 1 (6): 543-46.
Lehner, B., and P. Döll. 2004. Development
and Validation of a Global Database of
Lakes, Reservoirs and Wetlands. Journal of
Hydrology 296: 1-22.
Lempérière, F. 2006. The Role of Dams in
the XXI Century: Achieving a Sustainable
Development Target. International Journal
on Hydropower & Dams 13 (3): 99-108.
L’hote, Y., G. Mahe, B. Some, and J. P. Triboulet. 2002. Analysis of a Sahelian Annual Rainfall Index Updated from 1896

3

to 2000. The Drought Still Goes on.
Hydrological Sciences Journal 47: 121-36.
Li H., A. Robock, Liu S., Mo X., and P. Viterbo. 2005. Evaluation of Reanalysis Soil
Moisture Simulations Using Updated Chinese Soil Moisture Observations. Journal
of Hydrometeorology 6: 180-93.
Li H., A. Robock, and M. Wild. 2007.
Evaluation of IPPC Fourth Assessment
Soil Moisture Simulations for the Second
Half of the Twentieth Century. Journal
of Geophysical Research 112: D06106.
doi:10.1029/2006JD007455.
Lindstrom, G., and S. Bergstrom. 2004.
Runoff Trends in Sweden 1807-2002.
Hydrological Sciences Journal 49: 69-83.
Lins, H. F. 2008. Challenges to Hydrological
Observations. WMO Bulletin 57 (1): 55-8.
Lins, H. F., and J. R. Slack. 1999. Streamflow Trends in the United States. Geophysical Research Letters 26: 227-30.
———. 2005. Seasonal and Regional Characteristics of U.S. Streamflow Trends in
the United States from 1940 to 1999.
Physical Geography 26: 489-501.
Liu Shiyin, Ding Yongjian, Shangguan
Donghui, Zhang Yong, Li Jing, Han
Haidong, Wang Jian, and Xie Changwei. 2006. Glacier Retreat as a Result of
Climate Change Due to Warming and
Increased Precipitation in the Tarim River
Basin, Northwest China. Annals of Glaciology 43 (1): 91-6.
Loaiciga, H. A., J. B. Valdes, R. Vogel, J.
Garvey, and H. Schwarz. 1996. Global
Warming and the Hydrologic Cycle.
Journal of Hydrology 174: 83-127.
Lu C., M. Kanamitsum, J. Roads, W. Ebisuzaki, K. Mitchell, and D. Lohmann.
2005. Evaluation of Soil Moisture in the
NCEP-NCAR and NCEP-DOE Global
Reanalyses. Journal of Hydrometeorology
6: 391-408.
Maurer, E. P., A. W. Wood, J. C. Adam, D.
P. Lettenmaier, and B. Nijssen. 2002.
A Long-Term Hydrologically-Based Data
Set of Land Surface Fluxes and States for
the Conterminous United States. Journal
of Climate 15 (22): 3237-51.
Mayewski, P. A., and P. A. Jeschke. 1979.
Himalayan and Trans-Himalayan Glacier
Fluctuations since AD 1812. Arctic and
Alpine Research 119 (3): 267-87.
McCabe, G. J., and D. M. Wolock.
2002. A Step Increase in Streamflow in the Conterminous United
States. Geophysical Research Letters 29.
doi:10.1029/2002GL015999.
McDonald, K. C., J. S. Kimball, E. Njoku, R.
Zimmermann, and M. Zhao. 2004. Variability in Springtime Thaw in the Terrestrial High Latitudes: Monitoring a Major
Control on the Biospheric Assimilation

207

PART

3

Chapter 11C

of Atmospheric CO2 with Spaceborne
Microwave Remote Sensing. Earth Interactions 8 (Paper No. 20): 1-23.
McNaughton, K. G., and T. W. Spriggs.
1986. A Mixed-Layer Model of Regional
Evaporation. Boundary Layer Meteorology
34:243-62.
———. 1989. An Evaluation of the PriestleyTaylor Equation. In Estimation of Areal
Evaporation, eds. T. A. Black, D. L. Spittlehouse, M. D. Novak, and D. T. Price.
Wallingford, UK: International Association of Hydrological Sciences.
Meybeck, M. 1995. Global Distribution of
Lakes. In Physics and Chemistry of Lakes,
eds. A. Lerman, D. M. Imboden, and J. R.
Gat. Berlin: Springer.
Milly, P. C. D., J. Betancourt, M. Falkenmark, R. M. Hirsch, Z. W. Kundzewicz,
D. P. Lettenmaier, and R. J. Stouffer.
2008. Stationarity Is Dead: Whither
Water Management? Science 319: 57374.
Milly, P. C. D., and K. A. Dunne. 2001.
Trends in Evaporation and Surface
Cooling in the Mississippi River Basin.
Geophysical Research Letters 28: 1219-22.
Milly, P. C. D., K. A. Dunne, and A. V. Vecchia. 2005. Global Pattern of Trends in
Streamflow and Water Availability in a
Changing Climate. Nature 438: 347-50.
Mitsch, W. J., and J. G. Gosselink. 2000.
Wetlands. New York: John Wiley and
Sons.
Montgomery, D. R. 2007. Soil Erosion
and Agricultural Sustainability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
104 (33): 13268-72.
Mote, P. W. 2003. Trends in Snow
Water Equivalent in the Pacific Northwest and Their Climatic Causes.
Geophysical Research Letters 30.
doi:10.1029/2003GL017258.
Mote, P. W., A. F. Hamlet, M. P. Clark,
and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2005. Declining
Mountain Snowpack in Western North
America. Bulletin of American Meteorological Society 86: 39-49.
Mudelsee, M., M. Börngen, G. Tetzlaff,
and U. Grünewald. 2003. No Upward
Trends in the Occurrence of Extreme
Floods in Central Europe. Nature 425:
166-9.

———. 2004. Changes in Australian Pan
Evaporation from 1970 to 2002. International Journal of Climatology 24: 1077-90.

Nijssen, B. N., R. Schnur, and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2001. Global Retrospective
Estimation of Soil Moisture Using the VIC
Land Surface Model, 1980-1993. Journal
of Climate 14 (8): 1790-1808.

———. 2005. Changes in New Zealand Pan
Evaporation from the 1970s. International Journal of Climatology 25: 2013-39.

Oberman, N. G., and G. G. Mazhitova.
2001. Permafrost Dynamics in the
Northeast of European Russia at the End
of the 20th Century. Norwegian Journal of
Geography 55: 241-4.

Roderick, M. L., L. D. Rotstayn, G. D.
Farquhar, and M. T. Hobbins. 2007. On
the Attribution of Changing Pan Evaporation. Geophysical Research Letters 34:
L17403. doi:10.1029/2007GL031166.

Ohmura, A., and M. Wild. 2002. Is the
Hydrological Cycle Accelerating? Science
298 (5597): 1345-6.

Scherrer, S. C., and C. Appenzeller. 2004.
Trends in Swiss Alpine Snow Days: The
Role of Local- and Large-Scale Climate
Variability. Geophysical Research Letters
31. doi:10.1029/2004GL020255.

Omran, M. A. 1998. Analysis of Solar Radiation over Egypt. Theoretical and Applied
Climatology 67: 225-40.

Scibek, J., and D. M. Allen. 2006. Comparing Modeled Responses to Two HighPermeability, Unconfined Aquifers to
Predicted Climate Change. Global and
Planetary Change 50: 50-62.

Osterkamp, T. E. 2005. The Recent Warming of Permafrost in Alaska. Global Planet
Change 49: 187-202. doi: 10.1016/j.
gloplacha.2005.09.001.
Paul, F., A. Kaab, M. Maisch, T. Kellenberger, and W. Haeberli. 2004.
Rapid Disintegration of Alpine Glaciers
Observed with Satellite Data. Geophysical Research Letters 31: L21402.
doi:10.1029/2004GL020816.

Sharkhuu, N. 2003. Recent Changes in
the Permafrost of Mongolia. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Permafrost, 21-25 July 2003, Zurich,
Switzerland, eds. M. Phillips, S. M.
Springman, and L. U. Arenson. Lesse,
The Netherlands: A.A. Balkema.

Pavlov, A. V. 1996. Permafrost-Climate
Monitoring of Russia: Analysis of Field
Data and Forecast. Polar Geography 20
(1): 44-64.

Sheffield, J., and E. Wood. 2008. Global
Trends and Variability in Soil Moisture
and Drought Characteristics, 1950-2000,
from Observation Driven Simulations of
the Terrestrial Hydrologic Cycle. Journal
of Climate 21: 432-58.

Peterson, B. J., R. M. Holmes, J. W. McClelland, C. J. Vörösmarty, R. B. Lammers,
A. I. Shiklomanov, and S. Rahmstorf.
2002. Increasing River Discharge to the
Arctic Ocean. Science 298: 2171-3.
Raymond, P. A., J. W. McClelland, R. M.
Holmes, A. V. Zhulidov, K. Mull, B. J.
Peterson, R. G. Striegl, G. R. Aiken,
and T. Y. Gurtovaya. 2007. Flux and Age
of Dissolved Organic Carbon Exported
to the Arctic Ocean: A Carbon Isotopic
Study of the Five Largest Arctic Rivers.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 21 (4). doi:
10.1029/2007GB002934.
Robock, A., M. Mu, K. Vinnikov, I. Trofimova, and T. Adamenko. 2005. FortyFive Years of Observed Soil Moisture in
the Ukraine: No Summer Desiccation
(Yet). Geophysical Research Letters 32:
L03401. doi:10.1029/2004GL021914.

Nemani, R. R., C. D. Keeling, Hashimoto
H., W. M. Jolly, S. C. Piper, C. J. Tucker,
R. B. Myneni, and S.W. Running. 2003.
Climate-Driven Increases in Global Terrestrial Net Primary Production from
1982 to 1999. Science 300 (5625):
1560-3.

Rodell, M., Chen J., H. Kato, J. Famiglietti,
J. Nigro, and C. Wilson. 2006. Estimating Groundwater Storage Changes
in the Mississippi River Basin (USA)
Using GRACE. Hydrogeology Journal.
doi:10.1007/s10040-006-0103-7. ftp://
ftp.csr.utexas.edu/pub/ggfc/papers/
Rodell2006_HJ.pdf.

New, M., M. Todd, M. Hulme, and P. D.
Jones. 2001. Precipitation Measurements
and Trends in the Twentieth Century.

Roderick, M. L., and G. D. Farquhar. 2002.
The Cause of Decreased Pan Evapora-

208

tion over the Past 50 Years. Science 298:
1410-11.

International Journal of Climatology 21:
1899-1922.

Shenbin, C., L. Yunfeng, and A. Thomas.
2006. Climatic Change on the Tibetan
Plateau: Potential Evapotranspiration
Trends from 1961-2000. Climate Change
76: 291-319.
Shi Y. F. 2005. Glacial Inventory of China
(Synthesis volume). Shanghai: Science
Popularization Press.
Shiklomanov, I. A., and J. Rodda. 2003.
World Water Resources at the Beginning of
the 21st Century. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Shuttleworth, W. J. 2008. Evapotranspiration Measurement Methods
2008. Southwest Hydrology 7 (1): 22-3.
www.swhydro.arizona.edu/archive/
V7_N1/.
Shuttleworth, W. J, A. S. Capdevila, M.
L. Roderick, and R. Scott. Forthcoming. On the Theory Relating Changes
in Area-Average and Pan Evaporation.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society.
Smith, S. L., M. M. Burgess, D. Riseborough, and F. M. Nixon. 2005. Recent
Trends from Canadian Permafrost Moni-

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle
toring Network Sites. Permafrost and
Periglacial Processes 16: 19-30.
Smith, L. C., T. M. Pavelsky, G. M. MacDonald, A. I. Shiklomanov, and R. B.
Lammers. 2007. Rising Minimum Flows
in Northern Eurasian Rivers: A Growing Influence of Groundwater in the
High-Latitude Hydrologic Cycle. Journal
Geophysical Research 112: G04S47.
doi:10.1029/2006JG000327.
Smith, N. V., S. S. Saatchi, and T.
Randerson. 2004. Trends in High
Latitude Soil Freeze and Thaw Cycles from 1988 to 2002. Journal of
Geophysical Research 109: D12101.
doi:10.1029/2003JD004472.
Smith, L. C., Sheng Y., G. M. MacDonald,
and L. D. Hinzman. 2005. Disappearing
Arctic Lakes. Science 308: 1429.
Srivastava, D., K. R. Gupta, and S. Mukerji,
eds. 2003. Proceedings: Workshop on
Gangotri Glacier: Lucknow 26-28 March
2003: Special Publication No. 80. Geological Survey of India. New Delhi: Vedams
eBooks.
Stallard, R. F. 1998. Terrestrial Sedimentation and the Carbon Cycle: Coupling
Weathering and Erosion to Carbon Burial.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 12: 231-57.
Stanhill, G., and S. Cohen. 2001. Global
Dimming: A Review of the Evidence for
A Widespread and Significant Reduction
in Global Radiation with Discussion of its
Probable Causes and Possible Agricultural
Consequences. Agriculture and Forest
Meteorology 107: 255-78.
Stewart, I. T., D.R. Cayan, and M. D. Dettinger. 2005. Changes toward Earlier
Streamflow Timing across Western North
America. Journal of Climatology 18:
1136-55.
Surazakov, A. B., V. B. Aizen, and S. A.
Nikitin. 2007. Glacier Changes in the
Siberian Altai Mountains, Ob River
Basin (1952-2006) Estimated with
High-Resolution Imagery. Environmental
Research Letters 2 04 5017. doi:10.1088
/1748-9326/214/045017. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/2/4/045017.
Svensson, C., Z. W. Kundzewicz, and T.
Maurer. 2005. Trend Detection in River
Flow Series: 2. Flood and low-flow index
series. Hydrological Science Journal 50:
811-24.
Swenson, S., and J. Wahr. 2006. PostProcessing Removal of Correlated Errors
in GRACE data. Geophysical Research
Letters 33: L08402. doi:10.1029/
2005GL025285.
Syed, T. H., J. S. Famiglietti, Chen J., M.
Rodell, S. I. Seneviratne, P. Viterbo, and C. R. Wilson. 2005. Total
Basin Discharge for the Amazon and

Water in a changing world

Mississippi River Basins from GRACE
and a Land-Atmosphere Water Balance.
Geophysical Research Letters 32: L24404.
doi:10.1029/2005GL024851.
Szilagyi, J., G. G. Katul, and M. B.
Parlange. 2002. Evapotranspiration
Intensifies over the Conterminous United
States. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 127: 354-62.
Tapley B. D., S. V. Bettadpur, M. Watkins,
and C. Reigber. 2004. The Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment: Mission
Overview and Early Results. Geophysical Research Letters 31: L09607. doi:
10.1029/2004GL019920.
Thomas, A. 2000. Spatial and Temporal
Characteristics of Potential Evapotranspiration Trends over China. International Journal of Climatololgy 20: 381-96.
Trenberth, K. E. 1999. Conceptual Framework for Changes of Extremes of the
Hydrological Cycle with Climate Change.
Climatic Change 42: 327-39.
Trenberth, K. E., L. Smith, T. Qian, A. Dai,
and J. Fasullo. 2007. Estimates of the
Global Water Budget and Its Annual
Cycle Using Observational and Model
Data. Journal of Hydrometeorology 8 (4):
758.
Vaccaro, J. 1992. Sensitivity of Groundwater
Recharge Estimates to Climate Variability
and Change, Columbia Plateau, Washington. Journal of Geophysical Research
97: 2821-33.
van Roosmalen, L., B. S. B. Christensen,
and T. O. Sonnenborg. 2007. Regional
Differences in Climate Change Impacts
on Groundwater and Stream Discharge
in Denmark. Vadose Zone Journal 6: 55471. doi:10.2136/vzj2006.0093.
Vonder Muhll, D., J. Notzli, K. Makowski,
and R. Delaloye. 2004. Permafrost
in Switzerland in 2000/2001 and
2001/2002. Glaciological Report (Permafrost) No. 2/3, Glaciological Commission of the Swiss Academy of Sciences,
Zurich.
Vörösmarty, C. J., M. Meybeck, B. Fekete,
and K. Sharma. 1997. The Potential
Impact of Neo-Cartorization on Sediment Transport by the Global Network
of Rivers. In Proceedings of the Fifth IAHS
Scientific Assembly at Rabat, Morocco,
April-May 1997, eds. D. E. Walling and
J.-L. Probst. Wallingford, UK: International Association of Hydrological Sciences.
Walter, M. T., D. S. Wilks, J.-Y. Parlange,
and R. L. Schneider. 2004. Increasing
Evapotranspiration from the Conterminous United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 5: 405-08.
Walter, K. M., S. A. Zimov, J. P. Chanton,
D. Verbyla, and F. S. Chapin. 2006.
Methane Bubbling from Siberian Thaw

3

Lakes as a Positive Feedback to Climate
Warming. Nature 443. doi:10.1038/
nature05040.
Wentz, F. J., L. Ricciardulli, K. Hilburn, and
C. Mears. 2007. How Much More Rain
Will Global Warming Bring? Science 317:
233-5.
Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R.
Cayan, and T.W. Swetnam. 2006.
Warming and Earlier Spring Increase
Western U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity. Science 313. doi:10.1126/science.1128834.
Willett, K. M., N. P. Gillett, P. D. Jones,
and P. W. Thorne. 2007. Attribution of
Observed Surface Humidity Changes to
Human Influence. Nature 449: 710-13.
Wood, A. W., L. R. Leung, V. Sridhar, and
D. P. Lettenmaier. 2004. Hydrologic
Implications of Dynamical and Statistical Approaches to Downscaling Climate
Model Outputs. Climatic Change 62:
189-216.
Worrall, F., and T. P. Burt. 2007. Trends
in DOC Concentration in Great Britain.
Journal of Hydrology 346: 81-92.
Wu Q. B., and Zhang T. 2008. Recent Permafrost on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.
Journal of Geophysical Research 113:
D13108. doi:10.1029/2007JD009539.
Xu C. -Y., G. Lebing, Jiang T., Chen D., and
V. P. Singh. 2006. Analysis of the Spatial
Distribution and Temporal Trend of Reference Evaporation and Pan Evaporation
in Changjiang (Yangtze River) Catchment. Journal of Hydrology 327: 81-93.
Yao T. D., Pu J. C., Tian L. D., Yang W.,
Duan K. Q., Ye Q. H., and L. G. Thompson. 2007. Recent Rapid Retreat of the
Naimona’nyi Glacier in Southwestern
Tibetan Plateau (in Chinese with English
Abstract). Journal of Glaciology and Geo­
cryology 29 (4): 503-8.
Yao T. D., Wang Y. Q., Liu S. Y., Pu J. C.,
Shen Y. P., and Lu A. X. 2004. Glacial
Retreat High Asia and Its Influence on
Water Resource in Northwest China. Science in China 47 (12): 1065-75.
Ye H. 2000. Decadal Variability of Russian Winter Snow Accumulation and Its
Associations with Atlantic Sea Surface
Temperature Anomalies. International
Journal of Climatology 20: 1709-28.
Yeh P. J. -F., S. C. Swenson, J. S. Famiglietti, and M. Rodell. 2006. Groundwater
Storage Changes Inferred from the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
(GRACE). Water Resources Research 42:
W12203. doi:10.1029/2006WR005374.
Yiou P., P. Ribereau, P. Naveau, M. Nogaj,
and R. Brazdil. 2006. Statistical Analysis
of Floods in Bohemia (Czech Republic)
since 1825. Hydrological Sciences Journal
51: 930-45.

209

PART

3

Chapter 11C

Zhang T. 2005. Influence of the Seasonal Snow Cover on the Ground
Thermal Regime: An Overview.
Reviews of Geophysics 43: RG4002.
doi:10.1029/2004RG000157.
Zhang T., R. G. Barry, K. Knowles, F.
Ling, and R. L. Armstrong. 2003.
Distribution of Seasonally and Perennially Frozen Ground in the Northern
Hemisphere. In Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Permafrost,
Zurich, Switzerland, 21-25 July 2003,
eds. M. Phillips, S. M. Springman, and
L. U. Arenson. Lesse, The Netherlands:
A. A. Balkema.

210

Zhang T., O. W. Frauenfeld, M. C. Serreze, A. Etringer, C. Oelke, J. McCreight, R. G. Barry, D. Gilichinsky,
Yang D., Ye H., Ling F., and S. Chudinova. 2005. Spatial and Temporal Variability of Active Layer Thickness over the
Russian Arctic Drainage Basin. Journal
of Geophysical Research 110: D16101.
doi:10.1029/2004JD005642.
Zhang X., K. D. Harvey, W. D. Hogg, and
T. R. Yuzyk. 2001. Trends in Canadian
Streamflow. Water Resources Research 37:
987-98.
Zhang T., Roger G. Barry, K. Knowles, J.
A. Heginbottom, and J. Brown. 1999.

Statistics and Characteristics of Permafrost and Ground Ice Distribution in the
Northern Hemisphere. Polar Geography
23 (2): 147-69.
Zhang X., L. A. Vincent, W. D. Hogg, and
A. Niitsoo. 2000. Temperature and
Precipitation Trends in Canada during
the 20th Century. Atmosphere-Ocean 38:
395-429.
Zhao L., Ping C. -L., Yang D., Cheng G.,
Ding Y., and Liu S. 2004. Changes of
Climate and Seasonally Frozen Ground
over the Past 30 Years in Qinghai-Xizang
(Tibetan) Plateau, China, Global Planet.
Change 43: 19-31.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Changes in the global water cycle

Chapter 12

3

Evolving hazards –
and emerging
opportunities
Author: Bruce Stewart
Contributors: Yoganath Adikari, Vladimir Aizen, Ali Chavoshia, Hu Chunhong, Pablo García,
M. Gopalakrishnan, Hege Hisdal, A.W. Jayawardena, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Peter Letitre,
Robert Naiman, Julian Olden, Roberto Pizzaro, Erich Plate, Carmen Revenga, James Robertson,
Léna Salamé, Kyoji Sassa, Pratap Singh, Vladimir Smakhtin, Lena M. Tallaksen,
Jos G. Timmerman, Carel De Villeneuve, Des Walling and Maciej Zalewski
Coordinator: Andras Szöllösi-Nagy (UNESCO)
Facilitator: Denis Hughes

Key messages
In many places climate-related events have become more frequent
and more extreme. In developing countries extreme floods can result in many deaths, while in developed countries they can result
in billions of dollars in damages. More intense droughts in the past
decade, affecting an increasing number of people, have been linked
to higher temperatures and decreased precipitation but are also frequently a consequence of the mismanagement of resources and the
neglect of risk management.
Changes in flow and inputs of chemical and biological waste from
human activity have altered the water quality and ecological functioning of many of the world’s rivers. Global warming is expected to
have substantial effects on energy flows and matter recycling through
its impact on water temperature, resulting in algal blooms, increases
in toxic cyanobacteria bloom and reductions in biodiversity.
In areas of increasing water stress groundwater is an important buffer
resource, capable of responding to increased water demands or of compensating for the declining availability of surface water.
A review of recent changes in the global
water cycle that analysed more than 100
studies (based on observations) found rising global and regional trends in runoff,
floods and droughts, and other climaterelated events and variables in the second
half of the 20th century that together
support the perception of an intensification of the hydrologic cycle.1 Meanwhile,
substantial uncertainty remains about
trends of hydroclimate variables due to
differences in responses by variables and
across regions, major spatial and temporal limitations in data (see chapter 13)
and the effects of modifications in water
resources development (withdrawals,
reservoirs, land use changes and so on) on
flow regimes.
Water in a changing world

Hazards vary with climate regions
Just as regions are experiencing different
degrees of change related to climate variations and population and development
pressures, so are they responding differently to changes in hydrologic extremes.
This chapter identifies the areas that are
most sensitive to changes in extremes and
hazards and those that are likely to experience the most negative impacts on water
resources.
•

Deserts face conflicting influences
under climate change: potentially
seeing more vegetation with higher
carbon dioxide levels, but overall
facing increases in drought and
211

PART

3

Regions in the
transition zone
between major
climate zones
are susceptible
to drought and
thus to potential
changes in climate

Chapter 12E
temperatures. With an already fragile
environment, desert ecosystems could
experience severe impacts.
•

Grasslands are influenced by precipitation, both its total amount and its variability. Changing seasonal variability
is important even when total precipitation is rising, and declining summer
rainfall could damage grassland fauna.

•

Mediterranean ecosystems are diverse and
vulnerable, susceptible to changes in
water conditions. Even with a temperature rise of 2ºC, the Southern Mediterranean may lose 60%-80% of species.

•

Tundra and Arctic regions face the loss
of permafrost and the potential for
methane release with greater warming
at the poles.

•

Mountains are seeing shortened and
earlier snow and ice melt and related
changes in flooding. At higher altitudes increased winter snow can lead
to delayed snow melt.

•

Wetlands will be negatively affected
where there is decreasing water volume, higher temperatures and higherintensity rainfall.

Some studies have used climate models and
greenhouse gas emission scenarios from
the recent assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
to forecast differences between climate
zones today and in 2100.2 They have found
that under both high- and low-emission
scenarios many regions would experience
biome-level changes, suggesting that rainforest, tundra or desert areas may no longer
have the same type of vegetation by 2100
because of climate shifts (box 12.1).3 By the
end of the 21st century large portions of
the Earth’s surface may experience climates
not found today, and some 20th century
climate characteristics may disappear.
Regions in the transition zone between
major climate zones (particularly between
temperate and dry climates) are susceptible
to drought and thus to potential changes
in climate. A shift in climate may create
a new transition zone, with unknown
feedback mechanisms. A northward shift
is observed in Southern Europe, causing a
decline in summer precipitation in Central and Eastern Europe. Climate models
consistently predict an increase in summer temperature variability in these areas
and attribute it mainly to strong land­atmosphere interactions. This could cause
212

more droughts and heat waves in this
and other mid-latitude regions. Regional
climate models suggest that towards the
end of the 21st century about every second
summer could be as warm as or warmer
(and as dry as or dryer) than the summer
of 2003 in Europe.
Snow cover has decreased in most regions, especially in spring and summer.
Snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere
observed by satellite from 1966 to 2005
decreased in every month except November and December, with a step-wise drop
of 5% in annual mean in the late 1980s.
In the Southern Hemisphere the few long
records or proxies show mostly decreases
or no changes in the past 40 years or
more.4
The Himalayan region is highly vulnerable
to climate change because its major river
drainage systems depend on substantial
contributions from snow and glacier melt.
In India the river systems originating from
the Himalayas (Ganges-Brahmaputra and
Indus) contribute more than 60% to the
total annual runoff for all the rivers of
India. These river systems hold immense
potential as a future water source and
drain the major plains of the country.
Some Himalayan rivers receive more than
half their flow from snow and glacier melt
runoff near the foothills of the Himalayas.
Melting of glaciers and a reduction in solid
precipitation in mountain regions would
directly affect water resources for domestic
supplies, irrigated agriculture, hydropower
generation and other water-dependent
activities.

Changes in average streamflow
While hazards are normally associated
with hydrologic extremes, changes in
average streamflow, especially in already
water-stressed areas, could cause substantial risks to human activities. The IPCC report suggests that by 2050 annual average
runoff will have increased by 10%-40% at
high latitudes and decreased by 10%-30%
over some dry regions at mid-latitudes and
semi-arid low latitudes.5 However, in many
water-scarce regions land use change and
increasing water resources development
and use could mask the effects of climate
change. At high latitudes, where an increase in annual flow is predicted, the impact on low flow and drought depends on
the seasonal distribution of precipitation,
the storage capacity of the catchment (ability to take advantage of higher winter precipitation), changes in evapotranspiration
and the length of the growing season.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities

Box 12.1

3

A global perspective on regional vegetation and hydrologic sensitivities to climate change

The Mapped Atmosphere-Plant-Soil
System (MAPSS), a biogeographic model,
predicts changes in vegetation leaf area
index, site water balance, runoff and
biome boundaries. Global equilibrium
impacts on these ecosystem properties were simulated under five general
circulation model (GCM) potential climate
scenarios with doubled carbon dioxide
concentration.
Leaf area index is the ratio of the vegetation’s leaf surface area per unit of ground
area. The greater the leaf surface area, the
more rapidly the vegetation will extract
soil water. Most ecosystems will grow as
much leaf area as can be supported by the
water available during an average growing
season. Thus, under normal conditions
many ecosystems are very near a drought
threshold. Warming lengthens the growing season, and evaporative demand
increases exponentially with rising temperature. Consequently, entire landscapes
can extract all soil moisture before the
end of the growing season and become
susceptible to sudden decline under
rapid warming, especially if coincident
with a short-term drying trend. Regional
increases in precipitation and benefits to
plant water use efficiency from elevated
carbon dioxide concentrations can offset
the increased drought stress in some
ecosystems. However, at global scales
most ecosystem models show that the
rapid increases in evaporative demand can
overwhelm these benefits over large areas,
possibly within the next few decades.
Regional patterns of vegetation change
and annual runoff are surprisingly consistent across the five GCM scenarios,
considering the relative lack of consistency
in predicted changes in regional precipitation patterns (see bottom map). Eastern
North America and Eastern Europe to

Average simulated change in vegetation leaf area index from five general
circulation model scenarios
With no change in water use efficiency

All-side leaf
area index
Less than -10
-7.5 to -10
-5.0 to -7.5
-2.5 to -5.0
-1.0 to -2.5
-1.0 to 0
0
0 to 1.0
1.0 to 2.5
2.5 to 5.0
5.0 to 10.0
More than 10.0

With increase in water use efficiency

All-side leaf
area index
Less than -10
-7.5 to -10
-5.0 to -7.5
-2.5 to -5.0
-1.0 to -2.5
-1.0 to 0
0
0 to 1.0
1.0 to 2.5
2.5 to 5.0
5.0 to 10.0
More than 10.0

Note: All-side leaf area index is the leaf area (all-sides) per unit
ground area; it is a non-dimensional (unitless) measure.
Source: Neilson and Marks 1994.

western Russia show particular sensitivity
to drought-induced forest decline. Uncertainties about potential evapotranspiration
and vegetation water use efficiency can
alter the sign of the simulated regional
responses, but the relative responses of
adjacent regions appear to be a function
largely of the background climate rather

The IPCC report notes increased annual
runoff and earlier spring peak discharge in
many glacier- and snow-fed rivers, indicating a regime shift for some rivers. This
trend is projected to continue in response
to increasing temperatures, resulting in
increased summer streamflow in downstream regions receiving melt water from
major mountain ranges, followed eventually by reduced streamflow.

Changes in extreme events
Extreme water-related events can have positive as well as negative impacts. They recharge natural ecosystems, providing more
abundant water for food production, health
and sanitation (box 12.2). In the lower
Water in a changing world

than of the vagaries of the GCMs and are
intrinsic to the landscape. Thus, spatial uncertainty maps can be drawn even under
the current generation GCMs.
Source: Ronald P. Neilson, Department of Forest
Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State University; Neilson et al. 1998; Scholze et al. 2006.

Mekong River delta, for example, Cambodians trap water and nutrients carried down
by the sediment during flood periods and
use them to replenish rice paddies. Floods
can be important to the aquatic and riparian ecology, as demonstrated during the
artificial flooding of the Colorado River at
the Grand Canyon in the United States. But
extreme water-related events also destroy
lives and property. The most common extreme events are floods and droughts.

Floods and flooding
With global climate change and projected increases in global temperature,
scientists generally agree that the hydrologic cycle will intensify and that
extremes will become more common.
213

PART

3

Box 12.2

Chapter 12E
Managing urban stormwater in association with land use and land-cover planning can
convert a nuisance into a resource

Urban areas cause substantial changes in
stormwater hydrology, increasing runoff
volumes and peak discharges and altering
water quality. In the traditional view urban
runoff is a nuisance to be removed as quickly and effectively as possible. However, new
studies and initiatives in several countries
around the world have shown that stormwater can become a resource, not merely a
nuisance. Optimal management of runoff
is determined by local conditions and can
include recharge of aquifers, retention and
detention to improve water quality and
reduce downstream flood impacts and the
cost of drainage systems, and on-site use of
the water (rainwater-harvesting) to irrigate
and enhance the urban environment.
Stormwater management can be exercised
from the household level to the entire built
area of a city.

Traditionally planners decide on land
uses and land cover and then give
engineers the task of designing drainage
systems to remove the runoff. In a framework known as water-sensitive planning,
water considerations are incorporated
in land use and land-cover planning
from the outset, following best management practices on the distribution of
pervious and impervious land cover and
on constructed facilities for capturing,
detaining, storing and infiltrating runoff.
Efficient water use and conservation,
recycling of grey water and possible use
of treated wastewater should also be
incorporated in planning.
With some effort, water-sensitive designs can also be applied to existing
urban areas. By connecting roof drains to

The moisture-holding capacity of the
atmosphere has been increasing at a rate of
about 7% per 1°C of warming, creating the
potential for heavier precipitation. There
have likely been increases in the number
of heavy precipitation events in many
land regions – consistent with a warming
climate and the observed increase in atmospheric water vapour, even where total
precipitation has declined.
In developing countries extreme floods can
result in many deaths, while in developed
countries extreme floods cause material
damage in the billions and tens of billions
of dollars (see table 12.1 for examples). Destructive floods in the last decade across the
globe have led to record high material damage. Other extreme high-impact water-related events not listed in table 12.1 are floods
in Europe in 1997 and 2002 and floods in
China in 1996 ($26 billion in material damage) and 1998 ($30 billion in material damage). Yearly economic losses from extreme
events rose tenfold between the 1950s and
1990s in inflation-adjusted dollars.6
The question is whether the frequency and
magnitude of flooding are also increasing
and, if so, whether that is in response to
climate variability and change. Disaster
losses, mostly weather and water related,
have grown much more rapidly than
population or economic growth, suggesting a climate change factor. Globally, the
number of great inland flood catastrophes
was twice as large per decade between
1996 and 2005 as between 1950 and
1980, and economic losses were five times
as great. The dominant drivers of these
214

pervious spaces, constructing low walls
around properties to make them into
mini-detention basins that store and infiltrate runoff and directing excess water to
playgrounds, planners can make better use
of stormwater runoff and reduce flooding
damages in open public spaces and parks.
In the Coastal Plain of Israel, for example,
where annual rainfall is just 500 millimetres, it has been estimated that the aquifer
recharge could be increased by about
25,000-77,000 cubic metres per square
kilometre of urban area by connecting
roof drains to a 15% pervious area on the
property and surrounding the property
with a low (approximately 20 centimetres)
wall.
Source: Carmon and Shamir 1997.

upward trends are socioeconomic factors, such as population growth, land use
change and greater use of vulnerable areas.
Documented trends in floods show no
evidence for a globally widespread change.
One study identified an apparent increase
in the frequency of ‘large’ floods (exceeding
100-year return period levels) in 16 large
basins across much of the globe during the
20th century.7 Analyses of long time series
of monthly river flow data showed that
seven of eight 100-year floods occurred in
the more recent half of the records.
However, subsequent studies have provided
less widespread evidence. A global change
detection study does not support the
hypothesis of a global increase of annual
maximum river flows.8 The study found
increases in 27 cases, decreases in 31 cases
and no trend in the remaining 137 cases of
the 195 catchments examined worldwide.
Of the 70 time series for Europe only 20
show statistically significant changes (11
increases and 9 decreases). However, the
overall maxima for the period (1961-2000)
occurred more frequently (46 times) in the
later subperiod, 1981-2000, than in the
earlier subperiod (24 times), 1961-80. Evidence is stronger for changes in the timing
of floods, with increasing late autumn and
winter floods. Fewer ice-jam related floods
have been observed in Europe.

Low flows and droughts
Climate change is expected to influence
precipitation, temperature and potential evapotranspiration and, through
their combined effects, to influence the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities

Table 12.1

Examples of major floods and flooding worldwide, 1860-2008

Meteorological
conditions

Date

Location

January 2008

Zambezi River,
Mozambique

Heavy torrential precipitation in
Mozambique and neighbouring
countries

May 2006

Lower Yukon,
United States

Snowmelt, ice-jam break-up

April-May
2003

Santa Fe,
Argentina

Saturated soil due to heavy
precipitation in summer 2002 and
April 2003

February
2000

Limpopo River,
Mozambique

July 1997

Peak
Impact
discharge
material
(cubic metres
damage
Human
per second) (US$ millions) losses
3,800

2

20 dead,
113,000 displaced

na

na

na

4,100

na

22 dead,
161,500 displaced

Extreme precipitation in tropical
depression, enforced with
torrential rain of three cyclones

10,000

na

700 dead,
1,500,000 displaced

Czech Republic

Saturated ground after extreme
long-lasting precipitation and
extreme precipitation

3,000

1.8

114 dead,
40,000 displaced

June 1997

Brahmaputra River,
Bangladesh

Torrential monsoon rains during
monsoon season

10,200

400

40 dead,
100,000 displaced

March-April
1997

Red River,
United States

Heavy rains and snowmelt

3,905

16,000

November
1996

Subglacial Lake
Grímsvötn, Iceland

Jökulhlaup flood

50,000

12

na

February
1996

West Oregon,
United States

Extreme spring snowmelt and
heavy spring precipitation

na

na

9 dead,
25,000 displaced

July 1995

Athens,
Greece

Storm of a short duration and
extreme intensity

650

na

50,000 displaced

November
1994

Po River,
Italy

Cold front associated with
cyclonic circulation and heavy
rainfall

11,300

na

60 dead,
16,000 displaced

February
1994

Meuse River,
Europe

Heavy rain due to low pressure
system

3,100

na

na

September
1993

Mississippi River,
United States

Heavy precipitation in June
and July; saturated soil due to
extremely high precipitation

na

15,000

November
1988

Hat Yai City,
Thailand

Brief torrential monsoon rain

na

172

664 dead,
301,000 displaced

January 1983

Northern Peru

El Niño situation with heavy rains

3,500

na

380 dead,
700,000 displaced

August 1979

Machu River,
India

Exceptionally heavy rainfall,
swollen river, resulting in collapse
of the Matchu Dam

16,307

100

1,500 dead,
400,000 displaced

JuneSeptember
1954

Yangtze River,
China

Intensive rainfall over several
months

66,800

na

January 1953

North Sea,
Netherlands

High spring tide and a severe
European windstorm

na

504

1,835 dead,
100,000 displaced

January 1910

Seine River,
France

Very wet period for six months
followed by heavy rains in January

460

na

200,000 displaced

May 1889

Johnstown,
Pennsylvania,
United States

Extremely heavy rainfall due to
storm followed by breach of dike

na

17

2,200 dead

July 1860

Eastern Norway

Frost and heavy snowfall
followed by snowmelt and heavy
precipitation

3,200

na

12 dead

100,000 homes flooded,
50,000 displaced

50 dead,
75,000 displaced

30,000 dead,
18,000 displaced

na is not available or not applicable.
Source: Compiled by Siegfried Demuth, International Hydrological Programme, UNESCO.

Water in a changing world

215

PART

3

Chapter 12E

In the past three
decades droughts
have become
more widespread,
more intense and
more persistent

occurrence and severity of droughts. But
it is difficult to disentangle the impacts of
climate change from those of other human
influences (engineered effects and land use
changes) and multidecadal climate variability. More intense droughts, affecting more
people and linked to higher temperatures
and decreased precipitation, have been
observed in the 21st century, in Europe and
globally.9 A similar pattern is found for heat
waves. The high pressure system that developed over Western Europe in 2003 blocked
moist air masses from the west and allowed
warm, dry air masses from Northern Africa
to move northwards. The result was large
precipitation deficits and record-breaking
temperatures across most of Central and
Southern Europe, with drought conditions
lasting from March to September.
Several summaries of observed and
predicted impacts of climate change on
hydrologic droughts have been published.10
A study of spatial and temporal changes
in streamflow droughts using a dataset of
more than 600 daily European streamflow
records from the European Water Archive
of the UNESCO Flow Regime from International Experimental Data (FRIEND)
detected no significant changes for most
stations.11 However, distinct regional differences were found. For 1962-90, examples of increasing drought were found in
Spain, the eastern part of Eastern Europe
and large parts of the United Kingdom,
whereas examples of decreasing drought
were found in large parts of Central Europe
and the western part of Eastern Europe.

Box 12.3

Drought in Australia, 1996-2007

For large parts of southern and
eastern Australia dry conditions have
persisted since October 1996. For
some areas the rainfall deficit over this
period exceeded a full year’s normal
rainfall. In the agriculturally important
Murray-Darling River basin October
2007 marked the sixth year of lower
than average rainfall, with November
2001-October 2007 being the driest
such six-year period on record.
The recent drought in Australia has
contributed to changes in Australia’s
management of water resources.
Acknowledging that too much water
has been taken from rivers and
aquifers, particularly in the MurrayDarling basin, Australia has decided
that it must make better use of its
water resources. This means improved
efficiency and productivity of water
use and better use of water markets to
optimize the economic benefits that

216

water brings (see box 4.2 in chapter
4). Australia understands that it must
secure water supplies for current
and future needs, including from a
range of new sources that rely less on
rainfall given the clear threat climate
change poses to traditional water
sources.
Water restrictions have been put in
place in all major cities in response
to the severe drought. These include
restrictions on watering lawns, using
sprinkler systems, washing vehicles,
hosing in paved areas, refilling swimming pools and others. Restrictions
can be adjusted to current conditions.
In some cities water inspectors monitor water use and can impose fines or
shut off water supplies for water use
infractions.
Source: www.mdbc.gov.au/ and www.
bom.gov.au/.

These trends in streamflow drought could
be explained largely by changes in precipitation or artificial hydrologic influences in
the catchment. However, the period analysed and the selection of stations can also
influence regional patterns. Recent trend
studies of long time series in the Czech Republic show that, following a catastrophic
flood in 2002, extreme hydrologic drought
occurred in 2003 and 2004 as a result of an
increasing trend in air temperature and a
long-term decline in precipitation, especially during the summer months.12 Extreme droughts occurred in Europe in 2003
and 2006. All these recent droughts could
well change the spatial pattern of droughts
found for Europe in the earlier study.
The heat wave and drought between June
and mid-August 2003 in Europe were accompanied by annual precipitation deficits
of up to 300 millimetres. Vegetation and ecosystems suffered heat and drought stress,
and record wildfires were experienced
(more than 5% of the forest area of Portugal
burned). Gross primary production of terrestrial ecosystems across Europe fell to an
estimated 30% of normal. Damages resulting from agricultural crop losses and higher
production costs were estimated at more
than €13 billion. Major rivers, including
the Danube, Loire, Po and Rhine, were at
record low levels, disrupting inland navigation, irrigation and power-plant cooling.
Extreme glacier melt mitigated the effects
of low rainfall and high evaporation on
streamflows in rivers partly fed by glaciers,
such as the Danube and the Rhine.
In the past three decades droughts have become more widespread, more intense and
more persistent due to decreased precipitation over land and rising temperatures,
resulting in enhanced evapotranspiration
and drying. The occurrence of droughts
seems to be determined largely by changes
in sea surface temperatures, especially in
the tropics, through associated changes in
atmospheric circulation and precipitation.
In the western United States diminishing
snow pack and resultant reductions in soil
moisture also appear to be factors. In Australia (box 12.3) and Europe the extremely
high temperatures and heat waves accompanying recent droughts have implied
direct links to global warming. Sahelian
droughts have led to severe losses of livestock, with losses as high as 62% observed
in part of Ethiopia in 1998-99.13 Globally,
very dry areas (land areas with a Palmer
Drought Severity Index of 3.0 or less) have
more than doubled since the 1970s (from
about 12% to 30%), with a large jump in
the early 1980s due to an El Niño Southern
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities
Oscillation-related precipitation decrease
over land and subsequent increases due
primarily to surface warming.14
Climate change and other global trends
such as increasing population and increasing deforestation demand better risk assessment in the management of vulnerable
water resources, balancing social, environmental and economic requirements, to
achieve a sustainable water supply system.

Changes in groundwater
The groundwater portion of the water cycle
has been subjected to massive changes,
particularly during the past hundred years
as humans learned to dig or drill wells and
abstract groundwater using pumps. Use of
groundwater for irrigated agricultural has
increased enormously in the past 50 years,
and some 70% of global groundwater
abstraction is now estimated to be used in
irrigation. Particularly in areas associated
with the green revolution, heavy groundwater pumping has led to unsustainable
conditions, with falling water levels, degraded groundwater aquifers and increased
salinization. Pollution of shallow aquifers
became widespread four or five decades ago
and has triggered water quality protection
measures in many countries (see chapter 8).
Groundwater abstractions have also
contributed to the development of rural

Box 12.4

economies,15 indicating that a balance
has to be found in groundwater development. Groundwater serves a water shortage
buffer function during short-term climate
variations and is important to adaptation
strategies. In many places groundwater
mining from fossil aquifers is the only reliable means of obtaining water (see chapter 11). These groundwater resources are
increasingly being used for agricultural,
industrial and domestic water supplies,
although they are almost never recharged.
Changing land use and water infrastructure have also greatly modified groundwater regimes, with groundwater pumping from deep aquifers now a worldwide
phenomenon. In many places groundwater
is pumped with no understanding of its
source or its annual recharge and therefore
of how much may be used sustainably.
Results include falling water levels, desiccated wetlands, dewatered rock sequences
and land subsidence (box 12.4). More data
are urgently needed to quantify groundwater resources worldwide as a basis for
improved groundwater management.

heavy
groundwater
pumping has led
to unsustainable
conditions, with
falling water
levels, degraded
groundwater
aquifers and
increased
salinization

Changes in erosion, landslides,
river morphology and
sedimentation patterns
A more vigorous hydrologic cycle would
imply greater water extremes, which could
affect the relationships between hydrology

Controlled exploitation and artificial recharge as effective measures against
detrimental subsidence

Industrial and agricultural development in
the last century, accompanied by an exponential growth of cities, led to concentrated pumping of groundwater resources
worldwide. During the 1960s and 1970s
subsidence occurred in many parts of
the world, with widespread damage to
property and infrastructure. Large cities
built on highly compressible sediments
in coastal areas increasingly experienced
flooding and salt intrusion. Controlled
pumping schemes and artificial recharge
measures have managed to slow and even
reverse subsidence. But with sea levels projected to rise as a result of global climate
change, maintaining these schemes and
minimizing the contribution of subsidence
has become even more urgent.
Even as Venice experienced a relative sea
level rise of 23 centimetres over the last
century, the subsidence associated with
aquifer depletion increased exponentially
until 1961. With curtailing of overexploitation since 1970, subsidence has stabilized
at the rate of natural subsidence, at less

Water in a changing world

than 0.5 millimetre a year, and the artesian
aquifers have begun to rebound.
The effects of rapid urbanization and
industrialization are especially apparent in
China, where increasing subsidence has led
to extensive environmental and economic
damage in more than 45 cities, more than
11 of which have experienced cumulative
subsidence of more than 1 metre. Tianjin
experienced related economic losses from
1959 to 1993 estimated at $27 billion.
Shanghai took drastic measures in 1965, as
total subsidence since 1920 had reached as
much as 2.63 metres. Pumping has been
reduced by 60%, and users are requested
to inject the same quantity of water into
aquifers in winter as is used in summer.
While pumping-related subsidence has
been controlled, drainage for construction
and compaction of foundation layers have
been causing subsidence rates of up to 10
millimetres a year since 1990.
Many groundwater basins in the arid
and semi-arid United States experienced

subsidence in response to heavy pumping, effectively reducing aquifer storage.
As a result of rapid growth of Las Vegas,
Nevada, pumping rates have exceeded
natural recharge since about 1960, despite
imports of Colorado River water. In the
late 1980s the Las Vegas Water Valley
District initiated an artificial recharge programme, injecting Colorado River water
into the principal aquifers. Net annual
pumpage has now been reduced to the
level of natural recharge. The water level
drawdown has recovered from a maximum of 90 metres to as few as 30 metres.
Subsidence has also decreased considerably, although the depressurized aquifer
continues to compact, evidence that the
detrimental effects of overpumping can
continue long after control measures have
been taken.
Source: Ger de Lange, the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research, Built Environment and Geosciences; Poland 1984; Carbognin,
Teatini, and Tosi 2005; Hu et al. 2004; Chai et al.
2004; Wang 2007; Bell et al. 2008.

217

PART

3

Increased
erosion rates
have important
implications for
the sustainability
of the global soil
resource, food
security and
environment

Chapter 12E
and geomorphology. More intense rainfall
could lead to more water-induced erosion, while drier climates could result in
wind-induced erosion. And changes in
the seasonal distributions of rainfall can
have significant implications for patterns
of vegetation growth and thus for soil erosion. Climate and erosion are interdependent components of the Earth’s hydrologic
cycle and of the environment. In addition
to being affected by shifts in climate, soil
erosion can affect climate. Desertification processes are intertwined with soil
degradation and vegetation changes. These
changes, possibly exacerbated by erosion,
result in the loss of soil carbon and the
release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, contributing to global warming.
Changes in vegetative growth and land
use that are driven by accelerated erosion
can also influence the hydrologic cycle
and thus the climate.
Changes in the key hydrologic drivers,
such as rainfall amount and intensity, surface runoff and river discharge, caused by
climate change and changes in land cover
and land use, can be expected to cause
significant increases in global soil erosion
and in the sediment loads transported by
rivers. Changes in sediment load could reflect both changing rates of sediment mobilization and supply to the river system
and changes in transport capacity caused
by changes in discharge and the impact
of reservoirs and other human-made sinks
and stores in reducing downstream fluxes.
In turn, changes in the sediment regimes
of rivers affect the storage capacity of
reservoirs and the yield of water resources
systems. Although data are limited, it is
possible to assess the general magnitude
and direction of changes in erosion and
sediment transport over the past decades.

Erosion rates
The conversion of native vegetation to
agriculture has been shown to increase soil
erosion rates 10- to 100-fold.16 With agricultural land now occupying about 37%
of the ice-free area of the continents, it is
clear that agriculture has had an enormous
impact on global erosion rates. Increased
erosion rates have important implications
for the sustainability of the global soil resource, food security and the environment.
Much of the world’s farmland has been
cultivated for centuries and in some regions for millennia. Major increases in soil
erosion rates are unlikely to have occurred
within these areas in the recent past. But
in other areas, particularly in developing
countries, a rapidly expanding population
218

has led to recent land clearance and rapid
expansion of cultivated land. Since 1960
world population has approximately doubled, and cropland has increased by more
than 10%.17
From a global perspective, however, such
recent increases in soil loss are likely
to have been at least partially offset by
reduced erosion in other regions following implementation of soil conservation
programmes and improved land management during the 20th century. In the
United States soil conservation and related
measures promoted by the Food Security
Act of 1985 have reduced total annual erosion from cropland by an estimated 40%,
from 3.4 gigatonnes (Gt) a year to 2.0 Gt.18
In China erosion control measures in the
loess region of the Middle Yellow River
basin after 1978 helped reduce the annual
sediment load of the Middle Yellow River
from about 1.6 Gt in the mid-20th century
to 0.7 Gt at the end of the 20th century.19
Elsewhere, the progressive introduction of
no-till and minimum till practices – now
implemented on an estimated 5% of world
cropland20 – has also reduced erosion rates
on cultivated land. Such measures typically reduce erosion rates by more than
one order of magnitude.21
While an accurate assessment of the relative importance of these opposing trends
for the contemporary global soil erosion
budget is still not possible, it is clear that
significant changes are occurring. Furthermore, there is increasing recognition
that, with the greater variability of rainfall
and the higher frequency of extreme
storm events accompanying future climate
change, erosion rates in many areas of the
world are likely to rise. A recent study in
the Midwestern United States, combining the output from general circulation
models with erosion models that also took
into account the likely impact of climate
change on crop management and crops
grown, suggested that erosion rates would
increase in 10 of the 11 study area regions.
Increases relative to 1990-99 were predicted to range from 33% to 274% by 2040-59.

Sediment loads
A river’s sediment load is sensitive to a
range of environmental controls related to
both the supply of sediment to the river
and its ability to transport that sediment.
Long-term sediment measurements are unavailable for most of the world’s rivers, precluding detailed analysis of global trends,
but available data show that important
changes are occurring.22 For many rivers there is evidence of reduced sediment
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities
loads in recent years,23 primarily because
of the construction of dams, which trap
a large proportion of the sediment load
previously transported by the river. One
estimate suggests that more than 40% of
global river discharge is intercepted by
large dams (dams with a storage capacity
of more than 0.5 cubic kilometre).24 Dams
on the Colorado and the Nile Rivers have
reduced the sediment load of those rivers
to near zero.
Changes in sediment load have important implications for global geochemical
cycling and sediment-associated carbon
fluxes. From a more local perspective
increased sediment loads frequently cause
degradation of water quality and aquatic
habitats and increased siltation of reservoirs, river channels, canal systems and
harbours. In many contexts reduced sediment loads bring benefits, but in deltas
and coastal areas reduced sediment inputs
can remove important nutrient sources
and lead to shoreline recession. Landslides,
the most dramatic erosion process, present
the gravest hazard to human communities. Until the International Geotechnical
Society UNESCO Working Party on World
Landslide Inventory was established during the International Decade for Natural
Disaster Reduction of 1990-2000, there
was no common definition of landslides.
The international unified definition was
agreed as ‘the movement of a mass of rock,
debris or earth down a slope’.25 Landslides
are classified by a combination of the type
of material (rock, debris and earth) and
type of movement (fall, slide, flow, topple
and spread).
While the definition has been approved
internationally, no unified map of the
distribution of landslides has ever been
prepared. However, a global-scale landslide
susceptibility map was produced by the
International Programme on Landslides
with World Bank funding.26 Landslide
susceptibility is calculated from topography, earthquake and rainfall data. The
model does not include the shear strength
of soils, which is difficult to quantify at
the global scale. Recently, the US National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
(an International Consortium on Landslides member) also compiled a landslide
susceptibility map using Shuttle Radar
Topography Mission data, the Food and
Agriculture Organization’s digital soil map
and other information.
Changes in precipitation or precipitationcausing phenomena (such as cyclones
and typhoons) can lead to increased
Water in a changing world

severity or frequency of landslides. If
these changes are accompanied by seismic
activities, there is a strong potential for
an increase in landslide-triggering events.
For example, in 2004 Japan experienced
the greatest number of typhoons in its
history. After one of these typhoons the
2004 Niigata-ken Chuetsu earthquake
occurred. The earthquake triggered more
large-scale landslides than had events of
a similar magnitude, such as the 1995
Hyogo ken-Nanbu (Kobe) earthquake and
the 2005 Fukuoka-ken Saiho-oki offshore
earthquake. In February 2006 a small
earthquake, which occurred five days after
three days of continuous rainfall, triggered
a huge landslide in Leyte Island, Philippines, killing more than 1,000 people.

3

Climate change will
affect water quality
and ecosystem
health through
higher water
temperatures,
lower water levels,
more flooding
and changes in
lake stratification
patterns

Climate change will affect water quality and ecosystem health through higher
water temperatures, lower water levels, more flooding and changes in lake
stratification patterns. Aquatic ecosystem
dynamics are driven by temperature and
water availability, which determine energy
flow; the primary production, composition, structure and biological diversity of
ecosystems; the range of global biomass;
pattern of ecosystem succession and the
type of climax biome.
Increased water temperatures promote
algal blooms and increase toxic cyano­
bacteria bloom. A toxin produced by microcistis (Microcistina-LR) is 10 times more
toxic than strychnine. Toxic cyanobacteral
blooms, already present on all continents,
may intensify, requiring restrictions on
people’s use of water resources.
Relatively small increases in temperature
also accelerate energy flow and matter
cycling: a 1°C warming enhances ecosystem productivity by 10%-20% at all
trophic levels. An increase in zooplankton
consumption may reduce the density of
this food source, resulting in a decline in
the food base for fish, inhibiting growth
and favouring small species over large
(an insufficient food base for larger species). An overlapping of changing abiotic
conditions, such as rising temperature and
declining dissolved oxygen content, may
be an additional stressor, contributing
to a lowering of biodiversity and ecosystems function. This could mean shifts
in dominant species, a destabilization of
the ecosystem equilibrium and a shift to
another steady-state. Rising water temperatures and related changes in ice cover,
salinity, oxygen levels and water circulation have already contributed to global
shifts in the range and abundance of algae,
219

PART

3

if hazards become
more severe
(in intensity or
magnitude),
countries will face
new challenges,
requiring
additional
cooperation with
other concerned
countries in
mitigating hazards

Chapter 12E
zooplankton and fish in high-latitude
oceans and high-altitude lakes, as well as
to earlier migrations of fish in rivers.
The effects of increased temperatures and
the acceleration of biological processes
will differ depending on hydrologic type
and the characteristics and complexity of
aquatic ecosystems. In colder regions, for
example, rising water temperatures can
improve water quality during winter and
spring, with earlier ice breakup increasing
oxygen levels and reducing winter fishkills.27
The response of river ecosystems to climate change will depend on their location
within the river basin. Longitudinal linkages are important to the functioning of
river ecosystems. Upper sections of rivers
are usually driven by abiotic factors (flow
and water quality), and the biotic structures are better adapted to high abiotic
(hydrologic) variability, resistant to rapid
and unexpected changes and better able to
recover from stress. Down the river course,
with more stable abiotic characteristics,
biotic processes determine ecosystem dynamics, and ecosystems are more vulnerable to global warming.
Modification of precipitation patterns due
to climate change will directly influence
runoff and the timing and intensity of
nutrient and pollutant supplies to rivers
and lakes. Greater changes are expected in
catchments with degraded vegetation cover,
landscape drainage and wetland loss. Open
nutrient cycles in the terrestrial ecosystems
due to reduced nutrient retention in biomass and mineralization of organic matter
in soils will intensify nutrient loss to freshwater. More intense rainfall events will also
lead to greater fluvial erosion and increases
in suspended solids loads (turbidity) in lakes
and reservoirs.28 Extension of the growing
season due to global warming may increase
the duration of agricultural activities, which
may cause more nutrient leaching from
agricultural areas.29 All these processes will
contribute to intensification of eutrophication, a common problem in lakes and rivers
all over the world and a serious hazard for
human activities (drinking water, aquaculture, recreation) and ecosystem functioning.
The expected overall lowering of water
levels in rivers and lakes will worsen water
quality. Water reserves will become more
turbid through the resuspension of bottom
sediments,30 and the reduction in water
supply will increase the concentration of
pollutants in water resources. Oxygenation
of river water – a key indictor of biological

220

water quality – is enhanced under high
flow conditions that encourage surface
aeration. Simulations of stream conditions
under several climate change scenarios
found that decreased streamflows resulted
in decreased oxygen levels and water
quality.31 Salinity levels will increase
with decreasing streamflow in semi-arid
and arid areas. Salt concentrations are
predicted to increase 13%-19% by 2050 in
the upper Murray-Darling River basin in
Australia.32 Salinization of water resources
is also predicted to be a major hazard for
island nations, where coastal seawater
intrusion is expected with rising sea levels.
The higher temperature, change in precipitation patterns and shift in regional wind
regimes associated with climate change are
likely to alter the thermal stratification of
lakes and reservoirs. Higher temperatures
are likely to increase thermal stability and
alter mixing patterns in lakes, resulting
in reduced oxygen concentrations and
increased release of phosphorous from
sediments.33 Simulations suggest that lakes
in subtropical zones (latitude 30° to 45°)
and subpolar zones (latitude 65° to 80°)
are subject to greater relative changes in
thermal stratification patterns than are
mid-latitude or equatorial lakes and that
in subtropical zones deep lakes are more
sensitive than are shallow lakes.34
Simulations also show that winter stratification in cold regions would be weakened
and the anoxic zone would disappear.35
The greatest increases in water temperatures are foreseen in lakes where the
duration of ice cover will be substantially
reduced. In addition, simulations show a
10° or more northward shift in the boundary of ice-free conditions in the Northern Hemisphere.36 Observations during
droughts in the boreal region of northwestern Ontario, Canada, show that lower
inflows and higher temperatures produce a
deepening of the thermocline.37 Changes
in wind speed and direction contributing
to patterns of lake and reservoir mixing
and thermal stratification may alter the
biomass cycling in lakes. Countries that
share water resources may face additional
challenges under conditions of changing
hazards. In areas with experience of hazards countries are used to managing such
crises. But if hazards become more severe
(in intensity or magnitude), countries will
face new challenges, requiring additional
cooperation with other concerned countries in mitigating hazards.38
In new hazard-exposed areas there will be
great variations in how countries mitigate
World Water Development Report 3

PART

3

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities
hazards affecting international waters. In
broad terms OECD countries in Europe,
North America and South East Asia would
be able to direct their institutional and
financial resources towards new cooperative
efforts. Developing countries, with limited
resources and hazard mitigating experience,
would be more exposed. Examples include
the Mekong River basin and some of the
major basins in West and Central Africa.39
Changes in transboundary water resources
(through engineered developments or
climate change) will present opportunities for international cooperation. The
cooperation must be based on a common

Box 12.5

understanding of the nature of the resource as well as its value to the countries
who share it. And it must involve collecting and sharing reliable data and applying
compatible data analysis methods.
Attention is coming to transboundary
groundwater issues much later than to
surface water concerns. Governments,
institutions and other stakeholders that
have developed strategies for effective
groundwater resources management at
the local and national levels are learning
that coordination is also necessary across
administrative boundaries (see box 12.5
on the Guaraní aquifer). As a result, over

Towards transboundary management of the Guaraní aquifer

The Guaraní aquifer
in Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay
averages some 250
metres in thickness and
covers an estimated
area of 1.2 million
square kilometres. The
aquifer’s groundwater
resources are contained
in sand and sandstone
beds deposited since
the Mesozoic Era and
mostly confined below
volcanic rocks. Estimated
annual recharge is about
166 cubic kilometres,
produced mainly in
the zones where there
are outcroppings of
unconfined parts of the
aquifer. The climate in
the area is humid to
subhumid, with annual
precipitation of 1,2001,500 millimetres.
The quality of the
Guaraní’s groundwater
is generally good, with
a few exceptions. About
20 million people live
over the aquifer, and
some parts are intensely
exploited, while others
are virtually untouched.
There are still many gaps
in knowledge about the
state and performance of
this aquifer system.

Location of the Guaraní transboundary aquifer

Brasília

Cuiabá

BOLIVIA

Goiânia

Campo Grande
Belo Horizonte

BRAZIL

Ribeirão Preto

PARAGUAY

São Paulo

Jujuy
Asunción

Salta

Curitiba

Formosa

Santiago
del Estero

Potential indirect recharge areas
From surface runoff
From underground flows

Encarnación (Itapúa)

Tucumán
Resistencia

Corrientes

Posadas
Florianópolis

Catamarca
Porto Alegre

ARGENTINA

Santana do
Livramento
Concordia

Córdoba
Santa Fe

Paraná

Salto

Rivera

URUGUAY

Buenos Aires

Montevideo

A

T

LA

N

T

IC

O

C

EA

N

Potential direct recharge areas
Porous: Guaraní outcroppings
Fractured/porous:
basalt and sandstone
Potential discharge areas
Porous: Guaraní outcroppings
Fractured/porous:
basalt and sandstone
Fractured/porous: to be defined
Cities (pilot areas)
State/provincial capitals
National capitals
National boundaries
Plata watershed basin
Paraná geological basin
Paraná geological basin
(to be defined)
Wetlands

Source: Guaraní Aquifer System Project 2003.

The four countries have cooperated
since early 2003 in a project for sustainable management and protection
of the aquifer, with support from the
Global Environment Facility, the World
Bank and the Organization of American
States and with participation of the

Water in a changing world

International Atomic Energy Agency
and the German Federal Institute for
Geosciences and Natural Resources. The
project aims to explore and assess the
aquifer system in more detail and to
develop a framework for coordinated
management. In addition, four pilot

areas with emerging problems have
been selected to gain experience in
local management.
Source: www.sg-guarani.org/index;
UNESCO/OAS ISARM 2007.

221

PART

3

Over many
generations the
human race has
shown an amazing
ability to adapt and
adjust to climate
variability and
increasing pressure
on resources

Chapter 12E
the last decade international and regional
organizations have developed initiatives
related to internationally shared aquifer
resources management, in cooperation
with countries in the regions concerned.40
Mapping and descriptions of transboundary aquifers are the first steps. The United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe
conducted an inventory of transboundary
aquifers in Europe in 1999,41 and inventories in other regions followed. Recent
outcomes are an atlas of the 68 identified
transboundary aquifers of the Americas42
and an assessment report on transboundary rivers, lakes and aquifers that includes
51 transboundary aquifers in Southeastern Europe and 18 in the Caucasus
and Central Asia region.43 International
projects are facilitating the exchange of
information and experiences and developing improved methodologies and the
scientific basis of transboundary aquifer
management. A 2007 agreement created
the UNESCO Regional Centre for Shared
Aquifer Resources Management for Africa
in Tripoli. The United Nations International Law Commission, in cooperation with
the UNESCO-International Hydrological
Programme, drafted articles on the Law
on Transboundary Aquifers, which was
subsequently approved by the UN General
Assembly on 11 December 2008.

Challenges: hazards and
opportunities
Based on identified trends, the future will
see increased pressure on water resources
and changes in the patterns and magnitudes of resource availability related to
changing climate patterns. While climate
change represents a huge challenge, it
also represents an opportunity – for new
growth, innovation in the management
of water resources and development of a
modern economy. Because humans have
modified and adapted their lifestyles
to the existing climate and its inherent
variability, climate change is expected to
affect most aspects of human life, notably through the hazardous aspects of
water-­related events. Some areas may gain
greater access to water through increased
precipitation, while others may have less
or more variable water resources.
Over many generations the human race
has shown an amazing ability to adapt
and adjust to climate variability and
increasing pressure on resources. There
are many examples of countries that have
managed their scarce resources efficiently
and effectively, despite low rainfall and
222

streamflows. Spain, a traditionally dryclimate country, has historically succeeded
in managing its water resources through
adaptation. An example of potential
water gain is South Africa. Analysis of the
actual evapotranspiration and yield of five
commonly grown crops (beans, groundnuts, maize, millet and sorghum) in two
selected districts found that yield increases
with evapotranspiration, although the
gap remains wide between actual and
potential yield and actual and maximum
evapotranspiration, especially for rainfed
crops.44 The analysis also showed that a
2°C rise in temperature and a doubling
of carbon dioxide concentration in the
atmosphere will shorten the growing
period of maize, lowering crop water
requirements.
The increased exposure to potential climate change hazards has raised awareness
of critical issues related to water resources
management that require solutions regardless of the impacts of climate change.
The revision of management strategies
in response to potential climate change
threats therefore represents an opportunity to implement policies and practice
that will lead to more sustainable use of
resources. These could include improved
observation networks (see chapter 13),
increased integration of groundwater and
surface water supplies (including artificial
recharge), improved early warning and
forecasting systems for hazardous events,
improved risk-based approaches to management and the raising of community
awareness of sustainable water resources
use and individual responses to waterrelated hazards.
The threat of climate change has led to
many developments in the simulation
of atmospheric processes, improving the
accuracy of climate and weather forecasts.
Combined with improved technology
for monitoring, collecting and analysing
information, these developments should
lead to improvements in warning systems
for floods and droughts and other major
water-related events. If these can be combined with hazard mitigation strategies
involving all levels of affected communities, there are enormous opportunities to
avoid loss of human life and economic
losses.
There are also many specific examples of
turning potential hazards into opportunities. These include using increased runoff
from glacial melting to develop more
reliable water supplies for larger areas and
using flood water storage to increase the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities
reliability of water supplies and improve
floodplain management and planning
(box 12.6).

Box 12.6

Small and shallow alluvial aquifers scattered over the Earth’s arid and semi-arid
regions – preferential zones for human
settlement – are probably the most vulnerable groundwater systems to climate
change.45 Yet in areas of increasing water
stress groundwater is an important buffer
resource, capable of responding to overall
increased water demands or of compensating for loss in surface water availability.
This buffer capacity of groundwater
systems depends on the ratio between
the volume of stored groundwater and
the mean annual recharge. Some major
aquifers with non-renewable groundwater
resources are found in arid environments
of North and Southern Africa, the Arabian
Peninsula and Australia and under permafrost in Northern Asia.46 The direct impact
of climate change on such resources is
negligible, as their stored volumes are usually at least a thousand times the volume
of mean annual recharge. Their stocks may
be reduced more quickly than before, however, because of larger demands created by
climate change and the decline of alternative water sources. Renewable groundwater
systems with considerable storage will
provide similar buffers in other parts of
the world, and an increasingly larger share
of total water abstraction is expected to
come from groundwater.
The storage capacity of aquifers also offers
opportunities for enhancing groundwater
storage by artificial recharge or managed aquifer recharge. Managed aquifer

3

Lake Sarez, Tajikistan – turning a hazard into
an opportunity

Lake Sarez, deep in the centre of the
Pamir Mountains of Tajikistan, was
created in February 1911, when an
enormous rock collapsed from the
bank of the Murgab River Valley,
blocking the river and forming a dam
behind which a lake formed. Lake
Sarez is 55.8 kilometres long and
averages 1.44 kilometres wide, with a
maximum depth of 499.6 metres and
maximum water volume of 16.074
cubic kilometres. The lake’s water level
is currently about 50 metres below
the top of the dam and rising at a rate
of 20 centimetres a year as a result of
increased glacial melt, due largely to
global warming. At the same time,
the permeability of the dam material
is changing, and the mineralization of
water at the bottom levels is increasing. There is also a real threat of new
landslides around the lake.
Multiple hypotheses were developed
recently on how the natural barrier
would behave in a future earthquake
or other catastrophe. Evaluations
varied from the categorical ‘it will
burst’ to the no less firm ‘it will not’.

While some sources stress that a
catastrophic flood is unlikely, no one
is dismissive of the risk considering
the potential for devastation. A World
Bank statement indicated that ‘should
such a flood occur, the impact on
the downstream valleys would be
devastating, affecting up to 5 million
people’. The impact of a dam break
would be felt not only across Tajikistan
but also in Afghanistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan.
Tajikistan recently proposed construction of a water pipeline that would
serve all of Central Asia with safe
drinking water through the regulated
drainage of Lake Sarez. This would
reduce the risk of a dam break or overflow, while supplying drinking water
to the region. Lake Sarez is the largest
freshwater reservoir in the upper watershed zone of the Aral Sea basin.
Source: Vefa Mustafaev, UNESCO;
Sirodjidin Aslov, Ambassador of Tajikistan
to the United Nations; and N. F. Gorelkin
Uzbekistan Department of Hydrometerology; World Bank 2005.

recharge, applied at an ever-growing rate,47
should be part of integrated water and
catchment management strategies along
with surface water and soil management,
erosion and pollution control, demand
and environmental management and
wastewater reuse. Its role will become
increasingly important as the impacts of
climate change and variability become
more apparent.48

Notes

13. Easterling et al. 2007.

29. Hillbricht-Ilkowska 1993.

1.

Huntington 2006.

14. Dai, Trenberth, and Qian 2004.

30. Atkinson, DePinto, and Lam 1999.

2.

IPCC 2007.

15. Giordano and Villholth 2007.

31. Mimikou et al. 2000.

3.

For example, Williams, Jackson, and
Kutzbach 2007.

16. Montgomery 2007.

32. IPCC 2007.

17. Wilkinson and McElroy 2007.

33. Bates et al. 2008.

4.

IPCC 2007.

18. Uri and Lewis 1999.

34. Meyer et al. 1999.

5.

IPCC 2007.

19. Hu et al. 2008.

35. Fang and Stefan 1997.

6.

IPCC 2001.

20. Lal et al. 2004.

36. Hostetler and Small 1999.

7.

Milly et al. 2002.

21. Montgomery 2007.

37. Schindler and Stainton 1996.

8.

Kundzewicz et al. 2005.

22. Walling 2006.

38. Romm 2007.

9.

Zhang et al. 2007.

23. Walling and Fang 2003.

39. International Crisis Group 2007.

24. Vörösmarty et al. 2003.

40. For details see www.isarm.net.

25. Cruden 1991, p. 27.

41. Almássy and Buzás 1999.

26. IPL n.d.

42. UNESCO/OAS ISARM 2007.

27. IPCC 2007.

43. UNECE 2007.

28. IPCC 2007.

44. World Bank 2007.

10. van Lanen, Tallaksen, and Rees 2007;
Huntington 2006.
11. Hisdal et al. 2001.
12. Tallaksen, Demuth, and van Lanen
2007.

Water in a changing world

223

PART

3

Chapter 12E

45. van der Gun forthcoming.
46. Foster and Loucks 2006.
47. UNESCO 2005; Fox 2007.
48. Gale 2005.

References
Almássy, E., and Z. Buzás. 1999. Inventory
of Transboundary Groundwaters. Lelystad,
Netherlands: United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe.
Atkinson, J. F., J. V. DePinto, and D. Lam.
1999. Water Quality. In Potential Climate
Change Effects on the Great Lakes Hydrodynamics and Water Quality, eds. D. Lam
and W. Schertzer. Reston, VA: American
Society of Civil Engineers.
Bates, B., Z. W. Kundzewicz, S. Wu, and J.
Palutik, eds. 2008. Climate Change and
Water. Technical Paper of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change.
Bell, J. W., F. Amelung, A. Ferretti, M.
Bianchi, and F. Novali. 2008. Permanent
Scatterer in SAR Reveals Seasonal and
Long-Term Aquifer-System Response
to Groundwater Pumping and Artificial
Recharge. Water Resources Research 44
(2): W02407.
Carbognin L., P. Teatini, and L. Tosi. 2005.
Land Subsidence in the Venetian Area:
Known and Recent Aspects. Giornale di
Geologia Applicata 1 (1): 5-11.
Carmon, N., and U. Shamir. 1997. WaterSensitive Urban Planning: Concept and
Preliminary Analysis. In Groundwater in
the Urban Environment: Problems, Processes and Management, eds. J. Chilton, K.
Hiscock, P. Younger, B. Morris, S. Puri, S.
W. Kirkpatrick, H. Nash, W. Armstrong, P.
Aldous, T. Water, J. Tellman, R. Kimblin,
and S. Hennings. London: Balkema, Rotterdam, Brookfield.
Chai J. C., Shen S. L., Zhu H. H, and
Zhang X. L. 2004. Land Subsidence Due
to Groundwater Drawdown in Shanghai.
Géotechnique 54 (2): 43-147.
Cruden, D. M. 1991. A Simple Definition of
a Landslide. Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the Environment 43 (1): 27-9.
Dai, A., K. E. Trenberth, and T. Qian. 2004.
A Global Data Set of Palmer Drought Severity Index for 1870-2002: Relationship
with Soil Moisture and Effects of Surface
Warming. Journal of Hydrometeorology 5
(6): 1117-30.
Easterling, W. E., P. K. Aggarwal, P.
Batima, K. M. Brander, L. Erda, S. M.
Howden, A. Kirilenko, J. Morton, J. F.
Soussana, J. Schmidhuber, and F. N.
Tubiello. 2007. Food, Fibre and Forest Products. In Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, eds.

224

M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof,
P. J. van der Linden, and C. E. Hanson.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Fang, X., and H. G. Stefan. 1997. Simulated Climate Change Effects on Dissolved
Oxygen Characteristics in Ice-covered
Lakes. Ecological Modelling 103 (2-3):
209-29.
Foster, S., and D. P. Loucks, eds. 2006.
Non-Renewable Groundwater Resources:
A Guidebook on Socially-Sustainable Management for Water-Policy Makers. Paris:
United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization.
Fox, P., ed. 2007. Management of Aquifer
Recharge for Sustainability. Phoenix, AZ:
Acacia Publications.
Gale, I., ed. 2005. Strategies for Managed
Aquifer Recharge (MAR) in Semi-Arid Areas.
Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization.
Giordano, M., and K. Villholth, eds. 2007.
The Agricultural Groundwater Revolution:
Opportunities and Threats to Development. Comprehensive Assessments of
Water Management in Agriculture No 3.
Colombo: International Water Management Institute and CABI.
Guaraní Aquifer System Project. 2003.
Preliminary Map of the Guaraní Aquifer
System. General Secretariat, Guaraní
Aquifer System Project, Monte­video.
www.sg-guarani.org/index/site/
sistema_acuifero/sa001.php.
Hillbricht-Ilkowska, A. 1993. Lake Ecosystems and Climate Changes. Kosmos 42
(1): 107-21.
Hisdal, H., K. Stahl, L. M. Tallaksen, and
S. Demuth. 2001. Have Streamflow
Droughts in Europe Become More Severe
or Frequent? International Journal of
Climatology 21 (1): 317-33.
Hostetler, S. W., and E. E. Small. 1999.
Response of North American Freshwater
Lakes to Simulated Future Climates.
Journal of the American Water Resource
Association 35 (6): 1625-38.
Hu C., Liu C., Zhou Z., and R. Jayakumar.
2008. Changes in Water and Sediment
Loads of Rivers in China. Working Paper
prepared as a contribution to UNESCO’s
World Water Development Report 3, International Research and Training Center on
Erosion and Sedimentation, Beijing.
Hu R. L., Yue Z. Q., Wang L. C., and Wang
S. J. 2004. Review on Current Status and
Challenging Issues of Land Subsidence
in China. Engineering Geology 76 (1-2):
65-77.
Huntington, T. G. 2006. Evidence for
Intensification of the Global Water Cycle:
Review and Synthesis. Journal of Hydrology 319 (1-4): 83-95.
International Crisis Group. 2007. Nigeria:
Ending Unrest in the Niger Delta. Africa

Report 135, International Crisis Group,
Brussels.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2001. Climate Change
2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability Contribution of the Working Group II to
the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
eds. J. J. McCarthy, O. F. Canziani, N.
A. Leary, D. J. Dokken, and K. S. White.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 2007. Climate Change 2007: The
Physical Science Basis. Summary for
Policymakers. Contribution of the Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
IPL (International Programme on Landslides). n.d. IPL Leaflet. International
Consortorium on Landslides, Kyoto
University, Disaster Prevention Research
Institute, Uji, Kyoto, Japan. http://iclhq.
org/IPL-Leaflet-2004.pdf.
Kundzewicz, Z. W., D. Graczyk, T. Maurer, I. Pińskwar, M. Radziejewski, C.
Svensson, and M. Szwed. 2005. Trend
Detection in River Flow Series: 1. Annual
Maximum Flow. Hydrological Sciences
Journal 50 (5): 797-810.
Lal, R., M. Griffin, J. Apt, L. Lave, and M.
N. Granger. 2004. Managing Soil Carbon. Science 304 (5669): 393.
Meyer, J. L., M. J. Sale, P. J. Mulholland,
and N. L. Poff. 1999. Impacts of Climate
Change on Aquatic Ecosystem Functioning and Health. Journal of the American
Water Resources Association 35 (6):
1373-86.
Milly, P. C. D., R. T. Wetherald, K. A.
Dunne, and T. L. Delworth. 2002. Increasing Risk of Great Floods in a Changing Climate. Nature 415 (6871): 514-17.
Mimikou, M. A., E. Malta, E. Varanou, and
K. Pantazis. 2000. Regional Impacts
of Climate Change on Water Resources
Quantity and Quality Indicators. Journal
of Hydrology 234 (1-2): 95-109.
Montgomery, D. R. 2007. Soil Erosion and
Agricultural Sustainability. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 104
(33): 13268-72.
Neilson, R. P., and D. Marks. 1994. A
Global Perspective of Regional Vegetation and Hydrologic Sensitivities from
Climatic Change. Journal of Vegetation
Science 5 (5): 715-30.
Neilson, R. P., I. C. Prentice, B. Smith,
T. G. F. Kittel, and D. Viner. 1998. Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution
under Global Warming. In The Regional
Impacts of Climate Change: An Assessment
of Vulnerability, eds., R. T. Watson, M. C.
Zinyowera, R. H. Moss, and D. J. Dokken.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Evolving hazards – and emerging opportunities
Poland, J. F., ed. 1984. Guidebook to Studies of Land Subsidence Due to GroundWater Withdrawal. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization.
Romm, J. 2007. Hell and High Water: Global
Warming – the Solution and the Politics
– and What We Should Do. New York:
William Morrow.
Schindler, D. W., and M. P. Stainton. 1996.
The Effects of Climatic Warming on the
Properties of Boreal Lakes and Streams at
the Experimental Lakes Area, Northwestern Ontario. Limnology and Oceanography 41 (5): 1004-17.
Scholze, M., W. Knorr, N. W. Arnell, and
I. C. Prentice. 2006. A Climate-Change
Risk Analysis for World Ecosystems.
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science 103: 13116-120.
Tallaksen, L. M., S. Demuth, and H. A.
J. van Lanen. 2007. Low Flow and
Drought Studies – the Northern European (NE) FRIEND Experience (keynote
paper). In Climatic and Anthropogenic
Impacts on the Variability of Water Resources International Seminar, 22-24
November 2005. Montpellier, France,
ed. G. Mahé. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization, International Hydrological
Programme.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 2007. Our Waters:
Joining Hands across Borders. First Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and
Groundwaters. Geneva and New York:
United Nations. www.unece.org/env/
water/publications/ assessment/assessmentweb_full.pdf.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization).

Water in a changing world

2005. Recharge Systems for Protecting
and Enhancing Groundwater Resources.
Proceedings of the Fifth International
Symposium on Management of Aquifer
Recharge, Berlin, Germany, 11-16 June
2005. Paris: United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization.

3

Impact from Registered River Impoundments. Global and Planetary Change 39
(1-2): 169-90.
Walling, D. E. 2006. Human Impact on
Land-Ocean Sediment Transfer by the
World’s Rivers. Geomorphology 79 (3-4):
192-216.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Social, and Cultural Organization)/OAS
(Organization of American States)
ISARM (International Shared Aquifer
Resource Management). 2007. Transboundary Aquifers of the Americas. Final
Report of 4th Coordination Workshop,
20-22 November 2006, San Salvador.
United Nations Educational, Social, and
Cultural Organization/Organization of
American States, International Shared
Aquifer Resource Management Americas
Program, Washington, DC.

Walling, D. E., and D. Fang. 2003. Recent
Trends in the Suspended Sediment Loads
of the World’s Rivers. Global and Planetary Change 39 (1): 111-26.

Uri, N. D., and J. A. Lewis. 1999. Agriculture and the Dynamics of Soil Erosion in
the United States. Journal of Sustainable
Agriculture 14 (2-3): 63-82.

Williams, John W., Stephen T. Jackson,
and John E. Kutzbach. 2007. Projected
Distributions of Novel and Disappearing Climates by 2100 AD. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 104 (14):
5738-42.

van der Gun, J. A. M. Forthcoming.
Climate Change and Alluvial Aquifers in
Arid Regions – Examples from Yemen. In
Climate Change Adaptation in the Water
Sector. London: Earthscan.
van Lanen, H. A. J., L. M. Tallaksen, and
G. Rees. 2007. Droughts and Climate
Change. In Commission Staff Working
Document Impact Assessment: Accompanying Document to Communication
Addressing the Challenge of Water Scarcity
and Droughts in the European Union.
Brussels: Commission of the European
Communities.
Vörösmarty, C. J., M. Meybeck, B.
Fekete, K. Sharma, P. Green, and
J. P. M. Syvitski. 2003. Anthropogenic Sediment Retention: Major Global

Wang P. 2007. The Dragon Head’s Story:
Water/Land Conflict in Shanghai. Geophysical Research Abstracts 9: 11655.
Wilkinson, B. H., and B. J. McElroy. 2007.
The Impact of Humans on Continental
Erosion and Sedimentation. Geological Society of America Bulletin 119 (1-2):
140-56.

World Bank. 2005. A Safer Lake Sarez.
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
go.worldbank.org/NLINTLWL00.
———. 2007. Actual Crop Water Use in
Project Countries: A Synthesis at the
Regional Level. Policy Research Working Paper 4288, Sustainable Rural and
Urban Development Team, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Zhang X., F. W. Zwiers, G. C. Hegerl, F. H.
Lambert, N. P. Gillett, S. Solomon, P.
A. Stott, and T. Nozawa. 2007. Detection of Human Influence on Twentieth­Century Precipitation Trends. Nature
448: 461-65.

225

PART

3

Chapter 13
Bridging the
observational gap
Author: Wolfgang Grabs
Coordinator: Andras Szöllösi-Nagy (UNESCO)
Associate coordinator: Wolfgang Grabs (WMO)
Facilitator: Denis Hughes

Key messages
Worldwide, water observation networks provide incomplete and
incompatible data on water quantity and quality for managing
water resources and predicting future needs – and these networks
are in jeopardy of further decline. Also, no comprehensive information exists on wastewater generation and treatment and receiving water quality on a regional or global scale.
There is little sharing of hydrologic data, due largely to limited physical access to data, policy and security issues; lack of agreed protocols
for sharing; and commercial considerations. This hampers regional
and global projects that have to build on shared datasets for scientific and applications-oriented purposes, such as seasonal regional hydrologic outlooks, forecasting, disaster warning and prevention, and
integrated water resources management in transboundary basins.
Improving water resources management requires investments in
monitoring and more efficient use of existing data, including traditional ground-based observations and newer satellite-based data
products. Most countries, developed and developing, need to give
greater attention and more resources to monitoring, observations
and continual assessments of the status of water resources.
There is little doubt that global hydrologic
data are inadequate in both spatial coverage and frequency of observations. Moreover, hydrologic observation networks are
worsening in many countries because of
changing national investment priorities
and declining human capacity.1
Beyond physical inadequacy, there is widespread reluctance to share hydrologic data,
largely because of inadequate national administrative procedures and mechanisms,
issues related to commercial use of hydrologic data and information, and security
concerns and political sensitivities about
transboundary resources. Sharing is also
hampered by inadequate telecommunications systems. But the main reason for the
decline of networks is insufficient awareness of the global value of hydrologic data.
226

The importance of hydrologic
observations
Sound water resources management should
be based on a quantitative understanding
of the state of the resource. Because the
components of the water cycle vary over
time, long time series of observational data
are essential. Lack of such data compromises the validity of information used for assessments and subsequent decision-making.
When sufficient observational data are
lacking, models can be used to generate
information for decision-making, provided they have a baseline from which to
be calibrated. But synthetically generated
data cannot substitute for real-world observations. To keep networks affordable and
sustainable, a minimum-density network
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Bridging the observational gap
can effectively coexist with model-derived
data and information. Established analytical procedures can offer insight into
observational and model uncertainties and
provide a basis for thoroughly analysing
permissible reduction of information as a
result of minimizing networks.
Data are also crucial to improving understanding of the hydrologic cycle for
weather- and climate-related science
and for water resources management
through better assessment methods and
improved forecasting services that can
reduce disaster damages. One justification for improving hydrologic networks is
to minimize uncertainties in hydrologic
forecasting and prediction and therefore
to minimize decision-making risk. This
can be achieved in several ways, including
new and better-quality information from
improved measurements (quantity, quality,
timeliness) and measurement techniques,
improved model structures based on better
understanding of physical processes, and
better mathematical representation and
use of available information during model
identification and calibration.
Aside from technical considerations, uncertainty in hydrologic data can be attributed to the general inadequacy of observations in spatial and temporal coverage.
‘Uncertainty’ in this context relates to the
adequacy and quality of technical observations for forecasting and ­assessment – not
to the aberrations in technical observations. Uncertainty for assessment and
forecasting varies, but is generally high in
subtropical and tropical regions as well as
polar and mountainous regions. Developing countries, especially the least developed countries, generally have inadequate
networks associated with a high uncertainty of hydrologic observations.
There is a critical need for more availability and access to global hydrologic data,
information and products for climate and
hydrologic research and applications –
including the validation and refinement of
global circulation models and the quantification of the water balance and its variation over large basins and regions up to
the global level. Important scientific issues
include the quantification of a postulated
accelerated hydrologic cycle as a result of
global warming and the contribution of
continental runoff to sea level change. In
a general sense global hydrologic observations help quantify key environmental
and human-induced changes and interactions, identify significant trends, assess

Water in a changing world

variability of freshwater resources and
develop adequate response strategies.
While characterizing all components of
the water cycle (including water quantity
and quality, groundwater and surface
water) is important, measuring everything
is impractical. The components of surface water measured most frequently are
precipitation, streamflow, evaporation and
water in storage (reservoirs and natural
lakes). Other components (soil moisture,
for example) are generally quantified using
models that rely on the other measurements. The components of groundwater
measured most frequently are inputs (recharge and inflow), aquifer storage capacity and natural outflows. While effective
management of groundwater resources
depends on measuring these components,
none can be measured directly as a single
value because they all depend on a large
number of variables.

3

Data are crucial
to improving
understanding
of the hydrologic
cycle for weatherand climate-related
science and for
water resources
management

Water quality observation networks are
sparse and frequently use spot rather than
continuous observations. The numerous
water quality variables that determine how
water can be used and the treatment technologies required for safe use make it very
difficult to design effective and affordable monitoring systems and to identify
relationships between water quantity and
quality variations. Such information can
be extrapolated to sites that have no observations. The problem is exacerbated when
natural water quality is modified by both
point and diffuse anthropogenic pollution
sources. And deteriorating water quality
greatly affects the potential use of water,
increasing the need for networks of water
quality observations.
It is recognized worldwide that management of water resources should be environmentally sustainable and that adequate
protection of aquatic ecosystems is extremely important. Aquatic ecosystems are
sensitive to changes in water quantity and
quality, but the precise manner in which
they react to changes in abiotic drivers
is poorly understood. Better understanding is vital for allocating water and can
be achieved only by monitoring abiotic
drivers (flow and water quality) and biotic
responses (biomonitoring of biological
conditions; see chapter 8).2

Recent developments in
observation methods, networks
and monitoring
The adequacy of any hydrologic observation network is related to the accuracy of
227

PART

3

The adequacy
of observational
networks varies
widely by region,
but observations
for many water
cycle variables
have inadequate
spatial and
temporal coverage

Chapter 13
measurement systems, the density and
representativeness of the network, and
monitoring, data retrieval, storage and dissemination practices.
Observational errors are generally minimal when instruments are used in environments and under conditions for which
they were designed. But instruments must
be well maintained and calibrated, and
rigid quality management procedures must
be observed from the field to the release of
the primary data. Further reducing instrument errors is less critical than expanding
operational networks to decrease observation uncertainties. Error bandwidths
have not been significantly reduced, due
mainly to inadequate network densities,
poor quality and control over hydrologic
observations and insufficient hydrologic
data and information.3
The adequacy of observational networks
varies widely by region, but observations for
many water cycle variables have inadequate
spatial and temporal coverage.4 Continuously and consistently quantifying hydrologic
variables at the global, regional and basin
levels will require integrated observation
systems that use both terrestrial and satellite
observations. These systems will need data
assimilation products, including models
calibrated from the integrated networks and
multiplatform observations.
Most of today’s data for terrestrial observations and for many satellite observations
are funded through national agencies,
although satellite observations are increasingly carried out in the framework
of multinational agreements. It would be
worthwhile to investigate whether selected
terrestrial observations could also be carried out under multinational agreements.
Given the resource inputs from national
agencies, product development and other
derived services need to be responsive to
national requirements to encourage continued national participation and funding.
A close feedback loop needs to be established between national data providers and the users of global observation
systems. For developing countries this
requires more participation in global
projects. Most information generated from
global observation networks is used by
developed countries, and much less is used
by developing countries. Sharing information across regions, however, becomes
increasingly valuable – especially for
smaller countries, which can complement
their spatially or technologically restricted
national observation networks, and for

228

hydrometeorological variables and hydrologic data and information from shared
river basins used for forecasting.
For network development and the design
of multiplatform hydrologic observation
systems, the heterogeneity of research
fields makes it difficult to decide what variables should be collected and over what
time and space. Network requirements
also vary depending on the requirements
of the research and application communities. A flexible network architecture with
networks as subsets of larger composite
networks or observation systems is thus
desirable. Minimum operational baseline
networks of routine observations (groundand satellite-based) need to be augmented
by research networks on a long-term basis.
Growing demand for precise assessments,
forecasting and warnings requires quality
management frameworks for all observation systems. The value of data depends
on the accuracy and comparability of
observations from different entities and
instruments (including analytical laboratory procedures). Although regulatory data
quality frameworks exist at the national
and international levels, their implementation and adherence vary widely and are insufficiently documented from the country
level to higher levels. Lack of adherence is
frequently related to insufficient technical
training of staff involved in measuring and
managing data observations. The results
are inadequately and irregularly calibrated
instruments, few intercomparisons of different observation methods and analytical procedures, poor data quality control
measures for consistency and homogeneity
(the identification of systematic trends due
to environmental or instrumental changes)
and a lack of interaction and experience
sharing among institutions.
Objective assessment of data quality is rare
but nonetheless indispensable for reliably
using data in decision-making. For various
reasons, including poor quality and security
considerations, several data providers are
hesitant to share data. In developing countries the attitude exists that collecting some
data (of questionable reliability) is better
than collecting no data at all. But confidence in good-quality data can be an incentive to share the data with other countries,
development programmes and partners.

Changing status of operational
data over the recent past
This section examines the status of operational data from terrestrial hydrologic
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Bridging the observational gap
networks, multiple uses of national hydrologic observing systems, integration
of multisource observations, the sharing
of observations, observations and data on
water use, and hydrologic observations
from space.

State of terrestrial hydrologic
networks
For terrestrial hydrologic observation systems, especially in many developing countries, data collection is inadequate and
deteriorating. Many systems lack adequate
quality assurance and control standards
for calibrating instruments and reducing
data. And basic capacity to access, interpret and apply water cycle information
from both terrestrial and satellite observation systems is often insufficient.5
Many terrestrial hydrologic networks are
shrinking for several reasons:
•

Available records fulfil present hydrologic information requirements.

•

No direct economically justifiable use
of hydrologic information is apparent
(for example, in pristine basins or stations close to the mouths of rivers and
delta areas).

•

Logistical problems.

•

Budgetary or resource problems.

While the overall number of streamflow
stations did not change significantly, stations with a long-term record were most
affected by closures. The US Geological
Survey reports that from 1980 to 2004,
2,051 stream gauges with 30 or more
years of streamflow data were discontinued, leaving 7,360 at the end of 2005.6
An important source of global hydrologic
memory is being lost at a time when such
information is needed to characterize the
impacts of climate variability and change
on hydrology and water resources. Another example is Kyrgyzstan in the Aral
Sea basin, one of the best documented
environmental disaster cases, where the
number of hydrologic stations declined
48% during 1985-2005.7
The technical challenges behind the
current situation of hydrologic data in
Africa can be traced to the low quality
and quantity of basic equipment, poor
technology, few laboratories for recalibrating equipment, inadequately trained
human resources at both professional
and technician levels and insufficient
funding and capital to sustain current
Water in a changing world

operations or access new technologies.8
Many challenges in accessing datasets in
Africa arise from the reluctance of countries to exchange data freely. One reason:
many countries do not feel sufficiently
involved in regional or global studies and
believe that their data services are not
appreciated. Other factors are the absence
of protocols and conventions for sharing
water in some shared or international
basins and aquifers, limited feedback
from researchers and studies that use
African data and fear of losing ownership
of data.9
Anecdotal evidence (because no globally
representative studies are available) and
reviews of funding in the water sector
suggest that national agencies and donors
are not prepared to invest in multipurpose
hydrologic networks expanding to regional or global hydrologic networks. But
ongoing projects include new gauging stations at a limited scale, though these stations often operate only for a limited time
for specific projects (including scoping
projects, such as for proposed irrigation
schemes) and rarely have historic records.

3

An important
source of global
hydrologic memory
is being lost at
a time when
such information
is needed to
characterize
the impacts of
climate variability
and change on
hydrology and
water resources

One major effort to stem the decline of
hydrologic networks is the World Meteorological Organization’s World Hydrological
Cycle Observation System. Implemented at
the regional and transboundary river basin
levels, the programme focuses on establishing and operating requirements-driven
hydrologic information systems.10
There is no systematic monitoring of
groundwater, which constitutes 21% of
the world’s freshwater resources, at the regional or global level.11 Few of the publicly
accessible systems that contain relevant
general information on water at the global
level store data on groundwater quantity
or quality. In many countries little attention is paid to the uniformity of hydro­
geological data, precluding cross-comparisons. Few countries have up-to-date
groundwater databases from which the
current quality and quantity of groundwater resources can be elaborated. Without
such systems information is obtained from
model-derived data.
Information availability differs across
time and space, as do the methods used
to process this information. To address
this situation, the International Groundwater Resources Centre has established the
Global Groundwater Monitoring Network,
which uses available data and derived
information to periodically assess global
groundwater resources.
229

PART

3

Major investments
are needed to
reverse the decline
of hydrologic
observation
networks, including
surface water
and groundwater
observations and
water quality
monitoring

Chapter 13
Surface observations reveal only indirect
indicators of groundwater system status,
such as changes in vegetation patterns,
changes in river base flows, appearing or
disappearing springs and wetlands, land
subsidence and visible changes in the
water levels of shallow, large-diameter
wells. Subsurface observations are required
to quantify groundwater storage through
variations in groundwater levels, changing aquifer conditions and alterations in
the chemical composition of groundwater.
Groundwater levels and water sample
collection are carried out using observation wells. Advanced data loggers such as
pressure transducers and salinity sensors
allow groundwater and salinity levels to
be automatically measured at variable
intervals. Geophysical methods (well logs
and surface studies) help reveal changes
in moisture content and salinity and
trace some pollutants. There is promising
evidence that gravimetric remote sensing methods allow aquifer monitoring on
global to subregional levels, especially in
sparsely gauged areas.12
The availability of usable freshwater is
determined not only by the quantity
of the resource but increasingly by its
quality, which may further reduce the
net availability of water resources for
different uses and have critical environmental consequences. More than
100 countries contribute to the Global Environment Monitoring System
– Water, a programme with more than
3,000 stations operated by Environment
Canada under the auspices of the United
Nations Environment Programme. The
global database that it has built is key
for global freshwater quality assessment.
But a general lack of institutionalized,
continuous dataflow into the database
severely hampers further regional and
global assessments as well as programmes
to improve water quality, especially in
transboundary basins.13
National data holdings are frequently
fragmented, with no metadata catalogue
in place that allows a complete picture of a
country’s water quality situation. Notwithstanding some positive examples, monitoring networks in developing countries are
rudimentary, irregularly updated, rarely
objective driven and without sufficient
quality control to make observations truly
useful. It would be a formidable task not
only to establish sustainable baseline and
specialized water quality observation
networks, but also to make them interoperable with surface water and groundwater quantity observations that enable

230

calculating pollutant loads and biogeochemical fluxes, for example.
Observational gaps result from failure to
observe and collect data or from lack of
access to data. Increasingly, the gaps are
due to lost data and information as a result
of disasters, social unrest and technological evolution. Data rescue programmes are
thus crucial to retaining historical information and to expanding knowledge bases
as far back as possible. This is especially
important when considering that long
records of observations are a prerequisite
for detecting climate variability and changes in observations as well as for establishing the baseline hydrologic conditions that
existed prior to development activities.
Major investments are needed to reverse
the decline of hydrologic observation
networks, including surface water and
groundwater observations and water quality monitoring. National investment can
be mobilized with assistance from development partners, but doing so is very difficult
when investments are sought for transboundary hydrologic observation systems
or global data collection and monitoring
systems. This is partly due to the fact that
most development partners, including
institutional donors, focus their technical
assistance on bilateral needs rather than on
regional or global observing systems.
The general trends of in-situ observation
methods include:
•

Increasing use of automatic logging
systems and replacement of instruments with mechanical recording
devices.

•

Widespread use of motionless observing methods, including measurement
of hydrostatic pressure for gauge
heights and observation methods
without water contact, such as instruments using small radar devices
suspended over the water surface to
obtain gauge heights.

•

Coupling of in-situ stations with
automatic data transmission and telecommunications systems, including
mobile phone communication using
Global System for Mobile/General
Packet Radio Service standards.

•

Increasing integration of in-situ
observation systems with basinwide
hydrologic information systems,
including forecasting and decisionsupport systems.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Bridging the observational gap

Observation networks for different
purposes
National hydrologic observation networks
often serve several purposes – such as
providing information for water resources
assessments and forecasting and serving
as least influenced baseline hydrologic
stations for climate studies. A clear delineation of national hydrologic observation
systems for different uses is the exception
rather than the rule. Specialized hydrologic networks are justified, especially when
regular network observations do not provide the appropriate specific observations.
One example is the need for extreme event
data, which are generally less available
than regular network observations.
Justifying networks with higher observational density and higher reporting
frequency needs to be based on multipleobjective requirements analysis to assess
additional economic or scientific value
gained. The rational use of national hydrologic networks would be enhanced by
clearly delineating priority use of stations
based on such criteria as quality of data,
length of records, location of the station
and reporting cycle. Classifying hydrologic networks this way would allow rapid
identification of subnetworks for specialized purposes. Of particular interest would
be hydrologic stations recording flows
of water to and from national territories
to support assessment of the resource at
the national level. In addition, observational networks are sometimes established
for specific purposes – in particular for
environmental assessment studies. Most
of these stations are operated for only a
limited time, and their data deliveries are
generally poorly documented. One recommendation is to document and preserve
short-duration hydrologic observations to
supplement regular national hydrologic
networks.

From data to information –
integrating observations
Hydrologic forecasting and assessment
products increasingly use multisource
observations and complex data assimilation algorithms to improve accuracy,
reliability and timeliness. For example,
flood forecasts can be based on observations of precipitation from conventional
rain gauges, hydrologic radars and satellite
precipitation estimates combined with
current (real-time) measurements of soil
moisture and other variables. Thus, aside
from technical opportunities and challenges, integrating multiple observation
systems that operate at different spatial
and temporal scales requires systems to
Water in a changing world

ensure internally consistent data products,
keeping in mind that local, regional and
global datasets are equally important because they serve different purposes.

Sharing hydrologic observations
Other than technical obstacles, sharing of
hydrologic data can be hampered by limited physical access to data, national data
policy and security issues, lack of agreed
protocols for sharing and commercial considerations. Whether hydrologic data are a
public good or commodity does not have a
simple answer. One argument is that data
do not have an intrinsic value and therefore are not commercial products. Societal,
scientific and commercial value is added as
a result of information and service delivery products (such as hydrologic forecasts
or assessments) that have identifiable and
quantifiable socioeconomic values. For
example, flood disaster damages are often
less when an effective forecasting service
exists. The cost-benefit ratio for hydrologic
data used for forecasting ranges from 1:10
to 1:15.14

3

integrating
multiple
observation
systems that
operate at different
spatial and
temporal scales
requires systems to
ensure internally
consistent data
products, keeping
in mind that local,
regional and
global datasets are
equally important
because they serve
different purposes

The basis for sharing data and information is defined requirements from national
sectors, planning commissions, river basin
organizations, hydrologic and climate research communities, and national and regional development partners. Commercial
entities, including the public utility sector,
are also increasing requirements for shared
hydrologic data. A needs-based approach
should form the basis of any data-sharing
policy. Many data-sharing protocols and
agreements already exist at the national,
regional and global levels. Data-sharing
agreements between riparian countries in
transboundary basins where lower riparian
countries have a disproportionally larger
benefit from upstream observations could
also require downstream users to contribute to the maintenance and operation of
upstream stations in order to ensure longterm availability of hydrologic observations. Generally, scientific and technological advances and better management of
water resources and hydrologic forecasting
at all levels should not be hampered by
restrictions in data-sharing arrangements.
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes
requires its parties to exchange data on
water quality and quantity and pollution
sources as well as environmental conditions of transboundary waters. The first
Assessment of Transboundary Rivers,
Lakes and Groundwaters in the region,
231

PART

3

Chapter 13

the paucity of
contributions to
the Global Runoff
Data Centre is
often related
not to lack of
infrastructure
but to general
unwillingness to
share data in an
institutionalized,
regular manner

developed under the Water Convention in
2007, describes the hydrologic regime of
140 transboundary rivers, 30 transboundary lakes and 70 transboundary aquifers
together with pressure factors in their
basins, their status and transboundary
impact, as well as trends and envisaged
management measures.15
Observational gaps also arise when hydrologic observations are not shared. Regional
differences in data provided to the Global
Runoff Data Centre are apparent in both
quantity and timeliness. Hydrologic data
from North and Central America, the
Caribbean, Europe and Mediterranean
Asia are far greater than data from other
regions (map 13.1). In other regions few
hydrologic stations provide data to the
centre, and update intervals are too great
(figure 13.1). The paucity of contributions is often related not to lack of infrastructure but to general unwillingness to
share data in an institutionalized, regular
manner. This regional picture also suggests that most data are shared by a rather
constant number of national hydrologic
services, with few new services added over
time. This hampers regional and global
projects that have to build on such datasets for scientific and applications-oriented
purposes. Examples include the calibration
of models to provide seasonal regional
hydrologic outlooks, forecasting, disaster
warning and prevention, and water management in transboundary basins.
Inadequate use of current information
technologies severely threatens data and
information sharing even when basic

Map 13.1

hydrologic observations are available.
Typical inadequacies relate to incompatible information systems, which effectively
block the seamless exchange of data and
information between systems and different operators and programmes from the
national to the global level. These inadequacies lead to an effective blackout of
potentially valuable data and information
because they are not part of the information management cycle. The situation is
especially critical for forecasting purposes
when data need to be shared in real or
near real time.

Observations and data related to
water use
Many models used to extrapolate from
observations to areas with no observations
available are designed to simulate natural
conditions based on hydrometeorological
inputs. For model outputs to reflect quantitative changes of water resources availability and use over space and time, model
components that simulate anthropogenic
development impacts (such as population
trends, economic activities and land use
changes) need to be integrated. Model
calibration and validation likewise rely on
information on water storage in lakes and
reservoirs, water abstractions and return
flows.
Global data on water use exist primarily
for the agricultural sector (for example,
the AQUASTAT database by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). Data on consumptive and nonconsumptive use of water resources are not
a regular part of many national statistics,

Distribution of Global Runoff Data Centre streamflow gauges

Global Runoff
Data Centre stations
time series end
1919-79
1980-84
1985-89
1990-94
1995-99
2000-04
2004-present

Source: Global Runoff Data Centre (http://grdc.bafg.de/).

232

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Bridging the observational gap

Figure 13.1

Data delivery rate from runoff gauging stations to the Global Runoff Data Centre
(number of stations from which data have been received, 2001-07)

Region 1, Africa (888 stations)

Region 2, Asia (1,880 stations)

150

1,200

125

1,000

100

800

75

600

50

400

25

200

0

3

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

Region 4, North and Central America and
the Caribbean (2,320 stations)

40
30
20
10

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

Region 5, The Pacific and Australia
(434 stations)

2,500
2,000
1,500

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

Region 6, Europe & Mediterranean Asia
(1,225 stations)

400

500

300

400
300

200

1,000

Region 3, South America (585 stations)

200
100

500
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

0

100
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

0

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

Note: Regions are World Meteorological Organization classifications.
Source: Global Runoff Data Centre (http://grdc.bafg.de/).

although where abstractions are licensed,
information on the maximum use of
water may be available. This situation is
unsatisfactory because it prevents effective
management of water demand relative to
availability and supply of freshwater.
Despite the importance for the integrated
management of water quantity and quality
and for understanding water-related health
hazards, no comprehensive information
exists on the regional or global extent of
wastewater generation and treatment and
receiving water quality. Even at the national level such information is either inconsistently gathered or unavailable – partly
because of ill-defined data collection
responsibilities that rest with a multitude
of national organizations and commercial
entities that rarely share their information.

Hydrologic observations from space
Satellite observations are important means
for providing hydrologic data with acceptable spatial and temporal resolution,
especially in areas with no or limited
infrastructure. However, ‘acceptable resolution’ depends on what the data are to be
used for. In-situ data provide acceptable
coverage and temporal resolution mainly
in more accessible regions. In-situ data are
also used for calibrating and validating
space-based information, hydrologic or
water resources models and routine realWater in a changing world

time forecasting services. For forecasting of
runoff and water flows, data must be available within a fraction of an hour up to
several hours, depending on the size of the
basin and forecasting requirements. For
assessment a temporal resolution of several
weeks up to one month may suffice.
High priority for additional observations
should be focused on data-poor regions,
poorly observed hydrologic variables,
regions sensitive to change and variables
with inadequate spatial resolution. The
need for satellite-based observations that
complement in-situ observations should
be recognized. In-situ and space-based observations for hydrologic applications need
to be integrated in a comparable space
and time domain and under tight quality control. Such quality control would
require increased efforts to assess observation quality through intercomparison
and recalibration projects. This is especially important for achieving continuity
between historical terrestrial observations
and new satellite observations.
Terrestrial water level observations can
now be supplemented with sufficient accuracy by radar altimetry instruments flown
on the Envisat, Jason and TOPEX satellites.
Because the sensor carriers on these satellites are not geostationary, the altimetry
observations are taken at virtual gauging
233

PART

3

Merging data
streams from
both terrestrial
and space-based
observations will
require new model
structures that
need to be tested
for their utility
in operational
services

Chapter 13
stations along the path of the satellite at
various stretches of a river with an approximately weekly repetition cycle. This allows for basinwide hydrologic assessments.
Efforts are under way to derive discharge
time series from altimetry observations
through actual rating curves that use the
river morphology and through virtual calibration curves that use idealized channel
profiles in combination with hydraulic
parameters. The use of altimetry observations is, however, restricted to large rivers,
lakes and reservoirs and is not appropriate
for smaller tributaries.
Since 2002 gravimetric measurements
using the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment (GRACE) satellite have provided the means to observe changes in
large aquifers at a spatial scale over 40,000
square kilometres. However, separating
water masses (soil moisture, vegetation
and groundwater) is still difficult. Inverse
approaches are therefore needed to separate the hydrologic contributions of the
main water reservoirs (oceans, atmosphere
and total continental water storage including snow, soil wetness, groundwater and
ice caps) from monthly synthetic GRACE
geoïds. Nevertheless, at large scales gravimetric observations of changes in large
aquifers from GRACE and next-generation
missions like the Gravity Field and SteadyState Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE)
satellite are nearing a stage where they
could be used operationally.
Apart from directly measuring hydrologic variables such as water levels, snow
and ice cover extent, soil moisture and
groundwater, satellites are invaluable for
providing information for hydrologic
estimation (modelling) studies. Satellite
estimates of precipitation are an obvious
example. Several precipitation estimation
methods based on microwave and infrared instruments on numerous satellites
and associated different data retrieval and
interpretation algorithms have reached
a semi-operational and, in a few cases,
an operational level.16 Some global or
near-global precipitation products have
spatial resolutions down to 4 kilometres
and temporal resolutions down to threehourly, making them useful for water
management and flood forecasting. Several
hydrology-relevant products are associated
with the Moderate Resolution Imaging
Spectroradiometer instrument operating
on both the Terra and Aqua spacecraft:
inundation areas, surface changes of lakes
and reservoirs, surface reflectance, temperature, land cover and indexes of vegetation
change.

234

Opportunities and challenges
The combination of observations from
GRACE, GOCE, satellite altimetry and
other space systems such as active and
passive microwaves, satellite radar interferometry and visible and radar imagery
offer the potential for developing new
hydrologic products, such as present-day
satellite-derived precipitation products and
the planned Global Precipitation Mission.
Near-future developments are likely to
include the operational generation of
truly multiplatform information products
from terrestrial observations merged with
gravimetric observations from GRACE and
GOCE, radar altimetry and precipitation
estimates as inputs into hydrologic models
for forecasting, water resources assessment
and monitoring of the water balance of
basins. Likewise, merged multiplatform
information can be used to quantify
spatial and temporal variations of flooded
areas and water volumes. The improved
cooperation between the national meteorological and hydrologic services of
many countries with the aim to improve
hydrologic forecasting is at the heart of
the World Meteorological Organization
Flood Forecasting Initiative, launched in
2003. The availability of multiplatform,
multivariate data streams in near real time
and with high accuracy will be crucial to
achieving this goal.
Using the global concept of the World
Hydrological Cycle Observing System,
building on terrestrial hydrologic information systems and obtaining global hydrologic coverage from satellites to integrate
terrestrial and satellite-based observations
could close many gaps in hydrologic observations at all levels and support improved
hydrologic and water resources assessments, forecasting and research. To make
full use of satellite observations, a suite of
intercomparison and validation projects is
needed to assess the accuracy of satellitebased observations with terrestrial observations in a wide range of environmental
conditions. Merging data streams from
both terrestrial and space-based observations will require new model structures
that need to be tested for their utility in
operational services.
Despite current technological and methodological developments, an important challenge remains. To mainstream
satellite-­based observations that complement terrestrial observations in operational water resources management and
forecasting services on a routine basis and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Bridging the observational gap
for critical assessments, awareness and
capacity are needed in national meteorological and hydrologic agencies. Likewise,
space organizations need to know the
requirements for space-based observations
in order to design and operate new and
tailor-made missions and to create derived
observational and model products for
hydrology and water resources management. Space agencies will need to develop
front-end tools that allow primary data to
be converted into graphics and tables that
can be used in models and forecasting routines. This will require an intensified dialogue among space agencies, the science
community and hydrologic and meteorologic services to define interinstitutional
cooperation and sharing of responsibilities
on long-term archiving of satellite observations, access to data and information in
support of science and research, and the
development of products for operational
applications.

observations, including those from
pristine basins.
•

Financing of hydrologic networks,
including operation and maintenance,
should be based on a multiple-source
strategy rather than the prevailing
single-source, sector-specific funding
arrangements.

•

Integrated multiplatform network
solutions that combine in-situ and
space-based observations and that are
affordable for developing countries
should be promoted. This would enhance the observational base in spatial
and temporal coverage.

•

Other hydrologic information – such
as in-situ and remotely sensed soil
moisture and meteorological data and
information including precipitation,
evaporation, humidity, temperature
and wind fields – needs to be considered to complement hydrologic
information and to enhance the information content of hydrologic data
through integration in multivariate
models and predictions.

•

In data-sparse regions in particular,
modelling approaches need to be
mainstreamed to generate modelderived observation time series. A
promising tool is the reconstruction
of hydroclimatic data by downscaling.
Datasets from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction/
National Center for Atmospheric
Research for 1948-2007 are a widely
used source.

•

As observational gaps are often directly related to deficiencies in data
transmission and communication,
this could be overcome to a large
degree by connecting offline operating stations to modern telecommunication systems to increase spatial
and temporal availability of data from
already existing stations.

•

Making maximum use of existing
hydrologic observations requires more
effort to share hydrologic data and
information on all levels, including
transboundary river basins and shared
aquifer systems.

Some suggestions for bridging
the observational gap
Meta-information systems that promote
information rescue and institutional
sustainability of water information and
knowledge are prerequisites for all levels
of water management. Meta-information
systems provide generic information
about data, information, knowledge
sources and data products that are applicable to operations and research. Online
dedicated global information systemsbased applications can improve access
to information. Through a geographic
interface and standardized set of waterrelated attributes, information can be
seen in spatial context that shows analogies and patterns. Such applications are
indispensable for the global sharing of
information and apply to all components
of the water cycle.
In addition to the key messages of this
chapter, other important steps can be
taken to improve the current situation of
severe observational gaps in hydrologic
observations include:
•

At the national, regional and global
levels a minimum requirements analysis of long-term, multipurpose observational needs should be undertaken;
a new requirement is climate-relevant

Water in a changing world

3

Online dedicated
global information
systems-based
applications are
indispensable for
the global sharing
of information
and apply to all
components of
the water cycle

235

PART

3

Chapter 13

Notes

14. WRI 2004.

1.

GCOS 2003b; US Geological Survey n.d.

15. UNECE 2007.

2.

Personal communication with Richard
Robarts, Global Environment Monitoring System–Water.

16. Grabs 2007b.

3.

Based on author’s discussions with
instrument manufactures such as OTT
and SEBA.

4.

GCOS 2003b.

5.

GCOS 2003b.

6.

US Geological Survey n.d.

7.

Grabs 2007a; and presentation by Kyrgyzstan Hydromet at an ARAL-HYCOS
planning meeting, 6-7 December 2006,
Almaty.

8.

GCOS 2003a.

9.

GCPS 2003a.

10. World Hydrological Cycle Observing
System (www.whycos.org).
11. Based on data from the International
Groundwater Resources Assessment
Centre.
12. Grabs 2007b.
13. GEMS-Water 2008.

236

for the Third International Conference
on Water and Climate, 3-6 September,
Helsinki.
———. 2007b. Status of Hydrological InSitu Networks and Future Developments
Including Space-Based Observations.
Presentation for the Second Space for
Hydrology Workshop, 12-14 November,
Geneva.

References
GCOS (Global Climate Observing System). 2003a. Report of the GCOS/GTOS/
HWRP Expert Meeting on Hydrological
Data for Global Studies. WMO/TD-No.
1156. Geneva: World Meteorological
Organization.
———. 2003b. The Second Report on the Adequacy of the Global Observing Systems for
Climate in Support of the UNFCCC. WMO/
TD No. 1143. Geneva: World Meteorological Organization.
GEMS-Water (Global Environment Monitoring System–Water Programme).
2008. Water Quality for Ecosystem and
Human Health. 2nd ed. Nairobi: United
Nations Environment Programme.
Grabs, W. 2007a. The State of Hydrological
Observation Networks: Technical and
Operational Aspects. Overview of Global
and Regional Programmes. Presentation

UNECE (United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe). 2007. Our
Waters: Joining Hands across Borders.
First Assessment of Transboundary Rivers,
Lakes, and Groundwaters. Geneva and
New York: United Nations. www.unece.
org/env/water/publications/assessment/
assessmentweb_full.pdf.
US Geological Survey. n.d. Trends in the
Size of the USGS Streamgaging Network. National Streamflow Information
Program, Washington, DC. http://water.
usgs.gov/nsip/streamgaging_note.html.
WRI (World Resources Institute). 2004.
World Resources 2002-2004: Decisions
for the Earth: Balance, Voice, and Power.
Washington, DC: World Resources
Institute.

World Water Development Report 3

Bridging the observational gap

4

PART

Responses and choices

Chapter 14
Coordinator
Håkan Tropp
(UNDP)
Facilitator
George de Gooijer
Chapter
14

Options inside the water box

15

Options from beyond the water box

16

The way forward

Chapters 15-16
Coordinator
Olcay Ünver
(WWAP)
Facilitator
William Cosgrove

PART

4

Authors: George de Gooijer and Håkan Tropp

The Report describes the costs of not
investing in water resources development and management – the economic
losses and the human suffering and
underdevelopment. It also demonstrates
the high rates of return generated by
such investments.
Part 4 is about response options and
how to choose among them. What options are available to decision-makers
to respond to the challenges identified
in the previous chapters? How can they
select among these options? And what
are some of the trade-offs in choosing
certain options? What can transform
competition into synergy?
We have many of the answers. Across
the planet we have already shown that
it can be done! But there is no onesize-fits-all solution. The best mix of
responses to a country’s development
objectives and policy priorities to meet
its water challenges depends on the
availability of water in space and in
time and the country’s technical, financial, institutional and human capacities
– its culture, political and regulatory
frameworks, and markets.
Responses outside the water domain
strongly affect the macro changes that
influence how water is used and allocated. They also make water adaptation

measures more (or less) effective and
less (or more) costly. The Report shows
that decisions taken by external actors
may have more impact on the state,
use and management of water resources than decisions taken by managers within the water sector itself.
The demand for and the provision of
food and energy, the uneven ability to
invest and a changing climate exert
strong pressures on water. However,
the most important decisions affecting
water are often made without water
as the primary concern, even though
water may play an important role in
addressing the issue. Policy decisions
on health, food security and energy
security, for example, can intensify or
alleviate much of the pressure on water
­resources, affecting both supply and
demand.
Key drivers of water use changes – as
seen in previous chapters – include demographics, economic development and
trade, consumption and climate. These
drivers have powerful implications for
the options available inside and outside
the water domain and for how to mobilize decision-makers and other important actors.
Water resources are strongly affected
by climate change and variability. The
responses to the challenges posed by

PART

4

climate change, through best practices and low-regret measures, are also
specific to each country, especially for
vulnerable hot spots such as low-lying
islands, deltas, mountain areas and arid
regions, where action is not only cost effective in the long term but also urgent.
Options within the water domain are
distinct from those outside it. Leaders in the water domain can inform
the processes outside their domain
and implement decisions for the water
domain; but it is the leaders in government, the private sector and civil society
who determine the directions that will
be taken.
Many countries face multiple challenges but have limited financial and
natural resources and implementation
capacities. Countries need to fully use
synergy opportunities and to make
trade-offs and difficult decisions on
how to allocate among uses and users
to protect their water resources. Improved water management depends
on several interrelated factors, including accurate knowledge of the waterrelated problems to be addressed, their
root causes and the management options available to address them; political will; stakeholder participation and
cultural acceptance; transparency in
management and decision-making;

effectiveness of institutional frameworks; and sustainable funding.
An appropriate set of approaches and
strategies must be assembled for each
country and situation, based on the
biophysical characteristics of a water
system as well as local, national and
sometimes international characteristics
and capacities for achieving sustainability of water resources.
The urgency to respond will be especially high for countries already facing
severe water challenges and for countries that will face even more severe
water challenges if current climate,
demographic, socioeconomic and development trends continue.
Responses outside the water domain
are paramount in influencing the
macro changes in how water is used
and allocated and in making adaptation in the water domain more effective,
better integrated and less costly. Population growth, urbanization and climate
change are forcing the water domain to
adapt. Broader policy change and political action are required to change fundamental allocations and uses of water.
Global market conditions and trade
regimes affect crop prices and choices
and thus also have serious implications
for agricultural water use and demand.

PART

4

Economic development can improve the
water situation for many people, but it
can also cause overexploitation of water
and the environment.
Traditionally within the water sector
the first response to lack of water has
been increasing supply. The second response became managing demand, enhancing efficiency and reducing losses.
The third response is more drastic and
requires decisions outside the water
sector on reallocating resources, which
can exclude some sectors from further
supply. Effective water management
combines all three responses and involves all sectors. To achieve results,
many actors need to be involved. More
often than not this requires convincing
fellow decision-makers with well documented arguments. Water professionals
who understand the social, economic
and political conditions outside the
water sector that directly and indirectly affect how water is being used
and governed can better inform and

participate in decision-making outside
the water sector.
Chapter 14 looks at possible responses
within the water domain, and chapter
15 looks at responses outside the water
domain that affect how water is being
used and allocated. The examples of
response options are pragmatic and
include responses by governments,
private sector, civil society and consumers at various levels and scales. The
options take into account geographic
and hydroclimatic conditions, the level
of economic development, water subsectors and the supply and demand side
of the water resources equation within
the broader socio­economic framework.
Chapter 16 discusses the need for accelerated investments and informed
decision-making through partnerships.
It also considers the consequences
of increasing uncertainty and how
to prepare for decisions under such
conditions.

PART

Chapter 14

4

Options inside
the water box
Authors: George de Gooijer, Walter Rast and Håkan Tropp
Contributors: Virginie Aimard, Guy Allaerts, Maggie Black, Rutgerd Boelens, Stefano Burchi,
Hein Engel, Joakim Harlin, Molly Hellmuth, Sarah Hendry, Andrew Hudson, Anders Jägerskog,
Henrik Larsen, Patrick Moriarty, Eelco van Beek, Peter van der Zaag and James Winpenny
Coordinator: Håkan Tropp (UNDP)
Facilitator: George de Gooijer

Key messages
There are many practical examples of solutions within the water domain.
Some options show particular promise:
Supporting institutional development, to prepare institutions to deal
with current and future challenges, through such reforms as decentralization, stakeholder participation and transparency, increased
corporatization where feasible and fair, partnerships and coordination (public-private, public-public, public-civil society), and new
administrative systems based on shared benefits of water, including
when water crosses borders.
Considering the influence of water law, both formal and customary,
including regulations in other sectors that influence the management of water resources.
Consulting with stakeholders and ensuring accountability in planning, implementation and management as well as building trust
within the water and related sectors and fighting corruption and
mismanagement.
Strengthening organization structures and improving the operating
efficiency of water supply utilities to improve service quality and increase the coverage and density of connections, while also boosting
revenues and creating a more viable financial base to attract further
investment.
Developing appropriate solutions through innovation and research.
Developing institutional and human capacity, both within the water
domain and in areas or sectors outside the water domain. Capacity development can occur through traditional forms of education,
on-the-job training, e-learning, public awareness raising, knowledge
management and professional networks.
Creating a favourable investment climate of sound management
accountability and good governance within the water sector. This
should include new approaches such as payment for environmental
services.
Programs and activities are under way
around the world that directly address
the assessment, allocation or conservation of water resources. Improving water
Water in a changing world

governance includes more efficiently managing available water resources and current
and anticipated water uses, and informing
water users, stakeholders and decision241

PART

4

Identifying and
implementing
effective
governance
responses to
water-related
problems remain
an elusive goal

Chapter 14O
makers about the consequences of actions
taken (or not taken) to address such issues.
This chapter focuses on what can be done
within the domain of water managers to
address water problems. Because other
publications and reports already deal with
the technical and engineering aspects of
response options,1 the main emphasis is
on strengthening policy and laws, water
resources management, technical capacity,
finances and education and awareness.
Undergirding solutions inside the water
domain is good water governance, which
influences the choices people make about
the use (or misuse) of water resources.
This focus includes such approaches as
water supply and demand management, as
well as processes to ensure the collection,
analysis and use of the data necessary for
making water allocation decisions within
a policy framework that is flexible, comprehensive and realistic.

Water governance reform:
strengthening policy, planning
and institutions
In this Report water governance refers to
the political, social, economic, legal and
administrative systems that develop and
manage water resources and water services
delivery at different levels of society while
recognizing the role played by environmental services.2 It encompasses a range
of water-related public policies and institutional frameworks and mobilization of the
resources needed to support them. Governance issues overlap the technical, environmental and economic aspects of water resources and the political and administrative
elements of solving water-related problems
(see chapter 4). Identifying and implementing effective governance responses to waterrelated problems – taking into account the
differing contexts in which they may be
applied, their integration with other sectors
and their impacts on water use equity, efficiency and environmental sustainability
– thus remain an elusive goal.
Although many governments have met
increasing water demands primarily by
augmenting water supplies, many also
apply management and technological solutions to address water demands, including
more efficient use and conservation. As
pressures on water resources continue to
rise, countries will also need to consider
reallocating water resources from one
sector to another, further politicizing
water issues within countries and between
them. Water reallocation and demand
242

management options include administered
solutions (such as allocating less water
to agriculture) and economic incentives
(providing price signals to decision-makers
about the opportunity costs of water). Capital investments in infrastructure, sorely
needed in many countries, also require
investments in capacity and institutional
development to realize and sustain the
benefits of increased investments.
The stages of water development and management range from situations in which
virtually all water development possibilities have been exhausted (as the Fuyang
basin in China, and in the Middle East
and North Africa region) to situations in
which water development potential still
exists (such as the East Rapti River basin in
Nepal and many sub-Saharan countries).3
Improved planning policies and laws are
critical response options. Effective enforcement by government agencies and acceptability and compliance by providers, users
and stakeholders are also important to the
effectiveness of many water management
reforms, as evaluation of the effectiveness
of lake basin management interventions in
many developing countries has shown.4

Integrated approaches to water
planning and reform
Both developed and developing countries
are reforming their water resources planning policies and laws. European Union
members, for example, are implementing
the Water Framework Directive. Many
middle- and low-income countries in
Africa, Asia and Latin America are engaging in reform, focusing on principles of
integrated water resources management.
A recent United Nations report concluded
that implementation of the practices, especially water use efficiency improvements,
is lagging (box 14.1).5
Implementing integrated water resources
management is proving more difficult
than envisioned. The approach was meant
to facilitate integrating water priorities and
related environmental issues into national
economic development activities, a goal
often considered only after many development activities have already been undertaken (box 14.2). The Sixteenth Session of
the Commission on Sustainable Development endorsed integrated water resources
management as a framework and essential
tool for effectively managing water resources. It recommended that its review on
progress in the water and sanitation sector
go beyond mere stocktaking of integrated
water resources management efforts.6
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Box 14.1

UN-Water survey on progress towards 2005 targets for integrated water resources
management and water efficiency plans

The growing stress on water resources
presents managers with increasingly
difficult decisions for managing water
sustainability. Integrated water resources
management assists such decision-making
by drawing attention to efficient, equitable and environmentally sound approaches. At the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in 2002 countries agreed
on a global target to develop integrated
water resources management and water
efficiency plans by 2005, with support
to developing countries throughout all
levels.
In 2007/08 UN-Water conducted a survey
of government agencies in 104 countries
(77 of them developing countries or
economies in transition) to assess progress
towards the target. A questionnaire was
prepared by a UN-Water task force and
sent to all Commission on Sustainable
Development focal points by the United
Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs. It included questions in the
following categories:
•

Main national instruments and strategies that promote integrated water
resources management (policies,

Box 14.2

4

laws and integrated water resources
management plans).
•

Water resources development, represented by such items as assessments,
regulatory guidelines and basin
studies.

•

Water resources management, as
reflected in programs for watershed
management, flood control and efficient allocation.

•

Water use, represented by water use
surveys and programs for managing
agricultural, industrial and domestic
water uses.

•

Monitoring, information management and dissemination, as reflected
in monitoring and data collection
networks.

•

Institutional capacity building, represented by such items as institutional
reforms, river basin management
institutions and technical capacitybuilding programs.

•

Stakeholder participation, illustrated,
for example, by decentralized

structures, partnerships and gender
mainstreaming.
•

Financing, represented by such items
as investment plans, cost recovery
mechanisms and subsidies.

Of the 27 developed countries that
responded, only 6 have fully implemented
national integrated water resources management plans. Another 10 countries have
plans in place and partially implemented.
Particular areas of improvement are
public awareness campaigns and gender
mainstreaming.
Of the 77 developing countries that responded 38% had completed plans, with
the Americas at 43%, Africa at 38% and
Asia at 33%. Africa lags behind Asia and
the Americas on most issues, although it
is more advanced in stakeholder participation, subsidies and microcredit programs.
Asia leads in institutional reform. The
survey concluded that to adequately assess
the needs for advancing implementation
of integrated water resources management, countries needed better indicators
and monitoring.
Source: UN-Water 2008.

Responses to impacts of non-integrated approaches to water
resources management

The transboundary Rio Grande River between
the United States and Mexico (called Rio Bravo in
Mexico) illustrates the negative impacts of nonintegrated water resources management. In both
countries the region is one of the fastest growing, benefiting from the enhanced economic activities associated with the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA). One result of NAFTA
has been a proliferation of product assembly
plants (maquiladoras) on the Mexican side of
the border, making it a magnet for job seekers
in Mexico. This growth was accompanied by a
proliferation of informal settlements (colonias) on
both sides of the border. Further, there is extensive agriculture in the lower Rio Grande Valley,
making agriculture an important economic sector for Mexico and Texas. Finally, there are seven
major paired urban areas along the international
portion of the Rio Grande.
Because of the associated water demands, approximately 96% of the average flow of the river
is allocated for municipal, agricultural and industrial uses. Although water allocations are governed by several treaties, the river also is subject

Water in a changing world

to the jurisdictional concerns of federal and state
agencies in three states in the United States and
five states in Mexico. With responsibility for the
river’s quantity, quality and allocations residing in
several international, national and state organizations with differing mandates in two countries,
much of the river is overallocated and degraded.
An analysis of 67 EU projects related to integrated water resources management during
1994-2006 provides insight into the practical
challenges facing implementation. The analysis
finds that integrated water resources management can provide a useful reform and planning
framework, even though it has not yet provided
unequivocal guidance on implementing national
water planning and reforms. To be most effective, the analysis suggests, integrated water
resources management must consider policy
formulation and implementation as primarily a
political process involving government officials,
the private sector and civil society.
Source: Moore, Rast, and Pulich 2002; Gyawali et al.
2006.

243

PART

4

Too often, only
part of the
sanitation system
is implemented
under the guise of
being a sanitation
solution, and it is
later discovered
that other
components
are missing

Chapter 14O
For example, progress towards meeting
the Millennium Development Goal for
sanitation is lagging behind expectations
partly because of the traditional approach
to this issue. ‘Sanitation’ usually refers to a
single technology or instrument designed
to handle excreta and wastewater. Septic
tanks, pit latrines and composting toilets,
among others, are often referred to as
‘sanitation systems’, when in fact they are
technological components. When designed appropriately and linked to a range
of other components, they form a robust,
sustainable sanitation system.
Too often, only part of the sanitation
system is implemented under the guise of
being a sanitation solution, and it is later
discovered that other components are
missing. Examples of such components include provisions for treated effluent (which
is often diverted into open drains), fæcal
sludge (which is often dumped in open
fields) and other side streams that may be
generated (such as water from sinks and
showers). While the technological components themselves may work, the system as
a whole will probably be short-lived.
A sustainable sanitation system includes
all the components (physical parts and
actions) required to adequately manage human waste. When ‘sanitation’ is

Box 14.3

A more sustainable, holistic sanitation system can be designed by using components
that would, in conjunction with existing
or innovative new technologies, improve
coverage and service while reducing the
environmental burden. Several frameworks for a more systematic way of looking
at sanitation systems already exist.7
Allocating and reallocating water and
financial resources is unavoidable in
water policy and management. Different

Water resources management in Tunisia

Water resources management in Tunisia began
with development of the supply side, addressing
the water demands of various sectors. The country has since established a system of interlinked
water sources, making it possible to provide water
for multiple purposes, including mixed low- and
higher-salinity waters, which makes less usable
water more productive. The country developed
a national water-savings strategy for both urban
and agricultural needs at an early stage of water
planning, confirming a cultural ‘oasis’ tradition of
frugal management of scarce water resources.
Several principles underlie the Tunisian water
strategy. First is shifting from isolated technical
measures to a more integrated water management
approach – for example, a participatory approach
giving more responsibility to water users. Some
960 water user associations were created, encompassing 60% of the irrigated public areas. Second
is the gradual introduction of water reforms and
their adaptation to local situations. Third is the use
of financial incentives to promote water-efficient
equipment and technologies. Fourth is supporting
farmer incomes to allow them to plan for and secure agricultural investment and labour. And fifth
is a transparent and flexible water pricing system,
aligned with national goals of food security, that
will gradually lead to the recovery of costs.

244

considered as a multistep process and
not as a single point, waste products are
accounted for from generation to ultimate destination. This concept describes
the lifecycle of wastes generated at the
household level, which are then processed
(stored, transformed and transported)
until reaching a final destination. Ideally,
waste would be used beneficially, with the
nutrients, biogas, soil-conditioner and irrigation water components recovered from
wastes and with wastewater used to benefit
society in a cycle (‘closing the loop’). For
example, biogas could be used for cooking
gas or electricity, soil fertility could be increased with added soil-conditioner from
sludge drying beds and crop production in
peri-urban agriculture could be improved
through nutrient‑rich irrigation water
from a constructed wetland.

Irrigation water demands have been stable for
the past six years, despite increasing agricultural
development, seasonal peaks in water demands
and unfavourable climate conditions (including droughts). The country is now addressing
the current water demands of tourism (a source
of foreign currency) and of urban areas, to
maintain social stability. Wastewater from urban
centres is treated and made available for agricultural use. A targeted pricing policy enables full
recovery of operating costs of water services,
with tourists paying the highest water prices
and household users the lowest. Water system
monitoring is extensive, including real-time
information on all irrigation flows. One result is
improved groundwater storage and vegetation
recovery in sensitive natural areas. The current
plan ends in 2010.
Despite successes, however, Tunisia’s water
resources are still under considerable stress. The
combination of increasing population growth
and rising water use in all sectors signals major
future threats, providing the impetus for considering scenarios to address future allocation
choices.
Source: Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2002; Treyer 2004;
UNEP 2008.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options inside the water box
stakeholders may see themselves as either
winners or losers as a result of the changes
arising from reform and planning efforts.
Thus, planning should clearly identify the
trade-offs among various management
options (box 14.3). Further, coping with
water deficits and challenges often requires
improved engagement between water
actors based on water management and
allocation issues that extend beyond watershed boundaries.8 One clear conclusion
is that water governance, management
and use cannot be considered independently if the goal is water resources sustainability. Both the causes of water problems
and their solutions are partly embedded
in processes and forces outside the water
domain (see chapter 15).
Some countries are developing scenariobased planning tools. The Netherlands
has used scenario-based planning to help
make decisions on water management options. Its first plan, during the late-1960s,
addressed only water quantity, but more
recent plans have evolved into a multifaceted water management process, with
a main pillar being stakeholder involvement, from other ministries and local

Box 14.4

authorities to the private sector and the
public (box 14.4).
Many Asian countries have essentially
exhausted opportunities to further expand irrigated agriculture and other water
diversions. The objective in these cases is
to increase the productivity of developed
water resources and the effectiveness
of water-management institutions.9 But
despite progress in improving water management, many countries still face major
challenges, a consequence of increasing
population, growing water use by all
sectors and the approaching impacts of
climate change.

few countries
have internalized
water resources
management
concerns into their
socioeconomic
development
policies and
governance
systems

Institutional developments: current
response options in water reform
The ability of water management agencies to address water variability and to
deal with risk and uncertainties such as
climate change varies considerably, mainly
because few countries have internalized
water resources management concerns into
their socioeconomic development policies
and governance systems. Nor are countries
fully including water stakeholders in the
decision-making process, particularly at

Integrated water planning in the Netherlands

The Netherlands is preparing its fifth integrated water management plan, with the
possible consequences of climate change
high on the agenda.
Its first plan, prepared in 1968, was
supply-driven and addressed only quantity
issues. Deteriorating water quality, and the
very dry summer of 1976, led to fundamental changes in the country’s approach
to water management. The second plan
had to be completely different, so the
Policy Analysis of Water Management for
the Netherlands was carried out before
drafting the second plan.
For the second plan, despite a thousand
years of experience in water management,
the government enlisted the assistance of
the RAND Corporation, a U.S.-based think
tank with extensive experience in complex
policy processes. The company had been involved in an earlier integrated water project
in the Netherlands – the storm surge barrier, a multibillion dollar project to protect
the southern part of the country – helping
them secure close cooperation of other ministries and governmental levels involved.
The plan was expected to achieve three
primary ends: develop and apply a
methodology for producing alternative
water management policies, assess and

Water in a changing world

compare their consequences and help create domestic capability to conduct similar
analyses by the related Dutch entities.
Using more than 50 models, the project
resulted in a much better operational understanding of the water system. Multiple
cost-benefit analyses of options to improve
water management led to the identification of implementable local projects and
helped avoid large, expensive infrastructure
works that proved not to be cost-effective.
An important conclusion was that water
quality problems cannot be solved at the
national level – for example, reallocating
water could inflict large losses on some
sectors. Tight restrictions on groundwater
abstractions were needed to meet desired
environmental standards, which would
impose large losses on some users. The second plan, published in 1984, reflected this
complete change in thinking about how to
develop and manage the water system.
Subsequent water management plans
continued to develop integrated water
resources management. The third plan
(1989) added in-depth analysis of the role
of ecology in water management, and
the fourth plan (1998) focused on specific
water systems and themes, facilitating
implementation of needed actions and
clarifying institutional roles.

The evolution of these five water plans,
each building on its predecessor and
responding to changing circumstances,
facilitated significant shifts in thinking
and engendered new approaches to
water management. From its origins in a
technical, supply-oriented, model-based
decision process, the planning process
is now multifaceted, with a main pillar
being stakeholder involvement (other
ministries, local authorities, public and
the like) with a focus on sustainability and
climate proofing related to anticipated
changes.
The lessons learned from developing
the five water management plans in an
integrated manner are that implementing complete integrated water resources
management takes time (more than 30
years in the Netherlands), that external
input can facilitate implementation of new
concepts and that full involvement of all
stakeholders is needed. While cooperation
may not always be possible, involvement
is essential. By helping stakeholders understand the difficult trade-offs, the participatory practices made it easier to accept
the importance of change for the greater
good of society.
Source: E. van Beek, H. Engel and G. C. de
Gooijer.

245

PART

4

Chapter 14O

Many components
of ongoing
water reform are
part of broader
governance
reform agendas

Box 14.5

the basin level. And still missing are the
information, planning tools, management
strategies, and human, institutional and
system capacities needed to meet local
demand for sustainable water development
under conditions of climate variability and
change.
Many institutional systems are unable
to adapt to current and future challenges because of such factors as political
power monopolies, unilateral steering
by government and bureaucracy, hierarchical control, top-down management
and institutional fragmentation. These
institutional characteristics also prevent
political decision-makers from being
fully informed by water sector managers. Still, many developing countries and
economies in transition are transforming
their water management systems through
integrated water resources management
approaches. They are incorporating such
elements as decentralization (subsidiarity), transparency and stakeholder participation, administrative systems based on
river basins and catchments, coordination
and integration, partnerships (publicprivate, public-public, public-community/

Decentralization and participation. Many
components of ongoing water reform are
part of broader governance reform agendas. Uganda, for example, has transferred
water responsibilities to district and lower
levels, receiving broad and strong political support within the country and illustrating that water reform is an integral
part of reform efforts. Most countries
have devolved provision of drinking
water to the municipal government level.
Nevertheless, decentralization and devolution remain problematic. Ethiopia, for
example, has transferred important decision-making responsibilities to district
and village levels, but has not followed up
with capacity development and transfers
of funds. Ghana’s experience illustrates
the importance of user participation and
shows how financing can be resolved,
demonstrating that decentralization and
participation can yield positive outcomes;
Bolivia’s experience illustrates the beneficial use of cooperatives in such efforts
(box 14.5).

Participatory approaches in decentralized provision of water supply and sanitation
services

Enhanced decentralization and participation for rural water supply and sanitation in
Ghana. Ghana changed its rural water supply structure, expanding coverage through
greater participation and more efficient
delivery systems over a period of about 10
years. Water supply coverage rose from
55% in 1990 to 75% in 2004, with most of
the increase in rural areas. Decentralization
has been a part of broader political reform
and improved governance structures.
Responsibility for rural water supply was
transferred to local municipal governments and communities, coordinated by
the decentralized Community Water and
Sanitation Agency. Elected district assemblies are responsible for processing and
prioritizing community applications for
water and sanitation, awarding contracts
for wells and latrine facilities and running
latrine subsidy programmes. Village-level
participation is part of the new structure.
Village water committees plan for local
water supply and sanitation facilities and
raise funds for investment and operation
and management costs. An assessment in
2000 found greater satisfaction with water
quality and quantity at the village level.
Most community residents contributed
financially to these efforts, indicating that
they received adequate value for their

246

civil society), use of economic instruments and increased commercialization
and privatization.

investments. Members of the village water
and sanitation committees have received
training and opened bank accounts, and
women have played an active role in many
communities.

population. By 2002 SAGUAPAC was
providing water to approximately 95%
of the population in its service area and
sewerage services to about 50%.

Cooperative for Urban Water and Sanitation
Services Delivery in Santa Cruz, Bolivia. Utility
cooperatives were initially formed to provide utility services – mainly in rural areas
where investor-owned utilities would not
expand because of profitability concerns –
usually providing services at at-cost prices.

Based on a classical cooperative model,
SAGUAPAC has a 27-member Delegate
Assembly (three members from each of
the nine districts) that elects members of
the Administration and Oversight Boards.
(Some Bolivian utility cooperative boards
have a general assembly instead, open to
universal participation.)

The Cooperative for Urban Water and
Sanitation Services in Santa Cruz (SAGUAPAC) provides water and sewerage services
to Santa Cruz, Bolivia, a city of 1.2 million
inhabitants. The national government
approved the autonomous water board’s
request in 1979 to transform itself into a
cooperative, recognizing that a different
model was needed to provide services
efficiently to a rapidly growing population.
Civil opposition to state ownership and
recognition that community participation
was needed to achieve service improvements contributed to the adoption of a
cooperative structure.

SAGUAPAC applies the principles of autonomy, accountability, customer orientation and market orientation. It has become
one of the largest urban water cooperatives in the world – serving approximately
three-quarters of a million people and
billing close to $19 million a year. Assessed against international standards, its
performance over the years is considered
very good, providing continuous service
with good quality water through house
connections and maintaining satisfactory
financial performance. Most connections
are metered (97%), and tariff collection
efficiency is 90%.

SAGUAPAC’s service area covers about
63% of the city area and 66% of its

Source: WSP-AF 2002; UNDP 2006; Ruiz-Mier
and Van Ginneken 2006.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box
River basin management. River basin
management integrates physical and
administrative boundaries, nesting them
within each other at different scales. The
aim is to improve coordination in water
decision-making. River basin management
structures have been installed in many
countries, including Australia, Brazil,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, South Africa and EU
member countries. The European Union
Water Framework Directive is a stringent
programme for establishing sustainable
water resources management. It has had
a major impact in new member countries, largely by mobilizing funding for
improved water resources management.
The government of Québec (Canada) has
drafted a water law that identifies river
basins as the fundamental water management unit.
Evidence from countries such as South
Africa suggests that organizations and
catchment bodies smaller than the river
basin scale may be ineffective, may be
too complex to implement and may offer
benefits that are difficult to clearly identify. Several river basin organizations have

Box 14.6

found implementation challenging, experiencing considerable uncertainty about
their roles and functions in implementing
integrated approaches to water resources
management. Most organizations have
limited financial autonomy and depend on
money from the central government and
the donor community.10 Despite the spread
of river basin organizations at both national and international levels (box 14.6),
examples of progress are difficult to find.
It is unclear whether this is due to unsatisfactory performance or too short a period
to document experiences and results.

4

sectoral
approaches to
water resources
management
inevitably lead
to fragmented,
uncoordinated
development and
management

Coordination and integration. Coordination
with related sectors (agriculture, industry,
energy and so on) is vital for improving
water resources use and allocation (see
chapter 15). But sectoral approaches to
water resources management inevitably
lead to fragmented, uncoordinated development and management. Fragmented institutional frameworks and overly complex
coordination mechanisms in the water
sector are common in many countries.11
When appropriate links are missing, different ministries and agencies deal separately

Integrated management of land-based activities in São
Francisco basin, Brazil

The United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), in cooperation with the National Water
Agency (ANA) of Brazil and the Organization of
American States (OAS), and with funding from
the Global Environment Facility, undertook a
project during 1999-2002 to develop a watershed management programme for the São Francisco River basin. The basin traverses five states in
Northeastern Brazil before discharging into the
Atlantic Ocean.
The basin is strategically important to the economic development of a vast region of Brazil,
which has subjected its natural resources to
increasing demands. Mining, agricultural, urban
and industrial activities contribute large contaminant loads to the system, including organic
chemicals, heavy metals and sediment. Environmentally sensitive estuarine wetlands at the
river mouth were threatened by unsustainable
hydrologic management and land use practices
in the basin. The basin’s economic development
has been haphazard, occurring within a weak
institutional framework and resulting in less
than optimal use and degradation of its water
resources. Regulated flows over large stretches
also have altered natural flows, causing changes
in the freshwater, estuarine and marine flora and
fauna.
The initial project objective was to conduct planning and feasibility studies for formulating an
integrated watershed management plan as the
basis for environmentally sustainable economic

Water in a changing world

development of the basin. Components included
river basin and coastal zone environmental
analyses, public and stakeholder participation,
development of an organization structure and
formulation of a watershed management programme. Concluded in 2002, the environmental
analysis provided a sound scientific and technical
basis for remedial actions to protect the coastal
zone from land-based activities.
Communities were involved in identifying and
field testing remedial measures, and a process
was established for dialogue among stakeholders and agencies with economic interests in the
basin. Basin institutions are being equipped and
trained to implement new laws, regulations and
procedures for addressing environmental problems. Finally, agencies and individuals both inside
and outside government synthesized data and
experiences and prepared feasibility assessments
and cost analyses for a long-term basin management programme. Some 217 public events were
held, including seminars, workshops and plenary
sessions. More than 12,000 stakeholders, including more than 400 organizations, universities,
non-governmental organizations, unions, associations and federal, state and municipal government organizations, participated in the events. A
comprehensive Diagnostic Analysis and Strategic
Action Program for the Integrated Management
of the São Francisco basin was completed in
2003 and is currently being implemented.
Source: ANA 2004.

247

PART

4

Integrated water
management
approaches must
have institutional
and legislative
governing
frameworks to
ensure oversight
and monitoring
of water resources
and participation
of target groups

Chapter 14O
with water’s many subsectors. Weak water
governance encourages economic sectors to compete for larger shares of water
resources, to boost economic development or satisfy national production needs.
Similarly, where interjurisdictional water
governance is weak, riparian countries
and jurisdictions sharing a water resource
compete to develop their own water infrastructure and use. As this Report shows
throughout, it is the leaders in government, business and civil society who make
the decisions that determine effective
water use policy (see also chapter 15).
Some countries have identified a need for
coordination not only among ministries
but also with subnational levels in implementing water policy and legislation.
Integrated water management approaches
must have institutional and legislative
governing frameworks to ensure oversight
and monitoring of water resources and
participation of target groups. Thus, intersectoral coordination of water uses and
involvement of water users are necessary at
different levels of decision-making.12
One approach is to establish water councils, including high-level national water
councils, river and basin councils, subnational (regional, governorate, state) councils and water users associations (see box
14.5). Experience with national and subnational water councils is extensive, and
their functioning and political influence
can vary considerably. Their main purpose
is to develop links and structures for managing water resources across sectors and
involving water users and stakeholders in
planning and strategy development.13
Partnerships. Partnerships have been promoted within the water supply sector to
improve services. Most have been publicprivate partnerships, and results have
been mixed. Some countries are revising
procedures for public-private partnerships
(for example, Argentina), while others

Box 14.7

Other types of partnerships involve civil
society, municipalities and the private
sector. To be successful, these partnerships require adequate capacity in civil
society and private sector organizations
and commitment from municipal governments and agencies. Proper incentives
and mutual trust are also important.14
Argentina, Colombia, Honduras, Paraguay
and Peru have experience with partnerships going beyond the private sector.
The Cartagena Partnership in Colombia,
for example, was initially a partnership
of municipal authorities, the community
and a private water company. It explicitly
involved community organizations in
mobile payment collection units to collect
fees from residents, establishing a clear accountability mechanism for fee collection.
In Porto Alegro, Brazil, the municipality,
community organizations and the public
water company developed a partnership
establishing participatory budgetary processes and charging water fees based on
consumption rather than property taxes.
The partnership improved the financial
base for the public water company.
Brazil developed its water resources with
eight major coordination mechanisms over
a long period and implemented far-reaching institutional and legal changes. The
1988 Constitution specified federal and
state government responsibilities and legal
authority. The Ministry of Environment
and Water Resources was created in 1995,
and the National Water Resource Policy
Law was passed in 1997. States also passed
water laws. The reforms include establishing national, basin and state councils to
improve managerial coordination and
resolve water conflicts within the federal
framework. The public utility (Municipal
Department of Water and Sewage) operates

The right to water

Some countries identify access to water as
a human right in their constitution or other
high-level legal instrument, thereby opening up
constitutional courts and legal mechanisms to individuals and communities seeking to challenge
inadequate access. A referendum in Uruguay
in 2004, for example, added a human right to
water to the Constitution, with more than 64%
of the population voting for the amendment.
The High Court in South Africa ruled on 30 April
2008 that prepayment meters in Johannesburg

248

see no need for change. Some countries
(Bolivia, for example) reject any private
sector participation in water supply and
sanitation.

were unconstitutional on grounds of discrimination and that Johannesburg Water could afford
to supply a minimum amount of water (50 litres
a day) to each citizen. Courts in other countries
(for example, Argentina, Brazil and India) have
also sometimes reversed decisions to disconnect
water supplies to poor people who cannot afford
to pay. The long-term viability of this approach,
however, remains unclear.
Source: COHRE 2007.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box
under a no-dividend policy, reinvesting
all profits and investing at least a quarter
of annual revenue in water infrastructure.15 In Honduras the national water
and sanitation operator (SANAA) has long
worked with community-based organizations to improve services and procedures.
And Malaysia entered into a partnership
in an effort to reduce non-revenue losses
(box 14.8).

the legal framework and a draft Zero Investment Plan (2003), Kenya’s water sector has
undergone radical reform in policies and
strategies, with the aim of reducing poverty. Associated goals include efficient service delivery, respect for consumer rights,
financial sustainability and service coverage to poor people in both urban and rural
areas. Examples from some other countries
are illustrated in boxes 14.7 and 14.9.

Involving the informal private sector
(water vendors) also can improve service
delivery and help reduce quality-related
problems. New contractual approaches
have been developed in Paraguay, for
example, to target aguateros (mostly smallscale water companies), which have developed piped water supplies in peri-urban
areas without public funding. These aguateros can now legally take part in public
bidding processes, and their performance
can be tracked, improving accountability.16
These examples show that opportunities
exist for innovative partnerships and that
there is room for new institutional models.

Local water user groups and communities
sometimes acknowledge customary rights
to water use and allocation (box 14.10). In
rural areas customary water rights often
include operational rights and the right to
participate in decision-making about operations, inclusion or exclusion of members,
water distribution, irrigation schedules,
flow rates and organizational positions and
responsibilities.17 African chiefs in charge
of villager access to wells and the water
court in Valencia, Spain, which regulates
irrigation water access, are examples of
practices that reflect customary rights.

Water institutions and law
Law and policy are connected, with implementation of laws often being a trial and
error effort requiring feedback and practical cases that interpret certain aspects of
water law (see chapter 4). The government
of Kenya, for example, enacted a Water
Act in 2002 that established a new policy
framework for the water sector. Guided by

Box 14.8

4

Local water
user groups and
communities
sometimes
acknowledge
customary rights
to water use
and allocation

Another example of customary rights is
the traditional subak system of irrigation
water distribution and use among the traditional rice-growing communities in Bali,
Indonesia. The Indonesian Water Act of
2004 recognizes communal rights of local
traditional communities as long as they
do not contravene legislation and national
interests. This is the standard formulation
of customary rights protection in water

Public-private partnership for reducing non-revenue water
losses in Malaysia

Many water utilities lose large quantities of water
through distribution system leakage or billing
weaknesses (so-called ‘non-revenue water’),
which can undermine their financial viability. The
state of Selangor, in Malaysia, experienced a serious water crisis in 1997 attributed to the El Niño
weather phenomenon. The distribution leakage
rate for the State Waterworks Department was
estimated at 25%, or 500,000 cubic metres (m3)
a day, sufficient to serve an estimated 3 million
people daily.
To address the problem, the State Waterworks
Department employed a locally led consortium,
in a joint venture with an international operator.
The contract called for reducing non-revenue
water losses by 18,540 m3 a day for a payment
equivalent to $243 per cubic metre per day of
non-revenue water saved. The contractor was
given the flexibility to design and implement
activities to reduce losses, with a payment arrangement in place to cover necessary work and
materials for detecting and repairing water leaks,
identifying illegal connections, replacing customer meters as needed and establishing zones

Water in a changing world

for reducing non-revenue water (district-metered
areas). During an initial 18-month phase I, the
validity of the concept was tested on a limited
portion of the water delivery network.
Phase I exceeded its target, saving 20,898 m3
a day. Twenty-nine district-metered areas were
established, with an average savings of 400 m3 a
day in each area, and some 15,000 water meters
were replaced. The cost to the State Waterworks
Department was about $215 per cubic metre
a day. Phase II (2000-09) has an overall reduction target of 198,900 m3 a day, for a payment
equivalent to $528 per m3 a day. Based on interim results at the beginning of the sixth project
year, 222 district-metered areas were established, more than 11,000 leaks were repaired and
119,000 water meters (of a contractual minimum
of 150,000) were replaced. Non-revenue water
losses were reduced by 117,000 m3 a day (20%
above the 2009 contract target of 97,500 m3 a
day), and commercial losses were reduced by
50,000 m3 a day.
Source: Kingdom, Liemberger, and Marin 2006.

249

PART

4

A growing number
of countries
and cities are
incorporating
water-related
adaptations to
climate change
into planning and
policy efforts

Chapter 14O

Box 14.9

Examples of legal frameworks for managing water

Effectively managing competing water uses requires clear, widely accepted rules on allocating
water resources, especially under conditions of
scarcity. Water allocation systems should balance
equity and economic efficiency.
One means of avoiding conflicts of interests in
water legislature is to separate policy, regulation
and implementation functions, as Kenya does.
The Ministry of Water and Irrigation focuses on
policy formulation and guidance, while the Water
Services Regulatory Board and Water Resources
Management Authority address national and regional regulatory functions. Water service providers (such as community groups, non-governmental organizations, autonomous entities established
by local authorities and the private sector under
contract to regional water services boards) implement water supply and sanitation services.
Mexico passed the Law on National Waters
in November 1992, and implementation
regulations were adopted in January 1994.

Box 14.10

Implementation and enforcement of the new
regulatory structure began in 1993 with a survey
and registration of abstractions and disposals.
It took 10 years, and a series of intermediate
regulatory adjustments and massive information
campaigns, to complete the process.
Source: Velasco 2003.

Recognizing customary practices in drafting laws

The framers of the Namibia Water Resources Management Act of 2004 were aware of the potential
for deeply rooted customary practices – particularly livestock herding by traditional communities
– to clash with the development of large-scale
irrigated agriculture or tourism supported by
administrative rights for the same waters used by
herders. The new act prescribes the processing of
abstraction licences and the criteria to inform decisions on licence applications. The law recognizes
the existence of a ‘traditional community’ and the
extent of its reliance on a water source affected by
a proposed water abstraction (section 35(1)(h)).
Accommodation of the ‘reasonable requirements’
of any traditional community is included among
the standard terms and conditions of abstraction
licences (section 37(e)).

legislation in countries where customary
law is extensively practiced. Although
lacking in detail and clarity, such statements can suffice in areas with strong
social cohesion and where competition for
water from ‘outsiders’ is limited.18

Climate change and water resources
As chapter 5 demonstrates, climate change
and variability have many potential impacts, both locally and globally. They may
directly affect the quantity and quality
of water resources. Climate change and
variability also act on the other drivers
and thus on water use and demand. The
responses to challenges posed by climate
change will likely be specific for each
country or even parts of each country.
250

Amendments in 2004 added a package of regulatory, economic and participatory approaches
to water resources allocation and pollution
control. These include river basin planning,
licensing of water abstractions and uses, permitting for wastewater dischargers, charging for
water abstractions and wastewater disposal and
articulation of federal government administration
at the river basin and aquifer levels. The amendments also include provisions for recording legal
instruments in a public water rights registry and
providing opportunities for community participation through water user organizations and
membership in basin councils.

Another example of customary rights is the
traditional subak system of irrigation water
distribution and use among the rice-growing
communities in Bali, Indonesia. The Water Act
of 2004 recognizes communal rights of local
traditional communities as long as they do not
contravene legislation and national interests. This
is the standard formulation of customary rights
protection in water legislation in countries where
customary law is extensively practiced. Although
lacking in detail and clarity, such statements can
suffice in areas with strong social cohesion and
where competition for water from ‘outsiders’ is
limited.
Source: Stefano Burchi, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Developments are taking place at policy
levels. The National Adaptation Programmes of Action under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change are still in their early phases. Many
least developed countries must still coordinate climate- and water-related policies and
actions. Bhutan is one example of a country that has coordinated its national water
and climate change adaptation policies to
meet short- and long-term threats of glacier
lake outburst floods resulting from climate
change-induced glacier melting.19
A growing number of countries and cities
are incorporating water-related adaptations to climate change into planning and
policy efforts, along with institutional and
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Box 14.11

Water-related responses to climate change

London and Venice are redesigning their urban
stormwater drainage systems to accommodate
predicted changes in precipitation frequency
and intensity. Tokyo is designing urban holding ponds under roads and parks to temporarily
store storm runoff to avoid flash floods. Jakarta
recently initiated a programme to construct a
major stormwater drainage canal system (East
Canal) to provide adequate drainage to its eastern half. Viet Nam has developed an extensive
system of dikes, including 5,000 kilometres of
river dikes and 3,000 kilometres of sea dikes, to
protect from typhoons and rising sea levels.
Countries in the lower Danube River basin in
Eastern Europe restored thousands of hectares of
aquatic habitat through floodplain restoration.

technological measures to mitigate such
predicted impacts as sea-level rise, more
frequent droughts and increased precipitation (box 14.11).

Consulting with stakeholders
and avoiding corruption:
accountability in planning,
implementation and
management
Stakeholder engagement is important to
improving water resources management
through several channels, from direct
participation in planning to expanding
public awareness. One benefit is reducing
corruption, a source of devastating social,
economic and environmental impacts, particularly for poor people, and which can
increase the investment costs of achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.

Engaging stakeholders: benefits and
challenges
Stakeholder involvement through public hearings, advisory committees, focus
groups, stakeholder forums and the like has
often improved water projects, programmes
and related human livelihood opportunities. It can also increase public awareness
of water issues while informing both the
facilitators of change and those involved
in it. An example is the study on diffuse
water pollution of the North American
Great Lakes conducted by the US-Canada
International Joint Commission during the
1970s. The commission conducted public
hearings throughout the basin, both to
educate basin inhabitants about the study
goals and to secure their inputs on potential problems and solutions (box 14.12).
Some stakeholders who are left out of decision-making, such as small-scale farmers
Water in a changing world

In Andhra Pradesh, India, removing silt from
water tanks allows the capture of more monsoon
runoff, resulting in additional benefits of less
groundwater pumping, restoration of some dry
wells and irrigation of an extra 900 hectares of
land. Reconnecting lakes in the Hubei Province
in China to the Yangtze River – by opening sluice
gates and applying sustainable management
techniques – increased wetland areas and wildlife
diversity and population and will make the area
more resilient to flood flows. There are potential scaling-up possibilities with this approach,
as there are hundreds of sluice gates along the
Yangtze River that disconnect it from nearby
lakes.

4

Stakeholder
engagement
is important
to improving
water resources
management
through several
channels, from
direct participation
in planning to
expanding public
awareness

Source: World Bank 2008.

and poor urban households, may respond
by organizing their own activities (box
14.13). Irrigation management transfer in
India, Mexico and Turkey, for example, led
to investments in new techniques, better
collection of water user fees and improved
water resources management (box 14.14;
see also box 4.4 in chapter 4). In 1998 in
the Arwari River catchment in Rajasthan,
India, the Arwari River Parliament, with
2,055 members in 70 villages in 46 microwatersheds, was formed to improve water
management through controlled use of
water. The river parliament also explored
improving soil, land and forest management; increasing agricultural productivity;
seeking participation by women and generating self-employment and alternative
livelihood options. Its social, economic
and environmental impacts have generally
been positive, and increased agricultural
production has expanded livelihood opportunities. The Arwari River Parliament
has provided a platform to resolve land,
water and forest management disputes.20
To provide useful communication tools and
systems for exchanging information, data
and experiences, the Emilia-Romagna region in Italy developed a national forum on
water conservation as a common platform
for discussion and comparison of water conservation policies. The forum highlights the
most modern, innovative policies for water
saving and conservation at the national
level. It is organized into thematic working
groups (water saving in civil, agricultural
and industrial sectors; drinking water losses
in distribution systems; and communication). To expedite its work, the forum has a
Website,21 organizes an annual conference
(held on World Water Day) and thematic
workshops, produces newsletters and engages national and European experts.
251

PART

4

Chapter 14O

Box 14.12

Public participation panels in the North American Great Lakes basin review of water
quality

The United States and Canada established the International Joint Commission under the Boundary Waters Treaty
of 1909. The two countries signed the
Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement
in 1972, with the goal of restoring and
maintaining the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the Great Lakes
basin ecosystem. The agreement called
on the commission to conduct a study of
pollution in the Great Lakes system from
diffuse (non-point) sources in its drainage
basin. The International Reference Group
on Great Lakes Pollution from Land Use
Activities (PLUARG) was established to
undertake the study, focusing on three
major questions:
•

•

Are the Great Lakes being polluted
from land drainage from non-point
sources in the basin?
If so, what is the extent of this pollution, what are its causes and where is
the pollution occurring?

•

What remedial measures can address
these sources, and what would they
cost?

eight in Canada, comprising industrialists,
small business owners, farmers, labour
representatives, educators, environmentalists, women’s groups, sport and fishing associations, wildlife federations and elected
and appointed government officials. Each
panel met four times to discuss and make
recommendations on the environmental,
social and economic aspects of the study,
with many expressing their goals for the
Great Lakes. The panels reviewed and
commented on a draft of the PLUARG
report before its finalization and submission to the International Joint Commission.
Each panel also submitted a report to
PLUARG on its own views and recommendations on panel-identified problems,
as well as suggested solutions. PLUARG
also held numerous public meetings
throughout the Great Lakes basin to gain
additional perspectives. The input from
the panels and the public meetings were a
major contribution to the final report and
the PLUARG technical report series.

The PLUARG study, which involved scientists, managers and policy-makers from
both countries, concluded that non-point
sources (particularly agricultural and urban
runoff) were responsible for water quality
problems from phosphorus, sediments,
polychlorinated biphenyls, persistent
pesticides, industrial organic chemicals
and lead on either a lake-wide or localized
basis. Non-point sources also contributed
significant amounts of nitrogen, chloride,
non-persistent pesticides and heavy metals, although these pollutants did not yet
constitute a water quality problem.
Considering the many jurisdictions
involved (see map), and the diversity
of opinions to be considered, PLUARG
recognized the need for public input to
identify concerns and workable management strategies. PLUARG established nine
public panels in the United States and

Source: IJC 1978; PLUARG 1978.

Great Lakes provincial, state and county jurisdictional boundaries during 1978 PLUARG study

MINNESOTA

LA

KE

RIOR
SUPE

CA

NA
US DA
A

ONTARIO

N
IA

RG

EO

G
DA
NA
A
US

N
GA

A

LAKE MICHI

D
CANA
USA

WISCONSIN

Y
BA

LAKE
HURON

CA

MICHIGAN

NEW YORK

L
ILLINOIS

Great Lakes basin
United States–Canada border
Counties and districts

INDIANA

LAKE
O
ONTARI

E
AK E
RI
E

DA
NA
CA USA

PENNSYLVANIA

OHIO

Source: Great Lakes Commission.

252

World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options inside the water box

Box 14.13

Grass-roots water federations in Ecuador

In the highlands of Ecuador, as in other
Andean countries, greater competition for
declining water resources led to increasing
conflicts and applications to register water
rights. The provincial water agencies responsible for water allocations were understaffed, and water resources privatization,
viewed as ineffective by many, was making
national management and water conflict
resolution more difficult. The decentralization of power to provincial authorities –
rather than to user collectives – exacerbated perceptions of inequality and injustice
in the water sector. In July 2005 thousands
of water users demonstrated in Riobamba,
demanding removal of the state water
agency staff for inequitable treatment
of indigenous peasant and female water
users. Many community organizations

Box 14.14

also gathered to establish a provincial
water user federation (interjuntas), to build
capacity among water user organizations
and foster discussion forums on water
policy-making and law. This intersystem
organization now facilitates participation
by some 280 irrigation and drinking water
users organizations, all with mostly indigenous and small-farmer household constituencies. The interjuntas also facilitates
conflict management among water users
and among associated systems, especially
between poor groups and landlords and
between indigenous rural peoples and the
state, through its centre for the defence of
rights and mediation of conflicts.

the Federation of Cotopaxi Irrigation Users
now comprises 370 water user organizations composed of tens of thousands of
minifundio (small land holding) water
user families. Community water quantity
and quality rights are represented at the
national level through collaboration with
the national water civil society platform,
National Water Forum, and direct negotiations with the state. Federations such as
interjuntas and the Federation of Cotopaxi
Irrigation Users illustrate that equitable
water distribution requires democratic
decision-making and transparency of public investments and monitoring of government activities in the water sector.

Other new water user organizations are
starting to emerge. In Cotopaxi Province

Source: Dávila and Olazával 2006; Boelens
2008.

Participatory irrigation management and the role of water user associations

Participatory irrigation management engages irrigation users at all levels and in all
aspects of managing irrigation schemes.
Based on the belief that water users are
best suited to manage their water resources, participatory irrigation management
allows considerable flexibility in water
management methods.
India. Despite large investments, the
irrigation schemes in the Indian state of
Andhra Pradesh have been in serious trouble because of deteriorating infrastructure
and low agricultural productivity. Policy
reforms were introduced in 1996/97 to
deal with irrigation concerns, including a
threefold increase in water user charges,
creation of water user associations and capacity building in water user associations
across the state. Institutional reforms included the creation of farmer-government
partnerships in irrigation operations and
maintenance, consolidation of irrigation
management transfer, new cost recovery
methods, expenditure prioritization and
capacity building for state agencies and
water user associations.
Water user association board members are
elected by local water users. Transferring
management authority to user groups has
created a strong sense of ownership and
empowerment. Still, some studies criticize
the reforms for being more a top-down
government programme than a farmerinitiated effort, and some suggest that
establishment of the water user associations resulted in needless proliferation of
community organizations, when the village government could have handled the
task (a view not shared by water users).

Some constraints to the new management system include limited power
supply in rural areas, below design
water discharge levels and continuing
dependence on government funds in
many cases. Nevertheless, there have
been many positive results. Collection
of water tariffs increased from 54% to
65% during the first year of implementation. Management of irrigation canals
by water user associations has resulted
in more effective water use, with an additional 52,361 hectares being irrigated
in 1998 in the Tungabadra High Level
Canal. Irrigation canal water-carrying
capacity rose about 20%-30%, and agricultural productivity increased. There
was also a dramatic reduction in farmer
complaints.
Mexico. Most farming in Mexico is irrigated, with water services provided by
the central government since the end of
World War II. By the end of the 1980s the
government was subsidizing more than
75% of the operation, maintenance and
administration of irrigation districts – a
non-sustainable outcome. As a result,
farmers received relatively low-quality
services for which they were reluctant to
pay.
Under an extensive programme of agricultural reform, management of irrigation
districts was transferred to water user
associations, with responsibility for irrigation systems to be shared between the
associations and the then newly formed
National Water Commission (CNA). After
the transfer of irrigation management
responsibilities, the rate of tariff collection

more than doubled in five years, peaking
in 1997 at 72%. Water fees were raised,
sometimes more than 100%. The expectation was that the water user associations
would become financially self-sufficient,
generating enough resources to cover the
costs of CNA. That has not yet happened,
however, so those costs are still being
covered by a ministerial fund. Nevertheless, the irrigation systems have become
financially more self-sufficient. In the lower
Bajo Rio Bravo Irrigation District, for example, self-sufficiency rose from 36% in 1989
to 100% in 1994.
Turkey. Both the State Hydraulic Works and
the General Directorate of Rural Services
are responsible for managing soil and
water resources in Turkey. The State Hydraulic Works is responsible for large-scale
irrigation and water infrastructure; the
General Directorate of Rural Services, for
on-farm development and small irrigation
schemes. Water scarcity has been a problem since the 1960s, and operation and
maintenance of the country’s irrigation
systems was a financial and institutional
burden for the government. Revenue
collection was difficult, and water use was
very high.
With support of the World Bank the
central government began transferring
irrigation schemes, even large ones, to
water user associations in 1993, to reduce
costs for the central agencies. Following
Mexico’s example, Turkey transferred
1,350,000 hectares of irrigated land to
the water user associations by 1997, with
87% of irrigation projects transferred
by 2007. This rapid transfer of irrigation
(continued)

Water in a changing world

253

PART

4

Box 14.14

Chapter 14O
Participatory irrigation management and the role of water user associations (continued)

management was motivated by the rising
costs of irrigation schemes to the central
government, the availability of on-the-job
training programmes in Mexico and the
United States, the commitment of State
Hydraulic Works staff and clearly defined
goals and pilot projects. The transfer has
resulted in more efficient use of water
resources, increased investments in new
technologies, higher water user tariff

collection rates (from 42% in 1993 to 80%
in 1997), lower energy costs (approximately 25%) and more equitable allocation of
water resources.
The legal status of water user associations
remains to be defined, and central agency
obligations to provide technical and
administrative assistance at the beginning
of a transfer still need to be clarified. In

The participation requirements of article
14 of the EU Water Framework Directive
are an attempt to launch a broader discussion about participatory approaches, as
illustrated in box 14.15.

Addressing corruption and
mismanagement in the water sector
Corruption can have enormous social, economic and environmental repercussions,
particularly for poor people. Water-related
construction projects such as aqueducts,
sewer systems and basic sanitation and
wastewater treatment plants have become
magnets for corruption in many developing countries, which have limited oversight
capacity for efficient use of public resources. Transparency International’s Global
Corruption Report 2008, prepared in collaboration with the Water Integrity Network,
estimates that corruption in the water supply sector increases the investment costs of
achieving the water supply and sanitation
target of the Millennium Development
Goals by almost $50 billion.22
In recent years preventing corruption has
captured the attention of governments,
private firms, civil society organizations and
donors. A positive example is the formation
of the Water Integrity Network, a global network promoting water integrity by coalition

Box 14.15

Source: Jairath 2000; Raju 2001; Johnson 1997;
Palacios 1999; Garces-Restrepo, Vermillion, and
Muñoz 2007; Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 1999;
Döker et al. 2003.

building. Several countries of the Southern
Africa Development Community region
have taken positive steps. Zambia established water watch groups in some cities to
monitor relations between water regulators
and service providers. South Africa set up
telephone hotlines for consumer redress and
complaints. Some districts in Malawi developed water board anticorruption policies
aimed at improving water sector efficiency
by preventing malpractice and addressing
water consumer problems.23 Box 14.16 provides additional examples of such efforts.

Capacity development for more
effective action
Effective interactions between individuals,
sector organizations and regulatory and
administrative authorities are critical to
advances in all areas. Administrative systems and sector policies in many countries
are in need of considerable reform. This
section offers some suggestions for governments and other water stakeholders to
increase their capacity for effective action.

Assessing institutional and human
capacities
A first step in improving services is to
assess their ability to deliver more effective services and to prepare for future

Public participation in water resources management

The RhineNet project highlights the value of
public participation. The project covered floodplain restoration, construction of fish ladders,
flood protection and recreational enhancement.
Public involvement in projects increased public
acceptance, even among those who might be
considered ‘losers’ in the process.
The project plans for reactivating the Saar River
floodplains in Hostenback, Germany, provide
an example. The plans were presented to the
mayor of Wadgassen and the general public.
The project received widespread support, with
citizens showing considerable flexibility over details of the required construction. One important

254

2004 the government abolished General
Directorate of Rural Services as part of
broader administrative reforms, delegating its responsibilities to the provincial
governments.

agreement called for use of a much less used
alternative path for the estimated 8,000 trucks
that would be involved in the project’s earth
removal activities. Meetings and discussions
were held regularly during the project, providing
opportunities for citizens to voice their concerns,
and events were reported in local bulletins,
newspapers and electronic media. An important
finding was that such efforts require considerable time for interviews and discussions with the
individuals affected by the project – discussions
that could not be replaced by media reports or
press conferences.
Source: Lange 2008.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Box 14.16

4

Responding to corruption and mismanagement in the water sector – examples from
Colombia, India and Lesotho

Development of anticorruption agreement
with Colombian water pipe manufacturing
companies. The Colombian Association of
Environmental and Sanitary Engineers,
whose affiliated water pipe manufacturing
companies had a 95% share of the national market and a monopoly on bids in
public tenders for water supply and sewer
systems, undertook an anticorruption
initiative as part of a sectoral antibribery
agreement. The association, together with
Transparency International-Colombia,
worked to develop an agreement among
pipe manufacturers based on Transparency International’s Business Principles
to Counteract Bribery. The agreement,
signed in April 2005, resulted in substantial reductions in bid award prices, thereby
reducing the scope for bribery.
The agreement was developed in reaction
to the lack of transparency in the pipe
business sector, particularly in public sector procurement, which resulted in overpriced products and substandard quality
in public projects and utilities, creating
an environment of mistrust. The situation eventually became untenable for the
companies and the trade association, as
transaction costs became unsupportable.
Under the agreement each company prepared a general anticorruption policy and
specific guidelines for each area specified
in the Business Principles to Counteract
Bribery (pricing and purchasing, distribution and sales schemes, implementation
mechanisms, internal controls and audits,
human resources management, protection
of ‘whistle blowers’ and communications,
internal reporting and consulting). The
agreement also laid out the roles of an
Ethics Committee and a Working Group
tasked to supervise implementation, as
well as extensive legal and economic powers for dealing with companies that fail to

comply. A similar agreement was signed in
Argentina in December 2005, and agreements also are being considered by Brazil
and Mexico.
Citizen report cards for improved water
services in Bangalore, India. To improve the
quality of underperforming public water
and sewer utilities in Bangalore, India, the
national Public Affairs Centre established a
system of benchmarks and citizen ‘report
cards’. These report cards triggered a series
of reforms enhancing public sector accountability and responsiveness. Although
the first report card in 1994 gave low ratings to all major city service providers, only
a few service providers acknowledged the
problems and took corrective actions. The
second report card in 1999 indicated partial improvement in some services, while
the third report card in 2003 revealed substantial improvements by almost all service
providers, as well as a visible decline in
corruption. Satisfaction levels rose dramatically, from 4% in 1994 to 73% in 2003.
Both supply and demand drivers of
change contributed to this surprising
turnaround. The trigger for public action
seems to have been the public scrutiny
and publicity attending the report cards,
leading to important interventions on
the supply side. A strategic decision of
the state government was to establish a
new public-private partnership forum to
catalyse action and assist service providers in upgrading their services and
responsiveness. The political support and
commitment of the state’s chief minister,
the innovative practices resulting from
the partnership forum, the active role of
external catalysts (civil society groups and
donors) and the learning experiences from
initial responses contributed to the better
performance. An open and democratic

uncertainties. Such assessments can cover
part of a sector (for example, management
of river basins or sanitation) or focus on
institutional architecture and capacity (for
example, the education system, community management and the legal framework).
Improving a weak institutional environment is not a linear process.24 It often
requires efforts on several fronts, focusing on alleviating acute problems while
creating the conditions for more favourable change over time. The United Nations
Development Programme, for example,
supported rapid water sector assessments
in Bolivia, China, Ghana, Mali, Mexico
and Peru, providing modest international
support to local agencies to assess the
Water in a changing world

society is a prerequisite for the use of this
monitoring and accountability tool.
Lesotho highlands project trials. The Lesotho
Highlands Water project, the world’s largest international water transfer project,
transfers water from the Orange River
to the Vaal River, providing extra water
to Johannesburg, South Africa. Lesotho
receives royalties for the water ($31 million
in 2004, about 5% of its GDP). Under
phase 1 of the project four dams and 110
kilometres of tunnels were completed at a
cost of about $2 billion.
The first chief executive of the Lesotho
Highlands Development Authority,
charged with overseeing the project, was
tried on bribery and fraud charges in
2001. His subsequent conviction was an
important victory in the fight against corruption and illustrated what a determined
government can do in fighting corruption.
Recognizing that bribery has both a demand and supply component, the Lesotho
government also brought charges against
the multinational companies paying the
bribes. Three major firms were convicted
by the High Court of Lesotho, and all three
were assessed fines. The World Bank also
barred one company from bidding on
future projects. The trials for future bribery
prosecutions established several important
precedents related to what the prosecution has to prove in regard to bribery,
where the crime took place (determined
by the location of the impacts of the
crime) and what degree of financial transparency is required to prove the crime (a
major breakthrough was the prosecution’s
access to Swiss banking records of the accused companies).
Source: Balcazar 2005; Stålgren 2006; Thampi
2005; Stålgren 2006; Earle and Turton 2005.

challenges to their water sector and each
country’s capacities to devise new strategies with prioritized interventions.25
In China the Ministry of Water Resources
and the Guizhou Provincial Administration worked on an institutional performance assessment, focusing on strengths
and weaknesses in the economic and
institutional aspects of water management, such as pricing, river basin management and stakeholder involvement in
integrated water resources management.
In Mexico the water initiative added to the
National Water Commission’s broader efforts to improve the water sector’s overall
performance. The Peruvian assessment
guided a parliamentary debate on sectoral
255

PART

4

governments will
need to rely more
on an informed
and capable civil
society whose
role in water
management
complements
the work of
government
agencies

Chapter 14O
priorities, helping reform agencies and
generating new skill mixes.26 In Indonesia
the 1998-2004 financial crisis triggered
a deep institutional and administrative
reform of the water sector, which is crucial
to its economy, emphasizing decentralized
decision-making, participatory irrigation
management, cost recovery and cuts in
staffing.

Strengthening institutional
arrangements and capacity to
support an agenda of change
Changes in society and in the environment call for regular adjustments of the institutional architecture of the water sector.
Regular performance and capacity reviews
can identify needed reforms and promote
agreement on capacity development for implementing the reform. Uganda’s National
Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC)
transformed itself from an organization
plagued by unaccounted-for water, weak
billing practices and high operating costs
to one with steadily improving performance since 1998. NWSC separated operations and maintenance from performance
monitoring and regulation. The capacity of
utilities to work with this system was developed incrementally by multidisciplinary
teams, beginning with simple performance
contracts and upgrading to more complex
arrangements. NWSC became a ‘learning
organization’, creating an environment
where managers must account for performance against goals and staff are expected to
embrace innovation and tackle problems
(see box 14.23 later in the chapter).

Engaging with civil society in
developing its capacity
With the large numbers of water management stakeholders, governments are
increasingly constrained in what they can
achieve alone. They will need to rely more
on an informed and capable civil society
whose role in water management complements the work of government agencies.
As civil society becomes more water literate, it will come to a clearer understanding
of the importance of water issues and lend
solid support to water sector initiatives.
That requires broad access to information
and the capability to engage with governments on water service delivery issues –
often requiring capacity-building efforts to
be effective.
Many resources are available for community and civil society capacity development in water and sanitation. Examples
of Internet-accessible resources include
a comprehensive collection of capacity
256

building materials on ecological sanitation emerging from the 4th World Water
Forum in Mexico in 2006;27 material
on gender, water and capacity building
provided by the Gender and Water Alliance;28 an overview paper and guidelines
for improving knowledge management at
the personal and organizational level in
the water and sanitation sector;29 and a
conceptual introduction to water sector alliances, case studies and lessons in scaling
up innovations in water, sanitation and
hygiene, both prepared by the International Water and Sanitation Centre.30

Stimulating professional knowledge
Water sector professionals require a sophisticated understanding of the hydrologic
cycle and its variability. They also need
a better understanding of the relationship between water use and sustainable
economic development and water-related
interactions in society, and of the needs of
decision-makers. Non-professionals often
require a better understanding of their
interactions with and influences on water
systems. This knowledge can come from
research, the traditional domains of local
communities and education, training and
focused workshops. But the knowledge
is often fragmented, held by a growing
number of water stakeholders, each with
part of the solution. Thus, communication
is critical for building the knowledge base
and institutional and human capacities
needed to forge political consensus.
Networks are becoming increasingly important knowledge pools and mechanisms
for knowledge dissemination (box 14.17),
exchange and management. They must be
structured, managed and funded according to their purpose (research, sharing of
professional experience, training and so
on). Networks are well suited to identifying and articulating large-scale, complex
problems and to offering solutions and
best practices tested in other places.
Learning alliances are groups of representative stakeholders with a focus on developing jointly owned approaches to problems
that create a broader sense of ownership
and lead to more rapid implementation.
The Euro-Med Participatory Water Resources Scenarios (EMPOWERS), a regional
pilot project led by Care International–UK
from 2003 to 2007, sought to increase
sustainable access to water for vulnerable
populations in Egypt (where water demands exceed supplies), in Jordan (which
has one of the world’s lowest per capita
water levels) and the West Bank and Gaza
(where access to water is strictly controlled
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Box 14.17

Networking to share water resources management
experiences

Cap-Net is a network of 20 national and regional
capacity-building networks and three global networks committed to capacity building in water
resources management. Most of the member
networks are informal voluntary associations of
institutions and individuals committed to building capacity to address local needs and priorities.
Cap-Net uses its global network structure to
rapidly share international and regional knowledge. It facilitates knowledge development and
exchange, supports the delivery of capacity
development services to meet local priorities
and brings expertise from networks and the
international level to neglected areas. Having
identified economic and financial instruments for
implementing integrated water resources management as a neglected area, Cap-Net used its
network experts to develop a training package
structured to allow local adaptation. The training
manual was tested, revised and translated into
four languages within one year and has been

by an external authority). The International Centre for Water Hazard and Risk
Management (ICHARM), an Asia-Pacific
water knowledge hub of the Asian Development Bank, provides hazards mapping
and tsunami training courses.
The Sustainable Water Management
Improves Tomorrow’s Cities Health
(SWITCH) project is a major research
partnership for innovation in integrated
urban water management in implementing action-oriented, water demand-led
research programs. The project encourages learning alliances to better define the
research agenda and initiate research in
aspects of the urban water cycle to help
cities improve water sector integration and
scaling-up impacts.31 SWITCH has led to
the establishment of learning alliances in
10 cities around the world.
In the Netherlands government institutions for surface water, groundwater and
coastal protection were merged to improve
their output. Innovation and research also
were boosted in countries in Southern and
Eastern Africa through WaterNet, linking some 50 university departments and
institutions with common interests and
expertise in water-relevant topics. Pooling
their knowledge allows them to cover all
the major aspects of water resources management (such as hydrology, environmental engineering, economics, law and water
and sanitation technologies).
In India the Solution Exchange, which
links people across the country and the
Water in a changing world

implemented in Africa, Asia and Latin America
through the partner networks.
The Regional Centre for Urban Water Management in Tehran is an organization of 13 countries
and six international organizations whose mission is to transfer practical scientific knowledge
and develop capacities in all dimensions of urban
water management, to promote sustainable
development and enhance human well-being
and to facilitate integrated, transboundary water
management. Its governing board comprises
10 water-related ministers (from Bangladesh,
Egypt, India, Iran, Kuwait, Oman, Pakistan, Syria,
Tajikistan and Yemen) and high-level representatives of three international organizations (the
UNESCO Institute for Water Education, the International Water Academy and the International
Water Association).

4

Increasingly, water
stakeholders
are being linked
through online
knowledge
networks and
partnerships
linking researchers
addressing
similar issues

Source: Cap-Net 2008 and www.cap-net.org.

globe, harnesses the power of communities of practice to leverage the knowledge
and experience of multiple development
practitioners for the common objective
of problem-solving. In Madhya Pradesh,
India, the UN-HABITAT Programme on
Sustainable Cities works in four cities to
improve and expand urban water supply,
sewerage and sanitation, water drainage and solid waste management. The
programme seeks to influence water use
practices, policies and measures away from
traditional approaches, which increase
pressures on water resources and lead to
overexploitation of groundwater, and toward innovative demand management to
optimize available water in the municipal
water supply system. The programme consolidated responses to a survey on experiences, suggestions and best practices from
other parts of India, translated them into
Hindi and circulated them at the Madha
Pradesh State Parliamentarians Forum for
Water.
Information and communication systems
are mostly Internet-based, offering new
tools for multistakeholder information
sharing and communication. By providing access to scenario and forecasting tools
and facilitating communication across
administrative levels (from the local to the
national and regional), these tools are well
suited to facilitate negotiation.
Increasingly, water stakeholders are being
linked through online knowledge networks and partnerships – communities of
practice – linking researchers addressing
257

PART

4

Water resources
management plans
can be difficult
to fund and
implement without
the involvement
of water users

Chapter 14O
similar issues. Simple tools, such as e-mail
lists, are the preferred low-technology
avenue for this activity.

benefits of advancing scientific, educational and community development goals
for water systems.

Local stakeholders are usually the first to
experience and address local problems
and to find local solutions. Decisionmakers can learn from this local knowledge and apply its lessons to building the
capacity of local institutions and civil
society (box 14.18). Informed decisionmaking requires a balanced combination of top-down (often larger-scale) and
bottom-up (often smaller scale) approaches and procedures.

Public education and awareness raising
can also be as simple as informing water
stakeholders about changes in work routines or personal habits that can alleviate
problems associated with unsustainable
use of water resources (see chapter 2).
Greater public awareness is facilitated by
making details of water system problems
and corrective programmes readily available to the public through the public education system, the information media and
non-governmental organizations.34

Stimulating public awareness
Increasing public awareness about water
resources also facilitates sustainable use.
Water resources management plans can be
difficult to fund and implement without
the involvement of water users.
One way to promote public knowledge is
through science and education centres
that compile, analyse and disseminate
information on water resources. Such
centres often focus on identifying and
disseminating information on water system problems and sustainable use. They
often consider the economic, ecosystem
and cultural importance of specific water
systems and their resources; direct and
indirect uses and values and promising
tools and strategies for management and
lessons from case studies. They also provide valuable region-specific information,
such as the public and media awareness
campaign by the Yemen National Water
Resources Authority, including the Yemen
Water Awareness video.32 Information
centres such as the Lake Biwa Museum
(Japan), Balaton Limnological Research
Institute (Hungary) and Leahy Center
of Lake Champlain (United States) focus
their attention on lake basins.33 The
centres, sponsored by private foundations,
corporations, government agencies, nongovernmental organizations and academic
institutions, demonstrate and promote the

Box 14.18

Developing appropriate
solutions through innovation
and research
Technological innovation covers a broad
field, from technical issues to financial
considerations, water service models and
water governance issues (policy, sustainable financing, cultural values, political
realities, law and so on). It can enable
rapid and significant changes within the
water sector. And it can improve existing
systems (better hand pumps, for example)
and develop new ways to address water
issues.

Incorporating local knowledge in networks – the Integrated
Watershed Management Network of Eastern Africa

The Integrated Watershed Management Network
(IWMNET), is a three-year (2007-10) capacitybuilding initiative for integrated watershed
management in Eastern Africa involving German
and Eastern African universities. Activities include
specialized training on integrated water resources
management and related issues and support for
ongoing water sector reforms in Ethiopia, Kenya,
Tanzania and Uganda. Water user associations, for

258

The Emilia-Romagna Region in Italy
launched a regional communication
campaign on water conservation in
2004 called “Acqua, risparmio vitale”
(Water, vital saving). The campaign was
relaunched in 2008 with a new slogan,
“Mezzo pieno o mezzo vuoto? Comunque la
pensi, l’acqua va risparmiata!” (Half full
or half empty? Whatever you think, save
water!). This education strategy uses a
combination of brochures for the general
public, television and radio spots and
advertisements on city buses.35 Water
managers can also use such communication activities to inform the key decisionmakers working outside the water managers’ domain (see chapter 15).

example, are assisted in drafting and executing
subcatchment management plans and in sharing
their experience in drafting participatory catchment management plans. An online e-learning
component makes all information accessible to
students and professionals, even in rural areas.
Source: iwmnet-eu.uni-siegen.de and www.iwmnet.eu/
index.html.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options inside the water box

Developing a capability for
innovation
Experience suggests that at least three key
factors have contributed to the innovation
driving the rapid economic transformation
of many emerging market economies. One
is investing heavily in basic infrastructure
(roads, schools, water supplies, sanitation
facilities, irrigation systems, health centres, telecommunications, energy resources
and the like) as the foundation for technological learning. A second is developing
and nurturing small and medium-size
enterprises, which can supply local operational, repair and maintenance expertise
and technicians. A third is developing and
nurturing institutions of higher education
(engineering and technological academies,
professional engineering and technological associations, industrial and trade
associations and the like).36 Most of these
efforts are outside the scope of water managers’ responsibilities (some are discussed
in chapter 15).
Business enterprises and non-governmental organizations can be a focus for
learning.37 An example is the innovative
adaptation for use in Cambodia of ceramic
filters, long used elsewhere to remove contaminants from water. Because most Cambodians lack access to microbiologically
safe water at point of use, household-based
water treatment is critical for protecting
them from waterborne diseases. Most
Cambodians must still collect water, store

Box 14.19

it for household use and treat it themselves
to ensure safe drinking water. Potters for
Peace, a non-governmental organization,
developed an innovative use of ceramic
filters, inventing a low-cost, on-the-spot
production method using clay and sawdust
treated with colloidal silver to increase
bactericidal properties. Potters for Peace
now trains others to operate filter-making
facilities in Cambodia, Cuba, El Salvador,
Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Indonesia,
Kenya, Mexico, Sudan and Yemen.38 Water
management techniques also can be used
in innovative ways to address a range of
issues (box 14.19).
Because irrigation is the single largest
water user on a global scale, improved irrigation technology is a good example of
using technology to reduce water demands
by improving water use efficiency (box
14.20).

Most of the key
factors that have
contributed to the
innovation driving
the rapid economic
transformation of
many emerging
market economies
are outside the
scope of water
managers’
responsibilities

Linking research and development in
the developing world
Expanding demand-driven research capacity in developing countries is essential for
reaching a critical mass of people engaged
in research and development who can advance economic development.39 The Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness of 2005,
an international agreement affirmed by
more than 100 ministers, heads of agencies and other senior officials, stressed that
developing countries must become more
capable of solving their own problems,

Using water management to preserve biodiversity and economic livelihoods – Kafue
Flats, Zambia

Large dams can disrupt the natural water
cycle and the ecosystems that rely on it.
Kafue Flats in Zambia illustrates the use of
technological innovation and cooperation
to alleviate such disruptions.
Kafue Flats is a rich wildlife habitat occupying 6,500 square kilometres along
the Kafue River, a major tributary of the
Zambezi River. It sustains the livelihoods of
local people engaged in hunting, fishing
and cropping when floods recede on the
flats at the end of the wet season. In 1978
the Itezhi-tezhi Dam was built upstream
of the Kafue Gorge hydroelectric dam,
Zambia’s primary source of power, to store
wet season peak flows to maximize hydropower production at the hydroelectric
dam. The Itezhi-tezhi Dam ended the beneficial wet season flooding of Kafue Flats,
adversely affecting the 300,000 people
who rely on it for their livelihoods.

(ZESCO), in cooperation with WWF, local
people and commercial farmers, initiated
a project to restore a more natural flow to
water releases from the Itezhi-tezhi Dam.
An integrated water resources management study was undertaken in 2002,
including development of a Kafue River
basin hydrology model. The model was
linked to real-time data from rainfall and
river gauging stations in the catchment to
predict water flows and reservoir levels.
Based on this modelling exercise, agreement was reached among all the partners
in 2004 to implement new dam operating
rules. A major water flow mimicking the
natural wet season flooding pattern was
released for the first time in early 2007,
and modules have been launched for wetlands rehabilitation, focusing on infrastructure development, tourism enhancement
and community-based natural resources
management.

In 1999 the Zambian government and
Zambia Electric Supply Corporation

The long-term results are expected to
include improved ecological health for

Water in a changing world

Kafue Flats and improved livelihoods for
local people (particularly increased fish
and pasture productivity), development
of a wildlife-based tourism industry and
sustained irrigation capacity. The hydroelectric production potential of the Kafue
Gorge Dam is expected to be maintained
or to increase. Discussions are under way
on scaling up the environmental flows
model to the other dams in the watershed
(Kafue Gorge, Cahorra Bassa and Kariba)
to extend benefits to the entire course of
the rivers in Zambia and Mozambique.
Preparations also are under way on a joint
operations and management strategy for
the three dams, involving the Zambezi
River Authority, the Joint Operational
Technical Committee for Cahorra Bassa
and Kariba Dams, and the Southern Africa
Development Community agreement for
an integrated water resources management strategy for the Zambezi River under
the auspices of its shared water protocol.
Source: WWF 2008.

259

PART

4

Reliable and
accurate water
resources
information and
data, by reducing
uncertainty about
water resources,
help decisionmakers make
more reliable
and politically
persuasive
assessments of
water risks

Chapter 14O

Box 14.20

Using irrigation technology to increase water use efficiency

Irrigation water can be delivered to crops
through surface, sprinkler and drip irrigation systems. Although introducing new irrigation technology typically increases costs, it also increases
water use efficiency, resulting in water savings.
A California study, for example, found that water
use efficiency ranged from 60%-85% for surface
irrigation to 70%-90% for sprinkler irrigation and
88%-90% for drip irrigation. Potential savings
would be even higher if the technology switch
were combined with more precise irrigation
scheduling and a partial shift from lower-value,
water-intensive crops to higher-value, more
water-efficient crops.
China introduced water-saving measures and
irrigation system modernization in agriculture in the 1990s. China has some 400 large

including through stronger research
capacities that will enable them to absorb
and use knowledge from other sources and
countries as well as to advance knowledge
(box 14.21).

Source: Cooley, Christian-Smith, and Gleick 2008; ICID
2008.

Water resources data and
information

Data and information needs

Water resources data include information on the quantity and quality of water
resources and also on governance. Such
data are crucial to a wide range of water
resources stakeholders.

Reliable and accurate water resources
information and data, by reducing uncertainty about water resources, help decisionmakers make more reliable and politically
persuasive assessments of water risks. More
detailed and accurate information also
guides better choices on needed infrastructure and makes public institutions more accountable for the impacts of their actions.

The World Bank conducted an assessment
of the water supply and sanitation sectors
in Ethiopia, including progress towards
the Millennium Development Goals.40 The
amount and quality of data available for
the assessment from different regions varied considerably, and some data were contradictory. The data thus could not be used
for a sound public review of expenditures

Box 14.21

Research links in developing countries

The Water Law and Indigenous Rights programme (2001-07) began as an international
action-research alliance to inform the debate on
peasant, indigenous and customary rights in the
Andean region and to facilitate action on local,
national and international platforms. A major
objective was to better understand local water
rights and water management. The strategy
was to focus on research and action, together
with local, regional and international networks
(both indigenous and non-indigenous), while
training policy-makers, water professionals and
grass-roots leaders. The programme deepened
water policy debates on recognition of water
rights, enabling better legislation and more
democratic water governance and management
policies. Network participants have extended
their activities into new policy research and
action networks on the plurality of water rights,
multiscale water user organizations and ways
to strengthen and recognize such processes
through training and user-oriented intervention
strategies.

260

irrigation systems (each with an irrigated area
of more than 20,000 hectares), which account
for about a quarter of the total irrigated area of
56 million hectares. Modernization included the
application of new materials and technologies
to upgrade irrigation system structures and the
application of modern irrigation concepts and
institutions to improve irrigation management.
Water conveyance and irrigation intervals have
been shortened, and water losses have been
reduced. Agricultural output in the programme
area increased 46%, even though irrigation
withdrawals have fallen from about 80% of
total water withdrawals in 1980 to 60% today, a
dramatic reduction.

Concertación (2006-11) is an interdisciplinary research and capacity-building network
concentrating on peasant empowerment and
indigenous water management, with a focus on
the Andean region. The Water Research Fund for
Southern Africa, established in 1999, is available
to researchers and institutions in any Southern
Africa Development Community country. A peer
review system ensures that high quality research
proposals are selected for funding. A board
consisting of researchers with different professional backgrounds and from different countries
formulates the fund’s research policy and defines
priority areas. Although external donors are the
main source of funding, rather than the research
end users, the fund is exploring ways to better
link societal demands to the research community and of reviewing its role in promoting this
connection so that the supported research is
responsive to the region’s needs.
Source: Rap 2008; www.eclac.cl/drni/proyectos/walir/
homee.asp; www.iwsd.co.zw/index.cfm.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box
in these sectors. The study revealed that
most town water utilities do not have
proper accounts, data on sanitation are
absent or fragmentary and work by nongovernmental organizations in the water
supply and sanitation sectors is uncoordinated and undertaken without collaboration with responsible national authorities.
The assessment also found that funding
of these sectors, on both a sectoral and
per capita basis, was low, resulting in poor
water service throughout the country.

Water resources monitoring
Data on technical and scientific aspects of
water resources management often come
from monitoring activities, including
measurements of chemical, biological and
other parameters of the quantity or quality
of water systems. Such data can illustrate
the limits of the water resources, expose
hard-to-see connections and contribute
to innovative solutions to water resources
problems, as illustrated in box 14.22.
Monitoring networks are inadequate and
weakening (see chapter 13). Although
modelling is not a substitute for accurate
field measurements, modelling experience
has advanced to the extent that some data
can now be generated with models.
The Lake Naivasha Riparian Association
in Kenya used modelling to investigate
the potential impacts of water abstractions
to supply intensive horticultural activities
that began in the early 1980s. Association members were concerned that the

Box 14.22

horticultural activities were responsible
for falling lake water levels. Horticultural
interests denied the claim, pointing out
that the lake was higher than it had been
in the 1950s, prior to development of their
industry. The modelling work considered
the contributions of surface and groundwater to the lake levels, clearly illustrating
that the declining lake levels coincided
with commencement of horticultural
activities in 1982. The results were
ultimately accepted by all stakeholders,
including the horticulturalists, resulting
in their working more closely together to
promote a stronger conservation ethic for
the lake.41

4

The need for
sustainable
financing is one
of the most
persistent concerns
in water resources
decision-making

Traditional knowledge and experiences
of the people directly affected by a water
system, whether as members of its shoreline community or as economic actors
dependent on it for their livelihoods, are
also important. Traditional knowledge can
come from the legends and oral histories of indigenous people. In some areas
such memories may be the only source
of information on the history of a water
system. The Ugandan government, for
example, used local knowledge to identify
and protect important fish breeding areas
on the eastern shore of Lake Albert on the
Uganda-Democratic Republic of Congo
border.42

Financing
The need for sustainable financing is one
of the most persistent concerns in water

Using monitoring information in water resources management

Information from monitoring activities can be
used to expose the limits of water resources, reveal hidden connections and develop innovative
solutions to water resources problems. Data on
fishing intensity and gear were used in declaring temporary fishing moratoriums for Lakes
Baringo and Naivasha in Africa and in setting
restrictions on allowable fishing technologies for
Lake Victoria. These measures contributed to the
recovery or significant improvements of these
fisheries.
Biophysical processes in water systems are
complex and often expressed in small incremental changes that are not readily observable.
Detailed measures and investigations at Lake
Biwa, Japan, showed that declining snowfall over
several decades, combined with a weakening
water profile in the lake, had led to a decline in
the dissolved oxygen levels in the lake’s bottom
waters, increasing lake eutrophication and pointing to the potential effects of global warming on
the lake.

Water in a changing world

Field monitoring in the Lake Chad basin in Africa
demonstrated that wet season conditions could
be simulated by water releases from the Tiga
and Challawa Dams and that artificial flooding of
wetlands could be undertaken with the existing
infrastructure.
Several years of monitoring data from Lake Ohrid
in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
suggested that the phytoplankton and zooplankton communities in the lake were changing,
consistent with its increasing eutrophication and
making an unequivocal case for nutrient control.
Monitoring data collected from Lake Dianchi
in China demonstrated the success of policies
to reduce the external nutrient load from local
enterprises. Such post-project monitoring can
help marshal support for the often considerable
outlays required for water resources management programmes and activities.
Source: ILEC 2005; World Bank 2005.

261

PART

4

Small-scale
water providers
typically include
entrepreneurs
filling a void left by
the market failure
of the formal
water sector and
small companies
providing services
to municipalities
under contract

Chapter 14O
resources decision-making. Ultimately,
all financing in the sector comes from
tariffs, the national budget and external
aid. Decision-makers in the water sector do
not control all of the factors influencing
these financing sources, but they can help
create a favourable investment climate and
ensure good management of the financial
resources at their disposal. Several key
initiatives over the past five years have
shaped the agenda of water financing,
including the World Panel on Financing
Water Infrastructure (chaired by Michel
Camdessus), the Task Force on Financing
Water for All (chaired by Angel Gurria)
and the UN Secretary General’s Advisory
Board on Water and Sanitation (UNSGAB).
This section offers examples of how some
countries are tackling the problems and
implementing the recommendations identified in these reports.

Water supply service providers
manage financial resources well,
creating favourable investment
climates
Reforms have responded to the failure of
public sector water providers to provide
adequate levels of service and quality,
often because of poor governance and
inadequate investments. Reforms have also
focused on transparency and accountability, low revenue collection, infrastructure
deterioration and service breakdown.
Privatization of water services is still
an exception, and there is not enough
experience to establish its long-term efficacy. Although the number of people
served by the private water sector has
grown from roughly 50 million in 1990 to
about 300 million in 2002, most people
in developing countries are not served by
either private or partially private companies (see chapters 4 and 7 for additional
discussion).43
The National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) in Uganda is a public sector
utility that has assumed a more formal
business structure. Within a short period
this once poorly performing utility had
improved service quality (expanding coverage from 12 towns in 1998 to 22 towns
today) and strengthened financial viability
through more efficient service provision
and increased revenue collection. Its experience also illustrates the importance of
good leadership, showing that substantial
changes can occur rapidly under the right
conditions.44
To improve efficiency and finances, NWSC
introduced performance-based contracts
for local utilities and separated operations
262

and maintenance from performance monitoring and regulation. Results included a
substantially larger service base, increased
staff efficiency and a more viable financial
base (box 14.23).
The Tunisian water authority SONEDE is
another example of a water supply agency
operating with good management practices. As indicated in box 14.3, a targeted
pricing policy enables full cost recovery of
operating the service, with tourist establishments paying the highest rates and
households the lowest. Unaccounted for
water in Tunis has been reduced below
10%.

Providing official development
assistance for water resources in
more user-friendly forms
In Kenya, output-based aid underpins
the loans being made by a commercial
microfinance agency. The international
aid repays part of the investment cost once
the work is completed. This approach differs from a normal guarantee of the lender
in that it creates a strong incentive for the
bank to ensure timely and effective completion of the project.

Small-scale local water providers
Small-scale water providers serve an
estimated 25% of the urban population
in Latin America and East Asia and about
50% in Africa and South-East Asia.45
Small-scale water providers typically
include entrepreneurs filling a void left by
the market failure of the formal water sector and small companies providing services to municipalities or public authorities
under contract.
The main obstacle to the expansion of
small-scale water providers is lack of
financing. Financing is generally from personal assets, profits from other businesses,
community contributions and short-term
credit from local banks or microcredit
agencies. Options to increase access to
financing for small-scale providers include
microfinance schemes, access to local
development and infrastructure banks,
projects funded by non-governmental
organizations or donors and investment
subsidies (for example, in Cambodia grants
from the International Development Association cover 50%-60% of investment
costs). The Philippines has successfully
used loan financing at market rates, while
Colombia has used a middle path that
preserves incentives and enhances financial sustainability by plotting increased
tariffs over time and placing revenues in
an investment fund.46
World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options inside the water box

Box 14.23

Addressing water supply and sanitation challenges in Uganda

Uganda faced numerous challenges in
addressing water supply and sanitation
services related to urbanization and population growth pressures, including lack
of harmony in water policies, inadequate
governance, divergent stakeholder preferences, managerial inefficiencies and limited investment capital. To address these
deficiencies, the government initiated a
series of complementary activities:
•

Instituting timely, rational expansion of
water production and network facilities.

•

Using an optimal mix of technologybased approaches (such as yard taps,
prepaid meters and public standposts).

•

Introducing and subsidizing public access to water connections.

Performance indicator
Service coverage (percent)
New water connections (number per year)
Total number of water connections
Number of employees

50,826

180,697

1,784

1,388

37

7
32.5

Income (billions of Uganda shillings)

21.9

70.4

Profit after depreciation (billions of Uganda shillings)

-2.0

6.5

•

Equitably providing water and sanitation infrastructure, with an emphasis
on sanitation.

•

Using community-based approaches
and mainstreaming consumer
preferences.

Several activities were especially helpful in
improving Uganda’s urban water supply
and sanitation services:

Establishing stakeholder coordination
forums, such as water councils, at different levels.

•

Lack of legal recognition of small-scale
providers is another obstacle to expansion.
To strengthen legitimacy, local water authorities in Mauritania and Uganda enter
into management contracts with private
operators, which then provide water supplies to small towns.

Payment for environmental goods
and services
Payment for environmental services is based
on the recognition that the environment,
such as wetlands and watersheds, provides a
range of life-supporting goods and services,
including potable water supply, irrigation
water, food and fibre, wastewater treatment,
flood control and aesthetic benefits (figure
14.1). Environmental goods and services,
traditionally thought of as provided for
‘free’ by nature, lack a functioning market
for pricing them. Further, for many environmental goods and services there is no
direct link between the service provider and
the consumer – for example, between an
upstream provider (a land owner or resource
manager) and a downstream user (public
water supply, agriculture and industry).
Water in a changing world

71
24,418

51

Using output-based investment approaches to strengthen service targeting.

•

47
3,317

Non-revenue water (percent of total)

•

Implementing innovative capital
financing mechanisms (such as tariff
indexation and conservation, ‘soft’ loan
financing and bond issuance).

2007

Staff per 1,000 water connections

As a result of these activities, water delivery and service efficiency and profitability rose dramatically during 1998-2007
(see table). Coverage increased more
than 50%, with total water connections
more than 3.5 times higher in 2007
than in 1998. Employee efficiency also
increased, and income rose more than
300%.

•

1998

Using performance-contract arrangements that promote a private sectorlike perspective, including market

orientation, customer focus, incentive
plans and accountability.
•

Applying managerial subsidarity,
keeping decision-making close to
beneficiaries.

•

Separating water supply and sanitation
operations from monitoring and regulation to improve accountability.

•

Incorporating sanitation improvement
initiatives into water supply and sector
plans based on appropriate technologies
for affordability and social acceptability.

•

Coordinating investment activities,
operations management and user communities to ensure maximum impact.

Source: Mugisha and Sanford 2008.

With the market for these services often
poorly developed or non-existent, ecosystem managers have little economic incentive to improve their management efforts.
The payment for environmental services
concept attempts to address this problem
by creating markets for environmental
services, collecting money from water users
and paying those providing the resource,
thereby encouraging efficient and sustainable delivery of watershed services.
Experience with payment for environmental services is growing in several countries.
In the United States New York City obtains
its drinking water from watersheds in the
Catskill Mountains north of the city. Water
quality was traditionally very good, requiring little or no treatment. By the end of
the 1980s, however, agricultural and other
development in the Catskills threatened the
water quality. New York City planners chose
to work with upstream land owners in the
Catskill watersheds to address potential
water quality problems. The resultant plan
included payments for both on-farm capital
costs and pollution-reducing agricultural
263

PART

4

Figure 14.1

Chapter 14O
Ecosystems and some of the services they provide

Mountain and polar
Food
Fibre
Freshwater
Erosion control
Climate regulation
Recreation and ecotourism
Aesthetic values
Spiritual values

Inland water
Rivers and other wetlands
Freshwater
Food
Pollution control
Flood regulation
Sediment retention and transport
Disease regulation
Nutrient cycling
Recreation and ecotourism
Aesthetic values

Forest and woodlands
Food
Timber
Freshwater
Fuelwood
Flood regulation
Disease regulation
Carbon sequestration
Local climate regulation
Medicines
Recreation
Aesthetic values
Spiritual values

Cultivated
Food
Fibre
Freshwater
Dyes
Timber
Pest regulation
Biofuels
Medicines
Nutrient cycling
Aesthetic values
Cultural heritage

Drylands
Food
Fibre
Fuelwood
Local climate regulation
Cultural heritage
Recreation and ecotourism
Spiritual values

Coastal
Food
Fibre
Timber
Fuel
Climate regulation
Waste processing
Nutrient cycling
Storm and wave protection
Recreation and ecotourism
Aesthetic values

Urban
Parks and gardens
Air quality regulation
Water regulation
Local climate regulation
Cultural heritage
Recreation
Education

Marine
Food
Climate regulation
Nutrient cycling
Recreation

Island
Food
Freshwater
Recreation and
ecotourism

Note: Different combinations of services are provided to human populations from the various types of ecosystems represented here. Their ability to
deliver the services depends on complex biological, chemical and physical interactions, which are in turn affected by human activities.
Source: Based on MEA 2005.

measures, which helped reduce the costs of
conventional water treatment. This approach also protected the watersheds and
the other environmental goods and services
they provided (such as recreation and
biodiversity conservation). The payments
to water providers come directly from the
revenues collected from water users in
New York City.47 A similar approach was
used in Heredia, Costa Rica, which taxed
its approximately 50,000 connected water
users to pay farmers in the watershed for
improved conservation measures.

264

Another example of payment for environmental services focuses on rewarding
rural people for programmes that reduce
the loss of topsoil from cropland in Kenya
(box 14.24).
Some examples48 suggest that, for
payment for environmental services
systems to create an enabling environment, infrastructure development may
be necessary. This would be expected to
increase the costs of implementing such
systems.49

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Box 14.24

4

Paying for environmental ­services – green water credits in Kenya

Over the last 25 years much of the
cropland in Kenya has lost its topsoil.
Meanwhile, the population has roughly
doubled, increasing demand for food
and power. The International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD)-supported green water credits initiative is an
innovative mechanism for rewarding rural
people for sustainable water management
practices. The long-term goal is to empower upstream rural communities in the
Tana River basin to better manage their
land and water resources to improve food
and water security and livelihoods both
upstream and downstream in the watershed. It is also expected to decrease flood
potential, improve blue water resources
delivery downstream and provide diversified rural income sources.
Begun in the Tana River basin in 2006,
this programme was also intended to
demonstrate the feasibility of green water
credits as an environmental service tool.
The project builds on the difference

between green water and blue water.
Green water, which is soil moisture generated by rainfall that infiltrates the soil,
is a fully consumptive water use, while
some blue water (such as rivers and lakes)
is used non-consumptively and can be
reused.
The green water credits scheme includes quantifying current water fluxes
in the watershed and estimating fluxes
under the scheme, identifying potential
participants (demand assessment) and
developing a payment and reward mechanism for upstream land managers and
downstream clients based on appropriate
incentives. The main activities include
upstream soil and water conservation
techniques applied by farmers, leading
to more water being available downstream. Results to date include lessened
land degradation and improved quantity
and quality of blue water supply. With
the support of the Kenyan government,
the green water credits concept is being

scaled up to help improve food and
water supplies nationwide. Increased
power security has been another byproduct.
Concurrent with implementation of this
large scale, market-based scheme to improve land and water management, Kenya
is reforming its entire water sector. To this
end, the Tana River basin programme was
strategically aligned with recent Kenyan
water sector reforms, including the 2002
Water Act and the Kenyan National Water
Resources Management Plan, which assign
an economic value to water resources.
These efforts reflect past success and
future intentions by addressing water allocation issues along with financial considerations, to reward Kenya’s land stewards,
generating benefits for the rural poor and
the country as a whole.
Source: Falkenmark 2003; ISRIC 2007;
www.isric.org/UK/About+ISRIC/Projects/
Current+Projects/Green+Water+Credits.htm

Notes

25.

UNDP 1997.

48.

Muñoz Piña et al. 2008.

1.

26.

UNDP 1997.

49.

27.

www2.gtz.de/dokumente/bib/061322.pdf.

Pagiola and Platais 2007; World Bank
2007.

28.

www.genderandwater.org/
page/4208.

29.

Visscher et al. 2006; www.irc.nl/
page/29472.

30.

Smits, Moriarity, and Sijbesma 2007;
www.irc.nl/page/35887.

31.

Butterworth et al. 2008.

32.

www.youtube.com/
watch?v=btWcXNSvOHw.

33.

ILEC 2003.

34.

ILEC 2005.

35.

www.forumrisparmioacqua.it.

36.

Conceição and Heitor 2003.

37.

UN Millennium Project 2005; Juma
and Agwara 2006.

38.

WSP-UNICEF 2007; see also http://
s189535770.onlinehome.us/
pottersforpeace/?page_id=9.

Examples include WCD 2000 and US
EPA 2005.

2.

Rogers and Hall 2002.

3.

Bandaragoda 2006.

4.

ILEC 2005; World Bank 2005.

5.

UN-Water 2008.

6.

UN-Water 2008.

7.

See, for example, Eawag-WSSCCSuSanA (2008); and IWA (2008).

8.

Gyawali et al. 2006.

9.

Bandaragoda 2006.

10.

Cap-Net 2008.

11.

Rast 1999.

12.

ILEC 2005.

13.

Bayoumi and Abumoghli 2007.

14.

Phumpiu and Gustafsson 2009.

15.

See WWAP 2006; Phumpiu and
Gustafsson 2009; Caplan 2003; UNDP
2006.

16.

Phumpiu and Gustafsson 2009.

17.

Beccar, Boelens, and Hoogendam
2002.

39.

UNDP 2006.

18.

Burchi 2005.

40.

Watson et al. 2005.

19.

UNDP WGF-SIWI 2008.

41.

ILEC 2005; World Bank 2005.

20.

Moench et al. 2003.

42.

ILEC 2003.

21.

www.forumrisparmioacqua.it.

43.

UNDP 2006.

22.

Transparency International 2008;
UNDP and WGF-SIWI 2008.

44.

World Bank Institute 2005.

45.

Dardenne 2006; McIntosh 2003.

46.

Triche, Requena, and Kariuki 2006.

47.

Pagiola and Platais 2002, 2007.

23.

Cap-Net 2008.

24.

World Bank 2007.

Water in a changing world

References
ANA (Brazil National Water Agency),
GEF (Global Environment Facility),
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme), and OAS (Organization
of American States). 2004. Strategic
Action Program for the Integrated
Management of the São Francisco River
Basin and Its Coastal Zone – SAP. Brazil
National Water Agency, Global Environment Facility, United Nations Environment Programme, and Organization
of American States. www.gefweb.org/
interior_right.aspx?id=238.
Balcazar, R. A. 2005. The Establishment of
an Anti-Corruption Agreement with Pipe
Manufacturing Companies: A Colombian Experience. Presentation at Seminar
on Meeting International Targets without Fighting Corruption, World Water
Week, 20-26 August 2005, Stockholm.
Bandaragoda, D. J. 2006. Status of Institutional Reforms for Integrated Water Resources Management in Asia: Indications
from Policy Reviews in Five Countries.
Working Paper 108. International Water
Management Institute, Colombo.
Bayoumi, M., and I. Abumoghli. 2007.
National Water Councils: Comparative

265

PART

4

Chapter 14O

Experiences. United Nations Development Programme–Iraq, Amman.
Beccar, L., R. Boelens, and P. Hoogendam. 2002. Water Rights and Collective
Action in Community Irrigation. In Water
Rights and Empowerment, eds. R. Boelens
and P. Hoogendam. The Netherlands:
Gorcum Publishers.
Blue Plan, MAP (Mediterranean Action
Plan), and UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 1999. Participatory Irrigation Management Activities and
Water User Organizations Involvement
in Turkey. Sophia Antipolis, France: Blue
Plan.
———. 2002. Plan Bleu, CMDD (2002)
Études de cas. Forum avancées de
la gestion de la demande en eau en
Méditerranée, Fiuggi, Italie, 3-5 Octobre
2002.
Boelens, R. 2008. The Rules of the Game
and the Game of the Rules: Normalization and Resistance in Andean Water
Control. Ph.D. diss., Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
Burchi, S. 2005. The Interface between
Customary and Statutory Water Rights
– A Statutory Perspective. Legal Papers
Online No.45, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Butterworth, J. A., A. Sutherland, N.
Manning, B. Darteh, M. Dziegielewska-Geitz, J. Eckart, C. Batchelor, T.
Moriarty, C. Schouten, J. Da Silva, J.
Verhagen, and P. J. Bury. 2008. Building More Effective Partnerships for Innovation in Urban Water Management.
SWITCH Learning Alliance, Lough­
borough, UK. http://switchurbanwater.
lboro.ac.uk/outputs/pdfs/WP6-2_
PAP_Effective_partnerships_in_UWM_
abridged.pdf.
Caplan, D. 2003. Investment in Water
Infrastructure Benefits Orillia. CanadaOntario Infrastructure Program, Infrastructure Canada, Toronto, Ontario.
Cap-Net. 2008. Performance and Capacity
of River Basin Management Organizations: Cross-Case Comparison of Four
RBOs. Cap-Net, Pretoria.
COHRE (Centre on Housing Rights and
Evictions), AAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science),
SDC (Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation), and UN-HABITAT
(United Nations Human Settlements
Programme). 2007. Manual on the
Right to Water and Sanitation. Geneva:
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions.
www.cohre.org/store/attachments/
RWP - Manual_final_full_final.pdf.
Conceição, P., and M. V. Heitor. 2003.
Techno-Economic Paradigms and

266

Latecomer Industrialization. United Nations Educational, Social, and Cultural
Organization Encyclopedia, Paris.
Cooley, H., J. Christian-Smith, and P. H.
Gleick. 2008. More with Less: Agricultural Water Conservation and Efficiency in
California. Oakland, CA: Pacific Institute.
www.pacinst.org/reports/more_with_
less _delta.
Dávila, G., and H. Olazával. 2006. De la
Mediación a la Movilización Social: Análisis de Algunos Conflictor por el Aqua en
Chimborazo. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Döker, E., D. Er, F. Cenap, H. Özlü, and E.
Eminoglu. 2003. Decentralization and
Participatory Irrigation Management in
Turkey. Water Demand Management
Forum: Decentralization and Participatory Irrigation Management, 2-4 February 2003, Cairo, Egypt.
Earle, A., and A. Turton. 2005. No Duck
No Dinner: How Sole Sourcing Triggered
Lesotho’s Struggle against Corruption. Presentation at seminar on Can
We Meet International Targets without
Fighting Corruption? World Water Week,
20-26 August, 2005, Stockholm.
Eawag (Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology)-Sandec (Department of Water and Sanitation in
Developing Countries)-SuSanA (Sustainable Sanitation Alliance). 2007.
Towards More Sustainable Sanitation Solutions. Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic
Science and Technology, Dübendorf,
Switzerland. http://esa.un.org/iys/docs/
Susana_backgrounder.pdf.
Falkenmark, M. 2003. Water Management
and Ecosystems: Living with Change.
TEC Background Paper No. 9, Global
Water Partnership, Stockholm.
Garces-Restrepo, C., D. Vermillion, and
G. Muñoz. 2007. Irrigation Management
Transfer. Worldwide Efforts and Results.
Water Reports No. 32. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.
Gyawali, D., J. A. Allan, P. Antunes, A. Dudeen, P. Laureano, C. L. Fernández, P.
Monteiro, H. Nguyen, P. Novácek, and
C. Pahl-Wostl. 2006. EU-INCO Water
Research from FP4 to FP6 (1994-2006)
– A Critical Review. Luxembourg: Office
for Official Publications of the European
Communities.

Reference, Between the United States of
America and Canada, Signed at Ottawa,
November 22, 1978. International Joint
Commission, Washington, DC.
ILEC (International Lake Environment
Committee Foundation). 2003. World
Lake Vision: A Call to Action. Kusatsu,
Shiga, Japan: World Lake Vision Committee Foundation.
———. 2005. Managing Lakes and Their
Basins for Sustainable Use: A Report for
Lake Basin Managers and Stakeholders.
Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan: International Lake
Environment Committee Foundation.
ISRIC (International Soil Research and
Information Centre). 2007. Political,
Institutional and Financial Framework
for Green Water Credits in Kenya. Green
Water Credits (GWC) Proof-of-Concept
Report No.6, International Soil Research
and Information Centre, Wageningen,
The Netherlands.
IWA (International Water Association).
2008. Sanitation Challenges and Solutions. Sanitation 21 Task Force. International Water Association, London.
Jairath, J. 2000. Participatory Irrigation
Management in Andhra Pradesh – Contradictions of a Supply Side Approach.
Paper delivered at workshop on South
Asia Regional Poverty Monitoring and
Evaluation, 8-10 June 2000, New Delhi.
Johnson, S. H. 1997. Irrigation Management
Transfer in Mexico: A Strategy to Achieve
Irrigation District Sustainability. Research
Report 16. Colombo: International Irrigation Management Institute.
Juma, C., and H. Agwara. 2006. Africa
in the Global Knowledge Economy:
Strategic Options. International Journal
of Technology and Globalisation 2 (3/4)
218-31.
Kingdom, B., R. Liemberger, and P.
Marin. 2006. The Challenge of Reducing Non-revenue Water (NRW) in Developing Countries. How the Private Sector
Can Help: A Look at Performance-Based
Service Contracting. Water Supply and
Sanitation Board Discussion Paper Series
8, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Lange, J. 2008. A Guide to Public Participation, According to Article 14 of the EC
Water Framework Directive. RhineNet
Project Report, Freiburg, Germany.

ICID (International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage). 2008. China
Reduces Irrigation Water Withdrawals by
25 Percent. ICID Newsletter, International Commission on Irrigation and
Drainage, New Delhi.

McIntosh, A. 2003. Asian Water Supplies.
Reaching the Poor. Manila: Asian Development Bank and London: International
Water Association. www.adb.org/documents/books/asian_water_supplies/
asian_water_supplies.pdf.

IJC (International Joint Commission).
1978. Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, with Annexes and Terms of

MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Living Beyond Our Means:
Natural Assets and Human Well-Being,

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box
Statement from the Board. Washington,
DC: World Resources Institute.
Moench, M., A. Dixit, S. Janakarajan, M.
S. Rathore, and S. Mudrakartha. 2003.
The Fluid Mosaic: Water Governance in
the Context of Variability, Uncertainty and
Change. Ottawa: Ottawa International
Development Research Centre.
Moore, J. G., W. Rast, and W. M. Pulich. 2002. Proposal for an Integrated
Management Plan for the Rio Grande/
Rio Bravo. In 1st International Symposium
on Transboundary Waters Management,
eds. A. Aldama, F. J. Aparicio, and R.
Equihua. Avances en Hidraulica 10, XVII
Mexican Hydraulics Congress, Monterrey, Mexico, Nov. 18-22, 2002.
Mugisha, S., and B. Sanford. 2008. StateOwned Enterprises: NWSC’s Turnaround
in Uganda. African Development Review
20 (2): 305-34.
Muñoz-Piña, C., A. Guevara, J. M. Torres,
J. and Braña, J. 2008. Paying for the
Hydrological Services of Mexico’s Forests: Analysis, Negotiations and Results.
Ecological Economics 65 (4): 725-36.
Palacios, E. V. 1999. Benefits and Second Generation Problems of Irrigation
Management Transfer in Mexico. Water
Conservation and Use in Agriculture
Discussion Paper, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations,
Rome.
Phumpiu, P., and J. E. Gustafsson. 2009.
When Are Partnerships a Viable Tool for
Development? Institutions and Partnerships for Water and Sanitation Service in
Latin Americ Water Resources Management 23 (1): 19-38.
PLUARG (Pollution from Land Use
Activities Reference Group). 1978.
Environmental Management Strategy
for the Great Lakes System. Great Lakes
Regional Office, International Joint Commission, Windsor, Ontario.
Raju, K. V. 2001. Participatory Irrigation
Management in India (Andhra Pradesh)
- IMT Case Study. International E-mail
Conference on Irrigation Management
Transfer, International Network on
Partcipatory Irrigation Management,
June-October 2001.
Rap, E. 2008. Interdisciplinary Research
and Capacity Building Program on
Water Policy and Water Management in
Andean Countries. Background Paper for
Knowledge on the Move Conference,
27-28 February 2008, The Hague.
Rast, W. 1999. Overview of the Status
of Implementation of the Freshwater
Objectives of Agenda 21 on a Regional
Basis. Sustainable Development International Journal 1: 53-6.

Water in a changing world

Rogers, P., and A. W. Hall. 2002. Effective
Water Governance. TEC Background
Paper No. 7, Global Water Partnership,
Stockholm.
Ruiz-Mier, F., and M. van Ginneken. 2006.
Consumer Cooperative: An Alternative
Institutional Model for Delivery of Urban
Water Supply and Sanitation Services.
Note No. 5, Water Supply & Sanitation
Working Notes, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Stålgren, P. 2006. Corruption in the Water
Sector: Causes, Consequences and
Potential Reform. Policy Brief No. 4,
Stockholm International Water Institute,
Stockholm.
Thampi, G. K. 2005. Community Voice as
an Aid to Accountability: Experiences
with Citizen Report Cards in Bangalore. Presentation at seminar on Can
We Meet International Targets without
Fighting Corruption? World Water Week,
Stockholm, August 2005.
Transparency International. 2008. Global
Corruption Report 2008: Corruption in the
Water Sector. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Triche, T., S. Requena, and M. Kariuki.
2006. Engaging Local Private Operators
in Water Supply and Sanitation Services.
Initial Lessons from Emerging Experience
in Cambodia, Colombia, Paraguay, the
Philippines and Uganda. Water Supply
and Sanitation Working Notes No 12,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Treyer, Sébastien. 2004. Introducing
Political Issues in the Debate on Water
Resources Planning in Tunisia: A Necessity for the Implementation of Water
Demand Management Policies. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Water
and Politics: Understanding the Role of
Politics in Water Management, Marseille,
France, 26-27 February 2004. Marseille,
France: World Water Council. www.
worldwatercouncil.org/fileadmin/wwc/
Library/Publications_and_reports/
Proceedings_Water_Politics/proceedings_waterpol_full_document.pdf.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme). 1997. Capacity Building
for Sustainable Management of Water
Resources. New York: United Nations
Development Programme, Sustainable
Energy and Environment Division.
———. 2006. Human Development Report
2006: Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty
and the Global Water Crisis. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme) and WGF-SIWI (Water
Governance Facility, Stockholm
International Water Institute). 2008.

4

Water Adaptation: Freshwater in National
Adaptation Programs of Action, NAPAs,
and Climate Adaptation in Freshwater
Planning. Stockholm: United Nations Development Programme and Stockholm
International Water Institute.
UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2008. Africa: Atlas of
our Changing Environment. Division of
Early Warning and Assessment. Nairobi:
United Nations Environment Programme. www.unep.org/dewa/africa/
AfricaAtlas.
UN Millennium Project. 2005. Investing in
Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. New
York: United Nations.
UN-Water. 2008. Status Report on IWRM
and Water Efficiency Plans for CSD 16.
Paper prepared for 16th session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development in May 2008, UN-Water.
US EPA (Environmental Protection
Agency). 2005. Handbook for Developing Watershed Plans to Restore and
Protect Our Waters. Washington, DC:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Velasco, H. G. 2003. Water Rights
­Administration – Experiences, Issues and
Guidelines. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.
Watson, P. L., J. Gadek, E. Defere, and C.
Revels. 2005. Assessment of Resource
Flows in the Water Supply and Sanitation Sector. Ethiopia Case Study. World
Bank, Washington, DC.
WCD (World Commission on Dams).
2000. Dams and Development. A New
Framework for Decision-Making. London:
Earthscan.
World Bank. 2005. Lessons for Managing Lake Basins for Sustainable Use.
Environment Department, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
———. 2007. Promoting Market-Oriented
Ecological Compensation Mechanisms:
Payment for Ecosystem services in
China. Policy Report, World Bank Analytical and Advisory Assistance Program,
East Asia and Pacific Region, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
———. 2008. Climate Resilient Cities. 2008
Primer: Reducing Vulnerabilities to Climate Change Impacts and Strengthening Disaster Relief Management in East
Asian Cities. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
World Bank Institute. 2005. When Passionate Leadership Stimulates Enduring
Change: A Transformational Capacity
Development Anecdote from Uganda.
Capacity Development Brief No. 13.
World Bank Institute, Washington, DC.

267

PART

4

Chapter 14O

WSP-AF (Water and Sanitation Programme – Africa). 2002. Rural Water
Sector Reform in Ghana: A Major
Change in Policy and Structure. Blue
Gold Series, Field Note 2, Water and
Sanitation Programme, Nairobi.
WSP (Water and Sanitation Programme)UNICEF (United Nations Children’s
Fund). 2007. Use of Ceramic Water
Filters in Cambodia. Field Note,

268

Combating Waterborne Disease at the
Household Level. Water and Sanitation
Programme, Cambodia Field Office,
Phnom Penh. www.wsp.org/UserFiles/
file/926200724252_eap_cambodia_
filter.pdf.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006. The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2.
Water: A Shared Responsibility. Paris:

United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, and New
York: Berghahn Books.
WWF. 2008. Kafue Flats, Zambia: Preserving Biodiversity through Water
Management. Innovation for Sustainable Development: Case Studies from
Africa. World Wildlife Fund, Gland,
Switzerland.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options inside the water box

Chapter 15

4

Options from
beyond the
water box
Authors: William Cosgrove and Joana Talafré
Contributors: Richard Connor, William Cosgrove, George de Gooijer,
Gerry Galloway, Molly Hellmuth, Håkan Tropp and James Winpenny
Coordinator: Olcay Ünver (WWAP)
Facilitator: William Cosgrove

Key messages
Dealing with risk and uncertainty has long been a routine challenge for water resources managers and policy-makers across
sectors and the world. However, issues like climate change and
demographic dynamics have made the risks greater and the task
more complex. Risk management is now much more important
– indeed essential – to analysis and decision-making.
Drivers and policies outside the water sector have more impact
on water management than do many policies championed and
implemented by water-related ministries. Identifying trade-offs
and synergies between water and other policy sectors can enhance policy impacts in all sectors and avoid some adverse effects on water.
Because governments, civil society and business leaders make decisions every day that can affect water, it is important to identify
where such decisions can also lead to improvements in water sector management and in water sector and environmental services.
Examples of win-win situations abound – whether created by
governments, communities or businesses – that point to promoting deliberate cooperation between water and non-water actors and integrating water issues into external decisions.
International organizations, notably the UN system, can provide support and expertise to governments, help civil society
build capacity and catalyse leadership in the private sector.
Chapter 14 shows that many actions defined within the water sector also require
decisions by leaders and policy-makers
outside the sector. Furthermore, external
drivers and policies related to sectors that
affect overall economic diversification –
such as agriculture, trade, energy, health,
housing, finance and social protection –
have more impact on water management
than do many policies championed and
implemented by water-related ministries.1
The preceding parts of this Report demonstrate the complex links between those
external drivers and water.
Water in a changing world

Leaders in governments, civil society
and the private sector all make decisions
every day that affect water. It is important
to identify how decisions motivated by
economic or social objectives can also lead
to improvements in water sector management and in water sector and environmental services. This chapter illustrates such
win-win situations.
There are essentially two ways such winwin scenarios can unfold. First, policy
decisions or reforms made outside the water
sector can create space for change within
269

PART

4

Chapter 15O

curbing corruption
in the water
sector could save
an estimated
20%-70% of
invested resources

the water sector (discussed in the first part
of this chapter). In many cases the success
of reforms in the water sector has depended
on broader enabling conditions – such as
transparency and accountability in public
institutions, sound trade conditions and access to information. Responses to some external drivers may therefore indirectly lead
to improvements in water management.

Improving governance: promoting
transparency and accountability

The second way is more direct and involves avoiding the negative impacts of
non-water sectoral interventions by taking
water into account in decision-making
(discussed in the second part of this chapter) or cultivating deliberate cooperation
between water and non-water actors (discussed in the third part of this chapter).

The capacity to formulate and implement
appropriate policies is affected by the inclusiveness of decision-making, the strength of
institutions and attitudes towards corruption. Curbing corruption has particular
relevance as corruption diverts resources,
lowers effective investment and undermines public confidence and government
decentralization efforts (see chapter 14).

The examples in this chapter provide
useful insights into how programme and
policy decisions can achieve multiple
benefits when implemented so as to take
impacts on water into account.

Promoting win-win scenarios by
creating space for change
There are many paths to improving water
resources management. Direct water interventions need to be supported by a broader
enabling framework. Other chapters point
to the need to increase investment in the
water sector; to enhance water-related information, science and monitoring systems
and to create durable financial mechanisms
to enable better performance in the water
sector. This section provides examples of
decisions outside the ‘water box’ and their
contribution to improving water services.

Box 15.1

Combating corruption

Donors are increasingly requesting anticorruption measures in their
development assistance programming, to promote aid effectiveness.
Transparency and accountability in
government, along with clear rules
and procedures, will go far in ensuring
the stability needed to promote social
and economic development. Efforts to
promote integrity, transparency and
accountability in one sector can pave
the way for similar reforms in other
sectors as they benefit from the successes and lessons learned.
Key elements of a successful anti­
corruption strategy include citizen
participation and access to information, independent checks and
balances and oversight mechanisms,
public sector codes of conduct and

270

attention to incentives to corruption in
public administration.
Anticorruption strategies can be
incorporated at all levels of project development and implementation, from
procurement to monitoring and evaluation. For example, the Kecamatan
Development Program in Indonesia, a
project implemented by the Indonesian
Ministry of Home Affairs (Community
Development Office) and supported in
part by the World Bank, encouraged
village communities to participate in a
water infrastructure project. Competition among villages was used to single
out bad construction proposals and to
strengthen social control in measuring
quality throughout the project cycle.
Source: Martinez 2007; Olken 2005.

Governance provides the context for
making water management decisions,
establishing partnerships, mobilizing and
distributing resources and giving accounts.
Decisions about governance imply complex political processes and are heavily
influenced by history, culture and values.

Building integrity and accountability in
public decision-making systems also involves promoting the role of civil society,
non-governmental organizations and the
private sector. This could be particularly
relevant in the water services sector, where
curbing corruption could save an estimated 20%-70% of invested resources.2
Box 15.1 shows how government and
donor efforts to combat corruption have
also allowed for greater citizen participation in community water development, an
essential part of water governance.
Citizen participation in decision-making
at all levels is also central to promoting
good governance – creating a climate of
accountability and transparency. Organized interest groups, community-based
associations and other groups with the
capacity and legitimacy to express views
are crucial. Promoting a culture of consultation within the water sector and increasing consultative and participatory capacity
in general, will deliver benefits for collaborative water management.

Strengthening decision-making
through decentralization
Decentralization involves complex processes to enable decision-making and promote
the sharing of resources and responsibilities among various levels of government.
Occasionally, it includes the devolution of
some power and responsibilities to civil society. In the water sector decentralization of
management places decision-making closer
to the level at which services are provided.
Decentralization is typically part of a
broader package of governance reform. The
autonomy and resources accorded to local
governments will vary. In some countries
where decentralization is ongoing (for
World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options from beyond the water box
example, Uganda), local governments receive resources based on performance, and
local officials are held accountable based
on service and management standards.
Decentralized governance implies cooperation among a broader group of actors and
stakeholders, including central and provincial government institutions and sometimes
civil society, the private sector and resource
users. ‘When it works well, decentralization
has many benefits: it can allow for a democratisation of decision-making through
improved stakeholder inclusiveness, transparency and accountability. . . . It can also
encourage the integration of traditional
knowledge and practice with innovative
technologies and science to promote fair
and efficient management of water resources and services.’3 The benefits of decentralization for water management depend on
assigning adequate authority and resources
to local governments (box 15.2).
Australia provides a model of such coordination. Its National Resource Management
Ministerial Council develops policies and
strategies for national approaches to conservation and sustainable use of Australia’s natural resources, including land, vegetation,
biological resources and water. The council’s
role is to facilitate, oversee and monitor
implementation of national programmes
and action plans and to evaluate outcomes,
which would otherwise be difficult because
of the division of constitutional powers and
responsibilities among territorial, state and
national government entities. The council
is responsible for promoting community
engagement in conserving natural resources
and for coordinating with other ministerial
councils and bodies.4

Box 15.2

Promoting conducive
macroeconomic policies
The effectiveness of water institutions
depends on macroeconomic policies and
the environment created by these policies. In the long term macroeconomic
policies are so powerful and structurally
influential that the best sectoral institutions cannot completely counteract their
influence.
Many countries look to economic diversification – economy-wide and within
sectors – to reduce economic risk and
promote growth opportunities (box 15.3).
Economic activity in most least developed countries is heavily concentrated
in commodities, with agriculture and
fisheries contributing more than 36% of
GDP and 80% of export earnings.5 A few
commodities account for the bulk of each
country’s exports, with a single commodity often accounting for more than 60%
of export earnings. More than 70% of
the population of least developed countries is employed in primary commodity
production.

The effectiveness
of water
institutions
depends on
macroeconomic
policies and the
environment
created by
these policies

Some diversification schemes have direct
impacts on water use or water demand because they target a sector that uses water.
Others have an indirect impact on water,
for example, by altering patterns of energy
use. Decisions about diversification are
rarely made with water impacts in mind.
Rather, they are made in response to a perceived economic vulnerability or opportunity (such as expanding biofuel markets),
trends in the terms of trade, instability or
price changes in commodity markets or
the depletion of mineral or other natural
resources.

Decentralization in Uganda – making room for better environmental governance at the
local level

Devolving decision-making powers over
natural resources to publicly accountable
local authorities is frequently advocated
to achieve social development goals and
enhance environmental management.
Uganda’s experience, however, suggests
that to pave the way for better water governance and services, decentralization has
to be accompanied by adequate legislative and regulatory powers, executive and
enforcement authority for local authorities
and adequate resources.
Under the Uganda Local Government
Act of 1997 district and city councils can
enact by-laws, provided the by-laws do
not conflict with the national constitution or other laws. District councils are

Water in a changing world

responsible for disease control, environmental sanitation, entomological
services and vermin control, and forests
and wetlands. Despite this transfer of
authority, however, executive powers on
environmental matters have not been
effectively devolved. Instead, administrative deconcentration within line ministries
in charge of particular resources has been
attempted.
Local governments are required to help
enforce environment-related rules and
laws. Local councils below the subcounty
level have the power to decide on penalties when rules are broken, but the lack of
clarity regarding the powers of sanction
and arbitration has undermined good

environmental practices. In many cases
responsibility has been transferred but resources have not, impeding local council
efforts to promote better environmental
management.
Despite these constraints, there have
been positive achievements. In many
areas supplemental resources have been
mobilized from external aid sources to
support local council efforts. Local governments have made significant progress
in fulfilling their legal responsibility to
protect wetlands and river banks by
negotiating land and water use with the
local communities.
Source: Bazaara 2003.

271

PART

4

Chapter 15O

Measures to
improve education,
both access and
quality, can
improve access
to water and
sanitation

Box 15.3

Economic diversification in Mauritius helps promote access to
water

In the late 1970s and early 1980s Mauritius
launched a policy to diversify away from traditional exports (sugar and garments). In 1988
the government relaunched its tourism strategy, emphasizing low-environmental-impact,
high-spending tourism. In 1970 agriculture
accounted for 16% of global domestic product (GDP) and most exports (sugar), whereas
manufacturing accounted for only 14% of
GDP and mainly for the domestic market. The
service sector, which made up the bulk of GDP,
was largely non-tradable. By 1997 agriculture’s
share in GDP had fallen to 9% and less than a
quarter of exports. Manufacturing’s share had
nearly doubled (to 25%). A flourishing tourism
industry, which accounted for 15.7% of GDP
and 26.8% of exports, had transformed services into a tradable sector. By 1999 manufactured

Economic diversification alone is not
necessarily good for the environment or
water systems. Its impacts depend on the
trade-offs and choices that are being made,
including which sectors are growing and
what technology is being used. It is also
increasingly recognized that longer-term
considerations such as climate change (see
chapters 5 and 11) should be factored into
diversification schemes at local and national levels to ensure their sustainability
and long-term economic viability.

Creating space through social
policies for education and health
There are close and multiple links between education and water and sanitation.

Box 15.4

More relevant schools lead to benefits for
water

Efforts to increase the effectiveness
of basic education programmes by
integrating students’ environment
into the curriculum (school gardening
in rural areas, for example) show that
attendance increases and students
learn appropriate ways of interacting
with their environment, including in
agriculture, land and water management. Schools are able to forge
stronger links with their communities
as service providers, including of agricultural information, making school
more relevant.
Policy decisions that are essentially
driven by education goals – increasing
school attendance – can also ­create
space for improvements in water
management. The 2000 National Programme for Curriculum Development

272

in Sri Lanka acknowledged that
‘information regarding food habits
and types of food . . . can be used in
introducing innovative strategies in
education. Outdoor activities using
agricultural plots in the school and the
home can also make learning more
meaningful and hence attractive.
These plots could be used for introducing concepts in mathematics, language and social studies, etc. . . . Since
agriculture is the main occupation of
the parents in the Sinhala Medium
areas, every attempt must be made to
help them to learn better practices.
Well maintained agricultural plots in
the school could . . . also serve as demonstration plots for the community.’
Source: Atchoarena and Gasperini 2003,
pp. 180-85.

goods accounted for 75% of merchandise
exports.
Today, as an indirect result of these economic diversification efforts of the 1970s and 1980s, 94%
of the population in both rural and urban areas
has access to piped water and basic sanitation.
While agriculture is still by far the greatest water
user, accounting for 68%, the domestic sector is
the second, at 30%. This is largely to support the
tourism industry, the other economic mainstay of
Mauritius, whose development was aided by significant investment in water supply infrastructure.
Source: Benevides and Pérez-Lucy 2001; FAO-AQUASTAT database; Zhang 2003; Bird, Chenje, and Medina
2002; Chang 2008; WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation 2008, p. 48.

Provision of adequate sanitation in education facilities, particularly for girls, goes
hand in hand with access to education.
Similarly, interventions to increase access
to basic education are often accompanied
by efforts to provide drinking water in or
around schools. In addition, education
about health, water and sanitation, water
in agriculture and environmental issues
more broadly can lead to more sustainable
performance (box 15.4).
Measures to improve education, both
access and quality, can improve access
to water and sanitation. Women with
education have fewer children, which has
beneficial consequences for the health of
mothers and children and results in lower
demand per family for food and water (see
chapter 2, especially figure 2.3). Removing or reducing school fees could free
household income to pay for other services
– including food and water or agricultural
inputs that could increase water productivity. Higher schooling achievement may
contribute to better water management by
increasing prospects for non-agricultural
employment, potentially reducing the
land under cultivation and, in turn, the
amount of water used for irrigation. For
land under cultivation to shrink, however, off-farm employment has to generate
enough income to reduce a family’s reliance on agriculture for its livelihood – still
unlikely in most rural areas. In China,
for example, estimates of the returns on
investment in education show that the
increase in rural income during the 1990s
came mainly from off-farm employment.
Studies have shown that government policies that increased investment in education and in infrastructure for non-farm
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box
sectors in rural areas contributed significantly to rural non-farm employment and
to household income.6 In many cases this
can make the agricultural sector more efficient, by generating income that can be
used to provide better agricultural inputs.
There are indirect links between the loss
of agricultural labour force to diseases
such as HIV/AIDS and land degradation
and unsustainable agricultural practices.7
HIV-related disease and death cause
agricultural productivity to decline. This
creates or accelerates a feedback loop
between poverty and pressures on natural
resources, including water. There are similar links between agriculture and malaria,
with integrated pest management or an
ecosystem approach helpful in preventing
malaria transmission as well as improving land and water productivity and food
security.8 An agricultural intervention in
Kenya paved the way for improvements
in natural resources management, including water, although its primary goal was
malaria prevention (box 15.5).
Other interventions in the health sector
also promote better water management or
sanitation. For example, HIV/AIDS education and awareness programmes can be
closely tied to education reform, including
efforts to integrate the students’ environment into education programmes (see box
15.4). Initiatives to limit the public’s exposure to toxic chemicals (including agrochemicals) include efforts to limit chemical dispersal in the environment (air, land
or water) and can have an impact on water
quality. The United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe and World Health
Organization Euro Protocol on Water

Box 15.5

and Health, adopted in 1999, recognizes
this mutually reinforcing relationship
between health and water policies. The
protocol is the first international treaty
designed to reduce water-related deaths
and diseases through improved water
management and universal access to safe
water and adequate sanitation. This goal
is to be achieved through such measures
as establishing systems of surveillance
and response to water-related outbreaks
and adopting national targets and mechanisms to ensure mutual support and
compliance review.9

Clearing pathways towards
win-win situations: avoiding
negative impacts
Decisions at many levels and sectors can
have large impacts on water, while water
constraints can pose challenges to private
entrepreneurship, economic development, poverty reduction and sustainable
environmental services. Avoiding negative
impacts on water is a matter not only of
social responsibility, but also of the longterm sustainability of public and private
investments.

4

Decisions at
many levels and
sectors can have
large impacts on
water, while water
constraints can
pose challenges
to private
entrepreneurship,
economic
development,
poverty reduction
and sustainable
environmental
services

Economic decisions rarely consider their
potential environmental impacts, including possible adverse effects on water. And
although water constraints can influence
the outcomes of economic strategies, water
managers and water actors rarely participate in economic decisions. But recognition is building that water use will need to
be more sustainable to achieve economic
growth agendas, especially where the
economy is highly dependent on water.
For example, in Djibouti, where water

The ecohealth approach: combating malaria through
agricultural practices in Kenya

A project in Kenya – under the umbrella of the
International Development Research Centre
Program Initiative on Ecosystem Approaches to
Human Health and bringing together experts
from the International Centre for Insect Physiology and Ecology and the International Water Management Institute as well as the local community
– is examining links between agriculture and
malaria using an ecosystem approach. The goal
is to reduce the incidence of malaria through a
range of agricultural practices:
•

Reduce mosquito-breeding habitats by limiting the water used for rice cultivation.

•

Reduce the length of time that paddies
are wet, by changing flooding schedules
or alternating rice cultivation with dryland

Water in a changing world

crops such as soya. In addition to limiting the mosquitoes’ habitat, planting soya
could boost income, improve nutrition and
save water.
•

Introduce naturally occurring bacteria into
stagnant water to kill mosquito larvae during the peak breeding season.

The heart of the ecosystem approach is to
actively include community members in the
research process, therefore helping researchers understand people’s perceptions about the
health and development problems in the area.
This approach also seeks interventions and solutions that are transdisciplinary.
Source: Poverty-Environment Partnership 2008.

273

PART

4

Chapter 15O

As the example of
Ethiopia shows,
all decisions about
water use and
management take
place in a context
of macro- and
microeconomic
policies and
decisions

scarcity is severe, the 2004 Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper recognizes that ‘the
absence of a natural resources base, weak
human capital, high costs of labour and
production factors (energy, telecommunications and water), inadequate financial
intermediation, and administrative constraints of all kinds are the key obstacles to
economic growth and to the development
of private initiative’.10
Tunisia, a country with very limited water
resources, has succeeded in stabilizing
its demands and has plans for more active demand management (see box 14.3
in chapter 14). Tunisia implemented a
national water-saving strategy at an early
stage for both urban and agricultural
needs, in line with its long tradition as
an ‘oasis’ culture with experience managing common but scarce water resources.
Water demand for irrigation has been
stable for more than six years, despite
agricultural development, seasonal peaks
in demand and unfavourable climate conditions (drought). The water demands of
tourism (a source of foreign currency) and
cities (a source of social stability) have
been met.
Several principles underlie the Tunisian
strategy:

Box 15.6

•

Abandoning isolated technical
measures in favour of an integrated
approach.

•

Empowering users through a participatory approach (960 water user associations were created covering 60%
of the irrigated public area).

Measuring the water limits to growth in
Ethiopia

Until recently, most policy and macro­
economic decisions in Ethiopia have
been based on growth models that
assume that rainfall is consistently
distributed at historical average levels.
These models do not take into account
shocks to the economy caused by
extreme water events, such as floods
and droughts.
A World Bank study on Ethiopia estimated the magnitude of the impacts
of high water variability on growth
and poverty to assist the government in better managing water and
other parts of the economy (trade,
transport) and to reduce the impacts
of water shocks. The study found
that considering the effects of water

274

variability reduced projected rates
of economic growth 38% a year and
increased projected poverty rates 25%
over a 12-year period. It also found
that investments in water infrastructure, such as irrigation systems, were
needed to reduce vulnerability to
rainfall variability and that transport
infrastructure helped communities
adjust to localized crop failures by
enabling farms to sell their surplus
in food-deficit areas. The analysis,
conducted with the Ethiopian government, helped make water resources
management a central focus of the
government’s national poverty reduction strategy.
Source: Sadoff 2006.

•

Introducing reforms gradually and
adapting them to local conditions.

•

Applying financial incentive mechanisms to promote use of water-efficient
equipment and technologies (equipment purchases subsidized at 60%).

•

Supporting farmers’ incomes, to allow
them to plan for agricultural investment and labour.

•

Introducing a transparent and flexible pricing system, aligned with the
national goals of food security and
equity, leading to gradual recovery
of costs. The drinking water pricing
system supplies a basic-need level of
services at low cost.11

As the example of Ethiopia shows, all
decisions about water use and management take place in a context of macroand microeconomic policies and decisions
(box 15.6). To be attractive to public and
private actors, sustainable water management must also make economic sense.
Even in the growing number of companies that promote social responsibility,
economic viability remains the key driver
of business decisions. But as the examples
of the Coca-Cola Company (box 15.7)
and Mondi (box 15.8) show, reducing the
adverse effects of production on water is
not only a matter of social responsibility – it can also make good business sense.
Box 15.9 illustrates this point with several
examples.
The Coca-Cola example shows that companies have much to lose in public image
and consumer trust when they compete
with traditional uses of water. In this case
the damage to the company’s image was
potentially higher than the costs of taking
preventive action. In the Mondi example
another large company coupled its plans
for expansion and profitability with measures designed to have a positive effect on
the environment.
Further demonstration of rising private
sector awareness of the centrality of
sustainable water management is the
adoption of the CEO Water Mandate by
the members of the UN Global Compact
as a voluntary platform for addressing
sustainability in business operations and
supply chains.12 Launched 5-6 March
2008 by the UN Secretary-General and
committed business leaders to help
companies develop a comprehensive approach to water management, the mandate covers six areas: direct operations,
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Box 15.7

The Coca-Cola controversy in Kala Dera, India – learning from mistakes

In 2000 the Coca-Cola Company began
bottling operations in Kala Dera, a large
village outside Jaipur, Rajasthan, India,
where irrigated agriculture is the primary
source of livelihood. Within a year the
community noticed a rapid decline in
groundwater levels, for which the plant
was blamed. The community demanded
closure of the plant, and the cause received some international support, mainly
from university students in Canada, the
United Kingdom and the United States,
some of Coca-Cola’s largest markets.
In late 2004 the company agreed to
an independent enquiry into its water
management practices by the Energy and
Resources Institute (TERI), a non-profit international research organization based in
New Delhi. Released in January 2008, the
report was welcomed by both sides, each
finding some support for its positions.
For the activists opposed to the bottling plant the report confirmed that the

Box 15.8

4

plant was operating in an ‘overexploited’
groundwater area and that the plant’s
operations were contributing to a worsening water situation and were a source of
stress to the community. The assessment
made four recommendations: the plant
could transport water from the nearest unstressed aquifer, store water from
low-stress seasons, relocate the plant to
a water-surplus area or shut down this
facility.
For Coca-Cola the report noted that
the company was a very small user of
water, tapping less than 1% of the area’s
available water. Nonetheless, the report
recommended more consideration of
community water needs in plant location
and operations, arguing that ‘assessment of water availability in the vicinity
of a bottling operation should be from a
perspective . . . wider than business continuity’. Coca-Cola India pledged to reach
a net-zero balance in groundwater use
by the end of 2009, installed a rainwater

harvesting system for groundwater recharge and drafted guidelines for engaging with the community. To help farmers
use water more efficiently, Coca-Cola, in
partnership with local farmers and the
government, has started drip irrigation
projects with 15 farmers. Some 15 more
projects are planned in 2008-09.
Assessments across various plant sites
indicated that the state governments
in India have not been able to value
their water resources appropriately. The
review report seems to move towards a
view that holds corporations responsible
for their environmental impact beyond
the strictures of existing regulations.
The report recommends that Coca Cola
‘define a strategy wherein it is able to
offset this anomaly through appropriate
and commensurate interventions that . . .
result in a stream of benefit flows to the
community.’
Source: TERI 2008.

Mondi South Africa achieves sustainable expansion

Mondi South Africa, a wholly owned subsidiary of Anglo American plc, produces
pulp, paper, board, corrugated containers
and mining support systems. Activities
range from forestry operations to highly
technical manufacturing and converting
processes. To increase its competitiveness in a demanding international pulp
market, Mondi implemented a 2.3 billion
rand (approximately $24 million) expansion project, raising the mill’s production
capacity 25% and accommodating a
40% increase in timber supply from more
than 2,800 small growers who form part
of Mondi’s Khulanathi timber growers
scheme.

The project began in 2001 with an engineering study, followed by a detailed
environmental impact assessment in
2002. Through improvements in energy
supply infrastructure and targeted
equipment and technology upgrades,
the company achieved its expansion
objectives, while realizing the following
benefits:
•

A 50% reduction in sulphur dioxide
(2,177 tonnes).

•

A 35% reduction in nitrous oxide
(509 tonnes).

supply chain and watershed management, collective action, public policy,
community engagement and transparency. The endorsing members of the CEO
Water Mandate include the chief executive officers of 32 companies working in
all economic sectors around the world,
from agrifood to textile and financial
institutions.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on
the business and international community
during the 2009 Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Switzerland, to make water
security one of the key topics for climate
change adaptation and emphasized the
importance of a Global Agenda Council on
Water Security.13
Water in a changing world

•

A 50% reduction in carbon dioxide
(297,121 tonnes).

•

A 60% reduction in total sulphur.

•

Total energy and water cost-savings
of 38,678,843 rand (approximately
$4.9 million).

•

A reduction in water use of some
13,000 cubic metres per day.

•

A more than 25% reduction in
wastewater.

Source: WBCSD 2006.

Promoting win-win scenarios
through cooperation and
knowledge
In addition to avoiding negative impacts,
win-win choices need to be cultivated in all
aspects of social life to deal with the urgency of the water situation around the world.
Examples of win-win scenarios can be
found in all policy areas – from traditional
water-using sectors to security ­policies – and
implemented at various scales and levels.

Consultation and cooperative
management
Citizen participation in decision-making is
central to promoting good governance and
creating a climate of accountability and
275

PART

4

Chapter 15O

Box 15.9
•

•

•

Examples of clean production processes

In Turkey a tyre-making factory in the
Izmit region reduced its water consumption by nearly three-quarters,
from 900,000 litres a day to 250,000
litres, thus also reducing its discharges into the community sewers.
A detailed analysis made it possible
to replace a cooling system with a
closed-circuit system for an investment cost of $5,000 and a return
time of two years.
In Egypt one of the largest tinnedfood manufacturers (Montazah, near
Alexandria) underwent an eco-audit
and introduced measures to reduce
energy consumption: insulating steam
pipes, replacing leaky parts, fitting
a pressure regulator to the sterilizers and improving the recuperation
system and boiler efficiency. Water
consumption was reduced by implementing water-consumption hydrometer monitors, installing sprinklers (so
that water flows only when needed)
and improving the water collection
and recycling system. The savings in
water, steam and energy (nearly 40%
savings in fuel consumption) made it
possible to reduce discharges and amortize investments over 1-44 months.
One of Croatia’s biggest dairy companies, LURA in Zagreb-Lurat, undertook measures such as employee
training, reducing the diameter of
cleaning pipes and changing the hotwater circuit that reduced effluents

by 286,000 cubic metres a year (or
27%) and drinking water by 280,000
cubic metres a year. These simple,
low-cost measures (investment of
€31,000) involved employees, saved
water and energy (equivalent to
€328,000 a year) and reduced effluents, with an investment amortization of less than one month.
•

In Tunisia a manufacturer of car batteries identified 19 ways of preventing contamination and pollution
(acids, lead scoria and wastewater)
and saving lead and energy. The costs
of the new measures were $522,500,
while savings amounted to $1.5 million a year.

•

In Mexico the General Motors de
Mexico Ramos Arizpe Complex (2001
Stockholm Water Award recipient)
employed physical, chemical and
biological wastewater treatment
processes to recover and reuse 70%
of its industrial wastewater. It also
promoted use of brackish well water
by separating salts and increasing the
useable amount withdrawn from 67%
to 94%. It helped reduce pressure on
the only source of water for a population of 40,000, a small confined and
brackish aquifer.

•

In India the Staple Fibre Division of
Grasim Industries Ltd (2004 Stockholm Water Award recipient), a
producer of viscose staple fibre, has

transparency. Interventions to promote
a culture of consultation and to increase
consultative and participation capacity
will help to deliver benefits in all areas, including collaborative water management.
In 1978 Québec, Canada, created the
Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement (BAPE), an independent entity
charged with consulting with citizens on
projects that might have environmental
implications (box 15.10). The BAPE example shows that an adequately mandated
consultative process can legitimize policy
decisions and identify multiple social, economic and environmental benefits around
sound water management.
Creating institutions concerned with
major water-related issues helps identify
possibilities for collaborative initiatives in
other areas of the economy as well. In the
BAPE case the point of entry was the need
for a new water policy that would answer
the requirements of various users. Other
276

reduced water consumption by 85%,
process steam by 51% and electrical
usage by 43% since 1980. The company was among the first to replace
zinc – a pollutant particularly harmful
to marine and aquatic life – with aluminium in its production process.
•

In Australia, the driest inhabited
continent in the world, Sydney Water
(2006 Stockholm Water Award
recipient) supplies water to 4.2 million people. As part of its operating
licence, Sydney Water is required to
reduce per capita consumption by
35% before 2011. Since the inception
of its water conservation programme
in 2001, Sydney Water has saved
more than 20 million litres a day and
more than 310 organizations have
joined the initiative.

•

In the United States, Orange County,
California, (2008 Stockholm Water
Award recipient) focused on reuse in
its groundwater replenishment system,
which diverts and purifies highly treated sewer water that was previously
discharged into the ocean and returns
the cleaned water to the groundwater
basin. The system will provide enough
additional water to meet the needs
of 500,000 more people without
diminishing groundwater resources for
current users (2.3 million).

Source: Adapted from Benoit and Comeau 2005
and www.siwi.org/sa/node.asp?node=77.

points of entry can also be found. For
example, technical investigations can pave
the way to collaborative learning processes
among scientists and decision-makers, as
seen in the Upper San Pedro Partnership
in Arizona in the United States (box 15.11).
Cooperative management can occur between different types of actors, including
public-private partnerships. One example
is payments for environmental services,
using market-based tools to create incentives for maintaining a water resource or
paying for watershed services (see chapter
14). In Costa Rica the water utility in the
Heredia region pays landholders to protect
forests on the hill slopes from which they
derive their water, benefiting both landowners and municipal water customers.14

Win-win scenarios from sectoral
interventions
Agriculture. Lasting win-win benefits for
water and agriculture often result from explicitly recognizing and analysing trade-offs
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Box 15.10

Québec’s Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement consultation on water
resources management

In 1998 the minister of the environment
called on the Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement (Office for Public Hearings on the Environment, BAPE) to
hold a public consultation on water management in Québec. The consultations
– conducted through written comments,
public hearings and discussions – helped
develop recommendations on better water
management.
From 15 March 1999 to 1 May 2000 the
commission held 142 public meetings in
the 17 administrative regions of Québec
and heard 379 briefs. The BAPE report,
Water: A Resource to Be Protected, Shared
and Enhanced, was submitted to the minister of the environment on 1 May 2000.
The report emphasized three areas:
•

Improving governance through water
management at the river basin level.

•

Preparing regional portraits covering the public’s expectations for

Box 15.11

4

water management and aquatic
ecosystems.
•

Reforming legislation and institutions
needed to implement an integrated
water and aquatic ecosystem policy.

The report addresses 16 themes, among
them agricultural pollution abatement,
hydroelectricity, integrated management
of water and aquatic ecosystems at the
watershed level, water exports and the
special case of the St. Lawrence River.
The commission made 13 main recommendations for the short, medium and
long terms. It also presented findings and
observations for the government’s reflection. In 2002 the government of Québec
released its water policy, Water: Our Life,
Our Future. The policy seeks to protect
water resources as a unique heritage, manage water in a sustainable development
perspective and better protect public
health and the health of ecosystems.

The policy adopts most of the BAPE
recommendations. It reaffirms that water
is part of the collective heritage of the
province and incorporates measures
intended to:
•

Implement integrated river basin
management.

•

Implement this form of management
in the St. Lawrence River, by granting
it a special status.

•

Protect water quality and aquatic
ecosystems.

•

Continue water clean-up efforts and
improve water services management.

•

Promote water-related recreation and
ecotourism activities.

Source: Cosgrove 2009; BAPE 2000; Québec
Ministry of the Environment 2002.

Collaborative learning processes – adopting an adaptive management framework

The Upper San Pedro Partnership in
Arizona in the United States represents a
diverse consortium of interests, including
municipal, state and federal government
institutions. From its initial goal of developing a definitive regional groundwater
management plan in 1998, it evolved into
a more complex, yet flexible, ongoing
adaptive management planning process
that endures a decade later.
An adaptive management approach allows
actions with low risk or uncertainty to be
taken early on. Member agencies realized
that implementing certain water management strategies required substantial
information through monitoring, research
and modelling efforts as well as political
assessments, while other projects represented relatively low-risk strategies and
could be implemented sooner. By 2003
the partnership had identified more than

100 projects for implementation, including repair of leaky infrastructure, car-wash
water recycling, voluntary retirement of
agricultural pumping through conservation easements, recharge of treated
effluent and reintroduction of beavers. In
the 2004 Water Management and Conservation Plan the partnership prioritized
additional projects – developing model
codes and ordinances, establishing waterconservation surcharges for excessive use,
exploring a transfer of development rights
programme and other measures. Projects
with greater uncertainty, higher political
risks or significant costs were targeted for
additional feasibility studies or evaluation
using a decision-support system model.
The partnership uses the model to evaluate combinations of management options
(scenarios) such as the possible relocation of municipal wells, construction of
additional recharge facilities and various

and factoring them into decision-making.
Doing so may depend on the availability of
information, collaborative decision-making
and perceptions of available alternatives.
In poor communities where survival is the
main concern, people may have few choices
about how they use land and water, or the
perceived risks of alternatives could outweigh the potential benefits. This is why
most successful integrated rural development initiatives are designed to help such
Water in a changing world

water augmentation strategies. Unlike a
simple annual ‘bottom line’ water-budget
approach, the model considers spatial and
temporal groundwater management concerns, essential to sustain the ecological
values of the San Pedro Riparian National
Conservation Area.
In San Pedro complex and controversial
strategies such as water importation,
the transfer of development rights and
surcharges for excessive water use all had
the potential to divide the community. To
engage the community early on in planning processes, the partnership conducted
a series of community meetings to provide
citizens with an opportunity to thoughtfully consider issues and provide meaningful input.
Source: Holly Richter, Udall Center for Studies in
Public Policy.

communities reduce risks, develop alternatives and bring trade-offs to the forefront in
decision-making (box 15.12).
Investment in water infrastructure and
sanitation can reduce poverty by stimulating productive activity (see chapter 6).
In rural areas there is no definitive line
between ‘household’ water use and water
use for productive purposes – watering
plots for food and cash crop production,
277

PART

4

Box 15.12

Chapter 15O
The Integrated Watershed Development
Programme in Jhabua District, Madhya
Pradesh, India

By the 1960s severe deforestation had
seriously harmed the ecosystems and
livelihoods of the people of Madhya
Pradesh, India, resulting in widespread
soil erosion, overgrazing and inappropriate land use, barren landscapes and
seasonal migration of men in search
of employment. Under a project
implemented by the National Centre
for Human Settlements and Environment and local communities with
funds from the government of India,
multiple interventions attempted to
restore natural resources and improve
the socioeconomic conditions of
district residents. The project took an
integrated management approach,
based on community needs. Activities
included:
•

Protected afforestation on community land.

•

Distribution of seedlings to encourage planting on private land.

•

Soil and water conservation.

•

Pasture improvement through
planting pasture grasses.

•

Water harvesting.

•

Distribution of subsidized fuel and
energy-saving devices.

•

Integration of land use innovations
with measures to improve community livelihoods.

•

Promotion of alternative incomegenerating activities to reduce poverty and reduce seasonal migration.

In addition to immediate land productivity benefits, there were many
positive ecosystem-wide benefits, including a marked increase in groundwater recharge and water supply from
harvesting. Livelihoods improved as
well. The model was subsequently
adopted by neighbouring states.
Source: National Rural Development Institute n.d.; www.mprlp.in; www.nchse.org/
projects.htm.

livestock, trade and other income-generating activities. The amount of water provided to poor households with access to
land needs to be sufficient for these other
income-generating purposes.
Multiple-use initiatives for water recognize the benefits to poor households of

Box 15.13

Integrated multiple-use systems are found
worldwide – usually documented at the
farm and field levels – but conflicting
management objectives are just as common and create hurdles for the promotion of these systems. Multiple uses of
water imply multiple interest groups
whose water management objectives may
not always be compatible. Despite much
evidence of integrated water use at the
farm level (such as rice-fish systems and
irrigation-­aquaculture systems), sectoral
management at higher levels impedes true
integration of water and irrigation with
other sectors, including fisheries, forestry
and sanitation. Furthermore, multiple
uses and demands for water can generate
opportunity costs and externalities, even
when some uses are non-consumptive (fish
farming in irrigation canals, for example). These problems are intensified by
the seasonality of supply and the limited
availability of irrigation water in semi-arid
tropical countries as well as the common
pool, open access nature of the resource.15

Experience with multiple-use water services in Nepal

Since 2003 Winrock International Development Enterprises and local partners have
worked with more than 70 communities in
14 districts in Nepal to develop multipleuse water systems serving some 1,600
households (more than 9,300 people). The
approach combines multiple-use water
services with supporting business services
that allow the rural poor to realize health
benefits as well as sustainable increases
in income. Proven low-cost technologies
(nearby low-flow sources that are often bypassed by conventional programmes) are
used to provide cost-effective water services to small communities (15-50 households). Related business services focus on
income-generating opportunities from
productive water use activities, primarily
high-value horticulture. Typically, such
business services involve assessing rural enterprises (inputs, costs, demand, markets

278

having adequate water for non-household,
income-earning activities (box 15.13). But
such initiatives are often not in line with
water efficiency efforts. Surface irrigation is the most water-demanding form of
irrigation, but the excess water can have
other benefits: it enables aquaculture (as in
rice fields in China) and washes off the salt
accumulating in topsoil (avoiding salinization of cultivated lands). Efforts to save
water by reducing water input would thus
mean the loss of an income source (fish
production) and potentially of cultivated
lands, if salt accumulation becomes severe.

and prices) and identifying ways to add
value through products and services.
An evaluation of the Nepal pilot programme found that, in addition to
receiving water for drinking and domestic
uses, households with multiple-use water
services had increased their average gross
incomes by $250 a year through the
production and sale of horticultural products, made possible by reliable access to
productive water. For 70% of the systems,
gross margins covered costs within one
year. All schemes are managed by water
user associations, which are responsible
for securing water rights, operating and
maintaining the systems and managing
finances. Households contribute to operation, maintenance and capital replacement of the system. About 75% of water
user associations have savings and credit

schemes, and many provide revolving
microcredit for income-generating activities. Some 85% of households surveyed
were highly satisfied with multiple-use
water services, reporting greater quantities
of water available within close proximity
(less than 60 metres away, on average) for
household use, irrigation and livestock.
Other important benefits included time
saved from no longer hauling water,
reduced incidence of diarrhoeal diseases,
higher consumption of nutrient-rich vegetables and increased school attendance
by girls (more than 65% of households).
More than 60% of households had installed sanitary latrines, a combined effect
of more water for sanitation, increased
income and sanitation marketing.
Source: Development Vision – Nepal 2007.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options from beyond the water box
Energy. Energy demand and water use are
closely linked (see chapter 7). Energy costs
and concerns about energy efficiency can
be brought to bear in addressing water
issues. In parts of South Asia and other
regions where farmers use groundwater
drawn from private wells, the price of electricity needed for pumping is a powerful
instrument for controlling groundwater
abstraction by influencing farmers’ pumping behaviour.
However, electricity is underpriced in
many areas. The arguments against raising
electricity prices, and the practical problems in doing so, are similar to those for
holding down irrigation water prices for
small farmers. However, the rising cost of
public subsidies for fuel and electric power
has steeled the resolve of many governments to tackle this perverse incentive for
overabstraction of water. The metering
of electricity to farmers in North China
shows the efficacy of economic pricing
for resource management, given the right
institutional structure.16
In the example in box 15.14 decisions
about energy sources and consumption are
motivated primarily by profitability and
cost reduction, but they can also generate
benefits for water.
Adequate water and energy are prerequisites for breaking the cycle of poverty.
Using renewable energy in rural electrification, for example, is a win-win scenario
at the local level. Greater availability of
electricity would lessen dependence on
fuelwood (still a significant source of
energy in Africa, for example), reducing
deforestation and its effects on the local
water cycle, while providing an engine for
growth.
In the Dominican Republic, where many
people in rural areas have no access to
electricity, the non-governmental organization Association for Solar Energy Development helped more than 5,000 households obtain home solar power systems,
and numerous other public facilities have
been powered by solar energy. The association estimates that 3-6 tonnes of carbon
dioxide emissions are avoided for each 50
gigawatt panel that replaces kerosene lighting.17 In addition to enabling communities
to engage in alternative income-generating
activities, the programme helped develop
solar-powered potable water systems.
Using solar energy to draw groundwater
reduces the costs of access to water while
providing access to higher-quality water,
since surface waters are often polluted.
Water in a changing world

Local benefits vary by setting, but health
benefits (from reductions in indoor air
pollution), environmental benefits (from
reduced deforestation and emissions) and
economic benefits (from use of a renewable energy source) are all possible.
Tourism. With 898 million travellers worldwide in 2007 and 1.6 billion forecast for
2020, tourism is a growing sector of the
economy in many developing countries.18
In addition to direct employment and
investment, tourism generates jobs and
revenues in surrounding communities and
stimulates infrastructure investment. Sustainable tourism, or ecotourism, can also
provide the impetus for conservation efforts. Tourism depends on the availability
of natural resources, landscapes and eco­
system services, chief among them water
and biological diversity. But construction
of tourism installations and infrastructure
can also harm ecosystems through pollution, deforestation and overexploitation.
Tourism also requires increased water
supply and sanitation services, which can
divert water from other uses. Antigua and
Barbuda, whose economy is dependent on
tourism, must purchase water from neighbouring Dominica to satisfy demand.

the rising cost of
public subsidies for
fuel and electric
power has steeled
the resolve of many
governments to
tackle this perverse
incentive for
overabstraction
of water

There is increasing evidence that win-win
scenarios for tourism and water are possible, as well as for tourism and community
development. In Tunisia higher water tariffs
for tourist establishments cross-subsidize
water supplied to Tunisians (see box 14.3
in chapter 14). With the recent rise in
consumer awareness, tourism enterprises
everywhere are trying to demonstrate corporate social and environmental responsibility. Governments are also working to
promote more integrated tourism investment planning, sustainable use of protected

Box 15.14

The drive for competitive advantage leads to
water benefits

Eco-efficiency, a microeconomic
objective, focuses on reducing the
amount of water, energy, chemicals
and raw materials used per unit of
output. Eco-efficiency is motivated
not only by environmental concerns
but also by prospects of financial
savings through reduced energy
and water bills, less money spent on
raw materials and fewer regulatory
hurdles.
Swiss-based ST Microelectronics cut
electricity use 28% and water use 45%
in 2003 and reported saving $133
million. DuPont committed to keeping

energy use flat no matter how much
production increased, which has
reportedly saved more than $2 billion
over the past decade. Advanced Micro
Devices tracks kilowatt hours per
manufacturing index and reports a
60% reduction from 1999 to 2005.
Although motivated by the need to
innovate and increase profitability,
competitiveness and market shares,
these measures have all had the added
benefit of decreasing water use and
limiting pollution.
Source: Worldwatch Institute 2008.

279

PART

4

Chapter 15O

Water is emerging
as a strategic
resource that
underpins many
dimensions
of security

areas, impact assessments and certification
programmes. Ecotourism can help promote
conservation, poverty reduction and sustainable water management when adequate
enforcement and benefit-sharing mechanisms are in place (box 15.15).

Promoting multiple objectives
through regional economic
development
Regionally based development efforts at
the subnational level usually involve a
package of interventions in multiple and
mutually reinforcing sectors. Because
water resources are a cornerstone of economic development in many areas, regional economic development programmes
are either organized around water interventions (as in the Southeast Anatolia
example in box 15.16) or indirectly related
to the water sector. As the example of the
Tennessee Valley Authority in the United
States shows, achieving multiple economic, social and environmental objectives simultaneously is not only possible,
but also potentially easier than pursuing a
single objective (box 15.17).

Promoting win-win scenarios
through security and crisis
prevention
There are multiple links between water
and human security and, to some extent,
national security – from individual food
security, health, hygiene and sanitation,
and economic security to regional conflicts

Box 15.15

Governments are increasingly concerned
about security, including energy security,
development and socioeconomic security
and physical security. Political stability, a
tenuous achievement in many countries,
also depends on perceptions of economic
vulnerability (as evidenced in early 2008
riots over rising food costs in such countries as Bangladesh, Haiti, Somalia and
Yemen) and physical safety. The water-stability link is also stronger where water resources are scarce and competition among
users is likely to occur on a large scale.19
Promoting human security. Water is emerging as a strategic resource that underpins
many dimensions of security. And many
interventions at the local, regional and
global levels that are designed to address
security concerns are linked to water resources management (box 15.18).
An example is the development of renewable energy to promote energy security.
This can generate significant benefits for
water – freeing it for other uses and for
the protection of ecosystem integrity.
Disaster preparedness and climate early

Sustainable tourism, Çıralı, Turkey

Having experienced a surge in tourism,
Turkey is predicted to join Greece and
Croatia as a leading tourist destination in
the Mediterranean by 2020. The Southwestern Anatolian coast of Turkey, identified by WWF as one of the most ecologically important in the Mediterranean, is
also the most affected by mass tourism
development. To avoid the destruction
of its fragile coastline, the government of
Turkey has adopted an integrated coastal
management approach aimed at preserving not only the natural heritage but also
social and cultural integrity.
Çıralı was chosen for a pilot project to
implement this approach. Çıralı had
shifted from an agricultural economy
towards tourism in the late 1980s. The
resulting construction of tourism facilities
led to multiple problems. Pesticides from
agricultural activities had already polluted
soil and water sources, which were further
threatened by the growth of tourist restaurants around the village’s main spring.
Illegal construction spread due to the

280

among water users. Climate change, with
its associated pressures on water resources,
is expected to worsen human security
everywhere – by undermining development efforts and by exposing more people
to disasters resulting from extreme weather
events and disrupted ecosystems.

lack of enforcement of land development
regulations.
What precipitated a change was that Çıralı
beach was a major nesting site for the
endangered loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta
caretta). WWF Turkey (formerly known as
the Turkish Society for the Conservation
of Nature) entered the scene initially to
help protect the turtle. In 1997 the project
was broadened from turtle protection to
stimulating community awareness of its
responsibility for the natural environment
and to developing a model of sustainable
tourism in Çıralı. WWF examined land
resources management in the area and the
potential to create diverse, sustainable and
environment-friendly economic opportunities and to protect biodiversity.
With a new awareness of the need to
become guardians of their natural heritage, the local community pressured for
enforcement of the existing Coastal Law.
The responsible ministry, with buy-in
from local residents, moved the kiosks

and restaurants that had been built too
close to the shore in violation of the law.
WWF and the ministry prepared further
guidelines and recommendations for wise
use of land resources, including a land use
plan that defined the positioning of building infrastructure in the area and a land
management plan. Ecotourism activities
were started to generate support for conservation and create economic opportunities for the local community throughout
the year, instead of just seasonally. As
part of the venture locals were trained as
nature guides, and trekking paths were
identified – activities that attracted young
people in the community. A move was also
promoted from input-intensive agriculture,
which polluted soil and water supplies, to
organic agriculture. A cooperative was set
up by the farmers to produce and market
organic products and to create a brand for
produce of Çıralı origin.
Source: peopleandplanet.net 2002; www.
panda.org/news_facts/newsroom/news/index.
cfm?uNewsID=13382&uLangID=1.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Box 15.16

Integrating multiple sectors in Southeast Anatolia, Turkey

Turkey’s Southeastern Anatolia Project
(GAP) is a multisectoral, socioeconomic
development project designed to raise
incomes in this less-developed region to
narrow the regional income disparities
by improving the economic structure,
increasing productivity and employment
opportunities in rural areas, enhancing
the assimilative capacity of larger cities
in the region and contributing to the
national objectives of sustained economic
growth, export promotion and social
stability.
Begun as a water infrastructure development project, GAP evolved into a programme that supports sustainable social
and economic development through additional investments in urban and rural infrastructure, agriculture, transport, industry,
education, health, housing, tourism,
environmental protection, gender equality
and poverty reduction. The programme’s
total costs are split between investments
in water-related projects (48%) and those
in other sectors (52%).

Box 15.17

4

The project area is home to 6.5 million
people, or 10% of the country’s population. The project will generate 27,470
gigawatt hours of electricity, boosting national hydroelectrical output by 70%, and
add 1.7 million hectares to the 4.5 million
hectares of irrigated land.
Governance of the project changed with
the evolution of its philosophy. Management of the project began under the
national water authority in the 1970s and
shifted to the national planning organization in the 1980s. In 1989 the government
established a mandated entity, the GAP
Regional Development Administration,
to coordinate special programmes and
projects in social services (education,
health), gender equity and empowerment,
urban management, participatory irrigation
management, agricultural productivity,
resettlement, environmental conservation
and protection, and institutional and community capacity-building. The GAP Higher
Council, the highest decision-making body,
is chaired by the prime minister and initially

included ministers for planning, energy and
natural resources, and public works. Ministers for agriculture and environment were
added later. It has a coordinating body
of line ministries operating in the project
area, local governments, local chambers
of industry and trade, local chambers of
agriculture and regional universities.
The overall cost of the GAP is projected at
$32 billion, of which $17 billion has been
invested. Per capita farm incomes have tripled since irrigation was expanded. Rural
electrification and accessibility reached
90%, literacy rates rose, infant mortality
rates fell, and a more equitable land tenure system is in place. Urban settlements
served with water supply quadrupled. The
region’s economy, once the least developed in the country, is now at the national
average.
Source: Aysegül Kibaroglu, Department of
International Relations, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey; Government of
Turkey 1989.

The Tennessee Valley Authority: economic and social transformation in
a river basin and beyond

During the Great Depression of the 1930s
the Tennessee River Valley, which stretches
through seven southern states in the
United States and drains a basin of 105,930
square kilometres, was a land of despair.
More than 90% of valley residents had no
electricity, and nearly 40% had no toilets
or outhouses. Most of the power required
for agriculture came from horses, and most
of the residents were subsistence farmers
working degraded soil or in areas experiencing serious and repeated flooding.
President Franklin Roosevelt launched many
programmes designed to bring the economy out of depression and to improve the lot
of people mired in poverty. With a strong
interest in basin planning and in developing
system-level solutions, he asked Congress
to create ‘a corporation clothed with the
power of government but possessed of
the flexibility and initiative of a private
enterprise’. In 1933 Congress authorized the
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA).
Given a broad charter, the TVA focused on
carrying out its mission on an integrated,

watershed basis, dealing concurrently
with hydropower production, navigation
on the Tennessee River, flood control,
health problems such as malaria prevention and resource challenges that
included reforestation, erosion control
and restoration of fisheries. It would have
been labelled integrated water resources
management, had the concept been
identified in 1933.
By 1945 TVA had completed more
than a dozen large dams and built a
1,050-­kilometre navigation channel. It also
had become the largest supplier of electricity in the United States and a major driver for
rural electrification. Evaluations noted that
the TVA was substituting order and design
for haphazard, unplanned and unintegrated
development in its programme for flood
and navigation control, land reclamation
and cheap electricity for light and power.
By the 1960s residents of the Tennessee
Valley were sharing in unprecedented
economic growth and a higher standard of living, with electricity, clean

warning systems, increasingly used as
preventive responses to climate variability,
are directly linked to water management.
In Djibouti, whose capital was severely
affected by flooding in 2004, the World
Bank supported the Flood Emergency
Water in a changing world

water and sanitation provided to most
homes.
Today, the TVA provides electric power, recreation, improved water quality and a reliable supply of water to cool power plants
and meet municipal and industrial needs.
It generates more electricity than any other
public utility, operates a system of 49 dams
and res­ervoirs on the Tennessee River
and its tributaries and manages 118,572
hectares of public land. It operates the river
system as an integrated whole to provide
year-round navigation. Barges on the Tennessee River carry some 50 million tonnes
of goods annually. Structural and nonstructural approaches prevent an estimated
$230 million in flood damages annually. In
one decade, through the development of
water resources, the Tennessee Valley lifted
itself out of poverty; in seven decades it has
become a powerful economic and social
force in the United States.
Source: Gerald Galloway, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Maryland; www.tva.gov/heritage/hert_history.htm.

Rehabilitation Project for the construction
and rehabilitation of wadi banks, drainage
infrastructure and flood control dikes. Although an immediate response to physical
security concerns, these measures have a
potentially long-term beneficial effect on
281

PART

4

Box 15.18

Chapter 15O
Nepal: a community-led initiative to mitigate water-induced disasters

The Himalaya Mountain range is among
the richest freshwater locations on Earth;
the combined basins of nine major Asian
rivers rise there and are home to some
1.3 billion people. It is also among the most
fragile ecosystems, due primarily to the
mountain system’s propensity to masswasting (movement downslope of soil and
rock under the force of gravity), seasonal
monsoon precipitation fraught with extreme events and increasing population
pressure. Nepal, located in the middle of
the Himalaya range, has been subject to
the risks associated with mass-wasting and
flooding, which account for more than half
the disaster-related deaths in the country.
The situation has worsened in recent decades, with more intense and frequent extreme climate events associated with global
climate change, such as torrential rains.
The community of Madhumalla in Morang
District in southeastern Nepal is on the
bank of the Mawa River, a small river with
an upper watershed of about 20 square
kilometres. This 25 kilometre long river has
an average gradient of 4% in the upper
reaches and 2% in the lower reaches, and
its width varies from 200 metres to 700
metres. As do most rivers originating in

the southern belt of Nepal, the Mawa
River experiences unpredictable flooding
caused mainly by monsoon rains, with
sudden cloudbursts in the upper watershed generating torrents laden with debris,
boulders and sediments. This causes rapid
changes in river morphology, with a cycle
of aggradation and degradation of the
river bed, undercutting, erosion, overflowing of river banks and shifting of the entire
river course. The local population is under
constant threat of being washed away, and
homes and crops are frequently damaged.
The Madhumalla community, led by
then-Chairman Kashi Nath Paudyal,
embarked on a remarkable mission some
14 years ago to address the threats posed
by unpredictable and devastating floods.
To defend against undercutting and
erosion of the banks and degradation of
floodplains, the community employed the
bioengineering technique of planting a
stratified greenbelt along the river bank
using native trees, shrubs and grasses in
conjunction with reinforcing materials.
Structural measures, such as embankments and spurs made of gabion boxes,
were used to protect the greenbelt from
damage during the initial years.

groundwater replenishment by controlling
runoff from regular rainfall, thus contributing to the long-term water and food
security of the city dwellers.
Rapid urban migration creates human
security challenges. Many cities are illequipped to deal with a rapid influx of
rural inhabitants, who frequently establish
informal settlements. Governments adopt
a variety of strategies to deal with these
rapidly growing settlements; some invest
in rural development and infrastructure to
stem the flow of urban migrants.

Box 15.19

Resettlement in Rwanda

Rwanda’s Imidugudu (group settlement) Policy was launched in 1997,
after the civil war and genocide, to
resettle returned refugees. By focusing
on group settlement, the government
hoped to solve the problem of land
scarcity and more easily and efficiently
provide social and economic services.
During the initial phases of resettlement many families had to leave the
lowlands that provided ready access
to water for higher areas where access
to safe water was more difficult. In a
2002 status update Rwanda’s Ministry

282

for Infrastructure noted that while
22% of Rwandans had adopted the
group settlement scheme, inadequate
infrastructure development remained
a major challenge, particularly access
to clean water and adequate sanitation. Several supplementary initiatives
were put in place to respond to this
challenge, many of them funded by
foreign assistance, to invest in rural
water infrastructure and management.
Source: Rwanda Ministry of Infrastructure
2008; Japan International Cooperation
Agency 2006.

The project was designed and implemented drawing on indigenous knowledge of
locally available plant varieties and their
ability to withstand the forces of river
water and the community’s understanding of the local physical environment
and river morphology. The project is also
preparing to sell forestry products from
the plantation area, which are expected
to generate hundreds of thousands of dollars annually within a few years – turning
risks into rewards. The project mobilized
substantial resources internally in the form
of cash, labour and material assistance
and received grants from several national
and international donors totalling about
$40,000.
The approach worked as intended and
has been replicated in several other communities in the region, including nearby
refugee camps. The project area is currently a training centre on bioengineering
technology.
Source: Dinesh L. Shrestha, senior water and
sanitation officer, United Nations Refugee
Agency (UNHCR), Geneva, Switzerland, and
Tako Ganai, consulting engineer, UNHCR, Jhapa,
Nepal.

Rural development and increased agricultural productivity may help to avoid
slum formation by reducing migratory
pressures. Like slum-upgrading initiatives, rural development initiatives are
not entirely outside the domain of water
managers, since they usually require some
form of water intervention along with
measures to increase basic social services
and safety nets (food security and health
care).
Crisis recovery. Economic and humanitarian crises, often brought about by
prolonged droughts or other natural disasters, can quickly set back development
progress. Crisis recovery efforts increasingly aim to build greater resilience to
avoid future crises. For example, food
aid programmes can be coupled with
sustainable livelihoods initiatives and
environmental rehabilitation. In most
cases, as in Rwanda’s group resettlement
programme, crisis recovery and postconflict reconstruction efforts involve
interventions to restore damaged water
services and infrastructure (box 15.19).
In this sense they provide an opportunity to build stronger, more sustainable
and more resilient water systems and to
integrate risk management and climate
change into planning.
World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options from beyond the water box
Initiatives designed to address population growth, movement and geographic
distribution alter water use and impose
changes on the way water is managed.
Land redistribution policies are currently
being implemented in several countries.
Their potentially controversial aspects
aside, recent evidence has shown that effective land redistribution (in terms of its
contribution to poverty reduction) also depends on adequate postsettlement support,
including infrastructure development.20 In
Namibia, where most agricultural activity
consists of livestock farming, many newly
allocated farms remain underproductive
due to lack of functioning water delivery
points.21
Crisis recovery also often includes dealing with returning populations and with
the movement of internally displaced
people. As the examples of Rwanda (box
15.19) and Iraq (box 15.20) show, successfully reintegrating returning refugees
requires an environment that allows
them to meet their basic needs. Thus,
returning a region to stability requires
consideration of ecological services,
particularly access to safe water and sanitation. Identifying win-win situations
early on in crisis recovery efforts can
prepare the way for sustainable peace
and security.

Box 15.20

In addition to promoting human security
at the local level, interregional cooperation
around shared waters can promote peacebuilding and trust among countries, as in
the cases of the Nile River basin and the
Senegal River (box 15.21). Although the
causal pathways between water scarcity
and conflict are still under debate, there is
no doubt that international cooperation
on shared waterways is occurring, even
where tensions unrelated to water issues
exist (for example, in Central Asia). The
creation of international water institutions
demonstrates that cooperation is possible and can be successful provided the
rules are transparent and consensual. Box
15.22 also demonstrates the importance of
institutions, including clear dispute resolution mechanisms, and the need to find
solutions to water disputes, particularly in
cases of increasing scarcity.

The creation of
international
water institutions
demonstrates
that cooperation
is possible and
can be successful
provided the rules
are transparent
and consensual

Tackling risk and uncertainty
Dealing with risk and uncertainty has
long been a routine challenge for water resources managers and policy-makers across
sectors and the world. However, issues like
climate change and demographic dynamics are outside their control and have made
the risks greater and their task more complex. Risk management is now much more
important – indeed ­essential – to analysis
and decision-making for water.

Rehabilitating the Iraqi Mesopotamian Marshlands for integration and stability

The Iraqi Mesopotamian Marshlands constitute part of the largest wetland ecosystem
in the Middle East and Western Eurasia.
They are a crucial part of inter­continental
flyways for migratory birds, support endangered species and sustain freshwater fisheries and the marine ecosystem of the Persian
Gulf. In addition to their ecological importance, these marshlands have been home
to indigenous communities for millennia.
The destruction of the marshlands, and the
displacement of its indigenous Marsh Arab
population, is one of the major humanitarian and environmental challenges facing
Iraq. The competing roles of the marshlands
as a transboundary water resource and a
source of petroleum reserves have made the
future of the marshlands region a priority
on Iraq’s reconstruction agenda while also
presenting trade-offs for decision-makers.
Assessments in 2003 and 2004 reported
that 85,000-100,000 Marsh Arabs reside
within and near the remaining marshlands,
with fewer than 10% of them leading
a traditional subsistence existence. An
estimated 100,000-200,000 Marsh Arabs
remain internally displaced, and 100,000
are thought to be living as refugees outside

Water in a changing world

Iraq, primarily in Iran. Other communities
also reside within the marshlands region.
Following the collapse of the regime
in mid-2003, local residents opened
floodgates and breached embankments
to bring water back into the marshlands.
Satellite images analysed by the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
in 2003 revealed that some formerly driedout areas have been re-inundated, helped
by wetter than usual climate conditions.
By April 2004 approximately 20% of the
original marshland area was re-inundated,
up from 5%-7% in 2003.
UNEP initiated the Iraqi Mesopotamia
Marshlands project in 2004 through its
International Environmental Technology
Centre in Osaka and Shiga, Japan, with
funds from the governments of Italy and
Japan and in cooperation with the Centre
for the Restoration of Iraqi Marshlands of
the Ministry of Water Resources. Phase
III commenced in 2007. The project has
produced multiple benefits:
•

Environmentally sound technologies
on drinking water and sanitation

provision and wetland restoration are
being introduced and implemented,
drawing on Iraqi expertise.
•

Some 22,000 people in six pilot
communities now have access to
safe drinking water. Water treatment
facilities (with a capacity of 750 cubic
metres a day), 23 kilometres of water
distribution pipes and 127 common
distribution taps have been installed.
Some displaced residents are returning to pilot site areas, partly because
of the drinking water made available
through the project. As stability
returns, possibilities for rebuilding life
in the marshlands grow.

•

A sanitation system pilot project
has been implemented in the
Al-Chibayish community. Environmentally sound technology, using
constructed wetlands, aims to serve
approximately 170 inhabitants, who
face health hazards from discharges
of untreated wastewater to a nearby
canal.

Source: http://marshlands.unep.or.jp.

283

PART

4

The consequences
of global climate
change are
manifested
primarily through
water – in glacial
melt, floods,
droughts and
sea level

Chapter 15O

Box 15.21

Sustainable water institutions promote regional cooperation
and stability – the case of the Senegal River

Created in 1972 by an agreement among the
three riparian states (Mali, Mauritania and Senegal), the Organization for the Development of
the Senegal River (OMVS) established the river as
an international waterway and identified rational
exploitation and management as a goal. In 2002
member states adopted a charter on using the
river that sets out principles and modalities for
distributing water resources among sectors and
defines project approval criteria, environmental
rules and participation modalities for broader
public engagement.
The OMVS is a key institution through which
countries agree on future projects (such as dams,

Box 15.22

Source: www.omvs.org.

Allocation of water from the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo River
between Mexico and the United States

In summer 2002 Texas farmers breathed a sigh
of relief as the scarce water of the Rio Grande
(called Rio Bravo in Mexico) began to flow again
on their side of the border.
Under a 1944 treaty Mexico and the United
States had agreed to share the waters of the Rio
Grande and Colorado Rivers. Mexico agreed
to assign 254,880 cubic metres of water from
international storage, with the actual amount
of water to be released from the Amistad and
Falcon reservoirs determined by a complex accounting of reservoir inflows and water use by
both countries that would ensure that neither

Climate change. The consequences of global
climate change are manifested primarily
through water – in glacial melt, floods,
droughts and sea level rise. Planners can
no longer rely on past hydrologic conditions to forecast future risks. Climate
change increases the risk of failure or
underperformance of structures and
institutions. Developing countries are the
most vulnerable to climate change because
of their heavy dependence on climatesensitive sectors, low capacity to adapt and
poverty. Current climate variability and
weather extremes already severely affect
economic performance in many developing countries (see figure 5.2 in chapter 5).22
One way to cope with the uncertainty of
climate change is through management
measures that are flexible and robust
under conditions of uncertainty. Such
adaptive management principles, which
involve a systematic process for improving management policies and practices
by learning from previous strategies, are
particularly relevant for decision-making
under climate change.23
284

hydropower and agricultural investments) and
sectoral priorities. It is known as a water-focused
institution that promotes collaboration on multiple uses of water and integrated water management. The OMVS also has an environmental
observation arm that tracks the state of the
resource and its associated ecosystems to ensure
sustainability. Because of the river’s central role in
many activities in all three countries, cooperation
has gradually extended to tripartite discussions
at the central and local levels in other sectors,
such as agriculture and enterprises, contributing
to regional stability and integration.

country would run dry. But because of drought,
Mexico had fallen in arrears on its water
contributions.
A key part of the 2002 deal to resolve this dispute
was infrastructure modernization, with the goal
of increasing efficiency in water use. For the first
time the two governments agreed to share costs
and benefits by jointly investing in measures for
water conservation, sustainability and efficiency.
The agreement endorsed a bilateral financial
package for water conservation initiatives.
Source: Moore, Rast, and Pulich 2002.

As this Report emphasizes throughout, the
water sector must look beyond its traditional boundaries for solutions. Similarly,
actors outside the water sector must be
aware of links to risks in the water sector.
For example, because natural disasters are
often related to water, closer collaboration and coordination are needed between
disaster risk-reduction agencies and those
engaged in water resources management.
Water managers and those outside the
water sector can all contribute to innovative, integrated solutions. One innovation
reducing risk is the provision of insurance
linked to rainfall (box 15.23).
Several broader analytical tools offer
promise in dealing with risk and uncertainty. Environmental impact assessments have long been used to promote
a do-no-irreversible-harm approach to
policy and business decisions. Strategic environmental assessments are also
emerging as powerful tools to identify
both potential damages and opportunities, which could help in identifying
win-win scenarios. Their effective use
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Box 15.23

4

Rainfall-related index insurance for farmers

Reducing climate risk for small farmers
requires tools that can adjust to climate
variability and underpin other adaptation
strategies. Insurance schemes linked to the
amount of rain (index insurance) provide
security as well as productivity incentives.
Traditional insurance contracts that insure
against crop failure have several shortcomings. They can create perverse incentives
to allow crops to fail to collect the insurance. And they can result in a situation
where less productive farmers buy insurance, while more productive farmers do
not. This results in more payouts, leading
to higher premiums, ultimately making
this type of insurance too expensive for
farmers in poor countries.
In one new type of insurance, contracts
are written against a rainfall index. The
index depends on an established relationship between lack of rainfall and crop
failure, ideally verified by long historical
records of rainfall and yield. If rainfall is
below an agreed trigger point, farmers
receive payouts. However, farmers still
have the incentive to make the best productive choices, regardless of whether the
insurance pays out. Index insurance is also

cheaper to implement because the insurance company does not need to verify
damage in the field. That also means that
when rainfall is low enough to cause crops
to fail, insurers will pay out to farmers
within days or weeks. Thus farmers do not
need to sell assets to survive, which can
make them dependent on aid long after
the drought has ended.
With rainfall-indexed insurance farmers
might take greater risks with potentially
higher returns, such as investing in fertilizers
or sustainable land management practices.
To address the impacts of climate variability
and change, farmers must be able to take
advantage of good years. By using index
insurance to protect against massive losses
during major droughts, farmers are able to
put resources into being productive in good
years instead of being limited by the low
productivity of rare bad years.
There are also some disadvantages. If
crops fail for reasons other than drought,
or if rainfall at a farmer’s field differs from
that measured at the central rain gauge,
the farmer receives no compensation.
Index insurance systems are typically
developed as a part of a larger risk-

depends on adequate enforcement and
institutional capacity.
Knowledge and technology. Better knowledge about the state of resources and the
impacts of decisions can also reduce uncertainty. Sound information on the state
of water resources is needed not only for
water planning but also for making policy
choices in other sectors that are likely to
affect water services or availability. As seen
in the case of Ethiopia, information on
water availability can help in making informed economic decisions (see box 15.6).
Building strong water monitoring networks is thus an essential part of water
governance. In Australia the lead organization responsible for water monitoring
relies on information from multiple water
users, including individuals and corporations (box 15.24). However, monitoring
networks are often beyond the reach of
developing countries because they require
technical means and financing that are
unavailable (see chapters 13 and 14).
The principle of ‘decentralized’ collaboration, as applied in Australia, can also be
found at different scales. For example, the
United Nations Environment Programme
Global Environment Monitoring System
Water in a changing world

layering strategy in which index insurance
is applied at the most appropriate point,
and other tools – such as traditional insurance, government social safety nets and
­reinsurance – complete the package.
In Malawi farmers can now purchase
index insurance to guarantee loans for
agricultural inputs that would have otherwise been unavailable because of the
threat of drought. Thousands of groundnut farmers in Malawi have purchased
a packaged product that bundles index
insurance with a loan giving them access
to high-yielding groundnut seeds bred to
be productive in the local climate. Index
insurance packages and seed varieties
can be designed to adapt together as
risks change. In focus groups on climate
change farmers in Malawi have volunteered that the index insurance is their
primary mechanism to adapt to the
changing climate. As climate change
exacerbates risks, farmers can use the
improved varieties and index insurance to
take advantage of new opportunities.
Source: Dan Osgood, International Research
Institute for Climate and Society (IRI); Molly
Hellmuth, IRI, Columbia University.

on Water (GEMS/Water), financed by the
Canadian government, relies on data
provided by countries and provides capacity development for water monitoring.
Another example is World Water Monitoring Day™, an international education and
outreach programme coordinated by the
Water Environment Federation and the
International Water Association. World
Water Monitoring Day™ builds public
awareness and involvement in protecting water resources around the world
by engaging citizens to conduct basic
monitoring of their local water bodies.
It provides an easy-to-use test kit that
enables everyone from children to adults
to sample local water bodies for a core set
of water quality parameters, including
temperature, acidity, clarity (turbidity) and
dissolved oxygen. Results are shared with
participating communities around the
globe through the World Water Monitoring Day™ Website.24

Sustaining change: changing
habits through awareness
The important changes required to face
the challenges of managing the world’s
water resources will be determined by
changes in behaviour. The most profound
changes in consumption patterns at a
285

PART

4

Because of water’s
contributions to
every aspect of
development,
funding for water
need not compete
with funding for
other priorities

Chapter 15O

Box 15.24

Getting a complete picture of water resources through user
contributions – a new role for Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology

The Australian Bureau of Meteorology’s role has
expanded to transform Australia’s water resources
information. To secure a long-term water supply
for all Australians, the government announced
Water for the Future, a $12.9 billion water investment programme. The programme includes
$450 million for the Improving Water Information Programme, administered by the Bureau of
Meteorology and backed by the Commonwealth
Water Act 2007 and key stakeholders.
The bureau will enhance the quality and utility
of Australia’s water information by producing a
national water account, supported by a national
water monitoring and data collection network.
The programme includes development and
maintenance of an integrated, national water
information system accessible to the public.
Responsibilities of the bureau include:
•

Issuing national water information
standards.

•

Collecting and publishing water information.

collective level are those that occur as the
cumulative result of individual choices,
when new patterns of behaviour enter the
collective culture (see chapter 2).
One approach to changing behaviour is
to use controls. Public institutions such
as schools and hospitals can be mandated
and enabled to provide sanitation and safe
water, construction can be forbidden in
fragile areas, and penalties can be imposed
for the release of certain pollutants into air
and water. Governments can also encourage or promote certain types of behaviour
through subsidies, taxes and other incentives, such as payment for environmental
services.
Awareness raising and social marketing
are other tools for promoting behaviour
change. Examples of social marketing
campaigns around water issues can be
found in almost all countries. In the
Danube riparian countries educational
institutions and the private sector created a Danube Educational Toolkit, called
the ‘Danube Box’. Problems and needs in
several riparian countries were discussed
and collected in national workshops, from
which a prototype of a transboundary
educational kit emerged. At least five Danube countries (Austria, Germany, Hungary,
Romania and Serbia) are now promoting
the Danube Box in various projects and activities. These efforts are being organized
in close cooperation with the ministries
286

•

Conducting regular national water resources
assessments.

•

Publishing an annual national water
account.

•

Providing regular water availability
forecasts.

•

Advising on matters relating to water
information.

•

Enhancing understanding of Australia’s
water resources.

A national system for water information storage,
analysis and reporting requires an unprecedented
level of collaboration with stakeholders. Under the
new arrangements individuals, corporations and
other organizations that possess, control or manage water are required by law to transmit information to the bureau for compilation and analysis.
Source: www.bom.gov.au/water/regulations/
water-2008.shtml.

for environment, water and education,
along with pedagogical institutes and
school authorities.

Ensuring sustainable financing
Because of water’s contributions to every
aspect of development – social, economic,
political and environmental – funding
for water need not compete with funding
for other priorities. However, to realize
maximum benefit, water’s contributions
should be recognized in every aspect of
government and business planning. This
may entail adopting new forms of costing
or valuation. But it certainly means ensuring that water managers and stakeholders take part in decisions likely to affect
water. Thus, this section explores ways to
integrate water resources management in
development planning. It also considers
new ways of mobilizing resources for the
water sector.

Integrating water resources
management in development
planning
Traditional funding mechanisms, including national budget allocations and
development assistance, are likely to
remain the main source of resources for
water, environment and poverty reduction (see chapter 4). Evolution in development policies around the world points
to the need for broader, more integrated
platforms. Poverty reduction strategies
World Water Development Report 3

PART

4

Options from beyond the water box
provide a consensual basis for decisions
on allocating national budgets and aid.
Reliable information on water (including
trends in availability and quality) could
also be integrated into national budgets to
inform economic objectives and investment packages that benefit water. As Zambia’s experience shows, integrating water
considerations in national development
planning instruments can help leverage
national and international financing and
prepare the way for broad-based reforms
(box 15.25).
International assistance for water provision
will remain necessary, and some governments have demonstrated a commitment
to financing water and sanitation. For
example, the government of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country (Spain) recently adopted a resolution
reiterating its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals and proposing
to dedicate 5% of its water fees to promote
the sanitation target.25

Public-private partnerships, payments for
ecosystem services and similar schemes
are being explored for generating financing for the water sector. Such schemes also
offer innovative modalities of cooperation
at all levels (box 15.26).
Managing the multiple ecosystem services
of water use to optimize benefits and minimize adverse impacts is another promising approach. Using urban wastewater
for agricultural production, for example,
avoids discharging pollutants directly into
waterways and safeguards water quality
for domestic users.26 This role of farmers as environmental stewards should be
recognized and valued through economic
incentives from other sectors. This is the
aim of programmes such as green water
credits in Kenya (see box 14.24 in chapter
14). Cross-sectoral incentives can also be
applied at a broader level, as in Ecuador,
where the water sector is financed through
a tax on telecommunications (box 15.27).

The examples in
this chapter show
how government
policy, business
decisions and
civic initiatives
can benefit water
services and
achieve multiple
benefits

*    *    *
International organizations, notably the
UN system, can provide support and expertise to governments, help civil society
build capacity and catalyse leadership in
the private sector.

Cultivating innovations in financing
Innovative mechanisms are being devised
in many countries for mobilizing and
channelling resources to the water sector.

Box 15.25

Government, the private sector and civic
organizations – having faced and dealt
with water issues – provide many examples
of the way forward. The examples in this
chapter show how government policy,
business decisions and civic initiatives
can benefit water services and achieve
multiple benefits. They show that sustainable development is possible when links

Zambia’s experiences linking integrated water resources management with national
development plans

Zambia still has adequate water resources,
but declining rainfall patterns and increased water use are causing increased
water stress. Water is used by households
and for industrial production, as well as for
hydropower production, which earns Zambia on average some $10 million a year in
exports. Agriculture is also a key sector for
development, depending on water for irrigation, livestock watering and other uses.
During the past 10 years Zambia has
grown rapidly in response to economic
and administrative reforms. Increasing
pressure on water resources for economic
expansion led the government to undertake broad water sector reforms. As early
as 1994 the government introduced the
National Water Policy, following up with
reforms of water supply and sanitation and
then water resources management. The
reforms were planned through the 2001
Water Resources Action Programme, which
included an institutional and legal framework and water resources demand, supply

Water in a changing world

and infrastructure components. Reforms
included a new water policy, legislation
and a new institution to manage and
develop water resources.
In the Fifth National Development Plan
2006-10 the government of Zambia
expressed concern with ensuring that the
benefits of a healthier economy reach the
rural and urban poor. Recognizing the
importance of water for development, the
government integrated the water sector
reforms, including the new integrated
water resources management plan, and
the National Development Plan. Linking
these was seen as fundamental to poverty
reduction and achieving all the Millennium
Development Goals.
In formulating the Fifth National Development Plan, the government used a
participatory approach, involving 17 sector
advisory groups including water and a
government-led high-level forum to improve sector coordination and advise the

government on water sector reform, performance, and monitoring and evaluation.
The forum includes representatives from
key institutions and stakeholders inside
and outside the water sector. This process
secured political support for the integrated
water resources management plan, which
was selected as the instrument for implementing the water-related programmes of
the development plan.
The 1994 water policy had dealt mainly with
reforms within the sector. The new integrated water resources management policy
is intent on integrating water management
throughout all sectors in Zambia. As a result
of this integration of water and national
development planning, many donors have
incorporated water-related investment in
their assistance packages to Zambia.
Source: Mike Muller, visiting professor, Graduate
School of Public and Development Management, Witwatersrand University, based on
Nyambe and Feilberg n.d.

287

PART

4

Chapter 15O
are forged between water managers and
decision-makers in other sectors. Because
water issues are central to every aspect of
development, actors within and outside
the water sector need to strengthen their
collaboration to create and promote appropriate mechanisms for collecting and

Box 15.26

Payments for ecosystem services help curb climate change and conserve biodiversity
while protecting water resources

The highland forests and paramos (treeless
plateaus) of the Andes mountain chain
provide a variety of ecosystem services
for human and natural communities in
northern South America. In the centre of
the Colombian Andes the Chingaza and
Sumapaz National Parks cover more than
225,000 hectares of these fragile ecosystems, which contain habitats for a variety
of threatened flora and fauna and provide
crucial water for downstream human
populations. The area is the watershed for
Bogota, which has more than 7 million
residents. In recent years the water supply
has declined considerably due to human
activities such as agriculture and livestock
raising, which have led to degradation of
the high Andes ecosystems. The Bogota
Water and Sewerage Company (EAAB)
estimates that water demand will rise substantially by 2020. Immediate measures
are necessary to protect the watershed in
order to meet that anticipated demand.
Recently EAAB, together with the Colombian government and the support of

Box 15.27

Conservation International, implemented
a pilot project for financing and protecting these critical watersheds. The project
provides multiple benefits. Conceived to
provide climate change mitigation benefits
as well as reliable freshwater supplies, it
provides clean, renewable energy while
protecting the watershed and supplying
funding both to EAAB and the Colombian
national parks.
EAAB’s Santa Ana small-scale hydroelectric power plant generates electricity
without the greenhouse gas emissions
associated with traditional fossil fuel
plants. The dam is recognized as a Clean
Development Mechanism project by the
United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. It generates about
23,000 certified emission reduction units
each year with an approximate value of
$450,000. EAAB has committed to giving half this revenue to the Colombian
Park Service, which uses the resources
to consolidate and expand Chingaza
National Park. Increased funds for park

management will slow deforestation and
ecosystem degradation, by reducing
another source of greenhouse gases while
conserving biodiversity and improving
water supplies.
In the next phase of the project Conservation International and partners are
supporting an initiative to consolidate a
regional biological corridor to connect
Chingaza with Sumapaz National Park,
the eastern Andean mountain slopes
and the San Rafael water basin. A variety
of financing mechanisms will generate
income based on the water and climate
mitigation services the area provides.
Through a large-scale reforestation effort
on degraded lands in the corridor, the
project will expand its carbon sequestration and water provision, providing benefits to other communities that depend on
the water from threatened high Andean
ecosystems.
Source: www.conservation.org/explore/regions/
south_america/andes/Pages/andes.aspx.

A water services concession with public funding in Guayaquil, Ecuador

Guayaquil, Ecuador’s economic capital,
is home to 2.4 million people, or a third
of the national urban population. When
a concessionaire took over management
of water services in 2001, water coverage
lagged far behind the national average:
only 60% of residents had household
connections in 2000, compared with the
national urban average of 81% in 1998.
The gap was smaller for sewerage, with
coverage of 56% compared with a national urban average of 61%. The concession
is the second largest in Latin America by
population served after Buenos Aires.1
The concession rapidly expanded access
to piped water through household connections. Starting with 245,000 connections in 2000, it installed 160,000 new

288

sharing information, financing priority
investments and building responsive institutions. The political will to address water
issues worldwide remains crucial, along
with a willingness to consider innovative
ways to approach local, regional and international cooperation.

connections in the first five years of operation – a more than 10% annual increase
and three times the contractual target of
55,000. Those gains brought water coverage in the city up to 82% in 2005 and
benefited about 800,000 people, most of
them living in poor neighbourhoods not
previously served by the network. Over
the same period progress in extending
urban water access at the national level
stagnated. The concessionaire’s performance in improving sewer access was more
modest, rising from 56% to 62%.

10% tax on telephone bills is transferred
to utilities to support expansion of the
water network in uncovered urban areas.
New water connections are provided free
of charge in urban areas not previously
covered by the water network (areas
where most of the population is poor).
Part of the cost of expanding the network
is also subsidized. Sewer connections
were ineligible for these tax transfers and
subsidies, explaining the more modest
progress.

The good performance on water access
was made possible by a special tax transfer mechanism that the central government introduced in the 1980s to subsidize
new water connections. Revenues from a

1. Santiago de Chile (5.3 million customers)
is larger but operated under a divestiture
scheme (private ownership of infrastructure).

Note

Source: Yepes 2007.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Notes
1.

World Bank 2007.

2.

ADB and OECD 2001.

3.

WWAP 2006, p. 75.

4.

See Bayoumi and Abumoghli 2007 for
further examples.

5.

CFC and Benevides and Pérez-Lucy
2001; Zhang 2003.

6.

Fan, Zhang, and Zhang 2004; De Brauw
et al. 2002.

7.

See, for example, Hlanze, Gama, and
Mondlane 2005; www.fao.org/hivaids/
publications/farming_en.htm.

8.

Poverty-Environment Partnership 2008.

9.

UNECE 1999.

10. Djibouti Government 2004, p. 5.
11. Blue Plan, MAP, and UNEP 2003, 2007.
12. United Nations Global Compact 2008.
13. www.un.org/apps/sg/sgstats.
asp?nid=3682.
14. Worldwatch Institute 2008, p. 119.
15. Palanisami and Easter 2000.
16. Shah et al. 2004.
17. GEF Small Grants Facility 2003; Smith
2000.
18. World Tourism Organization (www.
unwto.org).
19. Trondalen 2008.
20. See for example, Binswanger et al.
2008.
21. Werner and Kruger 2007.
22. AfDB et al. 2003; Stern 2006.
23. Pahl-Wostl 2007; Pahl-Wostl, Kabat, and
Möltgen 2007.
24. www.worldwatermonitoringday.org/
About/About_Main.html.
25. www.lehendakaritza.ejgv.euskadi.net/
r48-11912/en/contenidos/informacion/
organismos_multilaterales/en_multilat/
presentacion.html.
26. Ragab and Koo-Oshima 2006.

References
ADB (Asian Development Bank) and
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2001.
Progress in the Fight against Corruption
in Asia and the Pacific. Manila: Asian
Development Bank; and Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
AfDB (African Development Bank), ADB
(Asian Development Bank), DfID (Department for International Development), DGD-EC (Directorate-General
for Development, European Commission), BMZ (German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and
Development), BuZa (Dutch Ministry
of Foreign Affairs), OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Water in a changing world

Development), UNDP (United Nations
Development Programme), and the
World Bank. 2003. Poverty and Climate
Change: Reducing the Vulnerability of
the Poor through Adaptation. Consultative draft presented at the Eighth
Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in New Delhi, 23 October-1
November 2002.www.unpei.org/PDF/
Poverty-and-Climate-Change.pdf.
Atchoarena, David and Lavinia Gasperini,
eds. 2003. Education for Rural Development: Towards New Policy Responses.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and Paris:
United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization.
BAPE (Bureau d’audiences publiques
sur l’environnement). 2000. Water:
A Resource to Be Protected, Shared and
Enhanced. Québec City: Government of
Québec.
Bayoumi, Mohammed, and Iyad Abumoghli. 2007. National Water Councils:
Comparative Experiences; Report submitted to UNDP, February 2007.
Bazaara, Nyangabyaki. 2003. Decentralization, Politics and Environment in
Uganda. Environmental Governance in
Africa. Working Paper 7, World Resources
Institute, Washington, DC.
Benavides, D. D., and E. Pérez-Ducy. 2001.
Tourism in the Least Developed Countries.
Madrid: United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, World Tourism
Organization.
Benoit, G., and A. Comeau, eds. 2005. A
Sustainable Future for the Mediterranean:
The Blue Plan’s Environment and Development Outlook. London: Earthscan.
Binswanger, Hans P., Roland Henderson,
Zweli Mbhele, and Kay Muir-Leresche.
2008. Accelerating Sustainable, Efficient,
and Equitable Land Reform: Case Study
of the Qedusizi/Besters Cluster Project,
Africa Region Working Paper Series
109. World Bank, KwaZulu Natal, South
Africa. www.worldbank.org/afr/wps/
wp109.pdf.
Bird, Geoffrey, Jacquie Chenje, and Sarah
Medina. 2002. Africa Environment
Outlook: Past, Present and Future Perspectives. Hertfordshire, UK: EarthPrint. www.
unep.org/ dewa/Africa/publications/
aeo-1/159.htm.
Blue Plan, MAP (Mediterranean Action
Plan), and UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2003. Results of
the Fiuggi Forum on Advances of Water
Demand Management in the Mediterranean: Findings and Recommendations.
Document prepared for the Next Mediterranean Commission for Sustainable
Development Meeting, Sophia Antipolis,
France, United Nations Environment
Programme/Mediterranean Action Plan,
Athens.

4

———. 2007. Water Demand Management,
Progress and Policies: Proceedings of the
3rd Regional Workshop on Water and
Sustainable Development in the Mediterranean. Zaragoza, Spain, 19-21 March.
MAP Technical Reports Series 168.
Athens: United Nations Environment
Programme.
CFC (Common Fund for Commodities)
and UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development).
2001. Enhancing Productive Capacities
and Diversification of Commodities in
LDCs and South-South Co-operation.
Workshop. 21-23 March. Common Fund
for Commodities and United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,
Geneva.
Chang, Philip. 2008. Armenia. In Asian
Development Outlook 2008. Manila: Asian
Development Bank.
Cosgrove, William. 2009. Public Participation to Promote Water Ethics and Transparency. In Water Ethics: Marcelino Botin
Water Forum 2007, eds. M. Ramon Llamas, L. Martinez Cortina, Aditi Mukherji.
London: Taylor and Francis Group.
De Brauw, A., Huang J., S. Rozelle, Zhang
L., and Zhang Y. 2002. The Evolution
of China’s Rural Labor Markets during
the Reforms. Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics, University of
California Davis Working paper 02-003.
University of California, Davis.
Development Vision – Nepal. 2007.
Final Report on Evaluation of UJYALO
Program. Volume 1, Main Text. Development Vision – Nepal (P.) Ltd., Kathmandu. http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/
PDACK585.pdf.
Fan, S., Zhang L., and Zhang X. 2004.
“Reforms, Investment, and Poverty in
Rural China.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 52 (2): 395-421
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations). 2005. Toward
Multi-Sectoral Responses to HIV/AIDS:
Implications for Education for Rural People (ERP). Paper presented as Ministerial
Seminar on Education for Rural People in
Africa: Policy Lessons, Options and Priorities, 7-9 September 2002, Addis Ababa.
GAP (Southeastern Anatolia Project).
1989. Southeastern Anatolia Project GAP
Master Plan Study. Nippon-Koei and
Yüksel Joint Venture, Ankara, Turkey.
GEF Small Grants Programme. 2003.
Solar Rural Electrification via MicroEnterprises, Dominican Republic. Latin
America & Caribbean: Dominican
Republic-3. Global Environment Facility,
Washington, DC, and United Nations
Development Programme, New York.
http://sgp.undp.org/download/SGP_
DominicanRepublic3.pdf.
Government of Djibouti. 2004. Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper, Djibouti.

289

PART

4

Chapter 15O

Hlanze, Zakhe, Thanky Gama, and
Sibusiso Mondlane. 2005. The Impact
of HIV/AIDS and Drought on Local
Knowledge Systems for Agrobiodiversity
and Food Security. LinKS Project on Gender, Biodiversity and Local Knowledge
Systems for Food Security Report 50.
FAO-LinKSSwaziland, Mbabane.
IMF (International Monetary Fund).
2004. Djibouti: Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper. IMF Country Report No. 04/152.
Washington, DC: International Monetary
Fund. www.imf.org/external/.
ISRIC (International Soil Research and
Information Centre). 2008. Green Water
Credits. World Soil Information, Wageningen, The Netherlands. www.isric.org/UK/
About+ISRIC/Projects/ Current+Projects/
Green+Water+Credits.htm.
Japan International Cooperation Agency.
2006. Project on Improvement of
Water Supply and Sanitation in the
Southern Part of the Eastern Province
(Pura-Sani Project). 1-1 Details of the
Project. Japan International Cooperation
Agency, Tokyo. http://project.jica.go.jp/
rwanda/0605427/english/01/01.html.
Martinez, Grit. 2007. The Role of Donors in
Tackling Sector Development Corruption. Power Point presentation 26 September 2007, Water Integrity Network,
Accra. www.waterintegritynetwork.net/
content/download/2038/34265/file/3_
The%20Role%20 of%20donors.pdf.
Moore, J. G., W. Rast, and W. M. Pulich.
2002. Proposal for an Integrated Management Plan for the Rio Grande/Rio
Bravo. In 1st International Symposium on
Transboundary Waters Management, eds.
A. Aldama, F. J. Aparicio, and R. Equihua.
Avances en Hidraulica 10, XVII Mexican
Hydraulics Congress, Monterrey, Mexico,
Nov. 18-22, 2002.
National Rural Development Institute.
n.d. Integrated Watershed Development
Project in Madhya Pradesh. National
Rural Development Institute, Hyderabad,
India. http://nird.ap.nic.in/clic/water_
madhya.html.
Nyambe, Imasiku A., and Miriam Feilberg.
n.d. Zambia – National Water Resources
Report for WWDR3. Ministry of Energy
and Water Development, Lusaka.
Olken, Benjamin. 2005. Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia. NBER Working Paper 11753.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Palanisami, K., and K.W. Easter. 2000.
Tank Irrigation in the 21st Century – What
Next? New Delhi: Discovery Publishing
House.
Pahl-Wostl, C. 2007. Transition towards
Adaptive Management of Water Facing
Climate and Global Change. Water Resources Management 21(1): 49-62.

290

Pahl-Wostl, C., P. Kabat, J. Möltgen, eds.
2007 Adaptive and Integrated Water
Management: Coping with Complexity
and Uncertainty. New York: Springer
Publishing.

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 1999. Protocol on
Water and Health to the 1992 Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes. United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe, London. www.
unece.org/env/documents/2000/ wat/
mp.wat.2000.1.e.pdf.

Peopleandplanet.net. 2002. A Showcase
for Sustainable Tourism in Turkey. Planet
21, London. www.peopleandplanet.net/
doc.php?id=1723.

United Nations Global Compact. 2008.
CEO Water Mandate: An Initiative by
Business Leaders in Partnership with the
International Community. New York: UN
Secretary-General.

Poverty-Environment Partnership.
2008. Poverty, Health and Environment: Placing Environmental Health on
Countries’ Development Agenda. Joint
Agency Paper. www.unpei.org/PDF/
Pov-Health-Env-CRA.pdf.
Québec Ministry of the Environment.
2002. Water. Our Life, Our Future: Québec
Water Policy. Québec: Bibliothèque Nationale du Québec.
Ragab, Ragab, and Sasha Koo-Oshima.
2006. Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Environmental Consequences
of Irrigation with Poor Quality Waters: Sustainability, Management and Institutional,
Water Resources, Health and Social Issues.
12 September 2006, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. New Delhi: International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage.

Werner, Wolfgang, and Bertus Kruger.
2007. Redistributive Land Reform and
Poverty Reduction in Namibia: Livelihoods after Land Reform. Country Paper.
Desert Research Foundation of Namibia,
Windhoek.

Rwanda, Ministry of Infrastructure. 2008.
Habitat and Urbanism Status in Rwanda.
Kigali. www.mininfra.gov.rw/docs/
HABITAT%20AND%20URBANISM
%20IN%20RWANDA.pdf.

WHO (World Health Organization)/
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s
Fund) Joint Monitoring Programme
for Water Supply and Sanitation. 2008.
Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: Special Focus on Sanitation. New
York: United Nations Children’s Fund,
and Geneva: World Health Organization.

Sadoff, Claudia. 2006. Can Water Undermine Growth? Evidence from Ethiopia. In
Agriculture and Rural Development Notes.
Issue 18. World Bank, Washington, DC.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTARD/Resources/Note18_Ethiopia_
web.pdf.

World Bank. 2007. Making the Most of
Scarcity: Accountability for Better Water
Management Results in the Middle East
and North Africa. MENA Development
Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Shah, Tushaar, Christopher Scott, Avinash
Kishore, and Abhishek Sharma. 2004.
The Energy-Irrigation Nexus in South Asia:
Groundwater Conservation and Power
Sector Viability. Colombo: International
Water Management Institute.

Worldwatch Institute. 2008. State of the
World: Innovations for a Sustainable
Economy. New York: Norton Institute.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006. The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2: Water:
A Shared Responsibility. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural
Organization, and New York: Berghahn
Books.

Smith, Julie, A. 2000. Solar-Based Rural
Electrification and Microenterprise
Development in Latin America: A Gender
Analysis. NREL/SR-550-28955. National
Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden,
CO. www.nrel.gov/docs/fy01osti/28995.
pdf.
Stern, Nicholas. 2006. Stern Review: The
Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute). 2008. Third Party Assessment of
Coca-Cola Facilities in India. New Delhi:
The Energy and Resources Institute.
www.teriin.org/cocacola_report_toc.php.
Trondalen, Jon-Martin, Simon Mason,
and Adrian Muller. 2008. Water and
Security: Entangled and Emerging Issues.
Working paper. Compass Foundation,
Geneva.

WBCSD (World Business Council for
Sustainable Development). 2006.
Anglo American/Mondi: Improved
Energy and Efficiency. Case Study.
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development, Geneva. www.wbcsd.
org/DocRoot/6NDZbCwuNlJpaFU9g0i6/
mondi_energy_efficiency_full_case_web.
pdf.

Yepes, G. 2007. Los subsidios cruzados en los
servicios de agua potable y saneamiento.
IFM Publications. Washington, DC: InterAmerican Development Bank, Infrastructure and Financial Markets Division.
Zhang Le-Yin. 2003. Economic Diversification in the Context of Climate Change.
Background Paper for UNFCCC Workshop on Economic Diversification, 18-19
October 2003, Teheran. United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change, Tehran. http://unfccc.int/files/
meetings/workshops/other_meetings/
application/pdf/bgpaper.pdf.

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Options from beyond the water box

Chapter 16

4

The way forward
Authors: Andrew Bullock and William Cosgrove
Contributors: Fatma Attia, Gerry Galloway,
Jack Moss, Uri Shamir and Albert Wright
Coordinator: Olcay Ünver (WWAP)
Facilitator: William Cosgrove

Key messages
Water and water systems must be managed to achieve social and economic development objectives and to sustain development. Water resources, properly managed, are critical to the survival and well-being
of individuals. They can ensure equity and security in water and sanitation for families, businesses and communities. And they can ensure
adequate water for food, energy and the environment as well as protection from floods and droughts.
Decision-making on water requires seeking synergies and selecting appropriate trade-offs. It also requires distinguishing between short-term
‘fire-fighting’ – responding to the urgent issues of the day – and longterm strategic development. Developing multipurpose water schemes
and reusing water wherever feasible can lessen the need for trade-offs by
enabling the same volumes of scarce water to deliver multiple outcomes.
The donor community can incorporate water into the broader frameworks of development aid and focus assistance on areas where it is
needed most – in sub-Saharan Africa, in Asian and Latin American
slums and in states recovering from conflict. Recent G-8 efforts in this
direction are promising.
The chief executives of the UN agencies, following the example of their
joint discussions of and collective responses to climate change, can
convene to examine the role of water, water systems and water management in development and environmental services, providing direction
to agencies and advice to member countries.
The World Water Assessment Programme and its partners are working
to help reduce uncertainty, facilitate decision-making and accelerate
investment by highlighting the links between socioeconomic development and investment in water management capacity and infrastructure
in other sectors.
The challenges are great, but unsustainable management and inequitable access to water resources cannot continue. We might not have all
the information we would like to have before acting, but we do know
enough now to begin to take significant steps. Actions must include increased investment in water infrastructure and capacity development.
Leaders in the water domain can inform the processes outside their
domain and manage water resources to achieve agreed socioeconomic
objectives and environmental integrity. But leaders in government, the
private sector and civil society will determine the direction that actions
take. Recognizing this responsibility, they must act now!
Water in a changing world

291

PART

4

Good water
resources
management can
transform social
systems for the
better and sustain
development

Chapter 16T

Making water an integral
part of all planning and
management decisions
Good water resources management can
transform social systems for the better and
sustain development. It can alleviate the
anxiety and fear arising from concerns
about too little water – or too much. It can
respond to humanity’s concerns for natural
and social changes and to our growing understanding of uncertainties, thus helping
avoid political instability in fragile states.
Action today is more important than ever –
for the poor as for those better off.
Meeting the many objectives of water resources management with limited human,
financial and institutional resources will
require more integrated and collaborative
procedures and stronger water management institutions and capacity. It will
require better monitoring, data analysis
and information products to fill the gaps
in knowledge of how water is used and
managed today and over time – and of the
health of ecosystems that supply it. And it
will require securing sustainable financing
to meet the costs of service provision using
existing infrastructure and to invest in
essential new infrastructure, both physical
and institutional.
The challenges are daunting. But they are
surmountable. Managers and professionals
in the water sector can work with leaders
and decision-makers in all sectors to meet
the challenges. They need to act within a
framework that:

292

•

Ensures accountability and transparency in planning and implementation, particularly through greater
stakeholder participation, with the appropriate incentives and disincentives.

•

Integrates gender-sensitive and equitable approaches in water issues.

•

Provides options for decision-makers
outside the ‘water box’, informed by
clear messages substantiated by sound
analyses from a water community
that understands its role in the broad
development agenda.

•

Secures financing for investment in
physical and institutional water infrastructure, using a variety of financing
instruments.

•

Develops capacity to improve the effectiveness and scales of progress.

•

Recognizes that nature also needs
water, to ensure the continuing delivery of life-supporting environmental
goods and services.

But leaders in the water sector, acting
alone, risk being overlooked in broader
decision-making for social and economic
development. And leaders outside the
water sector risk making uninformed and
suboptimal development decisions. The
most valuable evolution of integrated
water resources management could be its
extension into dialogue and partnerships
with water-using sectors whose policies
and strategies are governed by many factors outside the water sector.
Chapter 14 offers practical examples of solutions within the water domain. Options
that show promise involve:
•

Institutional and human capacity development, to prepare institutions for
current and future water and related
challenges.

•

Water law, both formal and customary, including regulations in other
sectors that affect water resources
management.

•

Consultation with stakeholders
and accountability in planning,
implementation and management
to build trust, as effective management involves pluralistic governance,
transparency and interactions among
parties with different interests.

•

Use of financial options and economic
instruments to support the reliability
and quality of the services provided.

•

Innovation and research to develop
appropriate realistic and sustainable
solutions.

•

Develops solutions that strike a convincing balance between objectives
and alternative means of achieving
them, through consultation, innovation and research.

•

Payment for environmental services
as an incentive for improving water
management efforts and for supporting sustainable ecosystems and water
security.

•

Provides data and information to
reduce uncertainty.

•

Creation by water sector decision-makers of a favourable investment climate
World Water Development Report 3

PART

The way forward
based on sound water management
and accountability.

Working through practical
partnerships
For decades hydrologists and water professionals have been writing about and
advocating for the essential role of water
resources management in addressing social
and economic development, pointing to
the need to balance objectives under financial, human and institutional constraints.
But decisions on water development and
management objectives, and the allocation
of human, financial and environmental resources to meet them, are made by leaders
in government, the private sector and civil
society, not by water professionals alone.
Therefore, water professionals need to inform the decisions of these leaders outside
the water domain on such issues as spatial
and development planning, demographic
planning, health, education, agriculture,
industry, energy, economic development
and the environment.
As government, business and community
leaders respond to the needs and initiatives of water users, they should be guided
by sound information about the economic
and environmental trade-offs in providing
these services. The international development community can provide guidance
by collecting evidence on successful and
failed interventions and introducing this
information into national planning. Decision-makers can learn from the examples
in chapters 14 and 15.
This Report takes as a starting point that
decisions and actions are most effective
when implemented at the lowest institutional level qualified to do so. Where
individuals are capable of meeting a
challenge, their efforts should be supported. Where individual efforts are not
enough, community members, including
the professional and business community,
can come together to meet the challenge,
often working with local governments.
To facilitate this possibility, a higher level
of government may need to step in to
delegate authority and provide the needed
technical or financial support.
Other actions may be beyond the capacity of individual communities and local
governments. Controlling and allocating
surface water and groundwater on a basin
and aquifer scale and establishing pollution control standards require the involvement of the water authority or ministry.
For national well-being, the president
or prime minister is the ultimate water
Water in a changing world

manager, supported by the cabinet as the
water management team.
International organizations, especially
the UN agencies, can provide support for
the member states, capacity assistance for
civil society and catalytic guidance for the
private sector in their efforts to incorporate water in decision-making processes
within and outside the water domain. The
leadership of the UN system and intergovernmental organizations can provide
counsel, drawing on their experience
worldwide. As in the joint discussion and
collective response on climate change, the
chief executives of the UN agencies could
meet on the role of water and water management in socioeconomic development
processes, environmental sustainability
and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Donor governments and
philanthropic organizations can enter this
discussion, in ways compatible with their
mission and objectives.

4

As government,
business and
community
leaders respond
to the needs
and initiatives
of water users,
they should be
guided by sound
information about
the economic and
environmental
trade-offs in
providing these
services

Municipalities, decentralized bodies and
local administrations are all engaged
in delivery service and managing water
resources. These responsibilities have typically been decentralized by the central
governments, but often without transferring the necessary financial and human
resources. These local bodies face difficult
choices in managing water systems, water
resources and water and sanitation systems
– on whether to regulate through concessions and contracts with private partners
and on how to engage with non-governmental organizations. They can inform
their decisions by drawing on a growing
base of water management experience
worldwide. All groups with a stake in water
resources management can work together
to craft national development plans for
water and sanitation, guided by poverty
reduction and environmental strategies
and international guidelines.

Obtaining and sharing information
Reducing environmental and social
risks today and preparing for a future of
increasing climate variability and climate extremes require information about
the availability and variability of water
resources today and tomorrow and about
trends in demand. Mechanisms for gathering this information are needed even as
countries proceed with infrastructure
construction. Information and tools for
decision-making under uncertainty will
help to avoid making decisions for the
short term that have irreversible harmful
environmental and social effects over the
long term.
293

PART

4

Chapter 16T

Because the
demands on water
are many and
diverse, water
management
needs to be guided
by broader social
and economic
development
objectives that
clarify expected
outcomes

Hydrology has moved out of catchments
and basins. While the volume of water in
circulation on our planet remains constant, climate change models suggest some
significant movements in water resources
and changes in local ecosystems in response
to human use and misuse. Data on water
resources – where the water is, where and
how it flows – are essential for understanding these global changes. Yet the necessary
data are not being collected. As the need for
information is increasing, attention to collecting environmental data is waning, even
though technologies for collecting data,
democratizing data access and gathering are
becoming more affordable. We must invest
in these technologies and in often-neglected
local data-gathering systems to enhance our
common understanding of water systems,
water resources and water management.
Equally important is information about
how much water is being used, by whom
and for what purposes, the ability and
willingness of water users to pay, cost
recovery rates and the investments needed
to achieve socioeconomic objectives.

Water synergies, balances and
trade-offs
Because the demands on water are many
and diverse, water management needs to
be guided by broader social and economic
development objectives that clarify expected outcomes. ‘Integrated’ development
plans – such as national development
strategies, poverty reduction strategies,
rural development strategies and regional,
district and city development plans –
should identify the full set of expected
outcomes for water managers.
Because drivers, demands and what can
reasonably be achieved given limited
resources differ, there will necessarily be
trade-offs. Where water is abundant, trade-

Box 16.1

Timescales for long-term planning

Planning and response timescales may
be categorized as follows:

• Behavioural change horizons (10
years).

• Responses to crises (such as
droughts, floods, civil strife) (1-2
years).

• Large infrastructure horizons (10-20
years).

• Human resources changes (2-3 years).
• Political horizons (3-5 years).

• Development horizons (15- 20
years).

• Small infrastructure horizons (3-5
years).

• Long-term capacity and intra­
generational equity horizons (25+
years and beyond, depending on
the level of the plan).

• Outcomes horizons (5-8 years).

Source: Authors’ compilation.

294

offs may have little detrimental impact on
concerned parties or the natural environment. As water becomes increasingly scarce,
trade-offs will be harsher, requiring sound
leadership to guide decision-making.
A key area of decision-making concerns
economic and environmental trade-offs,
a highly political process. It is important
to differentiate between short-term ‘firefighting’ – responding to the urgent issues
of the day – and strategic development.
Multipurpose schemes and water reuse can
reduce the need for trade-offs by enabling
the same volumes of scarce water to deliver
multiple outcomes.
In negotiating trade-offs, interest groups
strive to protect the interests of their members. Industry generally lobbies for self-regulation rather than control. Governments
are concerned with enforcing laws and
regulations. Local pressures and international regulators sometimes encourage
price controls, which can have negative as
well as positive impact, including preventing harmful price manipulations by speculators. Some international groups advocate
for global public goods and services. Nongovernmental organizations advocate for
water as a human right, charging governments with responsibility for service provision and users and beneficiaries for use
that ensures long-term social, economic
and environmental sustainability.

Choices about water uses
Options depend on social, economic and
environmental conditions, the availability of water over space and time, and the
threat of droughts and floods, all of which
vary around the world.
Where water is scarce, the challenge is to
select the development path that attains
the best social, economic and environmental outcomes. Such decisions shift
the trade-offs away from water resources
alone to broader concerns of environmental, economic and social benefits. Making decisions about water in this context
can sometimes introduce inefficiencies in
other development activities. For example,
importing food rather than producing it
domestically may permit water to be used
for higher value outputs, but many farmers will then need to find other ways to
earn a living.

Scales of space and time
Actions are constrained by the time horizon for which they are planned (box 16.1).
Politicians and water managers can find
long-term planning difficult, because the
World Water Development Report 3

PART

The way forward
plans and objectives often exceed the time
horizon of their tenure. Overcoming this
requires frameworks and incentives that
support long-term planning.

Status of economic development
The stage of economic development and
the financial and human resources available affect which water management
options are feasible. For example, when
financial resources are limited, choices may
have to be made on allocating funds to
sectors with the highest economic rate of
return or to those that provide basic services. Lack of resources may require finances
from sources outside the budget and using
resources from outside the country.
High-income countries are experiencing
water management problems that are very
different from those of poor countries.
While high-income countries can afford
to pay more attention to the environment
and to long-term water system sustainability, developing countries prioritize
eliminating poverty and raising the overall level of health and well-being, sometimes at the expense of environmental
sustainability.
The challenge is to build a new dialogue
between developed countries and developing countries on water management and
its role in sustainable development. Developed countries and developing countries
must work together to identify socioeconomic priorities and to invest in and use
water to power the engines of growth.
They must break cycles of poverty while
avoiding the harmful environmental and
health consequences of unbridled development experienced in many developed
countries. Cooperation between developed
countries and developing countries can
build mitigation, adaptation, avoidance
and no-regret measures into decision-making, to avoid incurring the costs of neglected environmental management later.

Working towards better
development outcomes
A nation’s water resources are used and
managed most effectively when they are
linked to broader development objectives.
What are the objectives, for example,
for feeding the population, for providing power for industry, commerce and
households, for job creation and incomes,
and for child education and health? What
are the relations between these objectives, and water and water systems? How
should water be managed to achieve these
objectives?
Water in a changing world

To incorporate these and other water
considerations, countries need strategic policies and plans. Such plans must
incorporate continuity despite changes in
personnel and avoid loss of direction when
administrations change or key individuals
leave. Development partners can consult
these plans to stay informed of government intentions and to direct water-related
investments into actions responsive to the
country’s needs.

Actions in a world of change, risk
and uncertainty
Risk and uncertainty are part of decision-making. What level of protection
is affordable (complex dams or simple
refuges)? What are the trade-offs between
investments that provide direct benefit
(hospitals, schools) and those that protect
against possible extreme events (flood
protection)? How much should be invested
in research where the stakes are high, but
the results uncertain? Perception of risk is
not fixed but is coloured by socioeconomic
conditions, culture and religion, as well as
environmental realities.

4

Developed
countries and
developing
countries must
work together
to identify
socioeconomic
priorities and to
invest in and use
water to power the
engines of growth

Risk management encompasses more than
managing extremes such as floods and
droughts. It entails the use of a structured
approach to manage uncertainty regarding these events. Decision-makers must
take into account multiple uncertainties,
including those associated with limited or
low-quality data and information and the
inherent unpredictability of climate and
other environmental factors. A promising
approach for dealing with climate risk is to
integrate management of current climate
variability and extremes with adaptation
to climate change.
The world faces major choices in meeting
the challenge of climate change and its potential environmental and socioeconomic
impacts. Public policy, so far dominated
by mitigation, could benefit from a better
balance between mitigation and adaptation. Carbon is a measure of the anthropogenic causes of climate change – water is a
measure of its impacts. The international
community also has to balance investing
for tomorrow’s likely problems of greater
climate variability and global warming
against investing for today’s problems of
climate variability to prevent losses from
droughts and floods. While both are vital,
focusing on today’s problems can also
create greater resilience for dealing with
tomorrow’s problems.
Because of uncertainty, decisions on current problems should leave the way open
295

PART

4

Informed
decisions – based
on expected
results and the
consequences of
failing to act – are
needed now

Chapter 16T
for future options. No-regrets strategies
– actions that would significantly reduce
the adverse impacts of change but would
not cause harm if projections of impacts
of change are wrong – are important in
responding to climate change. In contrast,
failure to act carries risks because the situation may deteriorate if no action is taken.
The World Water Assessment Programme
and its partners are working to reduce
uncertainty, facilitate decision-making
and accelerate investment by identifying
the links between socioeconomic development, environmental sustainability,
water management capacity and investments in water-related infrastructure and
other sectors. Work has begun, in concert
with UN-Water, to identify indicators and
supporting databases to guide decisions
on water policies and actions by leaders
inside and outside the water sector. It will
expand the information base on options
tested in many contexts. The World Water
Assessment Programme is also working on
scenarios linking external drivers to the
water sector that could be applied globally,
regionally and nationally. The next United
Nations World Water Development Report
will include the fruits of that work, along
with additional examples of how challenges are being addressed on the ground.

Targeting official development
assistance and philanthropic aid
For members of the international community there are choices between pursuing
their traditional regional financial and
political interests and focusing on areas
where aid of all types is needed most. The
greatest gaps in access to such water-related services as drinking water supply and
sanitation are in sub-Saharan Africa, Asian
and Latin American slums and countries
recovering from conflict. Inefficient water
use in agricultural production also is a
continuing problem in many countries
around the world, both developed and
developing.
The 2008 World Economic Forum in
Davos led to calls for policies to encourage
a minimum water impact alongside a minimum carbon footprint; the 2009 forum
included appeals to fight water scarcity.
At the 2009 G-8 meeting in Italy the G-8
leaders are scheduled to review the 2003
G-8 Evian Water Action Plan and discuss
strategies with their African partners for
enhancing its implementation.

296

Against a background of political and
strategic alignments, the international
community must look for ways to support the construction of the infrastructure
required to provide a range of direct and
indirect services provided by water systems, including water supply and sanitation, production of food and energy and
adaptation and mitigation of climate
variability. National and local governments
can optimize their investments by identifying actions that will produce the greatest
socioeconomic and environmental benefits. Supporting countries already on track
to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals at the expense of countries lagging
behind can only entrench global divisions.
sub-Saharan Africa in particular suffers
from lack of development of its water resources infrastructure for multiple uses.

Deciding – and acting!
Informed decisions – based on expected
results and the consequences of failing to
act – are needed now. Lagging investment
in water leaves hundreds of millions of
people exposed to the risks of environmental degradation and water-related disasters and susceptible to political unrest.
Billions of the world’s people suffer from
water-related diseases and hunger. Acting
to reduce such exposure can improve their
health and well-being and provide access
to healthcare for millions more. Country examples indicate that proper water
management could increase gross domestic product by 5% to 14% – an impact that
may be unachievable through any other
intervention.
The challenges are great, but the unsustainable management and inequitable
access to water resources cannot continue
– because the risks of inaction are even
greater. We might not have all the information we would like to have before acting, but we know enough to begin to take
significant actions. Some leaders are already acting, showing the way. Others are
ready to act. Leaders inside and outside the
water domain have critical, complementary roles. Leaders in the water domain can
inform the processes outside this domain
and manage water resources to achieve
agreed socioeconomic and environmental
objectives. But leaders in government, the
private sector and civil society determine
the direction that actions will take. Recognizing this, they must act now!

World Water Development Report 3

PART

2

Chapter 9

Figure 9.2

Three types of response to water scarcity and
competition

Con

se

state

Tap
g

gate

es
er

local

rv

in
l lining, improved da
Cana
mm
g
ana
awareness campaign
g
e
s, vo
me
l um
nt
,w
etr
ic
wa ater
te
rp
Adopt microirrigati
on,
im
ge cropping t
pr
ech
chan
ov
niq
ue
m
s
r
t
o
rage
s
on-fa
, re
du
c

Responses
to basin
closure

r,
roundwate

loc

al

sta

te

small drains,

intr
use
oduc
e conjunctive

ing

te
sta

eo
fc
ro
equ
ps
ity;
o
co
nfl
brib
ic
ery
;g

or
a

m

at

al

Chan
g

d

ements for great
er
rang
; ar
ies
ter grabbing,
a
iet
n; w
ar
atio
rv
tig
i
l
ase water)
rele
ts,
p(
eu
iv

ent
em
ag
,
n
dars
a
len
m
ca
e
d
ow
fl
n
an
tur
re
e

loc

Se
ct

an

Managing competition
through supply and demand
management and reallocation

c
ghts
lo
ater ri
s, w
Al
ota
ns
qu
titutio
n,
l ins
tio
ev e
ca
n-l
asi
ll o
,b
ea
l r kets
ar

es,
c t ic
pra
t
en
ons
em
u ti
ag nstit
i
an
,
m ing
ric

d

n

r

R

i
as
vo
iv
sb te
n
ir
er
a
a
bu
sio
tr
w
ild
d,
n,
al
ing
ate
tu
wa
r
g
i
,
s
grou
v
ste
g,
drain
ndwate
wa
r abstraction,
di n
te r
see
treat
ment, desalination, cloud

There are many shortcomings in how water
is managed today in a context of increased
scarcity: low efficiency, environmental degradation, and inequity. Despite some improvements competition is increasing and
water use efficiency remains low in most
sectors. But the answer is not just more
efficient allocation mechanisms and more
emphasis on greater yields and productivity, because these alone may lead to further
losses in equity and environmental sustainability. Rather, a combination of supply and
demand management measures is needed.

Three common responses to
competition

and can lead to conflict. The Mekong River
basin has been an exception, with concerns
around water arising only recently. Partly
because of conflicts unrelated to water the
river has long-remained undisturbed, but
dam development to meet the growing
need for energy in most of the riparian
countries is putting other downstream uses
at risk – particularly fisheries (box 9.4).

The responses to increased competition for
water are supply augmentation, conservation and reallocation (figure 9.2). The most
conventional response is to develop new
resources. For the state this typically means
building new reservoirs or desalination
plants or interbasin transfer. For users this
means more wells or farm ponds or gating
drains to store water. Conserving water
includes increasing the efficiency of use
by reducing losses. Changes in allocation,
to ease competition or to maximize water
use, are based on economic, social, environmental or other criteria. Augmentation
is a supply management strategy, while
conservation and reallocation are demand
management strategies, roughly defined as
‘doing better with what we have’.9

Despite competing demands and conflict,
however, there is little historic evidence
that water itself has led to international
warfare or that a war over water would
make strategic, hydrographic or economic
sense.6 At the international level water appears to provide reasons for trans­boundary
cooperation rather than war, often preventing instead of causing escalation.7
Many multilateral treaties on freshwater resources have stressed multiple ­objectives –
economic development, joint management
and water quality – rather than just water
quantity and hydropower (see appendix
2).8 The way Mexico and the United States
resolved their dispute over the allocation
of water from the Rio Grande River, which
included a cost-sharing arrangement for
water conservation measures, offers interesting lessons for the peaceful resolution
of water disputes (see box 15.22 in chapter

Supply augmentation is typically constrained by the availability of storage sites,
the social and environmental costs and the
rising financial cost of water. With needs
outstripping available stocks in many basins, transfers between basins have become
more frequent. Amman, Athens, Bangkok,
Kathmandu, Los Angeles and Mexico City
are procuring water further afield. The
massive transfer of water now under way
in China (from the Yangtze River to the
Yellow River) is being emulated in Brazil,
India, Jordan and Thailand. While this
trend is likely to continue, its potential will
gradually be exhausted and its costs will
spiral upwards. Other small-scale options,
such as farm ponds in Asia or wells, have
also been widely developed. Desalination
is an option in specific locations (islands
and coastal cities), but its cost is likely to
remain high (though it is declining) and its

Developing
Source: Based on Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture 2007.

154

15). A recent shift in emphasis from water
sharing to benefit sharing promises greater
transboundary cooperation.

World Water Development Report 3

Appendixes

The way forward

Appendix 1
World Water
Development
Report indicators
1

Even as we pay more attention to the
current state, uses and impacts of water
resources and identify the challenges that
the global community faces in managing
them, the flow of information to support this work is drying up rather than
growing.
The first edition of The United Nations
World Water Development Report, published
in 2003, included an extensive compilation of information, drawn from multiple
sources, documenting the state of water,
the resource and its uses. Many agencies and individuals opened their formal
and informal archives to share information from their knowledge bases. These
enthusiastic contributions established an
important baseline from which to move
forward.
In all, more than 160 indicators were reported on, ranging from the global quantum of water available and withdrawals
for human use to compliance with water
quality standards for key pollutants and
governance mechanisms to support water
management.
The first report also explicitly recognized
the need for further work, notably in collecting biogeophysical and socioeconomic
data as well as data on environmental
protection and investment in water. It
highlighted the danger of data availability
driving the selection of indicators, which
results in a ‘data-rich, but informationpoor’ syndrome, in which plenty of data
are produced but they are not tailored to
information needs

Author: Mike Muller

The second edition of The United Nations
World Water Development Report discussed
the consequences of poor data availability:
Data on almost every subject
related to water issues is usually
lacking, unreliable, incomplete
or inconsistent. We have learned
that merely collecting data is not
enough. It must be brought together, analysed and converted into
information and knowledge, then
shared widely within and between
countries and stakeholders to focus
attention on water problems at all
scales. It is only when the data has
been collected and analysed that
we can properly understand the
many systems that affect water
(hydrological, socio-economic,
financial, institutional and political
alike), which have to be factored
into water governance.
The number of indicators presented in the
second edition of the report declined to 62
because there was no systematic process
for updating the data used for most of the
indicators presented in the first report.
Water supply and sanitation has been an
exception: the World Health Organization
and United Nations Children’s Fund Joint
Monitoring Programme has systematically
addressed the challenge, investing to ensure a regular flow of updated information
on this subsector.
Three years later the production team for
the third United Nations World Water Development Report is in a similar situation to its
predecessors. During preparations for the

Mike Muller is co-chair, World Water Assessment Programme Expert Group on Indicators, Monitoring and
Data/Metadata Bases.

298

World Water Development Report 3

PART

World Water Development Report indicators
report, a survey of data providers suggested
that new data would be available for only
some of the indicators used in the second
report. At press time 30 indicators had
been updated. Because some indicators
included in the second report were identified as not useful by the source agency, 58
indicators are now listed in table A1.1. The
profile sheets describing these indicators
are available on the World Water Assessment Programme Website (www.unesco.
org/water/wwap/).
While the indicators on the water resources
situation in the first United Nations World
Water Development Report provided policymakers at the national, regional and global
levels with a critical overview of the situation, insight into the trends of key indicators is vital in a rapidly changing world.
In most cases it has not proved possible
to provide this insight. No new global
estimates of available water resources or of
volume abstracted by major sectoral users
are available. So while this third edition of
the report again contains much important
information, it remains impossible to provide information on the evolution of key
indicators. (One notable exception is a new
indicator, Status of progression on Agenda
21, which has been updated and included
in this report.)

Table A1.1

Several actions are planned to address this
gap: UN-Water has created the Task Force
on Indicators, Monitoring and Reporting to address the challenge of producing
key global indicators of the state of water
resources to meet the needs of policy- and
decision-makers at all levels. And the
World Water Assessment Programme has
established the Expert Group on Indicators, Monitoring and Data/Metadata
Bases to support this work, specifically by
promoting a dialogue between indicator
users and data providers/interpreters about
the feasibility of providing data for the
key indicators on a sustainable, ongoing
basis. The expert group will also propose
strategies to improve data collection and
interpretation.
It is hoped that the next United Nations
World Water Development Report will be
able to report some substantive progress
and answer key questions about whether
and how changing water resources endowments affect countries and regions,
whether the efficiency of water use for
national socioeconomic development is
improving and whether degradation of the
water environment has been slowed. At
the very least, it should be able to report
on steps taken to improve the flow of data
and information needed to establish and
monitor key trends.

List of United Nations World Water Development Report indicators and location
of detailed data
Locationc

Topic

Level of
stress on the
resource

Governance

Indicator

Category in
cause-effect
approacha

Type of
indicatorb

In World Water In World Water
Development
Development
Report 2
Report 3

Index of non-sustainable water use

Driving force,
Pressure, state

Key

Section 1

na

Rural and urban population

Pressure, state

Basic

Section 1

Map 2.1
Figure 2.1

Relative Water Stress Index

Pressure, state

Key

Section 2

na

Sources of contemporary nitrogen loading

Pressure, state

Key

Section 3

na

Domestic and industrial water use

Pressure, state

Basic

Section 3

Table 7.1
Figure 7.1

Impact of sediment trapping by large dams
and reservoirs

Pressure

Key

Section 4

na

Coefficient of variation for the Climate
Moisture Index

State

Key

Section 4

na

Water Reuse Index

Pressure, state

Key

Section 4

Figure 8.6

Access to information, participation and
justice

Response

Developing

Table 2.2
Table 2.3

na

Assessing progress towards achieving the
integrated water resources management
target

Response

Key

Table 2.1

na

(continued)

Water in a changing world

299

PART

Appendix 1

Table A1.1

List of United Nations World Water Development Report indicators and location
of detailed data (continued)
Locationc

Topic

Settlements

State of the
resource

Ecosystems

Health

Food,
agriculture
and rural
livelihoods

Indicator

Category in
cause-effect
approacha

Type of
indicatorb

In World Water In World Water
Development
Development
Report 2
Report 3

Index of performance of water utilities

State

Developing

na

na

Urban water and sanitation governance index

State

Developing

na

na

Slum profile in human settlements

Pressure

Developing

na

na

Total actual renewable water resources

State

Key

Table 4.3

*

Precipitation

Driving force

Basic

Table 4.3

Table 10.1
Map 11.1
**

Total actual renewable water resources
per capita

State

Developing

Table 4.3

**

Surface water as share of total actual
renewable water resources

State

Developing

Table 4.3

na

Overlap as share of total actual renewable
water resources

State

Developing

Table 4.3

na

Inflow from other countries as share of
total actual renewable water resourcesd

State

Developing

Table 4.3

**

Outflow to other countries as share of
total actual renewable water resources

State

Developing

Table 4.3

na

Total use as share of total actual renewable
water resourcese

State

Developing

Table 4.3

**

Groundwater development as share of total
actual renewable water resources

State

Key

Table 4.3

na

Fragmentation and flow regulation of rivers

State, impact

Key

Map 5.3
Figure 5.4

Figure 8.2

Dissolved nitrogen (nitrates + nitrogen
dioxide)

State

Key

Map 5.2

*

Trends in freshwater habitat protection

State, response

Key

Fig. 5.7

na

Freshwater species population trends index

State

Key

Fig. 5.2

Figure 8.1

Disability-adjusted life year

Impact

Key

Table 6.3

Table 6.3

Prevalence of stunting among children under
age 5

Impact

Developing

na

Map 6.2

Mortality rate of children under age 5

Impact

Developing

Table 6.2

*

Access to safe drinking water

Impact

Key

Map 6.1

Figure 7.3

Access to basic sanitation

Impact

Key

Map 6.2

Figure 7.4

Percentage of undernourished people

State

Key

Map 7.2
Figure 7.10
Figure 7.11

*

Percentage of poor people living in rural
areas

State

Key

na

*

Agriculture GDP as share of total GDP

State

Key

na

*

Irrigated land as a percentage of cultivated
land

Pressure, state

Key

Map 7.1

Map 7.5

Agriculture water withdrawals as share of
total water withdrawals

Pressure

Key

na

Table 7.1

Extent of land salinized by irrigation

State

Key

na

na

Groundwater use as share of total irrigation

Pressure, state

Key

na

Figure 7.1
(continued)

300

World Water Development Report 3

PART

World Water Development Report indicators

Table A1.1

List of United Nations World Water Development Report indicators and location
of detailed data (continued)
Locationc

Topic

Industry
and energy

Risk
assessment

Valuing and
charging for
the resource

Knowledge
base and
capacity

Indicator

Category in
cause-effect
approacha

Type of
indicatorb

In World Water In World Water
Development
Development
Report 2
Report 3

Trends in industrial water use

Pressure

Key

Figure 8.1

na

Water use by major sector

State

Key

Figure 8.3

Table 7.1
Figure 7.1

Organic pollution emissions (biochemical
oxygen demand) by industrial sector

Impact

Key

Figure 8.4

*

Industrial water productivity

Response

Key

Table 8.4

Figure 7.8

Trends in ISO 14001 certification

Response

Key

Table 8.2

Figure 8.7

Electricity generation by energy source

State

Key

Figure 9.1

Figure 7.11

Total primary energy supply by source

State

Key

Figure 9.2

*

Carbon intensity of electricity generation

Impact

Key

Table 9.4

na

Volume of desalinated water produced

Response

Key

Table 9.1

Box 9.5

Access to electricity and water for domestic
use

Pressure

Key

Table 9.5

*

Capability for hydropower generation

State

Key

Table 9.6

Map 7.6
*

Disaster Risk Index

State

Key

Box 10.4

na

Risk and policy assessment indicator

Response

Key

Figure 10.7

na

Climate Vulnerability Index

State

Key

Map 10.3

na

Water sector share in total public spending

Response

Developing

na

na

Ratio of actual to desired level of public
investment in drinking water supply

Response

Developing

na

na

Ratio of actual to desired level of public
investment in basic sanitationf

Response

Developing

na

na

Rate of cost recoveryg

Driving force,
response

Developing

na

na

Water charges as percentage of household
incomeh

Driving force,
response

Developing

Figure 12.5

na

Knowledge Index

State

Developing

Map 13.2

*

na designates that the indicator is not used in the report, although for many of these indicators updated information is provided online (see table note).
Note: An Indicator profile sheet with a detailed definition and explanation of how the indicator is computed (as well as data tables for some indicators)
is available for most indicators at www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr3/indicators. Exceptions are subindicators for ‘Total actual renewable water
resources’.
*See table accompanying the online Indicator profile sheet.
**See table accompanying the online Indicator profile sheet for Total actual renewable resources.
a. The categories are based on the DPSIR (driving forces, pressures, state, impact, response) framework. For details, see www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/
wwdr1/pdf/chap3.pdf and www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr2/pdf/wwdr2_ch_1.pdf (pp. 33-38).
b. Basic indicators provide fundamental information and are well established and widely used; data are generally widely available for all countries. Key
indicators are well defined and validated, have global coverage and are linked directly to policy goals. Developing indicators are in a formative stage and may
evolve into key indicators following refinement of methodological issues or data development and testing.
c. Because of updates to data and sources, data may not match across reports.
d. Now called ‘Dependency ratio’.
e. Now called ‘Millennium Development Goal water indicator’.
f. Proposed for United Nations World Water Development Report 3.
g. Now called ‘Rate of operation and maintenance cost recovery for water supply and sanitation’.
h. Now called ‘Water and sanitation charges as percentage of various household income groups’.
Source: Compiled by Engin Koncagül and Akif Altundaş.

Water in a changing world

301

Appendix 2
Water-related goals
and objectives of
major conferences and
forums, 1972-present

Table A2.1

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present

International forum

Agreed goals and objectives

UN Conference on the
Human Environment,
Stockholm, Sweden, 1972

•

The main issues of the conference were preservation and enhancement of the human environment.

•

The declaration of the conference acknowledged that ‘a point has been reached in history when
we must shape our actions throughout the world with a more prudent care for their environmental
consequences.’

UN Conference on
Water, Mar del Plata,
Argentina, 1977

•

The main objective of this first global-scale conference on water was to promote greater awareness
nationally and internationally of global problems related to water and to assess water resources and
water use efficiency through an integrated approach to water resources management.

•

Led to declaring the 1980s International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, with the
objective of providing drinking water and sanitation for all people by 1990.

International
Drinking Water
Supply and Sanitation
Decade, 1981-90

‘The goal of the Decade was that, by the end of 1990, all people should possess an adequate water
supply and satisfactory means of excreta and sullage disposal. This was indeed an ambitious target as
it has been estimated that it would have involved the provision of water and sanitation services to over
650,000 people per day for the entire ten year period. Although major efforts were made by government
and international organisations to meet this target, it was not achieved.’ (C. Choguill, R. Francys and A.
Cotton, 1993, Planning for Water and Sanitation)

Global Consultation
on Safe Water and
Sanitation for the 1990s,
New Delhi, India, 1990

•

The main issues were safe drinking water and environmental sanitation.

•

The New Delhi Statement declared: ‘Safe water and proper means of waste disposal . . . must be
at the center of integrated water resources management.’ (Environment and health, New Delhi
Statement)

World Summit for
Children, New York,
United States, 1990

•

The main issues were health and food supply.

•

The World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children stated: ‘We will
promote the provision of clean water in all communities for all their children, as well as universal
access to sanitation.’

International Decade
for Natural Disaster
Reduction, 1990-2000

Recognized the increased vulnerability of people and property to natural disasters and sought ‘to reduce
through concerted international action, especially in developing countries, the loss of life, property
damage and social and economic disruption caused by natural disasters.’ (Resolution 44/236 of the UN
General Assembly)

International
Conference on Water
and Environment,
Dublin, Ireland, 1992

The most important achievement was the development of the Dublin Principles:
•

Freshwater is a finite and vulnerable resource, essential to sustain life, development and the
environment.

•

Water development and management should be based on a participatory approach, involving users,
planners and policy-makers at all levels.

• Women play a central part in providing, managing and safeguarding water.
Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.
(continued)

302

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present

Table A2.1

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present (continued)

International forum

Agreed goals and objectives

UN Conference on
Environment and
Development , Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 1992

Agenda 21, chapter 18, ‘Protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources: application of
integrated approaches to the development, management and use of water resources’, dealt with the basis
for action, objectives and activities concerning:
•

Integrated water resources development and management.

•

Water resources assessment.

•

Protection of water resources, water quality and aquatic ecosystems.

•

Drinking water supply and sanitation.

•

Water and sustainable urban development.

•

Water for sustainable food production and rural development.

•

Impacts of climate change on water resources.

Ministerial Conference on
Drinking Water Supply
and Environmental
Sanitation, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands, 1994

•

The main issues were drinking water supply and sanitation.

•

The Programme of Action identified ‘assign[ing] high priority to programmes designed to provide
basic sanitation and excreta disposal systems to urban and rural areas.’

UN International
Conference on Population
and Development,
Cairo, Egypt, 1994

•

The Programme of Action highlighted ‘ensur[ing] that population, environmental and poverty
eradication factors are integrated in sustainable development policies, plans and programmes.’
(Chapter III – Interrelationships between population, sustained economic growth and sustainable
development)

World Summit for
Social Development,
Copenhagen,
Denmark, 1995

•

The main issues were poverty reduction, water supply and sanitation.

•

The outcome was the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development.

UN Fourth World
Conference on Women,
Beijing, People’s Republic
of China, 1995

•

The main issues were gender, water supply and sanitation.

•

The outcome was the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.

Second UN Conference
on Human Settlements
(Habitat II), Istanbul,
Turkey, 1996

•

The main issues were sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing world.

•

The outcome was the Habitat Agenda.

World Food Summit,
Rome, Italy, 1996

•

The main issues were food, health, water and sanitation.

•

The outcome was the Rome Declaration on World Food Security.

1st World Water Forum,
Marrakech, Morocco, 1997

The main issues were water and sanitation, management of shared waters, preserving ecosystems,
gender equity and efficient use of water ‘to recognize the basic human needs to have access to clean
water and sanitation, to establish an effective mechanism for management of shared waters, to support
and preserve ecosystems, to encourage the efficient use of water.’ (Marrakech Declaration)

International Conference
on Water and Sustainable
Development, Paris,
France, 1998

The outcome was the Paris Declaration on Water and Sustainable Development, whose objective was ‘to
improve co-ordination between UN Agencies and Programmes and other international organizations,
to ensure periodic consideration within the UN system. [To] emphasize the need for continuous political
commitment and broad-based public support to ensure the achievement of sustainable development,
management and protection, and equitable use of freshwater resources, and the importance of civil
society to support this commitment.’ (Paris Declaration)

Millennium Declaration,
New York, United
States, 2000

The Millennium Development Goals include the following water-related targets:
•

‘To halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income is less than one dollar
a day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger and, by the same date, to halve the
proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water.’

•

‘To stop the unsustainable exploitation of water resources by developing water management
strategies at the regional, national and local levels, which promote both equitable access and
adequate supplies.’
(continued)

Water in a changing world

303

PART

Appendix 2

Table A2.1

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present (continued)

International forum

Agreed goals and objectives

2nd World Water
Forum, The Hague, The
Netherlands, 2000

The Ministerial Declaration identified the following main challenges:

International Conference
on Freshwater, Bonn,
Germany, 2001

World Summit on
Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South
Africa, 2002

3rd World Water Forum,
Kyoto, Japan, 2003

G-8 Evian Summit,
Evian, France, 2003

•

Meeting basic needs – access to safe and sufficient water and sanitation.

•

Securing the food supply, particularly of the poor and vulnerable.

•

Protecting ecosystems – ensure the integrity of ecosystems through sustainable water resources
management.ASharing water resources, by peaceful cooperation between water users at all levels.

•

Managing risks from floods, droughts, pollution and other water hazards.

•

Valuing water – managing water to reflect its economic, social, environmental and cultural values.

•

Governing water wisely, including involving the public and the interests of all stakeholders.

•

The main issues were governance, finance mobilization, capacity building and knowledge sharing.

•

Identified water as key to sustainable development.

•

The outcome was the Ministerial Declaration Recommendations for Action: ‘Combating poverty is
the main challenge for achieving equitable and sustainable development, and water plays a vital
role in relation to human health, livelihood, economic growth as well as sustaining ecosystems. . . .
The conference recommends priority actions under the following three headings: governance,
mobilising financial resources, capacity building and sharing knowledge.’ (Ministerial Declaration
Recommendations for Action)

The summit dealt with the following freshwater-related issues:
•

Decentralization of governance.

•

Community empowerment.

•

Service provision: rural and urban challenges.

•

Information management.

•

Integrated water resources management.

•

Education and awareness.

•

Financial and economic mechanisms.

•

Regional challenges were particularly recognized and identified.

The outcomes included:
•

A water and climate dialogue, including agreed action points.

•

A water and poverty dialogue, including agreed action points.

•

A final report on financing water infrastructure.

•

Outcomes from the Dialogue on Food, Water and Environment.

•

A detailed document on Water Actions.

One outcome was a G-8 Action Plan on Water:
•

Promoting good governance.

•

Using all financial resources.

•

Building infrastructure by empowering local authorities and communities.

•

Strengthening monitoring, assessment and research.

•

Reinforcing engagement of international organizations.

Water for Life
Decade, 2005-15

Launched by the United Nations System, the aim is to promote efforts to fulfil international commitments
made on water and water-related issues by 2015, with special emphasis on the involvement and
participation of women.

The World Conference on
Disaster Reduction, Kobe
(Hyogo), Japan, 2005

Adopted the ‘Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and
Communities to Disasters’, recognizing the importance of water-related disaster risk reduction.
(continued)

304

World Water Development Report 3

PART

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present

Table A2.1

Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present (continued)

International forum

Agreed goals and objectives

4th World Water Forum,
Mexico City, Mexico, 2006

The ministers at the forum reaffirmed commitments made at the UN Conference on Environment
and Development, World Summit on Sustainable Development, and the Commission on Sustainable
Development during 2005, emphasizing:

5th World Water Forum,
Istanbul, Turkey, 2009

•

Expediting implementation in water, sanitation and human settlements.

•

Enhancing the sustainability of ecosystems.

•

Applying innovative practices such as rainwater management and development of hydropower
projects in some regions.

•

Involving relevant stakeholders, particularly women and youth, in planning and management.

•

They also expressed support for relevant UN water-related activities, including the coordinating role
of UN-Water.

The theme is Bridging Divides for Water.

Source: www.un.org/esa/sustdev and www.worldwatercouncil.org.

Water in a changing world

305

Abbreviations,
data notes and
units of measure

Abbreviations

306

ANA

National Water Agency (of Brazil)

AQUAREC

Integrated Concepts for Reuse of Upgraded Wastewater

AQUASTAT

FAO database on water and agriculture

BAPE

Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnment (Office for Public Hearings on the Environment, Québec, Canada)

BOD

Biochemical oxygen demand

CALM

Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring observational network

CNA

National Water Commission of Mexico (Comisión Nacional del Agua)

DOC

Dissolved organic carbon

EAAB

Water and Sewerage of Bogotá (Empresa de Acueducto y Alcantarillado de
Bogotá)

EIONET

European Environment Information and Observation Network

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FRIEND

Flow Regime from International Experimental Data

GAP

Southeastern Anatolia Project (Güneydoğu Anadolu Projesi)

GCM

General circulation model

GDP

Gross domestic product

GEO

Global Environment Outlook

GLAAS

Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water

GNI

Gross national income

GOCE

Gravity Field and Steady-State Ocean Circulation Explorer

GRACE

Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment satellites

GRAPHIC

Groundwater Resources Assessment under the Pressures of Humanity and
Climate Change programme

GW-MATE

World Bank Groundwater Management Advisory Team

IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

NAFTA

North American Free Trade Agreement

NEWS

Global Nutrient Export from Watersheds models
World Water Development Report 3

PART

Abbreviations, data notes and units of measure
NGO

Non-governmental organization

NWSC

National Water and Sewerage Corporation of Uganda

OAS

Organization of American States

OECD

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

OMVS

Organization for Development of the Senegal River (Organisation pour la
mise en valeur du fleuve Sénégal)

PDSI

Palmer Drought Severity Index

PLUARG

International Reference Group on Great Lakes Pollution from Land Use
Activities

POC

Particulate organic carbon

R&D

Research and development

RADWQ

Rapid Assessment of Drinking Water Quality survey method

SAGUAPAC

Cooperative for Urban Water and Sanitation Services in Santa Cruz

TVA

Tennessee Valley Authority

UN

United Nations

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

UN-HABITAT United Nations Human Settlements Programme
UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

UNSGAB

UN Secretary-General’s Advisory Board

WBCSD

World Business Council for Sustainable Development

WHO

World Health Organization

Data notes and units of measure
$

All dollars are current US dollars unless otherwise indicated

Billion

Billion is 1,000 million

Water

Refers to freshwater unless otherwise indicated

Btu

British thermal unit (1,054.35 joules)

exajoule

Unit of energy equal to 1018 joules

Gt

Gigatonne

kcal

Kilocalorie

kg

Kilogram

km2
3

km

Square kilometre
Cubic kilometre

2

Square metre

3

m

Cubic metre

mm

Millimetre

terawatt

Unit of energy equal to 1 trillion watts (1012)

m

Water in a changing world

307

List of boxes,
figures, maps
and tables

Boxes
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
1.11
2.1
2.2
2.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
5.1
5.2
5.3
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
8.1
8.2

308

Objectives and targeted audience of The United Nations World Water Development Report   vii
Commitment of African heads of state to water as a key to sustainable development   7
Economic impacts of lack of adequate sanitation facilities in South-East Asia   8
Estimated costs of restoring essential ecosystems in the United States   9
Progress in meeting the Millennium Development Goal target on water supply and sanitation   12
High-Level Event on the Millennium Development Goals, United Nations, New York, 25 September 2008:
Extract from compilation of partnership events and commitments   13
Malnutrition attributable to environmental risks   14
Water as capital   14
International Monetary Fund updated economic forecast for 2009   17
Extracts from Declaration of Leaders Meeting of Major Economies on Energy Security and Climate
Change at the G-8 Hokkaido, Toyako, summit, 9 July 2008   18
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Technical Report on Water and Climate Change   19
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon warns that water shortages are increasingly driving conflicts   20
Virtual water   35
Water: a brake on economic growth and corporate prospects   36
The role of women within the water sector and the importance of gender mainstreaming   38
The EU Water Framework Directive – uneven implementation   50
Australian water law reform   52
Experience with irrigation management transfer   55
Dalian water supply project in China – successful expansion of services   61
Subsidizing water supply and sanitation in the Republic of Korea   64
The cost of adapting to climate change   71
Micro-hydro plants in Nepal are expected to provide electricity access to 142,000 households and to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions   72
Health and climate change   73
Water services are a crucial element of nation-building in fragile states   81
Storing water for development   81
Land tenure and access to water and sanitation   85
Four water dimensions of rural livelihoods   86
Defining water services: single or multiple uses?   87
Agro-ecosystems and sustainability: an example from Peru   93
How much do we know about water uses?   97
Water withdrawal, demand and consumption   98
Rapid assessment of drinking water quality   103
How much water is needed to produce food for a single day?   107
Coping with water scarcity and climate change in agriculture in the Near East   112
Impacts of water shortage on rice production in Indonesia   114
Tourism water demand in the Mediterranean coastal area   117
Asian ‘Tigers’ and the hidden tip of the pollution iceberg   136
Addressing eutrophication and its effects in the Baltic Sea   138

World Water Development Report 3

PART

List of boxes, figures, maps and tables
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
11.1
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
12.6
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
14.8
14.9
14.10
14.11
14.12
14.13
14.14
14.14
14.15
14.16
14.17
14.18
14.19
14.20
14.21
14.22
14.23
14.24
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5
15.6
15.7
15.8
15.9
15.10
15.11

The arsenic crisis: as yet no solution   139
Long-term impacts of mining on ecosystems in transition economies   140
Impact of economic recession on pollution in Eastern Europe   141
A wastewater river   141
Setting target for pollution mitigation and limits for reuse – the example of Europe   142
Environmental flow assessment in Asia – from concept to reality   145
The closure of the lower Jordan River basin   151
Conflict between agriculture and industry over water in Orissa, India   152
Competition for water and downstream impacts in the Indus River basin   153
Fisheries and hydropower competing in the Mekong River basin   153
The untapped potential of marginal-quality water   155
Signs of progress in urban areas: examples in Asia and Australia   157
Changes in discharge of major global rivers   189
A global perspective on regional vegetation and hydrologic sensitivities to climate change   213
Managing urban stormwater in association with land use and land-cover planning can convert a
nuisance into a resource   214
Drought in Australia, 1996-2007   216
Controlled exploitation and artificial recharge as effective measures against
detrimental subsidence   217
Towards transboundary management of the Guaraní aquifer   221
Lake Sarez, Tajikistan – turning a hazard into an opportunity   223
UN-Water survey on progress towards 2005 targets for integrated water resources management and water
efficiency plans   243
Responses to impacts of non-integrated approaches to water resources management   243
Water resources management in Tunisia   244
Integrated water planning in the Netherlands   245
Participatory approaches in decentralized provision of water supply and sanitation services   246
Integrated management of land-based activities in São Francisco basin, Brazil   247
The right to water   248
Public-private partnership for reducing non-revenue water losses in Malaysia   249
Examples of legal frameworks for managing water   250
Recognizing customary practices in drafting laws   250
Water-related responses to climate change   251
Public participation panels in the North American Great Lakes basin review of water quality   252
Grass-roots water federations in Ecuador   253
Participatory irrigation management and the role of water user associations   253
Participatory irrigation management and the role of water user associations (continued)   254
Public participation in water resources management   254
Responding to corruption and mismanagement in the water sector – examples from Colombia, India and
Lesotho   255
Networking to share water resources management experiences   257
Incorporating local knowledge in networks – the Integrated Watershed Management Network of Eastern
Africa   258
Using water management to preserve biodiversity and economic livelihoods – Kafue Flats, Zambia   259
Using irrigation technology to increase water use efficiency   260
Research links in developing countries   260
Using monitoring information in water resources management   261
Addressing water supply and sanitation challenges in Uganda   263
Paying for environmental ­services – green water credits in Kenya   265
Combating corruption   270
Decentralization in Uganda – making room for better environmental governance at the local level   271
Economic diversification in Mauritius helps promote access to water   272
More relevant schools lead to benefits for water   272
The ecohealth approach: combating malaria through agricultural practices in Kenya   273
Measuring the water limits to growth in Ethiopia   274
The Coca-Cola controversy in Kala Dera, India – learning from mistakes   275
Mondi South Africa achieves sustainable expansion   275
Examples of clean production processes   276
Québec’s Bureau d’audiences publiques sur l’environnement consultation on water resources
management   277
Collaborative learning processes – adopting an adaptive management framework   277

Water in a changing world

309

PART

List of boxes, figures, maps and tables
15.12
15.13
15.14
15.15
15.16
15.17
15.18
15.19
15.20
15.21
15.22
15.23
15.24
15.25
15.26
15.27
16.1

The Integrated Watershed Development Programme in Jhabua District, Madhya Pradesh, India   278
Experience with multiple-use water services in Nepal   278
The drive for competitive advantage leads to water benefits   279
Sustainable tourism, Çıralı, Turkey   280
Integrating multiple sectors in Southeast Anatolia, Turkey   281
The Tennessee Valley Authority: economic and social transformation in a river basin and beyond   281
Nepal: a community-led initiative to mitigate water-induced disasters   282
Resettlement in Rwanda   282
Rehabilitating the Iraqi Mesopotamian Marshlands for integration and stability   283
Sustainable water institutions promote regional cooperation and stability – the case of the Senegal
River   284
Allocation of water from the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo River between Mexico and the United States   284
Rainfall-related index insurance for farmers   285
Getting a complete picture of water resources through user contributions – a new role for Australia’s
Bureau of Meteorology   286
Zambia’s experiences linking integrated water resources management with national development
plans   287
Payments for ecosystem services help curb climate change and conserve biodiversity while protecting
water resources   288
A water services concession with public funding in Guayaquil, Ecuador   288
Timescales for long-term planning   294

Figures
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
5.1
5.2
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

310

Decision-making affecting water   5
The costs of disasters as a share of GDP are much higher in poor countries than rich countries   8
US government investments in water infrastructure during 1930-96 yielded $6 in damages averted for
each $1 invested   8
Water investment requires a holistic approach – links between pricing, financing and stakeholders   9
Access to water and sanitation rises with income   11
Poverty remains high in sub-Saharan Africa   11
Cause-effect chains and links between water and the Millennium Development Goals   13
Historical and projected energy demand and oil prices show steadily rising demand and rapidly rising
prices   15
Wheat and rice prices have risen sharply in recent years   16
By 2030 about 60% of the world’s population is expected to live in urban areas   31
The cost of energy to consumers has been rising since the 1970s   34
The fertility rate declines with rising female literacy, 1990   37
Many developed countries have increased their investment in environmental research and
development    42
The use of renewable energy sources rose worldwide between 1990 and 2004    43
The absorption of older and more recent technologies depends on more than income   46
Formal and informal legal framework of water rights   52
If the vicious cycle of low funding is reversed, the benefits to society will be enormous   57
New infrastructure seems to dominate donor investments in drinking water and sanitation   58
In the few countries surveyed financial system constraints weighed heavily on achieving the Millennium
Development Goals sanitation target   59
Household expenditure and private sector investments in drinking water supply are generally
unknown   60
Private water operators have a substantial role in developing and developed countries   63
External private investment in the water sector, though variable, has been significant since the early
1990s   63
Official development assistance to the water supply and sanitation sector is rising again after a decline
during the 1990s   63
Climate change: processes, characteristics and threats   69
GDP growth tracks rainfall variability in Ethiopia (1983-2000) and Tanzania (1989-99)   70
The shift of economies from agriculture-based to industrialized, 1965-2001   82
The relation between freshwater use and level of development is inconclusive   83
The ratio of water use to GDP has been declining in many countries   83
Different categories of rural inhabitants in Africa   86
Benefits of a multiple-use approach to water   87

World Water Development Report 3

PART

List of boxes, figures, maps and tables
6.6
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
7.9
7.10
7.11
7.12
7.13
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
9.1
9.2
9.3
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
13.1
14.1

Agricultural systems can be managed to produce one ecosystem function or a range of
ecosystem services   91
Sources of water use globally and for major sectors, 2000   100
Future water demands in Mediterranean region countries for 2025 in Blue Plan business as usual scenario
(trend scenario)   101
Regional and global water supply coverage, by urban and rural areas, 1990 and 2006   103
Regional and global sanitation coverage, by urban and rural areas, 1990 and 2006   103
Gaps are large between farmer’s actual yields and achievable yields for major rainfed cereal crops   108
As irrigation area expanded, food price fell for 30 years before starting to rise again   109
Feed demand drives future demand for grains   109
Industrial water productivity varies greatly across countries   116
Interlinkages between energy and water   117
Water consumption for various power generation technologies in the United States, 2006   118
Renewable energy sources are expected to meet only a small part of total energy demand to 2030   119
Global freshwater fish production has grown rapidly in recent decades   122
Inland capture fisheries vary greatly by region, 2006   122
Biodiversity in freshwater species has declined by half since 1970   129
Effects of river fragmentation and flow regulation vary by region and biome type, 2005   130
Groundwater use has grown rapidly in some countries    131
Increasing frequency of harmful algal blooms in East China Sea associated with increasing
fertilizer use   138
Levels and types of wastewater treatment in OECD countries and selected European countries, 2006   142
High level of wastewater reuse in water-stressed countries, various years   142
The number of companies with a certified system of environmental management varied considerably by
country in 2006   144
Examples of hydrologic interactions in river basins – upstream-downstream impacts   152
Three types of response to water scarcity and competition   154
Importance of non-conventional sources of water for selected Middle East and Mediterranean region
countries, 2000-06   155
Distribution of global runoff to the oceans (exorheic) or internal receiving waters (endorheic) and the
corresponding distribution of contemporary population served   170
Impact of the Davis Dam on the Colorado River hydrograph   172
Human activities are sources for dissolved inorganic nitrogen, organic nitrogen, inorganic phosphorus
and organic phosphorus in coastal zones   174
The spatial distribution of surface area and nitrogen inputs and removal by types of water bodies differ
by latitude, most recent year available   176
Data delivery rate from runoff gauging stations to the Global Runoff Data Centre (number of stations
from which data have been received, 2001-07)   233
Ecosystems and some of the services they provide   264

Maps
1.1
2.1
6.1
6.2
6.3
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5

Fragile states as defined by the International Development Association   20
Expected areas of population growth and decline, 2000-2080   30
Diarrhoea deaths in 2004   89
Geographical pattern of stunting in children under age five on a country basis   90
Water stress level of major river basins, around 2002   92
Water withdrawals highlight discrepancies between regions and between the largest and smallest
consumers, around 2001   98
Annual water withdrawals per person by country, world view, 2000   99
Average national water footprint per capita, 1997-2001   102
Relative importance of rainfed and irrigated agriculture   108
Percentage of cultivated areas equipped for irrigation, around 2003   109
World potential and current hydropower production, 2004   119
Important waterways in the world, 2007    120
Increasing water scarcity   128
Restoration of the Mesopotamian Marshlands in Iraq, March 2003-December 2005   129
Annual withdrawals of renewable groundwater sources and non-renewable fossil aquifers, most recent
year available, 1995-2004   132
Groundwater use for irrigation on a country basis, most recent year available, 1995-2005   133
Groundwater use for drinking water on a country basis, most recent year available, 1995-2005   134

Water in a changing world

311

PART

List of boxes, figures, maps and tables
8.6
9.1
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
13.1

Ecological footprints and biocapacity, 2000   137
Difference between water withdrawn and water effectively used in Mediterranean region countries, all
uses, 2000-05   157
Contrasts between geophysical and human-dimension perspectives on water, most recent
year available   169
Global variations in the relationship between low flows and mean flows (percentage deviation of 1 in 10
year low flows relative to mean flows measured over 1961-90)   171
Impact of flood losses (comparative losses based on national GDP)   172
Patterns of long-term average diffuse groundwater recharge, 1961-90   173
Global groundwater recharge, most recent year available   174
Trend in annual precipitation rate, 1901-2005 and 1979-2005   182
Geographic distribution of the trend in the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) and annual variations
in the globally averaged PDSI, 1900-2000   183
Example of decline in lake abundance and total lake area in the discontinuous permafrost zone of
western Siberia, 1973-97   191
Circumpolar permafrost extent, 2000   192
Changes in the duration of spring snowcover, 1978-2006   194
Tien Shan, Akshiirak glacier massif   197
Interplay of climate factors and net primary productivity   198
Distribution of Global Runoff Data Centre streamflow gauges   232

Tables
1.1
1.2
3.1
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
5.1
5.2
6.1
6.2
6.3
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.3
7.4
7.5
8.1
10.1
10.2
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
11.1
11.2
12.1
A1.1
A2.1

312

Summary of scaling-up opportunities related to achieving the Millennium Development Goals in Africa   12
Types of ecosystem services   14
Return on investments in agricultural research and extension   47
Laws addressing water rights and water management   53
Laws addressing provision of water services   54
Annual capital requirements for water supply and wastewater services and water financing gaps, by
region, 2006-25   59
Commitments of official development assistance from bilateral and multilateral agencies, 2004-06   64
Economic impacts of flood and drought in Kenya, 1997-2000   71
The three water scenarios of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, to 2025   75
Water and the characteristics of rural livelihoods   85
Benefit-cost ratio by water and sanitation intervention in developing regions and Eurasia   88
Major diseases attributable to environmental factors   89
Water resources and withdrawals, 2000   99
Different types of biofuel and quantity of water needed to produce them in rainfed or irrigated
conditions   112
Typology of climate change impacts on major agricultural systems   113
Typology of climate change impacts on major agricultural systems (continued)   114
Water use per tonne of product produced, selected industries   116
Contribution of inland and marine fisheries to exports, daily animal protein supply and employment in
major fish-harvesting economies, latest year available    121
Comparison of point and non-point sources of water pollution    137
Estimates of renewable water supplies, access to renewable supplies and population served by freshwater,
2000   167
Definitions of key components of the land-based hydrologic cycle and examples of their reconfiguration
by humans   168
Definitions of key components of the land-based hydrologic cycle and examples of their reconfiguration
by humans (continued)   169
Indicative range of uncertainty in recent assessments of renewable water supply, most recent year
available   171
Estimated mean residence times (storage to throughput) and stored water volumes of the main
components of the Earth’s hydrosphere   173
Principal symptoms of human-river system interactions and human pressures on water use   177
Trends in annual maximum streamflow, by continent, for 195 stream gauging stations worldwide,
various years   188
Summary of key findings relative to trends in land surface water cycle components   203
Examples of major floods and flooding worldwide, 1860-2008   215
List of United Nations World Water Development Report indicators and location of detailed data   299
Water-related goals and objectives of major conferences and forums, 1972-present   302
World Water Development Report 3

Index

A

abiotic factors 219, 220
absorptive capacity 46‑47
access to water
climate change 222
corruption 55
economic 80, 270
education 38
electricity 72
finance 262
groundwater 134
health 88, 88‑89, 90, 271, 296
income 84, 86, 87
inequitable 296
monitoring 103‑104
poverty reduction 10‑11, 83, 84‑85
renewable water 167, 170
rights to 248
sanitation 84, 85, 88, 96, 102‑103, 104
solar energy 279
accountability 241, 251‑255, 270, 292
adaptation
climate change 18‑19, 68, 69, 71, 73‑74,
113‑114, 222, 251
collaborative learning processes 277
innovative 259
integrated 295
investments 72
technology 46‑47
uncertainty 282
aerosols 184
Africa
climate change 19, 73
hydrologic data 229
investment 11
knowledge networks 258
poverty 10, 11, 86
sanitation 60, 104
sustainable development 7
age distribution 29, 30, 31, 32
agriculture
biogeochemical cycles 175
charging for water 62
conflicts 152
economic development 80, 81‑82
ecosystems 91, 92‑93, 129
education 272‑273
food prices 34
green revolution 44, 217
groundwater 132‑133, 135‑136
pollution 144
poverty reduction 85
research and development 47
sediment 220
soil erosion 218
subsidized energy 117
technological innovation 41
trade 35
wastewater 142
water use 16, 21, 96, 97, 98, 99, 106‑115,
232‑233
win‑win scenarios 276‑278
see also rural areas
aid 17, 64, 260, 282, 296
Alaska 193
algal blooms 138, 211, 219
allocation of water 52, 92, 115, 150, 154, 157,
244‑245, 284

Water in a changing world

see also reallocation
alluvial aquifers 223
Altai glaciers 196‑197
Anatolia, Turkey 281
Andes 196
animal feed 109, 110
aquaculture 121‑123, 143
aquatic systems 91, 176, 177, 227
aquifers 131‑132, 134, 135, 136, 188, 189‑190,
221‑222, 223
see also groundwater
arctic regions 212
arid tropics 113
arsenic 139, 177
Arwari River, India 251‑254
Asia 82, 84, 136, 145, 157, 245
Asian Water Development Outlook 2007 7
atmospheric links 166, 173‑174
augmentation, supply 154
Australia 51, 52, 157, 216, 285, 286
awareness 35‑36, 105, 222, 251, 258‑259, 285, 286

B

Balkans 140
Baltic Sea 138
Ban Ki‑moon 19, 20, 275
behavioural changes 286
benefits of water 80‑95
bilateral aid 17, 64
biocapacity 136, 137
biodiversity 129, 219‑220, 259, 288
bioenergy 16, 34, 44‑45, 47, 72, 96, 106,
110‑112
biogas 244
biogeochemical cycles 173‑178
biotechnology 43‑44
biotic factors 220
Blue Plan, Mediterranean 101
blue water 107, 168
Bolivia 246
Brazil 247, 248‑249

C

Cambodia 259
Canada 187, 193, 195, 276, 277
capacity
bio‑ 136, 137
development 241, 255‑259, 291, 292
environmental sustainability 127
observation systems 229
technology adsorption 46‑47
water management investment 57‑60
capital 14, 57, 65
Cap‑Net 257
carbon cycle 181, 197‑201
carbon dioxide 44, 45
CEO Water Mandate 274‑275
certification 144
charging strategies 61‑62, 127‑128, 145
see also pricing strategies
chemical waste 211
chief executives 274‑275, 293
children 88
China 7‑8, 10, 36, 39, 61, 218, 272‑273
Çıralı, Turkey 280
circumpolar permafrost 192, 194

civil society 4, 248, 256, 270-271
climate change
agriculture 106, 112
bioenergy 111‑112
diversification 272
energy 117
future 68‑76
glaciers 196
governance reform 250‑251
groundwater 171, 189
hazards 211‑223
human security 280
hydrological cycle 201, 202‑203
migration 32
payments for ecosystem services 288
permafrost 193
risk and uncertainty 284‑285, 295‑296
runoff 82, 113‑114, 213
sustainable development 14, 18‑19
water use 96, 101
cloud cover 184, 185
coalitions 6
coastal areas 30, 117, 120, 175, 176
Coca‑Cola 274, 275
collaboration 276, 277, 285, 292
Colombia 255
Colorado River, US 172
commercialization 249
communication 235, 254, 256‑257, 258
communities of practice 257
community level 55, 105‑106, 248, 279‑280,
282, 293
see also local level
competition 21, 51, 134‑135, 150‑159
conflicts 19‑20, 32, 51, 127, 151‑152, 190
conservation 154, 218
consultation 275‑276, 277, 292
consumption
climate change 71‑72
ecological footprints 136, 137
energy 118
fertilizer 144
fish 121‑122
social drivers 39
water footprints 101
water use 98
conversation arenas 75
cooling processes 16, 98, 118
cooperation 220‑222, 234, 235, 269, 271,
275‑285, 295
coordination 247‑248, 271
corporate water footprints 35‑36
corruption 55‑56, 251, 254‑255, 280
costs
access to water 88‑89
adaptation 71, 73
charging for water 61‑62
disasters 8
energy 33‑35
environmental 9
extreme events 214, 215, 216
infrastructure 57‑58, 58‑60
lack of investment 82
nanotechnology 45
pollution 140
recovery 61, 65, 66
service provision 3
supply augmentation 154‑155
water management 56‑57
crises 3, 13, 14‑20

313

Index
crisis prevention 280‑288
crop production 106‑107, 111‑113
cross‑subsidization 62
cultivated areas 109
culture 38‑39
customary aspects 50, 54, 56, 250
see also traditional aspects
cyanobacteria 138, 211, 219
Czech Republic 216

D

dairy products 39, 109, 110
Dalian water supply project, China 61
damage costs 8‑9
dams 59, 129‑130, 151, 152‑153, 171, 172, 190,
219
see also reservoirs; storage
Danube 286
data 226‑236, 260‑262, 294
Davis Dam, US 172
decentralization 51, 65, 104‑105, 246, 270‑271,
285, 293
decision‑making
climate change 74, 75, 203
decentralization 269, 270‑271
environmental impacts 273‑274
informed 258
institutional 246
integrated 292‑293
participation 275‑276, 277
risk and uncertainty 295‑296
sustainable development 3‑23
trade‑offs 291, 294
decommissioning costs 59
deltas 113, 153
demand
agriculture 108‑110, 111‑112
competition management 154‑158
energy 15, 43
finance 60
groundwater 131‑134
industrial 116
population 29
sanitation 105, 106
technological innovation 42
water use 98
demographic level 14‑15, 29‑32, 37, 69‑70
desalinization 16, 41‑42, 45, 155
desertification 218
deserts 211
developed countries
charging for water 61
extreme events 211, 214
pollution 177‑178
priorities 295
private water operators 63
research and development 42
sewage treatment 141
technological innovation 45, 46, 72
water use 101
developing countries
access to water 88
adaptation 18
charging for water 61‑62
climate change 70, 73, 284
consumption patterns 39
diseases 13
economy 70
ecosystem services 92
energy use 119
extreme events 211, 214
finance 17, 73
fisheries 122, 123
food prices 110
hydrologic data 227
investment 9‑10
national frameworks 51
networks 203‑204, 228, 285
pollution 177
population 30‑31
priorities 295
private water operators 62, 63
public utilities 105
research and development 42, 260
sewage treatment 141
streamflow 186
technological innovation 41, 45, 46, 47, 72
wastewater 143
development
economic 21, 74, 80‑83, 80‑84, 96, 136, 291,
295‑296

314

global crises 14
institutional 241, 245‑250, 255‑256, 259, 292
planning 286‑287, 293
rural 282
sustainable 3‑23, 36, 68, 288
dialogue 136, 295
diarrhoeal diseases 89‑90
diet 14, 36, 39, 121, 122
diffuse groundwater recharge 173
diffusion of technology 41, 45‑47
disasters 8, 70‑71, 280‑282, 284
see also extreme events
disbursement delays 60‑61
diseases 13, 37, 70, 88, 89‑90, 104, 140, 143, 273
displaced people 32, 283
dissolved materials 173‑174, 200, 201
distributional aspects 21, 166, 170
diversification 271‑272
domestic level 63, 96, 102‑106
see also household level
Dominican Republic 279
donor community 291
downscaling 203
downstream impacts 153
drafting laws 54, 250
drinking water
access to 84
education 38
groundwater 134
health 88
infrastructure costs 59
investment 8
MDGs 11, 102
pollution 139
safe 104, 259
drivers 21
droughts 71, 183‑184, 188, 211, 214‑217

E

earthquakes 219
East China Sea 138
Eastern Europe 141
ecohealth approach 273
ecological footprints 136, 137
economic level
demand management 156
development 21, 74, 80‑84, 96, 136, 291, 295
drivers 32‑36
environmental goods and services 262‑263
extreme events 214, 215
fisheries 121
groundwater 131‑134, 134‑135, 217
growth 6‑7, 10, 14, 70‑71, 273‑274
investment 7‑9
livelihoods 259
macro‑ policies 271‑272
pollution 141
regional development 280, 281
technological innovation 41
water use 101
ecosystems
pressures on 150‑159
protection 21
restoration costs 9
services 14, 91‑93, 127‑129, 130, 177, 288
temperature and productivity 219
ecotourism 279‑280
Ecuador 253, 288
education 32, 37‑38, 88, 258‑259, 272‑273, 286
efficiency
agriculture 106, 115
charging for water 62
competition management 154, 157
education 37
finance 61
integrated water resources management 243
technological innovation 41, 260
water saving 274
water use 116, 118, 212
Ethiopia 261
electricity 43, 72, 117, 118, 119, 279
electrification 127, 279
emerging market economies
economic growth 32, 36, 58
finance 63, 64‑65
pollution 136, 143
social change 71‑72
water use 96, 101
Emilia‑Romagna Region, Italy 254, 258‑259
employment 121, 272‑273
empowerment 38, 53‑54, 274

end‑of‑pipe technologies 143‑144
endorheic zones 170
energy 15‑16, 18, 33‑35, 42‑43, 96, 115‑120, 279
see also bioenergy; hydropower
enforcement 49, 50, 56, 142
engineered systems 171, 214
environmental level
allocation systems 52
bioenergy 45
certification 144
degradation costs 9
diseases 89
economic decisions 273‑274
ecosystem services 91‑93
footprints 39
governance 271
green revolution impacts 44
impact assessments 284‑285
migration 32
monitoring 43
payment for goods and services 65‑66,
262‑263, 292
research and development 42
services 120
sustainability 12‑14, 37, 127, 134‑135, 145‑146
technological innovation 41, 47
urbanization 31
water use 127‑149
equity 157, 292
erosion 175, 218
ethanol 111, 112
eThekwini Declaration 2008 60, 104
Ethiopia 70, 274
Eurasia 88, 195
Europe 141, 142, 146, 187, 194, 216
European Union Water Framework Directive
50, 132, 247
eutrophication 138, 144, 175‑176, 220
evaporation 97, 116‑117, 167, 175, 184‑185, 190,
202, 204
evapotranspiration 106, 107, 112, 152, 156, 167,
184‑185, 189, 197, 202, 204, 222
evolution of water use 96‑126
exorheic zones 170
exports 35, 46, 102, 121, 271
external aid 64
external drivers 21, 269‑270, 296
external water footprints 101‑102
extreme events 21, 70, 71, 184, 211, 213‑217
see also disasters

F

female literacy 37
fertility 32, 37
fertilizers 138, 144
filtration 45
finance
climate change 72‑73
crises 17
economic development 295
hydrologic networks 235
investment 292
the missing link 56‑66
observation networks 228
options 49
pollution and mitigation 145
poverty reduction 85
response options 262‑263
sustainable 57, 66, 286‑287, 291, 292
see also investment
fires 200
fisheries 121‑123, 143, 153
floods 70, 71, 171, 172, 186, 187, 211, 213‑214
flows
environmental 145‑146
rivers 130, 170‑171, 214‑217
fluvial system filters 174, 176
food
bioenergy 44‑45, 72
diet 14, 36, 39, 121, 122
global crisis 14, 33‑35
population 108, 109
prices 16, 21, 33, 34, 47, 106, 108, 109, 110
security 16‑17, 33, 110, 123
water use 107
forecasts 74, 227, 231, 233, 234
formal water rights 52
forums 254
fossil fuels 43, 120
fragile states 19‑20, 81
see also vulnerability

World Water Development Report 3

Index
fragmentation 247‑248
France 97
freshwater
agriculture 16, 111, 112, 114, 115
biodiversity 129
development 83
drivers 29‑39
ecosystems 92, 120
fisheries 123
glaciers 196
lakes 190
quality 138, 139, 230
trends 100‑102
water cycle 166‑177
withdrawals 96, 97, 98, 100, 106
see also aquifers; groundwater
front‑end tools 235
fuel costs 33‑35
future aspects 68‑76, 135‑136, 202‑203

G

G‑8 Evian Water Action Plan 2009 296
Ganges River 39
GDP see gross domestic product
gender 38, 292
general circulation models 203
genetically modified organisms 44
GEO4 see Global Environment Outlook 2007
Germany 187
glaciers 196‑197, 198, 204, 213, 216
Global Environment Outlook 2007 (GEO4) 75
globalization 33, 36, 96, 102
global level
bioenergy 111
biogeochemical cycles 173‑178
climate change 212
crises 3, 14‑20
ecological footprints 137
economic growth 32
ecosystem degradation 130
energy 43
extreme events 214, 215
fisheries 122
food crises 33‑35
freshwater 230
groundwater 132, 134, 174
river flow 171
runoff 170, 233
sanitation 103
sharing data 226, 227
soil erosion 218
water cycle 166‑167, 181‑210
water scarcity 128
water use 97‑102, 232‑233, 235
waterways 120
Global Monitoring Report 2005 10‑11
global warming 21, 70, 181, 211, 216, 295
GNP see gross national product
governance 51, 55, 72‑73, 241, 242‑251, 270‑271
government level 4, 6, 21, 47, 63
grasslands 211‑212
grass‑roots water federations 253
gravimetric measurements 185, 186, 234
Great Lakes, North America 251, 252
greenhouse gases 72, 112, 117
green revolution 44, 217
green water 106‑107, 168, 263, 287
gross domestic product (GDP)
climate change 70, 71
disaster costs 8
diversification 271
energy security 34
flooding 172
groundwater 134
investment 82‑83
technological innovation 46
variability 171
water management 296
gross national product (GNP) 82
groundwater
buffer functions 211, 217, 223
cross‑impacts 151
energy 16, 279
global resources 174
hydrologic data 227
observation 229‑230
pollution 139, 177
recharge 135, 173, 189‑190, 217, 223
sustainable management 131‑136
terrestrial carbon 201
transboundary 221‑222

Water in a changing world

trends 188‑190, 204
variability 171‑172
water use 99‑100
see also aquifers
groundwater‑dependent economies 127, 131
growing seasons 200, 220, 222
Guaraní aquifer 221
Guayaquil, Ecuador 288

H

hand‑washing 90
hazards 211‑225
health
climate change 73
microbial pollution 138
policy 272‑273
pollution 139, 140, 177
poverty reduction 87, 296
wastewater 143
water relationships 88‑90
heat waves 184, 216
heavy metals 45, 139, 143
High‑Level Conference on World Food Security
2008 16, 34
High‑Level Event on the Millennium
Development Goals 2008 13, 14
Himalayan region 213
Hinduism 39
HIV/AIDS 273
holistic approaches 9, 74, 244
Honduras 249
household level
fisheries 121
investment 60, 277‑278
micro‑hydro plants 72
poverty reduction 84, 86‑87
sanitation 104, 105
water‑saving technologies 41
see also domestic level
Human Development Report 2006 10, 83‑84, 104
human level
biogeochemical cycles 174‑176
capacities 255‑256, 292
development 84
dimension perspectives 169
security 280‑282
technological innovation 41, 42
humid tropics 113
hydrologic cycle 21, 166‑172, 181‑210
hydrologic data 226‑236
hydropower
conflicts 152‑153
cross‑subsidization 62
energy 16, 34, 72, 118‑119, 119‑120
future development 43
water use 98
hygiene 90, 105, 143

I

ice 193, 220
ICT see information and communications
technology
IMF see International Monetary Fund
imports 35
income
access to water 84, 86, 87
charging for water 61
education 272‑273
energy use 119
food prices 33, 110
global crises 14
human development 84
investment 277‑278
pollution 140‑143
priorities 295
rural and urban 85
technology 46
see also poverty
India 10, 152, 213, 251‑254, 255, 257‑258, 275, 278
indicators 88, 90, 98, 104, 167
individual level 98, 99, 293
Indonesia 115
Indus River basin 153
industrialized countries 57, 82
see also developed countries
industry
agriculture conflicts 152
demand management 157
pollution control 143‑144

water use 41, 96, 97, 98, 99, 115‑120
inequality 33, 84, 98
inequity 61‑62, 296
informal sector 31, 37, 52, 63, 84‑85, 103‑104,
105, 249
information
climate change 73, 203
decision‑making 296
groundwater 132, 135, 229‑230
needs 15, 17‑18, 260‑262
networks 231, 256‑258
observational gap 226‑236
pollution 127, 136
sharing 256‑258, 292, 293‑294
wastewater 233
information and communications technology
(ICT) 43
informed decisions 296
infrastructure
corruption 254
costs 57‑58, 58‑60
development 81
government finance 63
international support 296
investment 7, 8, 9, 17, 82‑83, 242, 259, 291,
292
post‑conflict 20
technological innovation 46
inland water resources 91, 121, 122, 176
innovation 41‑48, 241, 259‑260, 292
in‑situ observations 186, 203, 230, 233, 235
institutional level
allocation 284
collaborative initiatives 276
development 241, 245‑250, 255‑256, 259,
292
international waters 283, 284
macroeconomic policies 271
in‑stream water uses 120‑123
insurance 284, 285
integrated approaches
climate change 74, 295
crisis recovery 283
decision‑making 269
hydrologic information 233, 235
institutions 247‑248
multiple‑use initiatives 278
observation networks 228, 231
planning 242‑245, 286‑287, 292‑293, 295
risk and adaptation 295
rural development 277, 278
waste management 143
water resources management 4, 53, 242, 243
water saving strategies 274
watersheds 51
Integrated Watershed Management Network
(IWMNET) 258
intensification 107, 201‑202
interconnectedness 150‑151
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) 19, 70, 131, 182, 184, 201, 202, 212‑213
internal water footprints 101‑102
International Joint Commission 251, 252
international level
conflicts 154
cooperation 220‑222
environmental sustainability 146
finance 287
institutions 283
policy and laws 50‑51
support 269, 293, 296
trade 32, 35‑36
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 17
International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) 144
Internet‑based resources 256, 258
invasive species 33
investment
adaptation 72
capacity 57‑60
climate change 70, 71
corruption 254
data‑gathering 294
decision‑making 292‑293
development 20
groundwater 131, 136
hydrologic observations 229, 230
hydropower 119
infrastructure 7, 8, 9, 17, 82‑83, 242, 259,
291, 292
monitoring 226
need for 296
pollution 140, 144

315

Index
poverty 37, 277‑278
research and development 42, 47
sanitation 84
technological innovation 259
wastewater 143
water 7‑9, 9‑14, 17, 82‑83
see also finance
IPCC see Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change
Iraq 129
irrigation
agriculture 114, 115
agro‑ecosystems 92‑93
bioenergy 111, 112
charging for water 62
customary rights 250
groundwater 132‑133, 189, 217
losses 156‑157
management transfer 55
multiple‑use initiatives 278
participatory 251, 253‑254
poverty reduction 85
technological innovation 260
wastewater 143
water use 107, 108, 109
ISO see International Organization for
Standardization
Italy 254, 258‑259
IWMNET see Integrated Watershed
Management Network

J

Japan 219
Jhabua District, Madhya Pradesh, India 278
Joint Monitoring Programme 2000 103, 104
Jordan River basin 151

K

Kafue Flats, Zambia 259
Kala Dera, India 274, 275
Kenya 71, 249‑250, 261, 263, 273
Ki‑moon, Ban see Ban Ki‑moon
knowledge 256‑258, 262, 275‑285, 292
see also information

L

lakes 138, 190‑191, 200, 204, 220, 223, 251,
252, 261
land
links 173‑174
redistribution policies 283
surface water cycle 181‑210
tenure 85
use planning 214
zoning 134, 145
land‑based hydrologic cycle 166‑172
landslides 219
latimetry observations 234
leadership 21, 291, 293, 296
leakage 58, 156
learning processes 256, 257‑258, 281
legal level 49‑56, 72‑73, 146, 156, 222, 249‑250,
262, 292
legitimacy 49, 56
Lesotho 255
lifestyle changes 14, 36‑37, 39, 71‑72
literacy 37
Living Plant Index 129
local level
action 293
conflicts 151
data‑gathering 294
finance 57, 65
governance 105, 271
investment 9
rights 52
sediment 219
trade 35
see also community level
longitudinal linkages 220
long‑term aspects 74, 140, 174, 183, 195, 294‑295

M

macroeconomic policies 271‑272
mainstreaming 38, 234‑235

316

malaria 90, 273
Malaysia 249
malnutrition 14, 90
management
accountability 251‑255
competition 154‑158
cooperative 275‑276
delivery contrast 51
groundwater 135‑136
integrated 292‑293
land‑based hydrologic cycle 168‑169
subsectoral level 4
marginal‑quality water 155
marshlands 283
Mauritius 272
MDGs see Millennium Development Goals
meat production 109
Mediterranean region 101, 113, 116‑117, 155,
156, 157, 212
Mekong River basin 153
melt‑water 193
Mesopotamian marshlands, Iraq 129, 283
meta‑information systems 235
methane 200
Mexico 243, 284
microbial pollution 138
microfinance 65
micro‑hydro plants 72
micro‑irrigation 156‑157
micro‑organisms 44
microwave technology 234
Middle East 154, 155
middle‑income countries 33
migration 30, 31‑32, 70, 282
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
achieving 3
corruption 55, 56
domestic water 96
drinking water 102
health 88
investment 11‑12, 13
partnerships 6
poverty reduction 10, 11
sanitation 59, 244
mining activities 139, 140
mismanagement 254‑255
see also corruption
mitigation
climate change 19, 68, 69, 111‑112
disasters 282
hazards 220‑221, 222
policy 295
pollution 127, 139‑145
technological innovation 72‑73
modelling
groundwater recharge 190
hydrologic data 203, 226‑227, 235
monitoring networks 261
soil moisture 185, 186
water quality 176
Mondi South Africa 274, 275
monitoring
groundwater 135
information 43, 261‑262
nanotechnology 45
networks 21, 226‑236, 285
performance 256
pollution 136, 146
supply and sanitation 103‑104
water quality 127, 174
mortality 13, 87, 88, 89, 90, 215
mountains 170, 212
multipurpose water schemes 291
multidecadal variability 182‑183, 187
multilateral aid 17, 64
multilateral treaties 154
multinational agreements 228
multiplatform information 228, 234, 235
multiple objectives 280, 281
multiple‑use approaches 86‑87, 115, 278, 294
multisectoral approaches 7
multistakeholder processes 12, 53

N

nanotechnology 45
national level
capacity assessment 256
climate change 251
conflicts 151
development plans 293
environmental sustainability 145‑146

finance 57, 65
fisheries 121
hydrologic information 230, 233
industrial water productivity 116
integrated approaches 242, 286‑287
law 50
observation networks 231, 235
policy 51‑52, 111
poverty reduction 10
security 280
sharing data 226
wastewater treatment 142
water footprints 102
water saving strategies 274
water use 98, 99
nation‑building 81
navigation 120‑121
Near East 112
negative population growth 30
Nepal 72, 278, 282
The Netherlands 245
net primary productivity 199‑200
networks 21, 203‑204, 226‑236, 257‑258, 261,
285
New York City, US 128, 263
NGOs see non‑governmental organizations
nitrates 139, 144
nitrogen 175, 176
non‑conventional sources 154, 155
non‑governmental organizations (NGOs)
54‑55, 158
non‑integrated approaches 243
non‑point source pollution 136, 137, 139,
144‑145, 178
non‑water sectoral interventions 269‑270
no‑regrets 296
North America 194, 195, 251, 252
Northern Hemisphere 192, 193, 194, 195, 213
nuclear energy 43
nutrients 138‑139, 144, 173, 175‑176, 219, 220

O

observation networks 21, 226‑236
see also monitoring
ocean links 173‑174
off‑farm employment 272‑273
official development assistance 64, 65, 262, 296
off‑stream uses 96, 97‑98, 99
oil prices 15‑16, 65, 119‑120
online information systems 235, 257
on‑stream uses 96, 98
operational data 228‑234
operation and maintenance 57‑58, 235
organic materials 138
Orissa, India 152
oxygenation 220

P

Pakistan 90, 141, 142
Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) 183‑184,
186, 216
Pamir glaciers 196‑197
pan evaporation 184, 185, 202
participation
consultation 275‑276, 277
decision‑making 6, 270, 292
demand management 274
institutional 246
policy 49
water management 53‑54, 251‑255, 256
particulate materials 173‑174, 200‑201
partnerships 4, 6, 12, 248‑249, 257, 293
pastoralists 31‑32
payments for goods and services 65‑66,
262‑263, 288, 292
PDSI see Palmer Drought Severity Index
peace and security 19
perceptions 36, 38, 106
performance monitoring 256
permafrost 190‑191, 192‑194, 200, 201, 204
Peru 93
pesticides 144
philanthropic assistance 64, 296
phosphorous 175, 220
planning
accountability 251‑255
incremental changes 241
integrated 242‑245, 286‑287, 292‑293, 294
land use 214

World Water Development Report 3

Index
river basin 53
strategic financial 61
point source pollution 136, 137, 139
policy
bioenergy 34
climate change 72‑73, 251
data‑sharing 231
decision‑making 296
external 269
governance reform 242‑251
groundwater 136
health 272‑273
incremental changes 241
land redistribution 283
law 249‑250
macroeconomic 271‑272
mitigation and adaptation 295
technology adsorption 47
water use 49‑56
‘polluter pays’ principle 62, 128, 140, 145
pollution
charges 62
corruption 56
laws 53
micro‑organisms 44
mitigation 127, 139‑145, 146
prints 36
water quality 136‑139
water supply constraints 177‑178
see also quality, water; wastewater
population
biogeochemical cycles 175
education 38
food production 108, 109
global runoff 170
pressures 14, 29, 30‑31
renewable water 167
snowmelt 194‑195
soil erosion 218
water use 98, 101
Potters for Peace, Cambodia 259
poverty
access to water 3, 10‑11, 83‑87
charging for water 61‑62
corruption 55
disaster costs 8
food prices 110
globalization 33
health 87, 296
investment 277‑278
priorities 295
rural electrification 279
social drivers 37
sub‑Saharan Africa 11
see also income
power generation technologies 118
precipitation
climate change 112, 213
extreme events 216
freshwater 166‑167
glaciers 196, 197
groundwater 190
landslides 219
net primary productivity 199, 200
satellite data 234
sediment 220
temperature 213‑214
trends 181‑184, 201, 202, 204
precision agriculture 133, 135‑136
prices
allocation of water 157
demand management 157
electricity 279
energy 15‑16, 117‑118
food 16, 21, 33, 44‑45, 47, 106, 108, 109, 110
fuel 15‑16, 33‑35, 65, 119‑120
poverty 37
pricing strategies 9, 61‑62, 262, 274
see also charging strategies
private sector 60, 62‑63, 105, 133‑134, 248, 249,
274‑275
productivity 116, 199‑200, 219
professional knowledge 256‑258
public level 10, 63, 105, 249, 251‑255,
258‑259, 288
public‑private partnerships 6, 248, 249
pumps 127, 131, 133, 217, 279

Q

quality, water
basin closure 151

Water in a changing world

biogeochemical cycles 173, 174, 177
climate change 219
demographic drivers 29
drinking water 103
industry 116
marginal 155
monitoring 127, 230, 261
observation networks 227
public participation 252
rights 53
risks 136‑139
Québec, Canada 276, 277

R

radiation 184‑185
rainfall 70, 284, 285
see also precipitation
rainfed agriculture 106, 107, 108, 112
reallocation 154, 155, 157, 242, 243‑244
see also allocation of water
recession, economic 141
recession, glaciers 196‑197, 198
recurrent costs 57
recycling 211
reference crop evaporation 185
refugees 31, 283
regional level
cooperation 284
economic development 280, 281
evaporation 185
fisheries 122
hazards 211‑213
hydrologic data 232, 235
networks 257
policy and laws 50‑51
public awareness 258‑259
radiation 184‑185
river effects 130
sanitation 103
service costs 59
sharing data 226
snow cover 195
streamflow 216
trade 35
water crises 13
water use 99
water withdrawals 98
regulations
demand management 156, 157
environmental technology 42
groundwater 135
policy and law 52‑53, 56
pollution mitigation 146
river flow 130, 171
technology adsorption 46, 47
trade‑offs 294
rehabilitation 20, 59, 283
religious belief 38‑39
remote sensing 18, 185, 186, 230, 235
see also satellite data
renewable energy 42‑43, 119, 279, 280
see also hydropower
renewable water 167‑172, 223
Republic of Korea 64
reputation 274, 275
research 42, 47, 241, 257, 259‑260
reservoirs
ecosystem degradation 129, 130
evaporation 116‑117, 175
sediment 72, 218, 220
trends 190, 204
see also dams; storage
resettlement 282, 283
residence times 138, 171‑172, 173
resilience 129‑130, 282, 295
respiration 199, 200
response options 21, 241‑268
reuse of wastewater 142‑143
revenues 60‑64
RhineNet project 254
Rhine River, Europe 121
rice production 115
rights 52‑53, 248, 250, 285
Rio Grande/Bravo 243, 284
risk
climate change 19
dealing with 269
decision‑making 292, 295‑296
integrated approaches 277
malnutrition 14
nanotechnology 45

pollution 145
sharing instruments 65
wastewater 143
water quality 136‑139
win‑win scenarios 283‑285
river basins
closure and interconnectedness 150‑151
competition 155
interregional cooperation 283
organizations 6
river management 247
transboundary 146
upstream‑downstream impacts 152
water quality 176
rivers
discharge 151, 175, 197, 201, 202, 219
environmental flows 145‑146
flows 130, 170‑171, 214‑217
parliaments 251‑254
sediment 218‑222
wastewater 141
see also streamflow
rules 50‑51
runoff
climate change 82, 113‑114, 213
glaciers 197, 213
global 170, 232, 233
hydrologic cycle 167
pollution 139
trends 186‑188, 202, 203, 204
rural areas
development 282
electrification 127, 133, 279
environmental services payments 263
groundwater 134‑135, 217
infrastructure 58
investments 82
population 31
sanitation 103
urban water needs contrast 84‑86
see also agriculture
Russian Federation 186, 188, 193, 194, 195
Rwanda 282, 283

S

safe drinking water see drinking water
salinization 130, 131, 220, 230
sanitation
access to 84, 85, 88, 96, 102‑103, 104
domestic 102‑106
economic impacts 8‑9
education 38, 272
finance 49
infrastructure costs 59‑60
integrated approaches 244
law 51
MDGs 11‑12
participation 246
poverty 11, 37
subsidies 64
São Francisco basin, Brazil 247
satellite data 43, 185, 186, 195, 204, 226, 228,
233‑234
see also remote sensing
scaling‑up 12, 106
scarcity, water 17, 18, 33, 112, 128, 154, 294
scenarios 74‑75, 101, 212‑213, 244, 269‑273,
296
schools 88, 104, 272
science and education centres 258
science and technology 42‑45
see also research
sea level rise 70
second‑generation bioenergy technology 44
sectoral level 15, 98, 151‑152, 276‑280
security
climate change 19‑20
energy 18, 34
food 16‑17, 33, 110, 123
water 11, 153
win‑win scenarios 280‑282
sediment 130, 175, 190, 201, 218‑222
seismic activities 219
self‑regulation 135
self‑sufficiency 34
self‑supply groundwater 97, 100
semi‑arid tropics 113
Senegal River 284
sensitivity 189, 190, 203
service provision/delivery
corruption 55

317

PART

Index
costs 3, 292
decentralization 246
efficiency 249
finance 61, 63
national 51‑52, 81
partnerships 6
small‑scale 89, 105‑106
sewage treatment 140‑143
see also wastewater
shared resources 51, 146, 220, 283
sharing data and information 226, 228, 229,
231‑232, 235, 236, 256‑258, 293‑294
Siberia 190‑191, 193
siltation 130
single‑use systems 87
skin disease 143
sludge 142
slums 30, 84, 103‑104, 105, 282
small islands 113
small‑scale water provision 63, 65, 249, 262
small towns 103
snow 113, 194‑196, 201, 204, 213, 216
social level
climate change 71‑72
decision‑making 4
development 291
drivers 36‑39
groundwater sustainability 134‑135
marketing 286
policy 272‑273
responsibility 274
sanitation 105‑106
water management 150
soft infrastructure 57, 82‑83
soil 185‑186, 200, 204, 218
solar energy 279
solar radiation 184
South Africa 222, 275
South Asia 106, 133
South‑East Asia 8
space hydrologic observations 233‑234
Spain 222
spatial level 118, 167‑172, 174, 175, 176,
294‑295
sphere of decision‑making 4, 5
spring melt 194, 195
stakeholders 9, 246, 251‑255
standards of living 39, 71
stationarity 181
statistical downscaling 203
The Stern Review 2006 71
storage
Africa 11
economic development 81, 82
groundwater 171‑172, 173, 223, 230
need for increases 153
terrestrial carbon cycles 197, 199
trends 190‑192
see also groundwater; reservoirs
storms 70, 214
streamflow 186‑188, 201, 202, 204, 213, 220,
229, 232
see also river flows
stunting in children 90
subsectoral management 4
subsidence 217
subsidies 62, 64, 66, 117, 133, 158, 279
supply 64, 68, 102‑106, 154‑158, 167, 246
support 293
surface fluxes 181
sustainable development 3‑23, 36, 68, 288
sustainable level
change 286
cost recovery 65
environmental 12‑14, 37, 127, 134‑135,
145‑146
finance 57, 66, 284‑288, 291, 292
groundwater 131‑136
institutions 284
sanitation 244
technological innovation 47
tourism 279‑280
water management 36
Sustainable Water Management Improves
Tomorrow’s Cities Health (SWITCH) 257
Sweden 187
SWITCH see Sustainable Water Management
Improves Tomorrow’s Cities Health
Switzerland 187
synergies 6, 269, 291, 294

318

T

Tajikistan 223
Tanzania 70
tariffs 60, 61‑62, 65
technological innovation 41‑48, 72‑73, 105,
115, 156, 259‑260, 285
temperature
extreme events 216
glaciers 196‑197
growing seasons 222
hydrological cycle 201, 202
permafrost 193
precipitation 213‑214
productivity 199‑200, 219
sediment 220
snow cover 195
temporal level 167‑172, 294‑295
Tennessee Valley Authority 280, 281
terrestrial systems 197‑201, 228, 229‑230
thaw lakes 200
thermal stratification 138, 220
thermocline 220
Tien Shan, Akshiirak glacier massif 197, 198
tourism 116, 117, 279‑280
toxic chemicals 273
trade 32, 35‑36, 62, 145, 158
trade‑offs 6, 49, 66, 269, 277, 291, 294
traditional aspects 52, 256, 262
see also customary aspects
transboundary 18, 146, 153‑154, 221‑222, 230,
231‑232, 243, 286
transition economies 140
transparency 49, 56, 150, 270, 292
transpiration 106
transport 111, 120‑121, 201
treaties 50, 154
tundra 212
Tunisia 156, 244, 274
Turkey 187, 280, 281

U

Uganda 91, 271
Ukraine 186
UN see United Nations
uncertainty
climate change 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 112‑114
data and information 292
dealing with 269
decision‑making 295‑296
economic 17
future water use 101
hydrological cycle 202‑203, 227
precipitation 181, 182
reducing 291
renewable water supply 170, 171
variability 211
water quality 174
water use 97
win‑win scenarios 283‑285
under‑five mortality 88
UN Secretary‑General’s Advisory Board on
Water and Sanitation (UNSGAB) 64
UNFCCC see United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
United Kingdom 187
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) 18, 19
United Nations (UN) 20, 269, 291, 293
United States of America (US) 243
allocation institutions 284
dams 172
ecosystem restoration costs 9
infrastructure 8, 57
power generation technologies 118
regional development 280, 281
snow cover 195‑196
soil conservation 218
streamflow 187
water charging 263
upstream‑downstream relationships 151, 152,
262‑263
upstream irrigation 157
urban areas
agriculture conflicts 152
groundwater 133‑134, 134‑135
infrastructure 57‑58
knowledge networks 257‑258
migration 282
pollution 140‑143

population 29‑30, 31
rural contrast 84‑86
sanitation 103
stormwater 214
wastewater 287
water loss 156
urbanization 29, 31, 101, 136, 138
user finance 57, 60, 61‑62, 286
use of water 16, 21, 41, 82‑83, 96‑149, 212,
232‑233, 294

V

value 92, 145, 157, 228, 231
values 38‑39
variability
adaptation 222
climate change 68, 73, 74
glaciers 196
precipitation 181, 182‑183
rainfall 70
soil moisture 186
spatial and temporal 167‑172
uncertainty 211
vegetation 212, 218, 220
Viet Nam, poverty reduction and growth 10
virtual water 14, 15, 32, 33, 35‑36, 101, 102, 168
vulnerability
aquifers 223
climate change 19‑20, 73, 113‑114
economic development 70
ecosystem services 92
groundwater pollution 134
poverty 37
urban and coastal areas 30

W

wastewater
agriculture 287
energy 117
environmental impacts 142‑143
information 233
infrastructure costs 58, 59
micro‑organisms 44
nanotechnology 45
perceptions 106
pollution 138
technological innovation 41
see also pollution; sewage treatment
water box dilemma 3, 4‑6
water footprints 15, 33, 35‑36, 96, 101‑102, 117
water as human right 54, 248
water‑logging 130‑131
water stress 92, 142
water user associations 6, 246, 248, 253‑254
WBCSD see World Business Council for
Sustainable Development
wealth 84
wetlands 91, 151, 191‑192, 204, 212
wildfire 200
willingness to pay 9, 57, 61
wind speed 185, 220
win‑win scenarios 269‑285
withdrawals
agriculture 106
groundwater 132
increases 96
industrial water 116
Mediterranean 157
water use 97, 98, 99, 100
women 38
World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD) 75
World Economic Forum 2008 296
World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure
9, 64, 262
World Water Assessment Programme 291, 296
World Water Monitoring Day™ 285
World Water Vision 2000 53‑54, 75

Y
Z

yields 107‑108, 112‑113, 222

Zambia 259, 287
zooplankton 219

World Water Development Report 3

UNITED NATIONS
WMO

WORLD BANK

UN-Water is a mechanism with 25
member agencies to strengthen coordination
and coherence among all United Nations bodies
that deal with freshwater issues: from water
supply, sanitation and health to climate, food, energy,
environment, disasters and sustainable water resources
management for socioeconomic development. Established
in 2003 by the High-Level Committee on Programmes of
the United Nations, it evolved from many years of close
collaboration among UN agencies. UN-Water is not
another agency; through task forces and programmes
led and hosted by various members, it adds value to
existing activities and fosters cooperation and
information sharing among UN agencies
and stakeholder representatives.

Including UNDESA, UNECE, UNESCAP, UNECA, UNECLAC, UNESCWA, UNCTAD

The news media are full of talk of crises – in climate change, energy and food and
troubled financial markets. These crises are linked to each other and to water resources
management. Unresolved, they may lead to increasing political insecurity and conflict.
Water is required to meet our fundamental needs and rising living standards and
to sustain our planet’s fragile ecosystems. Pressures on the resource come from a
growing and mobile population, social and cultural change, economic development
and technological change. Adding complexity and risk is climate change, with
impacts on the resource as well as on the sources of pressure on water.
The challenges, though substantial, are not insurmountable. The Report shows how some
countries have responded. Progress in providing drinking water is heartening, with the
Millennium Development Goal target on track in most regions. But other areas remain
unaddressed, and after decades of inaction, the problems in water systems are enormous
and will worsen if left unattended.
Leaders in the water sector can inform decisions outside their domain and manage
water resources to achieve agreed socioeconomic objectives and environmental
integrity. Leaders in government, the private sector and civil society determine these
objectives and allocate human and financial resources to meet them. Recognizing
this responsibility, they must act now!

UNESCO ISBN:
978-9-23104-095-5
Earthscan ISBN:
978-1-84407-840-0

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

The United
Nations
World Water
Development
Report 3
Case Studies
Volume

18:13

Page i

FACING
THE
CHALLENGES

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page ii

Published jointly by:
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), 7, place de Fontenoy, 75007 Paris, France,
and
Earthscan, Dunstan House, 14a St Cross Street, London EC1N 8XA,
United Kingdom.
© UNESCO 2009
UNESCO Publishing: http://publishing.unesco.org
Earthscan: www.earthscan.co.uk
The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The authors are responsible for the choice and the presentation of
the facts contained in this book and for the opinions expressed
therein, which are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not
commit the Organization.
Suggested citation: World Water Assessment Programme. 2009.
The United Nations World Water Development Report 3,
Case Study Volume: Facing The Challenges
Cover design: Peter Grundy, London, UK
Page design, layout and typesetting: Baseline Arts Ltd, Oxford, UK
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data has been applied
for.
Earthscan strives to minimize its environmental impacts and carbon
footprint by reducing waste, recycling and offsetting its carbon
dioxide emissions, including those created through publication of
this book. For more details of our environmental policy, see
www.earthscan.co.uk.
This book was printed in the United Kingdom by Butler, Tanner &
Dennis. The paper used is certified by the Forest Stewardship
Council (FSC), and the inks are vegetable based.
This case studies volume has been published on behalf of the United
Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), with the
support of the following countries:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brazil, Cameroon, China, Estonia,
Finland, Italy, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, the Pacific
Island States, Pakistan, Paraguay, the Russian Federation, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, and
Zambia.

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page iii

Foreword
Water in a Changing World: As the title of the third edition of the World Water
Development Report (WWDR3) suggests, we live in a world where adaptation to change
has become a critical necessity in many areas to assure the socio-economic well-being
of societies. Climate, social and economic conditions, markets, consumer values and
technology are only a few of the areas of change that the WWDR3 describes and
discusses in detail. This case study volume complements and compounds the analyses
provided in the report by taking a critical look at the state of water resources, varying
conditions and the resilience of national mechanisms for coping with change. It
examines these and other elements in 20 case studies from four regional settings
involving 23 countries and numerous small island developing states.
Since the inception of the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) in 2000, case
study development has been an integral part of the programme’s work, and our case
study partners have significantly contributed to the contents of the World Water
Development Reports. The study projects initiated in participating countries served as a
platform bringing relevant national stakeholders together to identify the gaps in
knowledge, the shortcomings in the legislative system and the aspects of institutional
capacity that need to be enhanced. Case study development has provided an impetus
for the national agencies responsible for water management to organize their data
collection and reporting efforts more efficiently. It has also helped raise public
awareness of the global water crisis and the visibility of integrated water resources
management on national agendas. Most importantly, in the process, the skills and
experience of both local water professionals and policy-makers are engaged and
enhanced. WWAP activities have also influenced action elsewhere, thanks to actively
conducted research on the protection and sustainable use of water resources.
In the past nine years, the number of case studies has continuously risen, from seven
in the WWDR1 to 20 in the WWDR3. The coverage figures have also changed, from
12 countries in the WWDR1 to over 23 in the WWDR3. Over the life of the programme
to date, more than 54 countries have been covered at basin or national level. This
prompted the WWAP Secretariat to allocate more space to present findings of the case
study projects. Hence the need for a separate, stand-alone publication.
It is my great pleasure to present this volume, Facing the Challenges, where you will find
case studies initiated in Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America, providing a succinct
account of the state of freshwater resources in a range of physical, climatic and socioeconomic conditions. Our readers will also be able to find comprehensive case study
reports on our website (www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr3/case_studies/).
I would like to express my appreciation to all our country partners who actively
participated in the development of the WWDR3 and to Mr Engin Koncagül, the case
studies coordinator, for his work in making this volume possible.
I trust you will find this report both informative and stimulating.

Olcay Ünver
WWAP Coordinator

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page iv

Acknowledgements
Special thanks to: Olcay Ünver

Republic of Korea
Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs

Editor: Engin Koncagül
Editorial team: Alison McKelvey Clayson, Rebecca Brite
Publications Coordinator: Samantha Wauchope
Graphics Coordinator: Akif Altundaş
Maps: AFDEC
Contributors:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay
(La Plata River basin)
Víctor Pochat, Silvia González, Verónica Iuquich, Miguel Ángel
López Arzamendia, staff of Intergovernmental Coordinating
Committee of the La Plata River Basin
Bangladesh
Ministry of Water Resources, Mozaddad Faruque, Jalaluddin Md.
Abdul Hye, Md. Mustafizur Rahman, Azizul Haque, A. H. M.
Kausher, Md. Anwarul Hoque, Md. Azharul Islam, Md. Shahjahan,
Saiful Alam, Hosne Rabbi, Andrew Jenkins
Brazil and Uruguay (Lake Merín Basin)
Gerardo Amaral, José Luis Fay de Azambuja, Ambrosio Barreiro,
Artigas Barrios, Jorge Luiz Cardozo, Daniel Corsino, Aldyr Garcia
Schlee, Adolfo Hax Franz, Henrique Knorr, Juan José Mazzeo, Fiona
Mathy, Joao Menegheti, Jussara Beatriz Pereira, Claudio Pereira,
Martha Petrocelli, Carlos María Prigioni, Hamilton Rodrigues, Silvio
Steinmetz, Manoel de Souza Maia, Carlos María Serrentino
Cameroon
Mathias Fru Fonteh, Kodwo Andah
China
Shang Hongqi, Sun Feng, Sun Yangbo, Pang Hui, Dong Wu, Song
Ruipeng, Jin Hai, Hao Zhao, Xu Jing, Ramasamy Jayakumar, Liu Ke
Estonia
Harry Liiv, Karin Pachel, Erki Endjärv, Peeter Marksoo
Finland and Russian Federation (Vuoksi River basin)
Sari Mitikka, Raimo Peltola, Bertel Vehviläinen, Noora Veijalainen,
Riitta-Sisko Wirkkala, Natalia Alexeeva
Italy
Beatrice Bertolo, Francesco Tornatore
Netherlands
Cathelijn Peters, Sonja Timmer, Olivier Hoes , Marcel E. Boomgaard,
Jan Strijker, Rens L. M. Huisman, Jan Koedood, Eric Kuindersma, Tim
van Hattum, Hans Waals, Joost J. Buntsma, Michelle J. A. Hendriks ,
Ed R. Kramer, Frans A. N. van Baardwijk
Pacific islands
Marc Overmars, Ian White, Hans Thulstrup
Pakistan
Mi Hua, Ch. Muhammad Akram, Zamir Somroo

Spain (Autonomous Community of the Basque Country)
Iñaki Urrutia Garayo, Josu Sanz, Fernando Díaz Alpuente, Mikel
Mancisidor, Tomás Epalza Solano, Ana Oregi Bastarrika, Sabin
Intxaurraga Mendibil
Sri Lanka
M. M. M. Aheeyar, Sanath Fernando, K. A. U. S. Imbulana, V. K.
Nanayakkara, B. V. R. Punyawardena, Uditha Ratnayake, Anoja
Seneviratne, H. S. Somatilake, P. Thalagala, K. D. N. Weerasinghe
Sudan
Abdalla Abdelsalam Ahmed, Kodwo Andah, Abdin Salih, Gamal
Abdo
Swaziland
E. J. Mwendera, Kodwo Andah, Department of Water Affairs
Tunisia
Mustapha Besbes, Abdelkader Hamdane, Jamel Chaded, Mekki
Hamza
Turkey (Istanbul)
Aynur Uluğtekin, Vildan Şahin, Gürcan Özkan, Canan Hastürk,
S. Erkan Kaçmaz, Aynur Züran, Gülçin Aşkın, Zeynep Eynur, Canan
Gökçen, Turgut Berk Sezgin, Selami Oğuz
Uzbekistan
Sh. I. Salikhov, Eh. Dj. Makhmudov, Anna Paolini, Abdi Kadir
Ergashev
Zambia
Peter Mumba, Ben Chundu, Adam Hussen, Peter Lubambo,
Kenneth Nkhowani, Friday Shisala, Christopher Chileshe, Peter
Chola, George W. Sikuleka, Joseph Kanyanga, Priscilla Musonda,
Hastings Chibuye, Christopher Mwasile, Liswaniso Pelekelo, Andrew
Mondoka, Imasiku A. Nyambe, Zebediah Phiri, Lovemore Sievu,
Mumbuwa Munumi, Osward M. Chanda

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page v

Contents
Foreword

iii

Overview

vii

Section 1 Africa
Cameroon

2

Sudan

5

Swaziland

8

Tunisia

12

Zambia

15

Section 2 Asia and the Pacific
Bangladesh

20

China: the Yellow River basin

24

Pacific islands

27

Pakistan: the Cholistan desert

31

Republic of Korea: the Han River basin

33

Sri Lanka: the Walawe River basin

36

Uzbekistan: the Aral Sea basin

39

Section 3 Europe and North America
Estonia

44

Finland and the Russian Federation: the Vuoksi River basin

47

Italy: the Po River basin

51

The Netherlands

55

Spain: the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country

58

Turkey: Istanbul

61

Section 4 Latin America and the Caribbean
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay: La Plata River basin

66

Brazil and Uruguay: Lake Merín basin

71

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page vii

Overview
Background
A global assessment of the state of freshwater resources
is essential for two main reasons: first, to foster an informed
society capable of taking on the important role of shaping
sustainable socio-economic development policies that affect
the future of humanity, and second, to help policy-makers
reach informed choices to protect society from emerging
water resources-related problems while assuring the
well-being of ecosystems. The World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP), established in 2000, is a collective
response of the United Nations system to an international
call for global assessment of freshwater resources that
goes back to the late 1970s (see Milestones). Driven by
this demand, and bolstered by the outcomes of several
important international meetings, the first edition of the
World Water Development Report (WWDR) was launched
in 2003. Entitled Water for People, Water for Life, it presented
a state of the art overview of information and knowledge
on freshwater resources from the 24 UN agencies then
comprising UN-Water (the number rose to 25 in 2008).
It included a case study section describing the major issues
and challenges affecting seven river basins in various parts
of the world. The second edition of the triennial World
Water Development Report (WWDR2, 2006), Water, a
Shared Responsibility, presented 16 such case studies.
Now, in an innovative departure from this format, the
third edition (WWDR3), Water in a Changing World,
features a companion volume of 20 case studies: Facing
the Challenges. In addition to studies conducted
at basin, national and transboundary level, as in the
previous editions, for the first time a group of countries
with similar characteristics (Pacific islands) is included to
widen the scope of analysis. All three editions of the

WWDR, including their case studies, can be found at
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/
The case studies in this volume are grouped into four
regions: Africa (Cameroon, Sudan, Swaziland, Tunisia,
Zambia), Asia and the Pacific (Bangladesh, China, Pacific
islands, Pakistan [Cholistan desert], the Republic of
Korea, Sri Lanka, Uzbekistan), Europe and North America
(Estonia, Italy [Po River basin], the Netherlands, Spain
[Basque Country], Finland and the Russian Federation
[Vuoksi River basin], Turkey [Istanbul]), and Latin
America and the Caribbean (La Plata River basin and
Lake Merín basin). Although each country or basin has
distinct characteristics, the grouping by region makes it
clear that there are many shared features and common
concerns that need to be addressed.
This volume focuses on the state of freshwater resources
and the management challenges facing over 25 countries,
and seeks answers to core questions present since the first
edition of the WWDR: How successfully have different
elements have been integrated into a coherent whole?
How well does the national system take account of
competing needs and uses? Do all stakeholders have a
voice in decision-making? Do water policies build in
incentives for conserving water and controlling pollution?
How resilient is the water management system and how
well is it able to meet changing human needs and
conditions? Is the human, institutional and financial
capacity sufficient to meet challenges? These questions
aim to identify the problems in achieving integrated
approaches to water management, while the main volume
analyzes these issues from a multisector perspective and
makes recommendations for addressing the challenges.

Location of case study countries

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

vii

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page viii

Overview

Milestones
1977 Mar del Plata Action Plan
(UN Conference on Water): The relative
lack of priority on systematic measurement
of water resources is stressed.
1992 Agenda 21 (UN Conference on
Environment and Development): The
importance of holistic management of
freshwater is underlined.
1998 CSD-6: The need for periodic
assessment of a ‘global picture’ of the
state of freshwater is recognized.
2000 Ministerial Declaration of the
Second World Water Forum:
Elaboration of a World Water
Development Report is urged as part of
the overall monitoring of Agenda 21.

2000 The WWAP is established.
2003 The first edition of the WWDR,
Water for People, Water for Life: Case
studies on the Chao Phraya River basin
(Thailand), Greater Tokyo (Japan), Lake
Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe (Estonia and
the Russian Federation), Lake Titicaca basin
(Bolivia and Peru), Ruhuna basins
(Sri Lanka), Seine-Normandy basin (France)
and Senegal River basin (Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal) are presented.
2006 Water, A Shared Responsibility
(WWDR2): 16 case studies are presented
– Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country (Spain), Danube River basin
(Albania, Austria, Bosnia-Herzogovina,
Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,

Findings: In many of the WWDR3 case studies, poverty,
the burden of disease, unsustainable use of water
resources, pollution, degradation of ecosystems and
insufficient water and sanitation coverage have surfaced
as main challenges. However, there is reason for cautious
optimism. In most cases, the problem stems overwhelmingly from insufficient capacity for better
management of existing resources, along with poor
cooperation among and across sectors, rather than from
unavailability of water for development.
Participation and decision-making: Another important
issue on the agenda of all the WWAP case study partners
is the need for user participation in decision-making
about water resources. The Netherlands provides one of
the best examples of successful real life decentralization
of water resources management through water boards
called Waterschappen. The principle of ‘interest-pay-say’,
applied in this country for centuries, allows local
communities to play a direct role in socio-economic
development through effective management of water
resources. The use of integrated water resources
management (IWRM) and reduction of the
fragmentation in the water sector constitute a dual
challenge that applies to developed and developing
countries alike. For example, in the Republic of Korea,
where functions and responsibilities for water resources
management are distributed among multiple agencies
practically working in a vacuum, local governments face
complications in executing the national water
management plan. Reforms under way in this and other
case study countries take a bottom-up approach,
establishing basin networks to allow management of
resources at grass roots level.
Integrated water resources management: While the
concept of IWRM is gaining popularity among the
WWAP case study partners, its implementation varies
considerably by country at regional level. For example in
viii

Germany, Hungary, Italy, Moldova,
Poland, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro,
the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Switzerland,
The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Ukraine), Ethiopia, France,
Japan, Kenya, Lake Peipsi (Estonia and the
Russian Federation), Lake Titicaca (Bolivia
and Peru), Mali, the state of Mexico
(Mexico), Tuul River basin (Mongolia),
La Plata River basin (Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay), South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Uganda.
2009 Water in a Changing World
(WWDR3) is accompanied by the
present volume Facing the Challenges,
a separate book of 20 case studies.

Africa, while Tunisia has developed IWRM-based national
policies and a master plan, conditions for effective use of
the IWRM approach are not yet in place in Cameroon. In
European Union countries (Estonia, Finland, Italy, the
Netherlands and Spain) IWRM is applied as an integral
part of the Water Framework Directive. In Latin America,
the National Water Law in Brazil enshrines the core
principles of decentralized water resources management
and stakeholder participation, and these are applied in
practice. In Uruguay, although the Constitution provides
for the IWRM principles, wide implementation of them is
still lacking. In Asia and the Pacific, IWRM is a relatively
new concept. For example, a Water Law emphasizing
IWRM was passed in China in 2002. All in all, global
recognition and implementation of IWRM will require
institutional reforms, sustainable funding and political
commitment.
Water supply, sanitation, public health and poverty:
Although access to safe water has not been formally
recognized as a human right in international law, certain
country partners have incorporated such recognition
into their constitutions. A recent example is Uruguay,
where access to safe drinking water and improved
sanitation has been accepted as a fundamental human
right since a national referendum in 2004. Brazil and
Paraguay have identified water resources as public
property. Although there is progress towards meeting the
targets in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
related to water and sanitation, achieving universal
access to safe water and improved sanitation will require
time and considerable investment in most regions.
Among the case studies featured in this volume, Estonia,
Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Finland and Uruguay are
the countries that have already reached this goal.
Countries where the burden of disease is the highest are
those in which water and sanitation infrastructure is not
sufficient to meet needs. For example, in Swaziland and
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page ix

Overview
Sudan, where access to improved sanitation is very
limited, water-related diseases, particularly malaria and
diarrhoea, are among the leading causes of death.
Cameroon and Zambia are also affected by this problem.
The situation is often exacerbated by persistent poverty
and malnutrition. In Bangladesh, for instance, about
70% of mothers suffer from nutritional deficiency
anaemia and over 90% of children have some degree of
malnutrition. Poverty varies even within countries, being
more prevalent in rural settings where subsistence
farming predominates. For example, in Swaziland about
84% of the country’s poor live in rural areas, where per
capita income is one-fourth the urban average and
people consume half as much food. Overall, rural people
are at a disadvantage because their access to almost all
services – water supply, sanitation, electricity, health
care, education, job markets – is poorer than that of
urbanites. The international community is urging
governments to take bolder action by introducing more
effective policies allowing better mobilization of national
funds to help lift millions out of extreme poverty,
and urging donor agencies to step up their financial
assistance programmes. As an example of what national
efforts can accomplish, effective strategies in Argentina
helped reduce the share of the population living in
poverty from 45.4% in 2002 to 21% in 2006. As a
recent example of innovative financing, in 2008 the
Government of the Autonomous Community of the
Basque Country in Spain agreed to allocate 5% of the
ecological tax revenue to support sub-Saharan countries’
efforts to meet the water and sanitation targets of the
MDGs. In Istanbul, a megalopolis with close to 12 million
inhabitants, US$3.6 billion was invested between 1994
and 2004 to improve the water supply and sanitation
infrastructure.
The role of climate change and variability: No matter
what the regional setting is, water-related natural hazards
linked to climatic variability and climate change cause
substantial socio-economic damage. Among the case
studies, the Pacific islands are likely to be most affected
by projected sea level rise, increasing intensity and
frequency of water-related hazards and fluctuation in
freshwater availability. The Netherlands is also at risk
from a possible overall sea level rise of up to 1.30 metres
by 2100. This would have serious repercussions, as the
area already below sea level accounts for 60% of the
population and about 70% of GDP. For centuries, Sri
Lanka and Bangladesh have also been severely affected by
natural disasters. In Bangladesh, from 1970 to 2008,
12 major cyclones killed more than 620,000 people and
affected some 45 million. The 2004 tsunami, which
caused widespread destruction in coastal areas of Sri
Lanka, claimed some 40,000 lives, displaced over 400,000
people and resulted in property damage estimated at
US$1 billion. The El Niño event of 1983/1984 affected
over 40,000 people in more than 70 cities of central
Uruguay and caused losses estimated at over US$1 billion
for the entire La Plata River basin. Droughts have had
equally disastrous effects. For example, El Niño and La
Niña events, combined with other climatic and
oceanographic conditions, have resulted in catastrophic
droughts in parts of the Pacific. During the 1990s,
prevailing drought in the North China Plain caused a
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

24% drop in runoff and led to a lack of flow in the lowest
700 km of the Yellow River, seriously limiting water
availability for human and environmental needs.
Such events have prompted governments to take
action aimed at mitigating the effects of future disasters.
However, in developing countries, while structural
measures are heavily used, non-structural measures
(the policy dimension) are often overlooked or receive
insufficient attention. For instance, the five riparian
countries of La Plata River basin are still attempting
to reach agreement on the definition of extreme
hydrological events. On the other hand, in the
Netherlands, projections of increased extreme events
have led the authorities to integrate spatial planning
with water management to create a ‘comfort zone’
for rivers. In addition, innovative and comprehensive
risk management policies and strategies are being
based on the key principles of resistance, resilience
and adaptation. Similarly, in the aftermath of the
tsunami, attention to policy and institutional aspects in
Sri Lanka led to enactment of a disaster management
law, strengthening of institutional capacity and active
community participation in disaster management.
Cooperation in transboundary contexts: Management of
water resources in transboundary basins requires close
cooperation among riparian governments to establish
mechanisms allowing for the protection and utilization
of resources. Such mechanisms are in place in most of
the relevant case study countries. Examples are the
Intergovernmental Coordinating Committee (La Plata
River basin), the Transboundary Water Commission
(Finland and Russia), the Tripartite Permanent Technical
Committee (Mozambique, South Africa and Swaziland)
and the Zambezi River Authority (Zambia and
Zimbabwe). The Nile Basin Initiative, representing nine
of the ten riparian countries, also aims to create a
cooperative environment. The establishment and
functional effectiveness of such arrangements, however,
depend heavily on the political will to cooperate. In the
Republic of Korea, despite ongoing negotiations, there is
no mechanism for jointly managing the transboundary
tributaries of the Han River basin with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Gaps in knowledge:A lack of comprehensive information
on the availability of surface and groundwater resources and
decaying hydrographical networks are identified as
shared problems in African and Latin American case
studies. In Africa, the lack of information is among the
leading barriers to sustainable management of water
resources. In the Lake Merín basin, shared by Brazil and
Uruguay, accurate long term water resources assessment
is difficult because of the deterioration of already limited
coverage of the hydrometeorological monitoring
network due to declining funding and maintenance
since the 1970s. Allocation of funds to establish,
maintain and expand monitoring systems is an often
overlooked prerequisite for effective decision-making.
Food security: Food security is an important concern in
all the case studies, and agriculture accounts for a
significant share of water consumption. Sustainable use
ix

Prelims (f) 2:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:13

Page x

Overview
of water resources in this sector, however, did not seem
to be an immediate priority. In the Po River basin,
especially during high consumption months, low water
availability creates tension among users and aggravates
quality-related problems. Yet there are no national or
regional plans for reducing high water consumption in
agriculture. Furthermore, low efficiency irrigation
methods, which are the main culprit in this situation, are
still widely used in the basin. In Uzbekistan,
unsustainable irrigation practices have led to irreversible
environmental destruction and severe shrinkage of the
Aral Sea. In some cases, the water footprints of nations
are larger than usage figures suggest. For example, the
Republic of Korea is the world’s fifth largest net importer
of virtual water. Water use efficiency is equally important
in other sectors. A good example of how economic tools
can be used to promote effective use of water resources is
Estonia, where combined water consumption decreased
by half while the average price of water increased by
nearly 25 times between 1992 and 2006.

provided by healthy ecosystems. Mainly due to poor
enforcement of existing regulations and lack of
integration with development activities in other sectors,
environmental damage continues to increase at an
alarming rate.

Environmental health and biodiversity: Reversing loss of
environmental resources and reducing biodiversity loss
are important MDG targets. Yet evidence suggests these
concerns are not always built into national development
policies and programmes. Similarly, public awareness and
political sensitivity regarding these issues are not fully in
place. Extensive areas of forest, mangroves and other
ecologically important habitats have deteriorated,
leading to reduction in or loss of biodiversity.
Development efforts undertaken without due
consideration of environmental values can cause
substantial socio-economic damage. In Cameroon, for
instance, the cost of the Waza Logone project to mitigate
the adverse environmental effects of the Maga Dam was
estimated to be two to three times higher than that of
building the dam. Often environmental degradation has
a substantial impact on the poorest and most vulnerable,
whose livelihoods depend on goods and services

The field evidence from the case studies clearly supports
the main message of the WWDR3: inaction is no longer
an option, and stepping out of the single sector ‘water
box’ is necessary to properly address mounting problems.
Though the challenges are considerable, our common
future lies in the full understanding and realization of
the ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’ principle
of the 1992 Rio Declaration. Examples of success in
addressing the challenges exist. A few of them are
depicted in this volume. The main issue is creating the
conditions necessary to replicate such success at local,
national and regional level. The main volume of the
WWDR3 provides comprehensive coverage of many
issues relevant to decision-making and represents an
important attempt to give leaders in government, civil
society and the private sector a broader selection of
possible solutions to water issues from both within and
outside the water box.

x

Conclusions
The major drivers of water demand and supply remain
demographics, land use changes and the implications of
economic development. Climate change, the impacts of
which becoming ever more apparent, makes these drivers
generally more negative and further aggravates the
situation. With mounting pressure on water resources
stemming from population growth and development, the
typical response of increasing supply to meet demand has
reached its limits. Given the cross-cutting role of water in
achieving many of the MDGs, effective management of
scarce water resources is one of the key tools decisionmakers can use to attain the overarching goal of
sustainable socio-economic development.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 1

1

Africa
Africa faces the toughest challenges of any continent.
While most of the developing world has managed to
reduce poverty, the rate in sub-Saharan Africa has not
changed much since the 1980s. With 40% of the
population living below the extreme poverty line of
US$1 per day and 73% of the population below US$2
a day, according to World Bank figures, this continues
to be the world's poorest region.
A heavy burden of disease (including the HIV and AIDS
epidemic), poor capacity in almost every aspect and
continuing social unrest are only some of the issues adding
to an already heavy socio-economic toll and putting subSaharan Africa off track to meet the Millennium
Development Goals.
This section contains five case studies, for countries
ranging from one of the smallest in Africa (Swaziland)
to the largest (Sudan). They reflect the highly complex
real-life issues involved in addressing water-related
challenges on this vast continent. Tunisia, the one
country case study outside of sub-Saharan Africa, shows
what might be achieved.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

CAMEROON
The country faces multiple
challenges: inadequate legal,
financial and institutional
capacity, and a fragmented
water sector. 2

SUDAN
Socio-economic development
has been undermined by
natural hazards, disease and
conflict. 5

SWAZILAND
Dependence on external
funding and water resources
shared with neighbouring
countries are special
challenges. 8

TUNISIA
A country that has enjoyed
sustained economic growth
and improved public health
faces increasing pressure from
sectors competing for water. 12

ZAMBIA: the Zambezi and
Congo river basins
The country is coming to grips
with the need for water policy
planning and strategies to
combat poverty. 15

1

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 2

1. Africa

Cameroon
Although endowed with abundant freshwater
resources, the country faces a lack of comprehensive
information, an inadequate legal and institutional
framework, weak enforcement capacity, poor
coordination among agencies and other obstacles to
sound, sustainable water management. Cameroon is
lagging on the Millenium Development Goals, in
part because its water sector is highly fragmented
and underfunded.
Setting the scene
Cameroon is situated between West and Central Africa
at the extreme north-eastern end of the Gulf of Guinea.
It is bordered by Chad in the north-east, the Central
African Republic on the east, the Congo, Gabon and
Equatorial Guinea on the south, and Nigeria on the west.
It has about 400 km of Atlantic coastline in the southwest, and shares Lake Chad with Chad in the north
(Map 1.1). The country’s total surface area is about
475,650 km2, and the estimated population is 18 million
(WHO/UNICEF, 2008), with more than half under age
25. The urban and rural populations are about the same
size, although urbanization is increasing by 4.7% per
year, on average. About 35% of the urban population
lives in the economic capital, Douala, or the
administrative capital, Yaoundé.1

Sanaga, Sanaga West, Sanaga South, Benoue, Congo and
Lake Chad. The Sanaga basin, located in the centre of the
country, is the largest, covering about 29% of the territory.
It and the Sanaga West and South basins constitute the
Atlantic basin. Cameroon’s total annual renewable water
resources amount to some 283.5 billion m3 or about
17,000 m3 per capita, using 2006 population estimates
(Aquastat, 2007). The groundwater resources have not
yet been comprehensively evaluated, so their potential
is not known precisely, but is estimated at 100 billion
to 120 billion m3. Due to the lack of comprehensive
monitoring of water resources, consumption patterns
are not known exactly. However it is estimated that
about 1 billion m3 of the total renewable water resources
is withdrawn annually. Of this, roughly 74% is used in
agriculture, 18% for municipal consumption and 8%
in industry (Aquastat, 2007).
Agriculture is the backbone of Cameroon’s economy,
accounting for about 41% of GDP (World Bank, 2007)
and 55% of the workforce (WRI, 2007). At about
69,750 km2, arable land amounts to 15% of the overall
surface area. About 29% of the arable land is cultivated,
mostly in the west and south-west. The share of the
population working in agriculture has been decreasing
since the 1970s, but as productivity has increased over
the same period, food security has not been directly
affected. Irrigation has contributed substantially to
productivity, making cultivation possible during the dry
season. In 2000, irrigated area of about 224.5 km2
Map 1.1 Cameroon

The country’s 1,200 km length, proximity to the sea and
topography give it a varied climate with wide differences
in rainfall and vegetation. The maximum rainfall of
10,000 mm occurs in the equatorial climate zone in the
south, and the minimum of 500 mm in the extreme
north on the edge of the Sahara. The average annual
rainfall is about 1,684 mm.
Climate change and variability
Average rainfall has been declining since the 1950s.
In the last three decades it has decreased by about 5%.
Reduced flow rates have been more pronounced in
areas with a Sahelian climate, where reductions ranging
from 15% to 25% have been recorded. These changes
have led to increased desertification in the north and a
falling water table due to reduced recharge. In addition,
previously permanent wells are drying up late in the
dry season.
State of the resource and water use
Cameroon has a dense network of rivers, most of which
arise on the central Adamawa plateau and flow north
or south. These provide it with abundant water resources
in relation to current demand. The six main basins are
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from Fonteh (2003).

2

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 3

Cameroon
(excluding 28 km2 of spate irrigation, where floods
are diverted from ephemeral rivers to cultivate crops)
corresponded to around 8% of the potentially irrigable
area. Large irrigation projects (more than 2 km2)
accounted for roughly 65% of the irrigated area
(Aquastat, 2005). Some large state-owned systems were
abandoned due to low performance, while others that
were privatized succeeded in improving efficiency of
banana production for export. Consequently, the
government has been privatizing larger irrigation
systems and supporting projects of less than 5 ha
(0.05 km2), aiming to increase irrigation efficiency
and sustainability.
Although Cameroon has sufficient water resources,
choices in water use have started to affect water
availability and ecosystems. For example, plantation of
eucalyptus in the western highlands to provide firewood
and construction material induced a very high
evapotranspiration rate, which has altered the ecosystem
and greatly diminished groundwater recharge and the
flow rate in the area.
The country’s estimated hydroelectric potential is
35 GW. Even with only around 2% of this potential
developed, hydroelectricity accounts for about 97%
of electricity generation in Cameroon (EIA, 2004).
Because there is no nationwide grid, 20% of the
electricity produced is lost, even though the south is
undersupplied. Also undersupplied are rural areas in
general, where only some 20% of the population has
access to electricity, compared with 80% in urban areas.
Overall, about 8.7 million people, or 53% of the
population, lack access to electricity (IEA, 2006). To
improve the situation, the Rural Electrification Agency
promotes micro hydro projects and has demanded an
increase in the national budget for rural electrification.
Cameroon’s heavy reliance on hydropower leaves its
energy sector extremely vulnerable to drought, however.
Existing hydroelectricity capacity falls short of meeting
current demand, and shortages are especially acute in
the dry season. Pending further hydropower
development, the National Electricity Company has
begun building thermal power plants. Despite the
country’s weak industrial base, the main user of
electricity is the aluminium industry, which accounts
for about half of all electricity consumed in Cameroon.

■ providing advice on water-related problems;
■ making recommendations on rational water

management, particularly concerning the
development and implementation of sustainable water
and sanitation projects.
Chaired by the minister in charge of water resources,
the National Water Committee includes high-level
representatives of major stakeholders involved in water
management in Cameroon, including the ministries
in charge of finance, public health, environment,
land management, urban development and housing,
agriculture, livestock and fisheries, commerce and
industry, territorial administration and meteorology,
as well as associations of mayors and concessionaires
of public water and energy services. The National
Water Committee was formed by decree in 1985 as a
consultative body to coordinate activities in the water
sector. It has met only infrequently and never fulfilled
its intended role. Recently signed enabling decrees under
the 1998 Water Law, however, could give the committee
new impetus and allow it to function more effectively
(UN Water/Africa, 2006).
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) is
accepted in Cameroon as the starting point for
policies that can enhance sustainable water resources
management and development, and assure water
security. However, conditions for effective use of the
IWRM approach are not yet in place. Not only does
Cameroon lack comprehensive information on water
resources, but the distribution of water management
authority is highly fragmented, and sectoral
management approaches predominate. Moreover,
the political will and commitment to enforce existing
laws and regulations is inadequate, as are human and
institutional capacity and investment for assessment
and monitoring. Nevertheless, measures to improve
water security have been carried out or are under
way, including:
■ public-private partnerships for electricity and urban

water supply;
■ an IWRM plan, expected by the end of 2009;
■ transfer of some water management responsibilities to

Due to the absence of an effective monitoring system,
data on industrial effluent emissions are patchy, and
the extent of water pollution in Cameroon is not
fully known.
Policy framework and decision-making
Water is considered to be public property in Cameroon,
and thus water protection and management are
government responsibilities. Several institutions are
involved in water management. Under the 1998 Water
Law, the National Water Committee coordinates their
actions. The committee is also responsible for:
■ proposing actions to the government to assure the

conservation, protection and sustainable use of water
resources;
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

local levels following implementation of a law on
decentralization.
The main challenges
Poor water services, rural-urban disparities: While
Cameroon is not yet on track to meet the targets of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) for water and
sanitation, it has made notable progress since 1990. In
2006, 70% of the population had access to safe drinking
water. The coverage in urban centres is 88%, significantly
better than the 47% in rural areas (WHO/UNICEF, 2008).
Of Cameroon’s 300 urban centres with 5,000 inhabitants
or more, however, only 98 have water supply networks.
Moreover, rapid urbanization in smaller towns has often
rendered existing infrastructure inadequate, with
frequent service interruptions. Many periurban dwellers
3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 4

1. Africa

Box 1.1 Combating degradation of Waza Logone floodplains
The Maga Dam was built in 1979 on the
Logone River to provide a continuous
supply of water and to improve rice
cultivation in the region. The project was
carried out without a comprehensive
environmental impact assessment. The
dam led to reduced flooding of the plain,
which in turn led to reduced groundwater
recharge, less fish farming and a reduction

in the production of sorghum and wild
rice. Pastures on the vast floodplains were
degraded and herdsmen in the region did
not have sufficient grazing for their cattle.
Wild animals, like the elephants of Waza
National Park, were forced out of their
normal grazing areas to search for food on
nearby farms. The reduced flooding had
disastrous consequences for the ecosystem

also lack access to safe drinking water. Another problem
is the amount of water unaccounted for: the average rate
of loss rose from 25% in 1990 to 40% in 2000, clearly
indicating an aging network and poor maintenance.
Hence, in reality, the supply situation is worse than the
figures imply.
Sanitation coverage is also poor. In urban areas only
58% of the population has access to improved
sanitation facilities, and the rate in rural areas is 42%
(WHO/UNICEF, 2008). Studies from different parts of
the country indicate that many water resources used for
household consumption are polluted to varying degrees
because waste disposal infrastructure is insufficient in
urban areas, and the capacity to enforce existing laws
is very weak. Especially affected are areas where latrines
and septic tanks, for example, are located near springs
and shallow wells used without treatment for household
water supply.
There is little information on the amount of pollution
reaching surface and groundwater resources, or on the
severity of the problem. Some studies have indicated
that most industrial facilities discharge waste into the
environment with little or no treatment. A 2002 study
of the effluent from a textile plant in the coastal region
indicated that some water quality parameters exceeded
recommended limits by up to 2,700%. The company
knows it is polluting, but because monitoring and
enforcement are inadequate, it lacks any incentive
to invest in wastewater treatment.
Water-related disease is quite common in Cameroon and
particularly affects children. The main causes of death in
children under 5 are diarrhoea, malaria and measles.
Among children under 4, diarrhoea accounts for about
10% of all deaths. Malaria affects about 46% of the
population. Health expenditure in Cameroon for
2001–2002 amounted to around US$110 million, which
corresponded to 4.5% of the national budget and about
1% of GDP.
Poverty is another major issue in Cameroon. Although
the poorest areas are in the far north, all regions suffer to
varying degrees. The first national household survey in
1996 estimated that 51% of the population was living in
poverty. The figure had fallen to 40% by the time the
second survey was conducted in 2001. However, the
decline mainly benefited urban dwellers. Just over 22%
4

and the lifestyle of the local people,
who are among the poorest and most
vulnerable in the country. To mitigate the
effects of the dam and increase flooding in
the plain, the Waza Logone project was
carried out, at a cost estimated to be two
to three times higher than that of building
the dam.

of people in urban areas are poor, compared with nearly
50% in rural areas (IFAD, 2008).
Decreasing biodiversity, wetland degradation:
Cameroon has a wide variety of natural resources,
including its forests, which occupy about 50% of the
country’s surface area. With its climatic and ecological
variety, Cameroon is rich in terms of biodiversity.
However, an inadequate legal and institutional
framework, combined with insufficient political will
and commitment to enforcement of regulations, has
led to decreased biodiversity. Wetlands are also at risk
because of various pressures, including overgrazing
and pollution. Other activities that have resulted in
degraded wetlands include drainage for agriculture
and for construction in urban and periurban areas.
In the past, some development projects were
carried out without adequate environmental impact
assessment (Box 1.1), which affected wetlands and
other ecosystems. Today, however, environmental
impact assessment is required for all major
development projects in Cameroon.
Conclusions
The biggest problem in Cameroon is not the availability
of water – it is the poor management and development
of the resources, coupled with inadequate political will
and commitment for the long term. The patchiness of
information available on the quality and quantity of
water resources is a major constraint for successful water
resources management and a handicap for poverty
alleviation efforts. Although progress has been made in
water supply and sanitation coverage, much more needs
to be done to improve the situation, especially in rural
areas. The enabling environment for application of the
IWRM approach is weak, as are institutional frameworks.
In this situation, Cameroon is lagging in meeting the
MDG targets. Improving water information systems, as
well as completion and implementation of an IWRM
plan, would go a long way towards improving water
security in Cameroon, in addition to contributing to
poverty alleviation.
References
Aquastat. 2005. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries/cameroon/tables.pdf#tab3
(Accessed December 2008.)
Aquastat. 2007. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/index.html. (Accessed
February 2008.)

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 5

Sudan
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2004. Country Analysis Briefs: Chad
and Cameroon. EIA, U. S. Department of Energy,
http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/Chad_Cameroon/Electricity.html
(Accessed December 2008.)
Fonteh, M. F. 2003. Water for people and the environment: Cameroon water
development report. Background paper for African Water Development
Report, Addis Ababa, Economic Commission for Africa.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2006. World Energy Outlook. Paris, IEA.
http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/2006.asp (Accessed December
2008.)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 2008. Rural Poverty in
Cameroon. Rural Poverty Portal.
http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/web/guest/country/home/tags/came
roon (Accessed November 2008.)

UN-Water/Africa. 2006. African Water Development Report. Addis Ababa,
Economic Commission for Africa.
http://www.uneca.org/awich/AWDR_2006.htm (Accessed December
2008.)
WHO/UNICEF. 2008. Coverage Estimates: Improved Sanitation, Cameroon. Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
http//documents.wssinfo.orgdownload?id_document=932 (Accessed
December 2008.)
World Bank. 2007. 2007 World Development Indicators Online. Washington,
DC, World Bank. http://go.worldbank.org/3JU2HA60D0 (Accessed
February 2008.)
World Resources Institute (WRI). 2007. EarthTrends: Environmental
Information. Washington, DC, WRI. http://www.earthtrends.wri.org
(Accessed February 2008.)

In addition to geographic and seasonal variability in
rainfall distribution, there are indications of a decreasing
trend in the amount of rainfall in the last 30 years, with
the dry zone increasingly extending towards the south.

Sudan
Receiving most of its lifeline water supply from the
Nile River, the country is suffering from waterrelated natural hazards, disease and conflict, which
put a heavy toll on sustainable socio-economic
development and have led to deepening poverty.
Setting the scene
Sudan is the largest country in Africa. It is bordered by Egypt
and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the north, Chad and
the Central African Republic on the west, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Kenya on the south,
and Ethiopia and Eritrea on the east. The Red Sea lies to
the north-east and forms a coastline of 700 km (Map 1.2).
Most of the country is part of the Nile River basin. Largely
composed of a flat plain, it ranges from 200 to 500 metres
in altitude except for isolated hills at Jabel Mera, the Nuba
Mountains and the Red Sea Hills. Annual rainfall varies
from 25 mm in the Sahara desert, in the north, to over
1,500 mm in the south. Temperatures generally vary from
4°C to 50°C. Surface features range from tropical forest and
marsh in the south and centre to savannah and desert in
the north, east and west. The population was estimated at
37.7 million in 2006 (WHO/UNICEF, 2008). About 25% of
the inhabitants live in the capital, Khartoum.1

State of the resource and water use
Almost 80% of the country falls in the basin of the Nile
River and its two main tributaries: the White Nile,
originating in the equatorial lake region (shared by
Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zaire), and the Blue Nile, which rises in the
Ethiopian highlands. The two join at Khartoum to form
the Nile, which flows northwards through Egypt to the
Mediterranean Sea. About 67% of the Nile River basin lies
within Sudanese territory. Estimates of the availability of
water resources in Sudan range from 36 billion m3 (SNWP,

Map 1.2 Sudan

Climate change and variability
Sudan is so vast (about 2,000 km from north to south and
1,800 km from east to west) that it lies in multiple
climatic zones. In the north, where the Sahara extends
into much of the country, the climate is arid, while the
south is influenced by a tropical wet-and-dry climate. This
variation directly affects rainfall: a rainy season runs from
April to October in southern Sudan, but the rainy period
gradually diminishes in length towards the north, and
rainfall is scarce in the far north. Overall, December to
February is the driest period except on the Red Sea coast.
1

Except where otherwise noted, the information in this case study is adapted
from Ahmed (2005).

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

5

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 6

1. Africa

Table 1.1 Water availability estimates, 2002 and 1982
Water resources

Estimate by SNWP
(2002) (billion m3)

Constraints and
remarks

Estimate by Salih et al.
(1982) (billion m3)

Sudan’s share of the Nile River

20.50a

20.35a

Seasonal pattern, limited storage.

Non-Nile streams

5.50

8.00

Highly variable flows of short
duration, difficult to monitor or
exploit.
Deep water, entailing high
pumping costs.

Renewable groundwaterb

4.00

2.00

Water conserved through
improved irrigation efficiency

––

2.00

Subtotal

30.00

32.35

Swamp reclamation

6.00

12.00

Potential annual availability

36.00

44.35

Remote areas with weak
infrastructure.
Based on assumption of a 10%
efficiency gain.

Capital intensive, with
considerable social and
environmental impact.

a. Measured at Sennar Dam in central Sudan. b. Salih et al. further estimated that the non-renewable groundwater potential totalled 564 billion m3.

2002) to 44 billion m3 (Salih et al., 1982) (Table 1.1).
In both cases, the biggest and the most reliable source is
the Nile.
Sudan has an agrarian economy: farming and animal
husbandry are the mainstay of 80% of the population.
Agriculture accounts for 34% of GDP. Livestock raising
contributed about half the agricultural GDP in 1998–2001
(Central Bureau of Statistics, 2003). Industry generated
18% of GDP in 2001. Of an estimated 0.84 million km2
of potentially arable land, some 0.17 million km2, or
20%, was in use as of 2002. The irrigated area totals
around 0.02 million km2, or a modest 12% of the
cultivated land area, but consumes about 20 billion m3 of
water – approximately equal to Sudan’s share of the Nile
River flow (Box 1.2). Agricultural water consumption is
expected to increase significantly, and likely to double by

2025. Although irrigation efficiency is high, a
considerable amount of water is lost to evaporation and
because of poor maintenance of irrigation systems. Water
rates for irrigation are based on the extent of cultivated
area rather than the actual quantity used. This approach,
coupled with a lack of clarity about the role of farmers in
the irrigation system, exacerbates the already high water
consumption. Adoption of rainwater harvesting
techniques could contribute significantly to
improvement in agriculture and livestock production.
The incidence of rural poverty is quite high, an issue
closely linked to national agricultural strategy. In the
1970s Sudan introduced large-scale mechanized farming
and promoted expansion of the irrigated area to increase
output, especially of cash crops. The new farming
systems and land allocation policies led to displacement

Box 1.2 Cooperation in the Nile River basin
Creating a more cooperative environment
for management of the Nile River has been
an aim in the region for centuries. In recent
years political conditions in basin countries
have provided a window of opportunity for
progress on cooperative development of the
shared waters. With the support of external
agencies, since the late 1990s nine of the
ten Nile riparian countries have begun a
process of institutional development that
has cemented cooperation and charted a
way towards future development in the Nile
basin. Yet, the main issue remains to put this
institutional development and cooperative

6

thinking into practice through the
development of projects of mutual benefit
that are sustainable and can alleviate the
worst poverty.
This key challenge is being faced by the
parties to the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI).
Based in Entebbe, Uganda, the NBI,
with representatives of all basin states
except Eritrea, is helping coordinate two
programmes with broad development
agendas. The implementation of these
programmes is now paramount. Success in
cooperation needs to be followed by a

transition to development activities,
which should become the mainstay of
this initiative, aiming to move towards
benefit sharing rather than water sharing.
Meanwhile, a 1959 agreement between
Sudan and Egypt is still the basis for
allocation of the Nile River water resources.
Accordingly, the average annual flow of
84 billion m3 is divided between the two
countries: Egypt receives 55.5 billion m3 and
Sudan 18.5 billion m3 (measured at Aswan
Dam in southern Egypt); some 10 billion m3
is assumed to be lost to evaporation from
the reservoir of Aswan Dam.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 7

Sudan
of subsistence farmers and nomads, and dismantled
traditional systems of communal ownership and
management (IFAD, 2008).
Sudan is rapidly urbanizing: the share of urban dwellers
in the population increased from 27% in 1990 to 42%
in 2006 (WHO/UNICEF, 2008). Household water
consumption is estimated at 1.1 billion m3. Safe water
and improved sanitation coverage is biased towards
urban settlements. In 2006, the percentage of population
with access to safe water supply was 78% in urban areas
and 64% in rural ones. The disparity is even greater for
access to improved sanitation, which is available to 50%
of urban dwellers but only 24% in rural areas
(WHO/UNICEF, 2008). Consequently, water-related
communicable diseases, particularly malaria and
diarrhoeal illnesses, are among the leading causes of
morbidity, especially in the north, and they are
exacerbated by widespread malnutrition. Malaria is
epidemic: some 75% of the population nationwide is at
risk (WHO, 2008a). In 2007 alone, over 2.7 million cases
were reported and nearly 6% of all hospital deaths were
linked to malaria (WHO, 2008b).
Pollution from households, agriculture and industry
seriously threatens the quality of freshwater resources.
In many places, such as southern and western Sudan,
where the groundwater table is only a few metres below
the surface, sanitation practices (mainly on-site disposal
systems such as septic tanks and pit latrines) and
improper urban waste disposal have caused very high
chemical and bacteriological contamination. Almost all
disposal wells and pit latrines tap the water table, and
they are often within 10 to 20 metres of wells used for
drinking water.
Thanks to the Nile River and its tributaries, Sudan has
an estimated hydropower potential of 9 GW, with
development of 5 GW being economically feasible.
Yet, the hydroelectric production capacity of the four
existing multipurpose dams is only 0.335 GW. Sudan’s
total electricity production capacity (thermal and
hydroelectric combined) of 1.2 GW (2004) does not meet
demand, and in fact is greater than the country’s limited
distribution capacity. A major factor limiting the
development of irrigation in Sudan is the poor storage
capacity of existing dams. Furthermore, siltation has
reduced the design capacity of the dams by one-third,
from 9.1 billion m3. Enhancing reservoir capacity is
critical to assure food security, since about 85% of the
annual water potential of the Nile River flows from July
to September and for the rest of the year the flow is very
low, especially in the Blue Nile, in whose vicinity 70% of
the irrigated area is located.
The Nile and its tributaries have always been used for
transport. At present, around 1,700 km of the waterways
are navigated, but this could be substantially improved.
Until 1977 the River Transport Corporation of Sudan had
one of the largest fleets in Africa, but continuous
deterioration since then has reduced the fleet to only
about 10% of its former size (2005). Waterway
navigation is not considered a priority; the service is
mainly between the north and the south, and has never
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

been significantly extended to other parts of the country.
Moreover, a lack of coordination among relevant
authorities has meant no consideration is given for
navigation when major structures such as dams and
bridges are built.
Policy framework and decision-making: Legal and
institutional aspects of water management
Water resources management is fragmented in Sudan.
In an attempt to address this problem, the Water
Resources Act (1995) gave responsibility for managing
freshwater resources to the Ministry of Irrigation and
Water Resources. Four years later, a National Council for
Water Resources was formed. It is headed by the
ministry, with participation by central and state
government representatives. Its objective is to formulate
general policies and the outline of water resources
development and management for the whole country,
and to coordinate actions between the state and central
levels. The main laws concerning water resources and
their protection are the Environmental and Natural
Resources Act (1991), the Water Resources Act (1995) and
the Groundwater and Wadis Directorate Act (1998). They
cover the entire spectrum of development, management
and protection of freshwater resources.
These efforts have not been successful, however, as
various dimensions of water resources management are
still spread among different ministries and dealt with by
many government organizations without integration or
coordination. Thus, many aspects of the legislation are
not enforced, with responsibilities ill defined and
coordination lacking. Moreover, major gaps in the laws
exist. For example, in irrigation development projects,
protection of groundwater resources from agricultural
pollution is not taken into consideration. Nor do mining
projects or the newly introduced oil development
include any provision for groundwater protection.
Efforts to produce a national water policy are continuing.
The main challenges: increasing pressures on scarce
resources
Cycle of poverty, droughts, floods and conflict: Sudan,
like other countries of the Sahel, has long suffered from
lengthy, devastating droughts. The most severe droughts
of recent decades occurred in 1980–1984, 1989, 1990,
1997 and 2000, causing widespread population
displacement and famine. In addition, floods in Sudan
have caused extensive damage, especially around the
Nile and its main tributary, the Blue Nile. Severe floods
on the latter river in 1988 and 1998 caused property
losses estimated at hundreds of millions of dollars.
Flooding of the Nile proper in 2007 affected over
500,000 people and destroyed thousands of homes
(WHO, 2008a). Seasonal rivers can also cause serious
flood damage. In 2003, for example, heavy flooding
along the Gash River affected 79% of the city of Kassala,
leaving 80% of the population homeless, and inflicted
heavy losses on agriculture in the region (NASA, 2008).
It is estimated that 85% of Sudan’s rural population lives
on less than US$1 per day. Overall, some 20 million
people were living in extreme poverty in 2002 (IFAD,
2008). The incidence of poverty varies considerably
7

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 8

1. Africa
because economic growth is geographically uneven and
conflict has devastated parts of the country. Severe
regional inequalities exist in access to even the most
basic services, such as education, sanitation, safe
drinking water and job opportunities. For example,
health services in southern Sudan reach only about 25%
of the population. People living in areas that have been
or continue to be affected by drought and conflict –
particularly the south and Darfur – are the most
vulnerable to poverty (IFAD, 2008). As of late 2007,
4.2 million people were affected by conflict, including
2.4 million internally displaced as a result of the conflict
in Darfur (WHO, 2008a).
Biodiversity: There is little public awareness or political
sensitivity about ecosystem protection in Sudan. Since
the 1970s, expansion of large-scale rain-fed agriculture,
urbanization and other types of development have
caused the destruction of over 5,000 km2 of forest, and
the extent of reforestation amounts to just 300 km2.
Many wildlife species have been lost for similar reasons,
as well as because of the conflict in the south, and
numerous other species are endangered or vulnerable.
Pasture lands have been destroyed or degraded by
overgrazing, droughts and fires.
Conclusions
In spite of substantial land and water resources, Sudan is
seriously handicapped by floods, droughts and the burden
of disease. Agriculture, which provides the livelihoods of
80% of the population, currently claims about 55% of
available freshwater resources. Given that the water use in
this sector may as much as double by 2025, water saving
through better irrigation methods will become a critical
factor for meeting the needs of other sectors in a
sustainable fashion. A decreasing rainfall trend associated
with climatic variability and likely climate change might
further limit water availability and lead to serious scarcity.
Overall, the lack of accurate assessment of water resources

Swaziland
Relying on transboundary rivers, Swaziland would
benefit from continued cooperation with its
neighbours as well as strengthened water resources
management legislation at home. These would help
alleviate the heavy burden of poverty and disease as
well as the country’s reliance on external funding in
the water sector.
Setting the scene
Swaziland, one of the smallest countries in Africa, is
almost enclosed within South Africa, sharing just the
northern half of its eastern border with Mozambique.1
8

and of a national water policy are the major obstacles
hindering effective management of water resources. A
fragmented water sector, lack of coordination among
bodies responsible for water management, gaps in
legislation and poor enforcement are other issues further
aggravating the situation. These challenges, combined
with social unrest, have led to deepening poverty, which
affects a majority of the rural population. However, there
is considerable potential for improvement through
adoption and implementation of better policies on
water and land resources.
References
Ahmed, A. A. 2005. Sudan National Water Development Report. Contribution to
African Water Development Report. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
Aquastat. 2005. Sudan. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries/sudan/index.stm
(Accessed December 2008.)
IFAD. 2008. Rural poverty in Sudan. Rural Poverty Portal,
http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/web/guest/country/home/tags/sudan.
(Accessed December 2008.)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). 2008. Earth
Observatory.
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/NaturalHazards/view.php?id=12099
(Accessed January 2009.)
Nicol, A., with Shahin, M. 2003. The Nile: Moving Beyond Cooperation. Paris,
UNESCO International Hydrological Programme and World Water
Assessment Programme.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001333/133301e.pdf (Technical
Documents in Hydrology, PC-CP Series, No. 16, accessed December
2008.)
Salih M. A. et al. 1982. Water Resources in Sudan. Report submitted to the
National Council for Research, Khartoum.
Sudan National Water Policy (SNWP). 2002. Khartoum, Ministry of Irrigation
and Water Resources.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2008a. Emergency Preparedness and
Humanitarian Action: Sudan, From Emergency to Sustainability.
http://www.emro.who.int/sudan/pdf/Sudan_Generic_donor_report.pdf
(Accessed December 2008.)
World Health Organization (WHO). 2008b. World Malaria Report.
http://malaria.who.int/wmr2008/malaria2008.pdf (Accessed December
2008.)
WHO/UNICEF. 2008. Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and
Sanitation. http://www.wssinfo.org/pdf/JMP_08.pdf.zip (Accessed
December 2008.)

Its population of 1.13 million (2006) is distributed over
an area of 17,370 km2. From west to east, the country
is divided into four well-defined regions: the Highveld,
Middleveld and Lowveld, and the Lubombo plain and
escarpment. The altitude ranges from 150 metres in
the east to 1,800 metres in the west. The climate varies
accordingly, though a generally subtropical climate
with summer rains prevails. Between 75% and 83%
of the annual rainfall comes from October to March.
Precipitation ranges from 500 mm in the south-east to
1,500 mm in the west, the average being 1,200 mm.
Climate change and variability
Swaziland is situated at a transition of major climatic
zones. Consequently, the country is prone to extreme
events, such as cyclones and droughts. The latest and
longest drought occurred over 1989–1994, while the
most recent severe cyclone, designated Domonia,
hit in 1984.

1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from Mwendera (2005).

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 9

Swaziland
Climatic models assessing the impact of climate change
in the Great Usutu River basin reveal higher
temperatures and more intense rainfall in early summer
(October to January), dissipating in late summer and
winter (February to September). The projections also
indicate a maximum reduction in annual runoff of up to
12.6% or 133.6 million m3. The combined effect of high
temperatures and low runoff, especially in winter, could
adversely affect groundwater recharge, particularly in the
Lowveld, and aggravate existing groundwater salinity.
Taken together, these changes are very likely to
negatively affect the agriculture-based economy as well
as ecosystems. The Great Usutu River basin – locally
often called the Lusutfu – is considered fairly
representative, as about three-quarters of the population
lives within and is supported through it (UNFCC, 2004).
State of the resource and water use
Swaziland has five principle river basins (the Lomati,
Komati, Mbuluzi, Great Usutu and Ngwavuma) whose
total annual renewable water resources amount to
4.5 billion m3. Of this, 42% or 1.87 billion m3 originates
in South Africa. The seasonal nature of the rainfall makes
discharge of surface waters extremely variable. In dry
areas such as the Lowveld, while the larger rivers are
through-flowing, most watercourses tend to flow only
after heavy local rainstorms. Hence, development of
groundwater resources is crucial. Although no
quantitative assessment of groundwater resources has yet
been undertaken, the annual potential is estimated at
0.66 billion m3. The Middleveld and Highveld have the
highest potential for groundwater exploitation, but the
number of wells in the Highveld is limited due to the
greater depth needed to reach the water table. In the
Lowveld, where the potential recharge is the lowest and
the need for groundwater is the highest, installed wells
tap about 42% of the estimated potential. Nationwide,
only about 6% of the potential is exploited.
As Table 1.2 shows, agriculture is the main consumer of
freshwater resources, accounting for almost 97% of
withdrawal. Of this, over 90% is used in growing sugarcane
as the main cash crop. The country is split between largely
rain-fed subsistence production by smallholders and cash
cropping on large private estates. Smallholders constitute
some 70% of the population and occupy 75% of the crop
land, but their productivity is low, accounting for only
11% of total agricultural output. Poor availability of water
for irrigation is a major constraint to smallholder
production; in years of low rainfall, harvests plummet and
further aggravate the food crisis (New Agriculturist, n.d.).
Table 1.2 Water demand by sector, 2002
Sector

Demand
% of total demand
(million m3/year)

Households

30

1.7

Animal husbandry

14

0.8

Industry

17

0.9

Other agriculture

1,734

96.6

Total

1,795

100.0

Source: GOS, 2002.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Map 1.3 Swaziland

Note: The principal basins in Swaziland are those of the Lomati, Komati, Mbuluzi, Great
Usutu and Ngwavuma rivers. This map shows the Lomati and Komati grouped into the
Incomati basin, and the Great Usutu and Ngwavuma forming the Maputo basin.

Grazing is the predominant land use in Swaziland: about
67% of the total land area, or 11,630 km2, is used solely
for this purpose. During the dry season an additional
2,500 km2, which is under cultivation during the
summer, is used for grazing. Rangelands on communal
land, as opposed to commercial ranches, appear to be
deteriorating (WSSD, 2002).
The population of Swaziland is predominantly rural. In
2006, 24% of the population lived in urban areas, which
have significantly better water supply and sanitation
coverage than do rural areas. About half the urban
population is concentrated in the main cities – Mbabane,
the administrative capital, and Manzini, the main
commercial centre. Overall, 60% of the population has
access to safe water supply and 50% to improved
sanitation (WHO, 2008).
Commercial forestry and the related wood processing
industry form an important part of the economy,
contributing about 15% to GDP, mainly through exports.
The sector employs some 8,000 people, amounting to 8%
of formal employment in Swaziland. The sugar industry
is another major economic player, providing between
17% and 22% of total export revenue and employing
16,000 people directly and 80,000 indirectly. Sugarcane
represents more than half of all agricultural output and
9

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 10

1. Africa
30% of agricultural employment. Industrial pollution
is a problem. Most companies do not report on their
environmental records or their use of energy and
natural resources (WSSD, 2002).
Policy framework and decision-making
In the past, ad hoc management of water resources
prevailed in Swaziland. Carried out by several ministries
and by institutions outside the government, it involved
multiple laws aimed at solving disparate issues.
They included the Water Act of 1967, the Water
Services Act of 1992, the Komati River Basin Water
Resources Development and Utilization Act of
1992, the Joint Water Commission Act of 1992, the
Swaziland Environmental Authority Act of 1992
and the Swaziland Administrative Order of 1998
(Aquastat, 2005).
Today the 2003 Water Act provides guidelines on
how the water sector in Swaziland is coordinated.
It establishes the National Water Authority, which
is the highest policy-making body responsible for the
development and management of the national water
sector. The Act also provides for the formation of river
basin authorities and water user associations to enhance
public involvement in water resources management.
In addition, the Act includes the private sector as a
partner in water development (Aquastat, 2005). One
objective of the Act is to guide the development of
policies on water allocation and pricing, pollution
control, water storage and basin management.
A draft national water policy (2001) has been
harmonized with the regional policy and strategy that
the South African Development Community (SADC)
adopted in 2007. The national policy has since been
reviewed by the National Water Authority and is being
finalized in consultation with stakeholders.
The National Development Strategy was launched in
1999 to provide guidelines on equitable allocation of

resources for socio-economic development in the
next 25 years, strengthen government planning and
management capacity on development and seek national
consensus on the direction of development. The strategy
includes several recommendations on water resources
development, such as formulating an overall policy to
cover all water uses, expanding smallholder irrigation
within a national irrigation development plan while
encouraging farmers to make use of all available water
resources, and building small and medium-sized dams
to provide a reliable source of water for small-scale
irrigation, livestock, fisheries and municipal use
(Aquastat, 2005).
The Swaziland Environmental Authority Act of 1992
addresses the issue of pollution control for water and
the environment and includes provisions for the
establishment of standards. The National Development
Strategy also highlights environmental management
as a key policy area, and stresses the importance of
tackling major environmental issues, such as soil
erosion, deforestation, waste disposal and industrial
and urban pollution, especially as regard the livelihoods
of rural people. Nevertheless, the country needs to
strengthen integration of environmental concerns in
all sectors and examine the potential environmental
implications of economic policies (WSSD, 2002).
The main challenges
Poverty and infectious diseases: The country suffers
from a heavy disease burden. The main causes of
Swaziland’s high rate of infant mortality – diarrhoea,
malnutrition and infectious diseases – can be linked to
constraints on access to safe water supply and
improved sanitation. Malaria remains a major health
problem, especially in the Lowveld, the Lubombo
plateau and parts of the Middleveld. The disease
occurs mainly during or after the rainy season. It is
estimated that 30% of the population resides in malaria
risk areas and 38% in malaria receptive areas
(Aquastat, 2005).

Box 1.3 Combating HIV and AIDS: a heavy toll in sub-Saharan Africa
Thanks to a sixfold rise in this decade of
financing for activities to fight HIV in lowand middle-income countries, the annual
number of AIDS deaths worldwide declined
from 2.2 million in 2005 to 2.0 million in
2007, partly as a result of a substantial
increase in access to HIV treatment. In a
number of heavily affected countries, such
as Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe,
dramatic changes in sexual behavior have
been accompanied by declines in the
number of new HIV infections, contributing
to stabilization in the percentage of HIVpositive adults (people aged 15 to 49).
However, sub-saharan Africa still bears the
burden of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. An

10

estimated 1.9 million people were newly
infected with HIV in sub-Saharan Africa in
2007, bringing the number of people living
with HIV to 22 million. Alarmingly, 67% of
the 33 million people worldwide with HIV
live in the region, and 75% of all AIDS
deaths in 2007 occurred there.
In Swaziland, the number of persons
affected by HIV increased from 160,000 in
2001 to 190,000 in 2007. The total
includes 15,000 children below age 14.
The HIV prevalence rate appears to have
stabilized. A national population-based
survey in 2006 put the rate at 26% – the
highest prevalence ever documented in
such a survey anywhere in the world

(Central Statistical Office [Swaziland] and
Macro International, 2007). On the positive
side, the country has made marked
progress in expanding coverage for HIVpositive pregnant women in recent years:
between 2004 and 2006, coverage of
prevention of mother-to-child transmission
increased from 5% to 67%. In addition,
donor funding for child-focused initiatives
has increased, with care and support
services now provided for 100,000
children orphaned as a result of HIV
(Global Fund, 2008).
Source: Adapted from UNAIDS, 2008.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 11

Swaziland

Table 1.3 Recurrent expenditure in the water sector
Sector

2002/2003
emalangeni
(thousands)

% of
total

(US$)
(thousands)

2003/2004*
emalangeni
(thousands)

(US$)
(thousands)

% of
total

2004/2005*
emalangeni
(US$)
(thousands) (thousands)

% of
total

24,483

2,310

0.8

26,274

3,457

0.8

24,139

3,713

0.8

Other expenditure

2,932,434

276,644

99.2

3,282,145

431,861

99.2

2,907,404

447,293

99.2

Total

2,956,917

278,954

100

3,308,419

435,318

100

2,931,543

451,000

100

Water resources
management

* Estimates.
Note: Average exchange rates used for calculations: 2002, US$1 = E 10.6; 2003,US$1 = E 7.6; 2004, US$1 E6.5
Source: GOS, 2004.

According to the Central Statistics Office (GOS, 2005), 69%
of the country is affected by poverty. The incidence of
poverty is much higher in rural areas (75%) than in urban
settlements (49%). About 84% of the country’s poor people
live in rural areas, where per capita income is one-fourth of
the urban average, and people consume half as much food.
About 66% of the population cannot meet basic food
needs, and 43% live in chronic poverty (IFAD, 2008).
Productivity at both household and national level is
increasingly affected by the high rate of HIV and AIDS
infection (Box 1.3). It is estimated that 26% of people aged
15 to 49 have the virus (UNAIDS, 2008), and that HIV and
AIDS cause 47% of deaths among children under age 5
(WHO, 2006). Over 10% of households are headed by
children who have lost both parents, and a significant
number by very old grandparents who cannot do physical
work (WSSD, 2002).
Limited investment in water sector: The share of government
spending allocated to the water sector has averaged less than
1% in recent years (Table 1.3). To improve water supply and
sanitation coverage, the level of government funding needs
to be raised. Meeting the national target of providing water
and sanitation services to all rural people by 2022 would
require a tenfold increase in investment.
The majority of funds for the sector come from external
sources. In fiscal 2003/2004, nearly two-thirds of estimated
capital expenditure was in the form of international grants
(Table 1.4). Current trends, however, show external donors
in the water sector reducing their assistance to Swaziland.
Thus, the government will need to allocate a greater share
of the national budget for improving water and sanitation
coverage, and increase the efficiency of investment.
Improving regional cooperation: Although located in a
generally arid part of southern Africa, Swaziland is
considered well situated because it is traversed by several
Table 1.4 Estimated capital expenditure in the water sector
by source of funds, 2003/2004
Source of funds

Amount
emalangeni
(thousands)

Amount
US$
(thousands)

Local funds

20,831

2,740

Foreign grants

35,348

4,650

Total capital

56,179

7,390

Note: The average interbank exchange rate in 2003 was US$1 = E7.6.
Source: GOS estimates, 2004.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

large rivers (the Komati, Mbuluzi, Great Usutu and
Ingwavuma) flowing from or into South Africa and
Mozambique. Given that 58% of overall water potential is
derived from Swaziland and the rest originates in South
Africa, upstream water resource development could reduce
the water supply availability for Swaziland as well as
downstream Mozambique.
In recognition of the importance of a coordinated
approach to the use and preservation of water resources, a
technical committee was formed under the SADC
framework to stimulate development and cooperation in
the region. The SADC member states, including Swaziland,
signed a Protocol on Shared Watercourse Systems in 1995,
which was reinforced in 2000 by a revised protocol seeking
to foster closer cooperation for sustainable management,
protection and use of shared watercourses.
In 1983, Mozambique, South Africa and Swaziland
established the Tripartite Permanent Technical Committee
to advise the three governments on water use and policyrelated issues concerning the Incomati and Maputo rivers
(as the Komati and Great Usutu are known in
Mozambique). Swaziland signed treaties with South Africa
in March 1992 to establish a Joint Water Commission and
the bilateral Komati Basin Water Authority, which is
responsible for the design, construction and management
of the Driekkopies and Maguga dams. A treaty establishing
a Joint Water Commission between Swaziland and
Mozambique was signed in July 1999. Mozambique,
South Africa and Swaziland signed the Tripartite Interim
Agreement for Cooperation on the Protection and
Sustainable Utilisation of the Water Resources of the
Incomati and Maputo Watercourses in August 2002, and
are undertaking studies into the possible elaboration of a
comprehensive water sharing agreement for the two rivers.
The development, finalization and satisfactory
implementation of such agreements are important to
foster cooperation in the region and minimize waterrelated conflicts that might arise as water needs increase.
Conclusions
Swaziland is well endowed with freshwater resources.
As more than 40% of the water potential originates in
South Africa, and the water requirements of downstream
Mozambique need to be considered, functional
cooperation agreements on the use of transboundary
waters are vital to the sustainable socio-economic
development of Swaziland and its neighbours. Swaziland
11

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 12

1. Africa
needs to strengthen its own legislation to improve the
management of water resources, as well as raise the level of
investment in the water sector, in order to alleviate the
excruciating poverty and heavy disease burden that its
people suffer.
References
Aquastat. 2005. Swaziland. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries/swaziland/index.stm
(Accessed December 2008.)
Central Statistical Office and Macro International Inc. 2007. Swaziland
Demographic and Health Survey 2006–2007: Preliminary Report.
Calverton, Md., Macro International.
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. 2008. Monthly Progress
Update – 31 January 2008.
http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/files/publications/basics/progress_upd
ate/progressupdate.pdf (Accessed January 2009.)
Government of Swaziland (GOS). 2002. Prioritised Action Programme on
Poverty Reduction. Mbabane, Ministry of Economic Planning and
Development,
Government of Swaziland (GOS). 2002. Swaziland’s National Report on the
World Summit on Sustainable Development 2002. Mbabane, Swaziland
Environmental Authority.
Government of Swaziland (GOS). 2004. Medium Term Expenditure
Framework, Budget 2005/05-2007/08. Mbabane, Ministry of Natural
Resources and Energy.

Government of Swaziland (GOS). 2005. Swaziland Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (SHIES) 2000/01. Mbabane, Central Statistical Office,
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development.
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 2008. Rural Poverty in
the Kingdom of Swaziland. Rural Poverty Portal.
http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/web/guest/country/home/tags/swazil
and (Accessed November 2008.)
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). 2008. Report on the
Global AIDS Epidemic. Geneva, UNAIDS.
http://www.unaids.org/en/KnowledgeCentre/HIVData/GlobalReport/200
8/2008_Global_report.asp
Mwendera, E. J. 2005. Swaziland Country Water Status. Contribution to
African Water Development Report. Addis Ababa, Economic Commission
for Africa.
New Agriculturist. No date. Country Profile: Swaziland. http://www.newag.info/02-6/countryp.html (Accessed December 2008.)
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 2004.
Swaziland’s First National Communication.
http://www.ecs.co.sz/unfccc/chapter4_3.htm (Accessed December
2008.)
World Health Organization (WHO). 2006. Country Health System Fact Sheet
2006: Swaziland.
http://www.afro.who.int/home/countries/fact_sheets/swaziland.pdf
(Accessed December 2008.)
World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD). 2002. National
Assessment Report: Swaziland.
http://www.ecs.co.sz/wssd/wssd_swaziland_national_assessment_2002.
zip (Accessed December 2008.)

hyper-arid and desert in most of the south. Over 40% of
the country lies in the hyper-arid zone. Although average
annual rainfall amounts to 220 mm, geographic
variation is substantial, with regional averages ranging
from 1,500 mm in the north to 50 mm in the far south,
in the heart of the Sahara.

12

1893
1897
1901
1905
1909
1913
1917
1921
1925
1929
1933
1937
1941
1945
1949
1953
1957
1961
1965
1969
1973
1977
1981
1985
1989
1993
1997
2001
1998

1993

1988

1983

1978

1973

1968

1963

1958

1953

1948

1943

1938

1933

1928

1923

Rainfall variability

1918

80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
-20.0
-40.0
-60.0

1913

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft Tunisia Case Study Report, prepared in 2008 (in French) by
Besbes et al.

Temperature fluctuations

1908

1

1.8
1.5
1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0
-0.3
-0.6
-0.9
-1.2
-1.5

1903

The predominant climate types are Mediterranean in the
north and Saharan in the south. Four climatic subregions
can be identified: subhumid in the far north, semi-arid
in the north-west and at Cap Bon, arid in the centre and

Figure 1.1 Anomalies in average temperature and
precipitation over the 20th century

1898

Setting the scene
Tunisia, located in North Africa, is bounded by Algeria to
the west, by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the south-east,
by the Sahara to the south and by the Mediterranean (with
a 1,200 km coastline) to the north (Map 1.4). The country
covers 164,420 km2 and has a population of 10.25 million
(2007). Its landscape is diverse, ranging from mountains in
the north-west to the arid south and the Sahara. In 2006,
66% of the population lived in urban areas (WHO/UNICEF,
2008). Urbanization is expected to continue, largely
through migration to coastal areas. On current trends, by
2025 some 75% of the population will live in urban areas.1

Climate change and variability
Analysis of changes in average temperature and rainfall
in Tunisia over the 20th century (Figure 1.1) indicates
that while temperatures have risen significantly, by
1.2°C, no trend in rainfall is apparent, although greater
variability can be observed in 1961–1990 than in
1901–1930 or 1931–1960 (King et al., 2007).

Temperature (°C)

Amid economic growth and urbanization, this
developing country has made big gains in water
and sanitation coverage, as well as a shift towards
long term sustainable practices, but faces mounting
tensions between competing users.

Precipitation (%)

Tunisia

The arid plains that mark the northern limit of the
Sahara include many depressions, locally called chotts
and sebkhats, which fill with water in winter and dry up
in summer. Their water is highly saline. The largest chott,
Jerid, is a 500 km2 salt lake.

Source: King et al., 2007.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:20

Page 13

Tunisia

Map 1.4 Tunisia

Algeria, is the biggest river, with an annual water
potential of around 0.8 billion m3. The south is
characterized by large, deep aquifer networks whose low
recharge rates make them barely renewable. Tunisia’s
annual water potential is estimated at 4.8 billion m3,
with groundwater amounting to about half (2.1 billion
m3). In 2005, the exploitation rate was roughly 80% for
deep aquifers and an unsustainable 108% for shallow
aquifers. (These averages are approximations, as the
figures for withdrawal and exploitable resources used
in calculation are quite uncertain.)
The high variation in rainfall, amount of arid land and
overuse of groundwater resources make storage of
freshwater a vital necessity in Tunisia. In 2005, there
were 27 large dams, 200 small hillside dams and 660
hillside lakes, with a combined capacity of 1.8 billion
m3 per year, amounting to 66% of the total surface
water potential. Despite the number of dams,
Tunisia lacks major hydroelectric generation capacity.
Modest projects carried out since the 1950s have
allowed it to exploit 40% of its hydropower potential.
Even so, hydroelectricity represents barely 1% of
overall energy production. Given the long term rise
in fuel prices, however, hydroelectric production is
expected to expand.
Of the country’s approximately 110,000 km2 of
arable land, only 49,000 km2 is currently in use,
mainly producing grain and olives. In 2006, agriculture
accounted for 81% of overall water consumption.
Although its share of GDP is gradually decreasing,
agriculture still plays an important role in the economy.
It employs 25% of the workforce, and was the third
biggest contributor to GDP in 2006 at 11%, behind
industry and mining (29%) and services (60%).

Since 2006, studies have been undertaken in Tunisia
to aid in elaboration of a national climate change
adaptation strategy. The aim is to move from reaction to
crises, such as droughts and floods, to management of
risk associated with climate change (early adaptation).
Projections for 2030 and 2050 form the basis of this
effort. Models for 2030 indicate a slight increase in the
frequency and intensity of dry years, though the northwest might benefit from a slight increase in precipitation
in wet years. However, by 2050 the average annual
temperature could rise by between 0.4°C and 1.2°C, and
the variability of rainfall could increase, especially in
spring and autumn (MARH/GTZ, 2006).
State of the resource and water use: storage is
essential
Tunisia has a dense hydrographic network in the north,
whose river basins account for 81% of the national
surface water potential. Oued Mejerda, which rises in
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

In urban areas, drinking water coverage had reached
almost 100% by 1993. Tunisia achieved this by
transferring large amounts of water from the
humid north to the arid south, and by installing
desalination facilities to treat brackish water in the
tourist areas of the south-east. In rural areas, access
to drinking water expanded from 62% in 1990 to 84%,
on average, in 2006. Over the same period, coverage
for the country as a whole advanced from 82% to 94%
(WHO/UNICEF, 2008).
The share of urban households connected to sewerage
was 96% in 2006. In rural areas, where sanitation relies
on more traditional methods such as septic tanks and
field disposal, access to improved sanitation is around
64% (WHO/UNICEF, 2008). Efforts are also being made
to minimize health risks by altering hygiene practices
through education.
Industry consumes around 0.1 billion m3 of water per
year, of which almost 60% is abstracted from deep
aquifers. In the absence of incentives for conservation,
water-efficient production processes and water recycling
are seldom if ever used.
Tourism is a big source of income in Tunisia with a
modest water footprint: the whole sector consumes only
13

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:21

Page 14

1. Africa

Box 1.4 Water resources management in Tunisia
Tunisia’s 1975 Water Code introduced
the principles of 1) protection of water
resources as a public good; 2) government
responsibility in supplying water and
in planning and monitoring water use;
3) the necessity of water conservation to
alleviate scarcity throughout the country;
4) recyc-ling of treated wastewater in agriculture; 5) the possibility of stake-holder
involvement in water resources management through community assoc-iations;
and 6) private sector involvement in

managing non-conventional resources.
The Ministry of Environment and
Sustainable Development is responsible
for pollution reduction and wastewater
recycling, while the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources has broad
responsibilities covering everything else.
Basing the institutional framework on the
principle of stakeholder involvement has
allowed Tunisia to manage its limited
water resources effectively. The fact that

25 million m3 per year, or 1% of the total exploited
resource. The rate is slightly higher in the south,
where tourism is expected to be developed intensively in
the future.
Policy framework and decision-making
Since 1970, as both knowledge about water resources and
demand from various sectors have increased, plans and
directives concerning water management have been
developed in Tunisia (Box 1.4).
A master plan for water use has been implemented for
each of the country’s three natural regions – the north,
the centre and the south. The master plans include
provisions on the transfer of surface and groundwater
and on flood protection for large urban centres.
These guidelines have allowed water resources to be
allocated in terms of present and expected demand from
the different users. They have also helped identify the
areas where irrigation makes the best use of available
resources. The national strategy for water resources
mobilization is now in its second decade (2001–2010),
and the aim is to mobilize 95% of conventional
resources by building dams, reservoirs and flood runoff
infrastructure, and to develop non-conventional
resources such as recycled and desalinated water.
These plans and strategies have helped Tunisia make
several reforms since the early 1990s. The most
important of these was a transition from supply-side
management towards a strategy of demand-driven
management. Thus, the emphasis is on institutional,
regulatory and technical practices that are likely to
change water users’ behaviour, encourage more efficient
use of resources and maintain a sustainable consumption
level. Measures have also been taken to reduce the
environmental impact of water policies, particularly by
protecting the most fragile ecosystems and limiting the
sources and effects of water pollution.

the water management system is
centralized has facilitated the trade-offs
necessary to balance supply with demand
while reconciling the needs of various
users. Having furnished itself with
appropriate tools for integrated resources
management and begun planning for the
day when demand will outstrip availability,
the country is well placed to avoid
many problems it might otherwise
have encountered.

overexploitation of water resources – especially
groundwater resources, from which 75% of irrigation
water is abstracted. Because of the large share of
agriculture in water consumption, efforts have been
made since the late 1980s to increase efficiency of water
use by charging a user fee for irrigation water. From 1990
to 2000, the price was increased by 9% per year. The total
of user fees collected quadrupled between 1991 and
2003, permitting recovery of much of the cost of
running and maintaining the water system. In 1995, a
vast irrigation rehabilitation programme was begun,
involving a generous incentive package in which small
agricultural holdings were offered subsidies of up to 60%
of the cost of modernizing installations. As a result, by
2007 some 80% of the irrigation system had been
improved with sprinkler systems, drip irrigation and the
like. This strategy has allowed Tunisia to stabilize
demand for irrigation water despite the growing extent
of the area under irrigation (Figure 1.2).
To maximize freshwater availability, other methods,
such as recycling of treated wastewater and desalination
of brackish water, are also being adopted. Desalinated
water is reserved for essential uses such as drinking
water, meeting the needs of tourist facilities and certain
industrial uses (chiefly in food processing and the
chemical and pharmaceutical industries) in regions
where local water resources are insufficient or of poor
Figure 1.2 Trends in agricultural water use and the
extent of irrigated land, 1990–2006

The main challenges: promoting sustainable use of
scarce resources
To promote economic growth, past policies encouraged
water use through preferential rates or subsidies. The low
value thus imputed to water gave users the mistaken
impression that resources were abundant. This led to
14

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:21

Page 15

Zambia
quality. However, tariffs are identical for all water, regardless
of whether it is desalinated or not. Although the official
policy is to provide access to clean drinking water for all,
which has bolstered the principle of social equity, the
approach to tariff-setting does not necessarily favour
protection and appropriate valuation of the resources.

economy driven by the service sector. To retain its
competitive edge, it remains essential for Tunisia to
continue implementing policies geared towards sustainable
socio-economic development by reconciling user needs
with the social and environmental value of water.
References

Zambia: the
Zambezi and
Congo river
basins
Zambia is facing difficult challenges such as
persistent poverty and increasing climatic variability.
Although it has sufficient land and water resources,
its success in addressing its problems depends
largely on how it implements its plans and strategies
for water resources.
Setting the scene
Zambia is a landlocked country in southern Africa
surrounded by Angola, Botswana, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe
(Map 1.5). The country lies mainly in the Zambezi River
basin, and partially in the Congo River basin in the
north. Zambia has a population of 11.7 million (2006)
and a surface area of 752,614 km2. It sits on the high
plateau of Central Africa at an average altitude of
1,200 metres, and enjoys a mild, subtropical climate.
Annual average rainfall ranges from 600 mm in the
south to 1,500 mm in the north.1
Climate change and variability: increasing frequency
of extreme events
A 2007 survey concluded that in the previous nine years,
local communities had been exposed to extreme climatic
variation that included droughts, floods, increased rain
intensity, extreme heatwaves and a shorter rainy season.
In fact, between 2000 and 2007 Zambia experienced
unusually unstable weather, with a sequence of two flood
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft Zambia National Water Resources Report, prepared in 2008 by
Imasiku A. Nyambe and Miriam Feilberg.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Besbes, M., Hamdane, A., Chahed, J. and Hamza, M. 2008. Tunisia Case Study
Report (in French), executive summary. (Draft.)
King, L., Nasr, Z., Almohamad, H. and Maag, C. C. 2007. Le Climat. Stratégie
nationale d’adaptation de l’agriculture tunisienne et des écosystèmes aux
changements climatiques, Ch. 7.2. Eschborn, Germany/Tunis, GTZ/MARH.
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources (MARH)/GTZ. 2006. Elaboration d’une
étude nationale d’adaptation de l’agriculture tunisienne et des écosystèmes aux
changements climatiques. Tunis/Eschborn, Germany, MARH (Direction
Générale des Etudes et du Développement Agricole)/GTZ.
WHO/UNICEF. 2008. Latest JMP Country Files. Joint Monitoring Programme for
Water Supply and Sanitation.
http://documents.wssinfo.org/resources/documents.html (Accessed
December 2008.)

years, two drought years and two years with normal
rainfall. Figure 1.3 shows fluctuations in rainfall in
Zambia between 1975 and 2006. Because of a lack of data,
it is difficult to assess how such climate change will affect
the country’s water resources.
State of the resource: future competition among
sectors
Zambia’s surface water potential totals some 100 billion
m3, with the Zambezi River contributing over 60% of
the runoff. Consequently, as a major stakeholder in
the Zambezi River Authority, along with Zimbabwe,
Zambia is helping establish the Zambezi Watercourses
Commission. Groundwater is also a major resource,
especially during the dry season. Although no
accurate assessment is available, the average renewable
groundwater potential is estimated to be 49.6 billion m3.
By far the largest user of water is hydropower generation.
Of about 38.5 billion m3 of overall water withdrawal,
36.3 billion m3 is used to generate electricity for internal
use and export to neighbouring countries. Some 70%
of the country’s hydropower potential awaits
development. There is as yet no real competition
for water among the various sectors (Table 1.5).
However, with irrigation expanding and awareness
on environmental issues growing, water released from
hydropower stations will need to be regulated so that
the needs of agriculture and the environment are both
served. The government recognizes the role of integrated

Figure 1.3 Annual rainfall variation, 1975–2006
Annual average rainfall (mm)

Conclusions
Tunisia is a semi-arid country with limited water resources
in which desertification is reducing the availability of arable
land. Modern irrigation techniques, promoted since 1995,
have allowed optimum utilization of water resources. In
recent decades, water and sanitation coverage has increased,
especially in rural areas. Increasing water demand in various
sectors has led to increasing tension, with each trying to
satisfy ever-increasing demand for water. Application of
integrated water resources management has helped create
an enabling environment for a flourishing and productive

1,200
1,150
1,100
1,050
1,000
950
900
850
800
750
700
1975

1980

1985

Mean annual rainfall

1990

1995

2000

2005

Historical average rainfall

15

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:21

Page 16

1. Africa
water resources
management (IWRM) in
meeting the needs of all
users, but successful
application of the
IWRM approach will
require prioritizing
investment and
strengthening the
capacity to manage
national and
transboundary
water resources.

Map 1.5 Zambia

Around 40% of Zambia’s
population lives in urban
settings. The capital,
Lusaka, and the Copperbelt
region in the north-west
are the most densely
populated areas. In 2005,
86% of people living in
towns had access to safe
water, compared with only
37% in rural areas. For the
same year, just 13% of the
rural population had
access to improved
sanitation, whereas
there was 41% coverage
in urban areas.
Zambia has good agricultural potential, with 56% of its
surface arable. Only 14% of the arable land is farmed,
and most cultivation is rain fed. Irrigated crops cover
only about 1,000 km2. The government established an
Irrigation Development Fund in 2007 and is encouraging
farming operations by making loans available at
concessionary rates. However, agricultural development
is hampered by insufficient financing, a lack of accurate
data and capacity information on water resources, and
inadequate market services and infrastructure.
Policy framework and decision-making: towards
integrated and participative approaches
The Water Act of 1948, the foundation of Zambia’s
water legislation, deals with ownership, allocation
and regulation of the nation’s surface water resources
without covering groundwater or the transboundary
aspects of rivers such as the Zambezi which constitute
international boundaries.

Table 1.5 Water use by sector, 2008

16

Sectoral use

Water
consumption
(billion m3)

Share in overall
water consumption
(%)

Agricultural

1.8

4.67

Industrial and
municipal

0.4

1.03

Hydroelectric

36.3

94.30

Total

38.5

100.00

To address these shortcomings, reforms have been
undertaken since the early 1990s, including the adoption
of the National Water Policy in 1994. It recognized water
as an economic good, highlighted the important role of
the water sector in overall socio-economic development,
promoted water resources development through an
integrated management approach and defined
institutional responsibilities of stakeholders in the sector
so as to achieve effective management and coordination.
The policy also provided for adequate, safe and costeffective water supply and sanitation services while
assuring environmental protection.
In carrying out its reforms in the water sector, the
Government of Zambia started with the water supply
and sanitation subsector, enacting the Water Supply and
Sanitation Act in 1997 (Box 1.5). It later turned to the
water resources management subsector with the Water
Resources Action Programme in 2001. The programme
developed a Water Resources Management Bill, a new
Water Resources Institutional Framework, an improved
Water Resources Management Information System
and a draft action plan on addressing challenges
related to water resources. Moreover, the Fifth National
Development Plan (FNDP, 2006–2010) is specifically
geared towards applying IWRM nationwide. To assist in
carrying out the water-related programmes in the FNDP,
in 2008 the government adopted an IWRM and water
efficiency implementation plan, with crucial stakeholder
participation (which also took place when the FNDP was
being drawn up). These processes are intended to help
Zambia plan and manage its water resources to further
socio-economic development.
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:21

Page 17

Zambia

Box 1.5 Institutional arrangements for urban water supply and sanitation
The 1997 Water Supply and Sanitation Act
obliges local authorities to provide water
and sanitation services using various
arrangements, such as partnerships with
private firms for build-operate-transfer
models as well as for concessions and
management contracts. They may also
create organizations known as
Commercially Viable Water Supply and
Sanitation Utilities, or CUs. All these
institutional arrangements must undergo
viability testing in order to be licensed by
the regulator, the National Water Supply
and Sanitation Council (NWASCO).

CUs operate as commercial businesses
within a framework regulated by
NWASCO. They are expected to
deliver efficiencies meeting private
sector standards and to be self-financing,
though the government may help
modestly with initial working capital and
infrastructure investment. CU managers
are recruited under competitive private
sector conditions.

been limited. Though many struggled to
meet the wage bill when first established
in 2000, some CUs averaged 102%
recovery of operation and maintenance
costs in 2007/2008. It is hoped that by
2010 more than half the CUs will reach a
similar level of effectiveness. Although
performance and quality of service had
been on a downwards trend, today an
upwards trend is evident in a number of
service indicators.

The CUs have made significant progress
even though government investment in
water and sanitation infrastructure has

Stakeholder participation was also secured through the
formation of the Water Sector Advisory Group, which
consists of four subsector advisory groups: (a) water
supply and sanitation, (b) water resources management,
(c) water resources infrastructure development, and
(d) monitoring, evaluation and capacity building.
The subsector groups provide for inclusion of
stakeholders from outside the water sector, such as
the Ministry of Finance and National Planning, which
chairs the subgroup on monitoring, evaluation and
capacity building. Inclusion of outside stakeholders in
planning and decision-making is important for achieving
an integrated approach to water management and for
long term sustainability of decisions (see Chapter 15,
Section 5 in the third edition of the World Water
Development Report).
The main challenges
Combating poverty: Zambia is among the world’s least
developed countries, ranked by the United Nations
Development Programme as 163rd out of 179 countries
on the Human Development Index. Since 2005, under
the Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative, Zambia
has received debt relief equivalent to some US$6 billion.
This has had a positive impact on the national budget
and hence on poverty. Nevertheless, 63.8% of the
population still lives on less than US$1 a day, and
46% of Zambians are undernourished. Conflicts in
neighbouring countries have caused movement of
refugees into Zambia, further aggravating the situation.
Extreme poverty is especially significant in rural areas,
where the majority of households depend on
subsistence farming.
Meeting public health needs: Water-related diseases such
as malaria and diarrhoea are major health problems in
Zambia. The toll of malaria alone is nearly 4 million
clinical cases and 50,000 deaths per year: it accounts for
as much as 20% of maternal mortality and 23% of all
deaths. Diarrhoea accounts for 6.9% of all illness
reported (2003). Zambia has also been affected by HIV
and AIDS, with about 9% of the population being HIV
positive (2000). The 2008 Health Survey indicated that
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

HIV and AIDS affected 14% of people aged 15 to 49 –
the country’s prime workforce. Another issue is that
increasing environmental degradation, affecting forests,
wildlife and fish populations, especially hurts the
livelihoods of the poor, who depend the most on these
resources. Wealthier communities are less affected.
Addressing environmental concerns: Copper mining is
an important source of income in Zambia, but it involves
pumping water out of mines and into natural waterways,
which degrades the environment and water quality.
For example, Konkola Copper Mine discharges some
300,000 m3 of water per day into the Kafue River, which
supports most of the country’s economic activities and
over 40% of the population. The Copperbelt
Environment Project has aimed at addressing
environmental consequences of mining. Stronger
regulation is needed for mines and other industries
whose effluents affect the environment. Although there
are some positive effects from mine discharges, such as
making more water available in the Kafue River for
downstream users, particularly in drought years, these
have not received much attention. Furthermore, the
effects of mine pumping on groundwater have not been
studied in detail yet.
Deforestation in Zambia is advancing at a rate of
3,000 km2 per year. It has resulted in localized flooding,
increased erosion, reduction in surface and groundwater
availability and loss of aquatic life. Accurate estimates
are hampered by the lack of an updated forest
resources inventory.
Decreasing surface and groundwater quality, due to an
increasing nutrient load, industrial and agricultural
pollutants and a falling groundwater table, is a growing
problem in highly populated urban areas. Sanitation
and solid waste management are also major concerns.
Waste collection and management are inadequate,
posing a serious threat to groundwater quality,
particularly in periurban areas and informal
settlements, where between 40% and 80% of the
urban population resides.
17

WWDR3 Africa (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:21

Page 18

1. Africa
Conclusions
Zambia is a country with enough water and land
resources to facilitate development. However, inadequate
data and capacity, in every dimension, seriously impair
the government’s ability to address many challenges,
most notably poverty and hunger. Increasing the share
of the population with access to safe water and improved
sanitation, especially for people living in periurban and
rural settings, would help curb the spread of preventable

18

diseases that claim too many lives and reduce
productivity. Application of IWRM, which is awaiting
the necessary legal and institutional structure, will
help combat poverty and malnutrition while assuring
sustainable socio-economic development and preserving
a healthy ecosystem.
References
Nyambe, I. A. and Feilberg, M. 2008. Zambia National Water Resources Report,
executive summary. Lusaka. (Draft.)

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 19

2

Asia and
the Pacific
This region supports some 60% of the world’s population
with only 36% of the world’s water resources. Growing
population, rapid urbanization and economic
development put heavy pressure on freshwater resources
and further accentuate the disparities in their natural
distribution.
The case studies presented in this section include striking
examples from six Asian countries and the Pacific
subregion, including the poorest country (Bangladesh),
the richest (Republic of Korea), the smallest (in the Pacific
islands) and the largest (China). The differing challenges,
and the degree to which the countries are equipped to
cope with them, show great variation, largely due to the
wide range of economic development. However, waterrelated disasters are a common threat affecting all the
countries, and the need to develop strategies for
adaptation to climate change is a shared concern.
With major transboundary rivers characterizing much
of Asia, regional cooperation among riparian countries
surfaces as an important issue, and benefit-sharing is a
paramount concern – one that is also highlighted in the
third edition of the World Water Development Report,
which this volume accompanies.

BANGLADESH: the
confluence of the Ganges,
Brahmaputra and Meghna
rivers
Challenges include variation in
seasonal water availability,
natural hazards, arsenic
poisoning and a population
burdened with persistent
poverty. 20

CHINA: the Yellow River
basin
Serious challenges require an
integrated approach and bold
remedial action. 24

PACIFIC ISLANDS
Small island states need to
enhance management capacity,
policy frameworks and
adaption to climate-induced
challenges. 27

PAKISTAN: the Cholistan
desert
Varied approaches are needed
to maximize scarce water
resources and improve the wellbeing and livelihoods of
nomadic populations. 31

REPUBLIC OF KOREA:
the Han River basin
Poor interagency coordination
amplifies the burden of
pressures from competing
interests in a developed
country. 33

SRI LANKA: the Walawe
River basin
Applying integrated
management approaches with
community participation would
improve livelihoods and reduce
environmental damage. 36

UZBEKISTAN: the Aral Sea
basin
Entrenched problems
stemming from unsustainable
agricultural practices and
legacies of the past impede
progress. 39

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

19

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 20

2. Asia and the Pacific
production. Tropical cyclones, storms and tsunami-like
tidal bores are quite common from March to May and
during the monsoon season.

Bangladesh:
the confluence
of the Ganges,
Brahmaputra
and Meghna
rivers
Recurring water-related hazards, declining
freshwater availability and poisoning from naturally
occurring arsenic in groundwater have undermined
the health and livelihoods of millions in this densely
populated country. Climate change might further
aggravate this situation. Efforts to institutionalize
integrated water resources management will play a
significant role in reducing the burden of persistent
poverty, especially among rural populations.
Setting the scene
Bangladesh is situated in the deltaic plain formed by
three large rivers – the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and
the Meghna. The combined total catchment of about
1.7 million km2 extends over Bhutan, China, India and
Nepal.1 Only about 7% of this huge catchment lies in
Bangladesh. With its 140 million inhabitants (2004)
and a surface area of 147,570 km2, Bangladesh is one of
the most densely populated countries in the world. It is
almost completely surrounded by India, except for the
Bay of Bengal in the south and a short border with
Myanmar in the south-east. The only significant
highlands are in the north-east and south-east. Most of
Bangladesh is low-lying and relatively flat. A network of
about 230 rivers, of which 57 are transboundary, forms a
web of interconnecting channels throughout the country.2

Climate change and variability: continuing
vulnerability
Data indicate that minimum temperatures in the monsoon
season have generally increased by 0.05°C and maximum
temperatures by 0.03°C. Tidal data covering 22 years show
that the sea level is rising about 4 to 7 mm per year.
Detailed climate modelling has not been carried out in
Bangladesh. However, scenarios by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change have consistently simulated
potential warming throughout the country in all
seasons, a moderate increase in monsoon rainfall and a
moderate decrease in dry season rainfall. Accordingly,
projections for the Ganges-Meghna-Brahmaputra river
basin predict a temperature increase of up to 2.6°C by
2050 and a rise in annual rainfall of up to 5.5% by 2020.
Bangladesh has long been vulnerable to water-related
hazards due to its high population density, location in a
low-lying delta subject to heavy rainfall, and inflows of
large volumes of surface water that are confined to a
relatively short monsoon season. Any change in climatic
conditions is likely to aggravate the situation.
State of the resource: wide seasonal variation in
surface water availability
A network of rivers, channels and other water bodies
covers 8.23% of the surface area of Bangladesh. Overall,
Map 2.1 Bangladesh

Bangladesh has a subtropical monsoon climate,
characterized by wide seasonal variations in rainfall,
moderately warm temperatures and high humidity,
with a hot, humid summer from March to June; a cool,
rainy monsoon season from July to October; and a cool,
dry winter from November to February. The annual
rainfall varies from 1,200 mm in the north-west to more
than 4,000 mm in the north-east.
About 90% of the annual rainfall occurs during the
monsoon season. From November to May there is almost
no dependable rainfall. Drought is widespread during this
dry period, and irrigation becomes necessary for any crop
1

A simplified map showing the full extent of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and
Meghna river basins can be found in the CD accompanying this volume of
case studies.
2
Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the executive summary of Bangladesh Case Study Report, prepared in
2008 by the Institute of Water Modelling and DHI.

20

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 21

Bangladesh
the annual freshwater potential of the country is
estimated to be 1,200 billion m3, of which more than
90% is inflow from upstream countries (Aquastat, 1999).
Bangladesh has a treaty with India on sharing the water
resources of the Ganges River.
The quantity of surface water varies greatly by season.
During the dry season, which lasts from November to
May, there is a serious shortage of water and demand
exceeds availability (Table 2.1). In particular, the southwest and north-west are prone to drought. During the
monsoon season, however, surface water is available in
excess of water demand. Unfortunately, due to the flat
topography of Bangladesh, storing this excess has not
been possible. Storage would require a regional plan and
the construction of facilities in the upstream countries of
India and Nepal.
Table 2.1 Seasonal fluctuation in surface water availability
and overall demand
Critical dry period
Wet season
(February–April)
(June–October)
Average water
availability

60 billion m3

1,030 billion m3

Demand

90 billion m3

142 billion m3

Bangladesh has a predominantly agrarian economy.
Agriculture generates about 21% of total GDP and provides
employment for about 52% of the national workforce. It
also claims the biggest share of the country’s land resources
(55.8% of the overall surface area), followed by forests
(14.2%) and urban areas (5.9%). Irrigation is common but
not fully developed. Out of some 85,000 km2 of arable land,
about 52% is irrigated (FAO, 2003). Due to the shortage of
surface water during the dry season and absence of
diversion structures, groundwater resources are heavily used.
For example, about 70% of irrigation water is abstracted
from aquifers (Figure 2.1). Groundwater also accounts for
nearly 95% of the household water supply. This has led to
declining water levels, especially in urban areas. In Dhaka,
the capital, the water table has declined at an alarming rate
of 2 to 3 meters per year over the last decade. There is also
evidence of wells drying up in rural areas.
Despite its agrarian base, Bangladesh is experiencing rapid
urbanization. In 2006, only about 25% of the population
was urban, but the share is expected to reach 40% by
2025. On average, 85% of urban dwellers and 78% of rural
inhabitants have access to safe water supply. Although
sanitation programmes have been implemented since the
1970s, on average only 36% of the population has access
to improved sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, 2008). In the
slums of major cities like Dhaka and Chittagong, access to
sanitary latrines is estimated to be as low as 14%.
Significant investment in infrastructure is required to
improve water supply and sanitation coverage
nationwide, especially in expanding urban areas.
About 57% of the rural population and 51% of city
dwellers are poor. Poverty alleviation is central to the
country’s development agenda. Assuring equity in access
to water and sanitation services has become critical for
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

addressing poverty issues effectively. Bangladesh has
made important gains in the fight against poverty: the
proportion of people living below the poverty line has
dropped significantly since the 1990s. In general, the
depth and severity of poverty have been reduced more
successfully in rural areas than in urban ones, although
the former still lag far behind the latter in terms of
development.
The country’s industrial capacity has been growing since
the 1970s. Industry’s contribution to national income
has reached almost 22%. However, industrial growth,
especially in textile production and leather processing,
has had dramatic consequences for water resources.
Many companies withdraw water on their own property
and tend to consider it a free commodity, resulting in
inefficient water use. Moreover, companies do not
monitor or keep a record of the wastewater they
generate. Therefore, data on the pollution load of various
industries are not readily available.
The potential for hydropower generation or conservation
of surface water is limited by Bangladesh’s flat terrain and
high population density. Kaptai Dam is the only major
hydropower facility in the country, and hydropower
represents a minimal share of energy production. The
upstream parts of the major river basins, however, have
potential for water conservation and hydroelectricity
generation, especially during the monsoon season.
Thermal power stations and some industries use large
quantities of water for cooling. When the water is
released it is up to 10°C hotter, with adverse effects for
both the environment and the operating efficiency of
other power plants and industries downstream.
Policy framework and decision-making: action on
reform is lagging
As many as 35 central government institutions, affiliated
with 13 different ministries, have responsibilities and
activities relevant to the water sector.
The National Water Policy (NWPo), published in 1999,
aims for a holistic, multisector approach to water
resources management and highlights the need to
Figure 2.1 Extent of irrigated surface area, by type of
irrigation

Source: Ministry of Agriculture, 2004.

21

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 22

2. Asia and the Pacific
manage water as a commodity essential for human
survival, socio-economic development and
environmental preservation.
The NWPo identifies National Water Sector Apex Bodies
(NWSABs), which include the National Water Resources
Council (NWRC) and its Executive Committee (ECNWRC),
the Water Resources Planning Organization (WARPO) and
the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR). The NWSABs are
responsible for reforms in the water sector.
In this set-up, the NWRC is the highest national water
management body. With 37 members and chaired by the
Prime Minister, it is responsible for coordinating all water
resources management activities in the country and
formulating policy on various aspects of water resources
management. The ECNWRC is essentially in charge of
guiding national, regional and local water management
institutions in formulating and implementing policies
and plans for improved water management and
investment. WARPO is the sole government institution
for macro-level water resource planning and serves as the
secretariat of the ECNWRC. The MoWR is the executive
agency responsible to the government for all aspects of
the water sector (ADB, 2004).
In 2001, the government introduced a National Water
Management Plan, prepared by WARPO. The plan’s aim
is to implement NWPo directives and decentralize water
sector management. It provides a framework within
which line agencies and other organizations are expected
to coordinate planning and implementation of their
activities. It includes components for the short term
(2000–2005), medium term (2006–2010) and long term
(2011–2025). The original intention was to update it
every five years, but the first update is pending.
A Water Act now being drafted will incorporate
existing water laws related to ownership, development,
appropriation, use, conservation and protection of water
resources. It is also expected to establish a legal basis for
ensuring that water rights are equitable, taking account of
all uses and resolving inconsistencies and conflicts among
various uses. The Act is expected to be finalized in 2009.
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) is a
relatively new concept in Bangladesh. The institutional
framework to deal with IWRM is not yet fully developed.
Although Bangladesh has a capable private sector and a
large network of non-government organizations dealing
with water, it needs to create an enabling environment
for IWRM. This will not be easy given the highly
fragmented water sector and the differing views and
priorities of the various agencies regarding the effective
use of water resources. Nevertheless, the government is
actively implementing a programme called Guidelines
for Participatory Water Management.
Despite continuing reductions in funding from
development partners, external agencies continue to play
an important role in the water sector. A network of local
consultative subgroups and other formal and informal
mechanisms promotes consultation, coordination and,
in some cases, active cooperation among these partners.
22

The main challenges
Disasters and hazards: Bangladesh is prone to water-related
hazards such as floods, cyclones, storm surges, flash floods,
droughts, riverbank erosion and rain-induced landslides. In
addition, salinity intrusion and waterlogging affect nearly
one-third of the country in the south-west. The country
suffered approximately 170 disasters between 1870 and
1998. Every year some 20% to 25% of the territory is
inundated during the monsoon season (WMO/GWP, 2008).
The frequency of major floods (Table 2.2), covering up to
70% of the country, is growing. During the 2007 flood and
cyclonic storm, the death toll exceeded 300, with 8 million
people displaced and serious consequences for the national
economy and people’s livelihoods. From 1970 to 2008,
12 major cyclones killed more than 620,000 people and
affected 45 million others (MoFDM, 2008).
Because of the almost flat terrain, flood prevention through
flow regulation is not an option for Bangladesh. A flood
forecasting and warning system established in the 1970s
covers all flood-prone areas and provides real-time flood
information, with early warning for lead times of 24 and
48 hours. The country’s flood management strategies have
continuously evolved over the last 50 years, so that now
more emphasis is put on other non-structural means of
mitigating floods, including controlling development in
flood plains and wetlands through legislation and
involving communities in flood management
(WMO/GWP, 2008).
Bangladesh is also vulnerable to recurrent droughts, such
as those that occurred in 1973, 1978, 1979, 1981, 1982,
1989, 1992, 1994 and 1995. The droughts of 1994 and
1995 in north-western Bangladesh led to a 3.5 million
tonne shortfall in rice production.
There is potential for regulating river flow in upstream
countries to reduce flooding, especially during the
monsoon season, and to augment water availability in the
Table 2.2 Socio-economic damage caused by floods in
Bangladesh, 1954–2007
Year

Impact

1954

Affected 54% of the country.

1974

Moderately severe, over 2,000 deaths, affected 58% of
the country, followed by famine with over 30,000 deaths.

1984

Inundated 53,520 km2, did damage estimated at
US$378 million.

1987

Inundated over 50,000 km2, did damage estimated at
US$1.0 billion, caused 2,055 deaths.

1988

Inundated 61% of the country, caused damage estimated
at US$1.2 billion, affected more than 45 million people,
caused 2,000 to 6,500 deaths.

1998

Inundated nearly 100,000 km2, affected 30 million
people, damaged 500,000 homes, caused 1,100 deaths
and heavy infrastructure loss. Damage estimated at
US$2.8 billion.

2004

Inundated 38% of the country, caused damage estimated
at US$6.6 billion, led to 700 deaths, affected nearly
3.8 million people.

2007

Caused more than 300 deaths. Over 8 million displaced.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 23

Bangladesh
dry season, as well as to maintain river levels to facilitate
inland waterway navigation and sustain ecosystems.
A better regulated flow could also reduce salinity intrusion
caused by the decline in freshwater availability in the
dry season. This, however, would require strengthened
regional cooperation, which has not yet been realized.
River bank erosion takes a terrible toll on people,
property and infrastructure. Major rivers, including the
Jamuna, Ganges and Padma, consume several thousand
hectares of flood plain per year and carry huge sediment
loads. As a result, riverbank erosion and siltation occur
frequently. An estimated 100 km2 of land per year has
been lost to erosion over the past 20 years. The mostly
rural victims of river erosion sometimes lose all their
personal belongings and property. Bangladesh also
loses several kilometres of roads, railways and flood
embankments annually to shifting waterways.
Response efforts for water-related natural disasters still
focus primarily on emergency relief rather than on
seeking ways to reduce vulnerability to natural hazards.
There is a need to strengthen the awareness that risk
reduction and disaster prevention make better economic
sense than responding to consequences through
emergency relief.
Health and water-related issues: The unreliable availability
and fluctuating quality of surface water resources prompted
the authorities to start developing a groundwater supply
system in the 1970s, installing wells in an effort to provide
safe drinking water. Bangladesh now has some 9 million
wells, of which about half are public wells installed by
government agencies (Jones, 2000).
Wells made it possible for about 97% of the rural
population to have access to bacteriologically safe water by
2000 and helped lower the infant mortality rate from 156
per thousand in 1990 to 69 per thousand in 2006 (UNICEF,
2008). Unfortunately, particularly in shallow aquifers, the
groundwater often contains arsenic at levels that can cause
poisoning (arsenicosis). Only about 74% of the rural
population has access to arsenic-free water. The naturally
occurring arsenic is a major concern for drinking water
supply and for animal husbandry and irrigation. It is also a
major development constraint in coastal aquifers. In 61 of
the country’s 64 districts, groundwater arsenic levels are
above the permissible limit. It is estimated that between
25 million and 35 million people depend on wells that
expose them to the risk of arsenicosis.
The main cause of death in Bangladesh, however, remains
poverty-related infectious diseases, which are exacerbated
by malnutrition. A marked gender differential in health
persists. About 70% of mothers suffer from nutritional
deficiency anaemia and over 90% of children have some
degree of malnutrition.
Pollution and environmental degradation: Water bodies
in Bangladesh receive a large amount of pollution in the
form of municipal, industrial and agricultural waste,
including pesticides and fertilizers. There is also
pollution originating in the upstream parts of the major
river basins.
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

The National Water Policy and National Water
Management Plan stress the importance of preserving
the natural environment as a condition for the socioeconomic development of the country. Both state that
care must be taken to conserve goods and services
provided by ecosystems, including fisheries and wildlife
biodiversity. Yet the country’s rivers, flood plains,
mangroves and natural lakes continue to deteriorate.
The situation is mainly due to poor enforcement of
regulations and lack of integration with development
activities in other sectors.
The degradation of water resources has a particularly
detrimental effect on poor communities that are highly
dependent on ecosystems for their livelihoods. In part to
address these challenges, the Ministry of Environment
and Forest supported the Environment Conservation Act
of 1995 and the Bangladesh Environmental Regulation
of 1997. These form the basis of modern pollution
control in Bangladesh. The revised industrial policy of
2005 also recognizes the need to control pollution as
stipulated under the Environment Conservation Act.
However, pollution control legislation has only gradually
been implemented.
Environmental impact assessments (EIAs) have been
carried out in Bangladesh since the late 1990s to
minimize the adverse effects of development projects.
However, a lack of resources and capacity often hampers
the process: most EIA consultants are poorly trained,
developers lack the resources to conduct EIAs
appropriately and there is inadequate awareness at
decision-making level of the benefits of conducting EIAs.
Conclusions
Although significant progress has been made, poverty
continues to plague the people of Bangladesh, particularly
in rural areas. They depend mainly on land for subsistence
and are severely affected by seasonal variation in surface
water availability, frequent floods, droughts and cyclones,
which cause substantial socio-economic damage.
The effects of potential climate change are likely to
worsen the situation, especially for the rural poor and
the disadvantaged, who already bear the brunt of the
consequences. To prosper in the 21st century, Bangladesh
needs to improve the way it manages its water resources
internally while continuing to work towards better
regional cooperation that can offer benefits for all basin
countries. A combination of these factors will also play a
pivotal role in key economic sectors and in breaking the
vicious circle of poverty.
References
Aquastat. 1999. Review of water resources statistics by country. Rome, Food
and Agriculture Organization. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/
water_res/index.stm (Accessed November 2008.)
Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2004. Bangladesh Country Paper.
www.adb.org/Water/NWSAB/2004/Bangladesh_Country_Paper.pdf
(Accessed 22 November 2008.)
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2003. Selected Indicators of Food
and Agriculture Development in Asia-Pacific Region 1992–2002. FAO
Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.
http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/004/AD452E/AD452E00.HTM (RAP
Publication 2003/10. Accessed 22 November 2008.)
Institute of Water Modelling/DHI. Forthcoming. Bangladesh Case Study
Report, executive summary.

23

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 24

2. Asia and the Pacific
Jones, E. M. 2000. Arsenic 2000: An Overview of the Arsenic Issue in Bangladesh.
Dhaka, WaterAid Bangladesh, December 2000. (Draft Final Report.)
Ministry of Agriculture. 2004. http://www.moa.gov.bd/statistics/
Table5.11_TAI.htm. Department of Agricultural Extension and Water
Development Board. (Accessed November 2008.)
Ministry of Food and Disaster Management (MoFDM). 2008.
http://www.mofdm.gov.bd/sidr%20damage.htm (Accessed
November 2008.)

UNICEF. 2008. http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/bangladesh_
bangladesh_statistics.html (Accessed December 2008.)
WHO/UNICEF. 2008. www.wssinfo.org/en/36_san_leastDev.html. Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. (Accessed
December 2008.)
World Meteorological Organization/Global Water Partnership (WMO/GWP).
2008. http://www.apfm.info/pdf/case_studies/bangladesh.pdf. Associated
Programme on Flood Management. (Accessed November 2008.)

China:
the Yellow
River basin

More than 60% of the annual precipitation falls between
June and September, during the crop growing season.
Average rainfall recorded during 1956–2000 was 454 mm
over the entire basin, the lowest level being in the upper
reach (372 mm) and the highest in the lower reach (671
mm). There is a declining tendency observed in rainfall
over the entire basin (Figure 2.2). During the 1990s,
because of prevailing drought conditions, average
precipitation was about 7.5% below the long term
average (Box 2.1).

Prolonged drought, floods and severe pollution
combined with high demand from booming
agricultural, industrial and urban sectors are
challenging China to take remedial measures
and implement a more integrated approach to
managing its water resources.
Setting the scene
The Yellow River is the second longest river in China
after the Yangtze River, and the sixth longest in the
world. Originating on the Qinhai-Tibetan plateau in
western China, it runs for some 5,500 km across the vast
North China Plain, traversing nine provinces before
draining into the Bo Hai Sea (Map 2.2). Its catchment
area of 795,000 km2 is home to 110 million people
(2000) or about 8.7% of China’s population. (The figures
increase to 189 million and 14.9% if the flood plain
surrounding the lower reach is included.) In 2000, about
26.4% of the basin was urbanized. As the cradle of the
northern Chinese civilizations and the centre of China’s
current political, economic and social development, the
river is known as ‘the mother river of China’.1
Climate change and
variability: declining
tendency in rainfall
The basin lies in two
different climatic zones:
arid and semi-arid
continental monsoon in
the north-west and semihumid in the south-east.

According to various models of the effects of climate
change on temperature and annual precipitation in the
Yellow River basin, annual average temperature could
rise by up to 3.90°C and precipitation by 8.67% by 2080
(Xu et al., n.d.). Significant warming could reduce the
availability of the water resources (Zhang et al., 2008).
Consequently, better water management and adaptation
of technology to improve water use efficiency will need
to be considered to avoid a critical water shortage in the
basin in the coming century.
State of the resource: declining quality and quantity
Average total renewable water resources for 1956–2000
were estimated at 66.1 billion m3, including 17.2 billion
m3 of groundwater. However, in 2000, the total available
water supply was around 48.4 billion m3.2 Water demand
in the basin sharply increased from 10 billion m3 in 1949
to 37.5 billion m3 in 2006. Groundwater has been
extensively exploited in the basin since the introduction
of the tube well in the late 1950s. In 2000, groundwater
abstraction reached 10.7 billion m3 and there were
some 380,000 tube wells in the basin. Consequently,

Map 2.2 The Yellow River basin

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Yellow River
Basin Case Study Report, prepared
in 2008 by the Yellow River
Conservancy Commission,
Ministry of Water Resources.
2
About 3 billion m3 of this comes
from groundwater resources outside
the basin’s topographic boundaries.

24

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 25

China

Box 2.1 The drought decade
In 1987 the State Council of China
established a Yellow River Water Allocation
Scheme, to better balance available supply
and actual demand by setting a cap on
abstraction at 37 billion m3 per year for
average runoff of 58 billion m3.
During the 1990s, however, drought
prevailed throughout the North China Plain,
including the Yellow River basin. Two main
tributaries, the Wei He and Fen He, were
reduced to a bare trickle. Runoff dropped by
24% compared to the long term annual
average. Furthermore, flow in the lower part

of the river dropped to 14% of its long term
average. From 1995 to 1998, for some 120
days each year, there was no flow at all in
the lowest 700 km of the river. This had
serious repercussions, such as extreme water
shortages in downstream provinces, the
inability to flush sediment out to sea, and
impaired sustainability in the delta
ecosystem and coastal fisheries.
Since 1999 the scheme has managed to
nominally end absolute flow cutoff,
though the flow levels are sometimes so
low as to be largely symbolic.

overexploitation of groundwater resources has been a
serious concern, particularly in the large and mid-size
cities along the Yellow River. Springs in Jinan, once
known as ‘the city of springs’, dried up in the late 1990s.
Overall, groundwater levels have dropped significantly
in 65 locations due to extensive withdrawals.
The biggest direct impact of a booming economy coupled
with rapid industrialization and population growth was
on water quality. For example, the amount of untreated
industrial sewage being dumped into the Yellow River
has doubled since the 1980s to 4.2 billion m3 per year.
The river receives over 300 pollutants, and only about
60% of its course is now fit for drinking water supply.
The reduction in quality has caused environmental
problems and contributed to the reduction in quantity.
Under the Water Pollution Protection Law, a legislative
framework for better protection of water resources is
being prepared. Necessary regulations and effluent
standards have also been formulated. In parallel, the
Water Resources Protection Law on the Yellow River
Basin is being modified.
As a result of intensive water development between 1951
and 1987, many structures were built in the basin for
flood control, hydropower and irrigation. In 2000, there
were over 10,000 reservoirs in operation, with total
storage capacity of 62 billion m3; 23 involve large dams.
Hydropower production in the basin amounts to
40 TWh per year.

Managing water scarcity is now the
number one priority in the Yellow River
basin. Given the growing imbalance
between supply and demand, it is difficult
to meet any new water demand from one
sector without lowering supply to the
others. It is clear that hard choices will
have to be made to address these
diverging needs. Since agriculture is by far
the largest consumer of water, one
unavoidable conclusion is that water
supply to agriculture must be reduced and
new ways found to make agricultural
water use more efficient.

Policy framework and decision-making
On a national scale, increasing water consumption
due to the booming economy has led to water shortages.
Consequently, the central government has increased
its investment in the water sector and enacted legislation
to alleviate water scarcity and assure continued economic
growth. Many laws were passed in the 1990s, such as the
Water Law, the Soil and Water Conservation Law, the
Flood Control Law, the Environmental Protection Law,
the Fishery Law, the Forestry Law and the Mineral
Resources Law. Some related administrative rules and
regulations for water management were also promulgated.
In 2002, a new Water Law, emphasizing integrated water
resources management, was passed. It has paved the way
for a transition from engineering-dominated and demandbased development to a resource-oriented strategy that
focuses on water availability.
At basin level, the Yellow River Conservancy Commission
(YRCC), established in 1946, manages the water resources of
the basin on behalf of the Ministry of Water Resources and
the State Council. The YRCC prepares and implements the
basin water development plan, decides the allocation of
water resources at provincial level and is in charge of
constructing and maintaining structures (except large dams)
for water resource development and flood prevention.
Figure 2.2 Rainfall in various reaches of Yellow River basin,
1956–2000
750

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

733

689

600

616

570

Rainfall (mm)

The expansion of irrigation in the basin has been rapid. The
irrigated area rose from 8,000 km2 in 1950 to 75,000 km2 in
2000. Demand for irrigation water grew steadily, reaching
38.1 billion m3 in 2000 (Li, 2005; YRCC, 2007). Although
the trend stabilized in the early 1980s and agricultural water
use has decreased since 2000 in accordance with the Yellow
River Water Allocation Scheme, agriculture still accounts for
84% of total water consumption, followed by industry
with 9% and households with 5%. The remaining 2%
goes for environmental use (2006). When consumption
exceeds water availability in the basin, the deficit is met
by using groundwater resources outside the basin, as well
as recycling.

450
300

482
380

515

614

529
451

374

455
373

360

456

413

150
0
1956 –1970
Upper

1971–1980
Middle

1981–1990
Lower

1991–2000
Basin average

Source: YRCC, 2002.

25

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 26

2. Asia and the Pacific
The water allocation is based on the integrated scheme
approved by the State Council in 1987 (see Box 2.1). The
provinces in the middle reach of the basin are allocated
22% of the available flow. The remainder is split equally
between the provinces of the upper and lower reaches.
The allocation is revised annually to reflect seasonal
variations in availability.
Since 2000, in line with the most recent approach adopted
by the Ministry of Water Resources, water management
and related development activities in the Yellow River
basin have aimed to integrate the interests of all regions
and sectors. Consequently, to balance available water
supply and the demand of various sectors, the YRCC
developed a water use plan based on medium to long term
supply and demand patterns. Annual water use plans are
issued to users to assure adequate supply for priority areas,
especially in the case of drought. Furthermore, the YRCC
established regulations encouraging household users to
install water-saving devices, farmers to adopt waterefficient practices and industry to promote techniques
minimizing water use and waste discharge. It also
established a market pricing system.
The main challenges
Managing sedimentation: The Yellow River gets its name
from the colour of the heavy sediment concentration that
it transports while flowing through an extensive loess
plateau covering 640,000 km2. The loose soil of the plateau
is easily eroded, and it is carried into the Yellow River and
its tributaries in massive quantities, particularly during the
intense summer rainstorms. The average sediment load
that the river carries is 1.6 billion tonnes per year. Of this,
only about 25% is carried to the sea, while the rest is
deposited on the riverbed. Due to this sedimentation, the
riverbed has risen at an average rate of 5 to 10 cm per year
and the dikes have been periodically raised in response.
The impact of sedimentation on channel dynamics has
made management of the river difficult, especially in its
lower reaches.
Meeting environmental water requirements: Due to
problems associated with the heavy sediment load of the
river, the YRCC has made flushing out sediment its most
critical environmental priority. Protecting biodiversity
and sustaining the wetlands and fisheries at the mouth
of the river are also important environmental concerns.
The minimum flow required to flush out sediment is
calculated as 14 billion m3, and an additional 5 billion
m3 is necessary for other environmental requirements.
With the surface water capacity almost fully used
already, and with industrial, urban and agricultural
demand growing as well as climatic variation putting
further stress on the resource, assuring the required
minimum environmental flow, which roughly equals
one-third of total average annual flow, is a very difficult
challenge to address.
Coping with floods and droughts: Millions of lives have
been lost to floods and droughts during the long history
of the Yellow River basin. From 206 BC to AD 1949,
1,092 major floods were recorded, along with 1,500 dike
failures, 26 river rechannellings and 1,056 droughts. The
flat North China Plain, which was formed by alluvial
26

deposits from the Yellow River, was always prone to
floods. However, following the establishment of the
People’s Republic of China in 1949, master planning for
flood control and construction of numerous hydraulic
structures significantly reduced the vulnerability and
losses due to floods.
Embankments, reservoirs and flood retention areas have
been established to increase flood control and enable
drought management (see Box 2.1). The structural flood
control system in China is designed basically for the
discharge capacity of the maximum flood recorded since
the 1950s for large rivers, and for five- to ten-year flood
frequency for smaller rivers.
Non-structural flood control measures have been
improved, mainly by developing and applying flood
forecasting and warning systems, and by implementing
laws, regulations, policies and economic approaches.
These include managing river channels and controlling
settlement in flood-prone areas. Potential flood risks are
being reduced to a level which the society and economy
can address, and flood management schemes have been
established for extremely large floods.
The YRCC and the provinces of Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan
and Shandong have jointly set up a Yellow River flood
control and drought relief headquarters, which provides
crucial input to planning for such disasters and
mitigating their impact.
Conclusions
Throughout history, the Yellow River basin has been
associated with floods, droughts and a rising river bed.
With large population increases, combined with rapid
growth in all sectors, declining water quality and
quantity have had a direct impact on the sustainable
socio-economic development of the basin and the health
of ecosystems. The water allocation scheme introduced
in 1987 and various laws and regulations enacted in the
1990s aim to address these problems while taking a
holistic approach that addresses the requirements of all
stakeholders. However, the need to strike a balance
between water demand for various sectors, sediment
management and some serious pollution issues remains
the major challenge facing the Yellow River Conservancy
Commission and the ministries concerned.
References
Li, G.Y. 2005. Maintaining the Healthy Life of the Yellow River. Zhengzhou,
China, Yellow River Conservancy Press.
Xu, Z. X., Zhao, F. F. and Li, J. Y. No date. Impact of climate change on
streamflow in the Yellow River Basin. http://www.ifwf2.org/addons/
download_presentation.php?fid=1077 (Accessed January 2008.)
Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC). 2009. Yellow River Basin Case
Study Report.
Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC). 2002. Information made
available during meetings between the YRCC and the International
Water Management Institute, Zhengzhou, China, September–October
2002.
Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC). 2007. Yellow River Water
Resources Bulletin, March 2002. www.yrcc.gov.cn. (In Chinese; accessed
December 2008.)
Zhang, Q., Xu, C.-Y., Zhang, Z., Ren, G. and Chen, Y. D. 2008. Climate
change or variability? The case of Yellow river as indicated by extreme
maximum and minimum air temperature during 1960–2004. Theoretical
and Applied Climatology, Vol. 93, Nos 1–2.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 27

Pacific islands
4,000 mm to less than 500 mm. The higher altitudes of
volcanic islands receive more rain, with about a 10%
increase per 100 metre rise in elevation.

Pacific
islands
The unique geography of the many small islands
dotting the Pacific Ocean exposes them to waterrelated natural hazards compounded by the effects
of climate change and variability, including sea
level rise. Pacific island countries are struggling to
build the capacity to address many challenges, such
as developing coherent policy frameworks and
integrated approaches to managing scarce
freshwater resources.
Setting the scene
There are about 30,000 islands in the Pacific Ocean, only
2,000 of which are inhabited. Many of the populated
islands are less than 10 km2, while some, especially
atolls, are less than 1 km2. The 18 Pacific Island countries
and territories considered in this study account for
550,000 km2 of land and some 7 million inhabitants
spread across 180 million km2 of ocean – about 36% of
the earth’s surface. If Papua New Guinea, a large island
country, is excluded, the land mass drops to 88,000 km2,
occupied by 2.6 million people. Of this population,
1.6 million live in Melanesia, 600,000 in Polynesia and
450,000 in Micronesia.1
The climate of the small tropical Pacific islands depends
on location and season, but is usually hot and humid,
except in the cool
highlands of some
Map 2.3 Pacific islands
Melanesian islands. The
year in many areas is
equally divided between
the dry and wet seasons.
South of the equator in
Melanesia and Polynesia,
the dry season is from May
to October. The wet season,
which lasts the other six
months, can include a
period of cyclones in some
locations. North of the
equator in Micronesia,
these seasons are reversed.
Average annual rainfall
varies considerably in the
tropical Pacific, from over

Climate change and variability: air-sea interactions
and frequent storms
Two of the most important climatic influences on small
Pacific islands are tropical storms and the El Niño and
La Niña phenomena. The natural pattern of El Niño and
La Niña episodes has a significant impact on many small
islands, producing extensive wet and dry cycles. For
example, an El Niño event combined with other climatic
and oceanographic conditions brings abundant rainfall
in the central Pacific but can cause catastrophic drought
in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and the other
Melanesian islands. The reverse condition, known as
La Niña, causes serious drought in the low equatorial
islands of western Kiribati.
In addition to problems stemming from existing climatic
variability, climate change and sea level rise could
significantly exacerbate the situation. Climate change
scenarios for the Pacific islands vary widely, depending
on location and the model used. Most models predict an
increase in frequency of El Niño episodes and intensity
of cyclones (World Bank, 2000). There is less certainty
about changes to rainfall, which could affect the
availability of freshwater resources, although a general
increase in sea temperature might favour an increase in
rainfall for very small islands. Current scenarios indicate
a rise in sea level of about 0.2 to 0.4 metres over the next
few decades. Even the slightest rise is of great concern for
small, low-lying island countries whose maximum
elevations are only a few meters above sea level. Tarawa
atoll in Kiribati has been the focus of impact studies
under various scenarios for sea level rise and climate
change. Results of groundwater modelling studies to
assess the combined effect of pumping, climate change

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from Pacific Dialogue on
Water and Climate: Synthesis Report,
(SOPAC, 2002), prepared by Tony
Falkland, Marc Overmars and David
Scott.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

27

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 28

2. Asia and the Pacific

Box 2.2 Rainwater collection
On small islands with high rainfall (e.g. in
Tuvalu), rainwater catchments, using the
roofs of houses and some community
buildings, are the primary source of
freshwater (Taulima, 2002).
On other small islands, rainwater helps
meet essential water needs (e.g. for
drinking and cooking). During periods
when rainfall is scarce or non-existent for
months, household rainwater storage may
be depleted unless very strict rationing is
imposed. On Funafuti, the main island of

Tuvalu, rainwater is collected in household
and communal tanks. When households
experience shortages during extended dry
periods, small tankers deliver water from
the communal tanks as a public service,
for a fee. The Tuvalu Government recently
resolved to combat drought by
maximizing storage and spending disaster
preparedness funds to buy rainwater
harvesting tanks for households.
In addition to using roof catchments,
islanders sometimes collect rain from

and sea level rise indicate that the impact of initial sea
level rise on aquifers is not detrimental (World Bank,
2000). This is particularly so when they are compared with
the impact of current climate variability, pollution of
groundwater from human settlements and overpumping
(White et al., 2007).
Preliminary assessment of vulnerability and adaptation
in some Pacific island countries in relation to climate
change identified improved management and
maintenance of existing water supply systems as a high
priority, given the relatively low costs associated with
reducing system losses and improving water quality.
State of the resource and water use
The limited freshwater supply in small Pacific islands is
used for various purposes, including for towns, industrial
activities, agriculture and forestry, tourism,
environmental needs and mining. Non-consumptive
uses include hydropower generation (e.g. in Fiji, Samoa
and Vanuatu), navigation and recreation.
To meet growing demand, naturally occurring water
resources are supplemented with non-conventional ones.
The former are surface water, groundwater and rainwater
collection (Box 2.2); the latter include desalination,
imports, wastewater recycling and use of seawater or
brackish water for selected purposes where potable water
is not needed.
Some islands, including in Fiji and Tonga, have imported
water as an emergency measure during severe drought.
In some instances, people move from water-scarce
islands to others nearby with more water. On many
small islands, local or imported bottled water is an
alternative for drinking water, although it costs more
than water supplied by local water authorities.
The use of seawater and brackish waters can conserve
valuable freshwater resources. For example, in densely
populated parts of Tarawa and Majuro (Marshall Islands),
dual pipe systems distribute freshwater and seawater.
Seawater or brackish well water is used for baths, power
plant cooling and firefighting, as well as in swimming
pools.
28

specially prepared surfaces such as paved
runways (e.g. in Majuro), which may be
near storage tanks, and in artificially lined
reservoirs (e.g. on some islands in the
Torres Strait, between Australia and Papua
New Guinea). Simple rainwater collection
systems consisting of containers such as
plastic barrels placed under the crown of a
coconut palm, where rainfall is
concentrated, are still used in some places
(e.g. outer islands of Papua New Guinea).

Recycled wastewater is not a common source in small
island countries but is sometimes used to irrigate gardens
and recreational areas at tourist resorts and hotels,
notably in Fiji and Maldives.
During severe droughts or after natural disasters, coconut
water can substitute for fresh drinking water. People on
some of the smaller outer islands of Fiji, Kiribati, the
Marshall Islands and Papua New Guinea, for example,
have survived on coconuts during extremely dry periods.
The coconut palm is very salt-tolerant and can continue
to produce fruit even when groundwater turns brackish.
Per capita freshwater use varies considerably between
and within island states. It depends on availability,
quality, type and age of water distribution system,
cultural and socio-economic factors and administrative
procedures. Although typical water use is of the order of
50 to 150 litres per person per day, leakage in poorly
maintained systems can lead to unnecessarily high
consumption. Water supply to resorts can also account
for a high proportion of total water use on some small
islands or parts thereof. Daily personal consumption in
such resorts can be as high as 500 litres (UNESCO, 1991).
Many small islands, particularly coral atolls and small
limestone islands, generally do not have sufficient water
resources for irrigated agriculture, or suitable soil
conditions. Irrigation on small islands thus tends to occur
on a relatively minor scale except in cases like that of Fiji,
where agriculture – primarily water-intensive cultivation
of sugar cane as a cash crop – is the largest water user.
Policy framework and decision-making: highly
complex and rooted in tradition
Water governance in small islands is highly complex
because of socio-political and cultural structures related
to tradition. Many inherited practices, rights and
interests concerning the extended family, community, or
tribal and inter-island relations (Box 2.3) may conflict
with the demands of urbanized societies. Addressing
related difficulties requires political will and institutional
reform at all levels to create a framework for integrated
water resources management (IWRM), as well as
behavioural change through long term awareness
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 29

Pacific islands

Box 2.3 Important considerations of culture and tradition in IWRM
Understanding the subtle fabric of a
community’s culture improves prospects
for projects’ sustainability and increases
the ability to assure equity in participation.
For example, in the traditional Fijian
concept of the vanua, land, water,
customs and human environments are not
separate, but rather are indivisible. Water
governance thus is not seen as separate
from overall governance.

Similarly, projects relying on women’s
groups would need to be aware that in
some communities, women who have
married into a village are not seen as
belonging to their husbands’ village and
so are not given the right to participate in
decision-making at any level.
Examples from Papua New Guinea also
reveal difficulties of working amid various

and advocacy campaigns, education, training and
the like.
IWRM is a relatively new concept for Pacific island
countries, and the formal development of this holistic
approach within national governance structures is not
widespread. Only a few countries have started drafting
national IWRM plans. Yet the underlying approach,
which involves taking socio-cultural, technical, economic
and environmental factors into account in the
development and management of water resources, has
existed in traditional practices for centuries in Pacific
island countries. In addition, since the 1990s it has been
increasingly recognized that IWRM is necessary to
adequately address competing water demands sustainably.
The major governance-related difficulties facing Pacific
island countries are fragmented management structure,
with multiple agencies dealing with water resources; lack
of an overarching policy; outdated laws; poor
administration capacity for integration, stemming from
insufficient interministerial cooperation; and inadequate
budgetary resources allocated to the water sector
(PIFS/SOPAC, 2005). These combine to hamper progress
towards preparation of water use efficiency plans and
application of IWRM.
Some major challenges
Meeting the Millennium Development Goals: Pacific
island countries have progressed at varying rates on the
water and sanitation related Millennium Development
Goals (MDG). For example, in 2006 only 46% of the
Figure 2.3 Access to improved drinking water supply, by
country, 2006
100 100

96

80
60

94

92

88

population in the Pacific islands had access to improved
drinking water. This corresponds to about half the 2006
global coverage rate. Although less populated countries
such as the Cook Islands, the Federal States of
Micronesia, Niue, Tonga and Tuvalu have high coverage,
the low coverage of Papua New Guinea, which alone
represents three-quarters of the region’s population,
pushes the regional average to levels comparable with
those of the least developed regions (Figure 2.3). To make
matters worse, rapid population growth, increasing
urbanization, damage to water catchments resulting
from deforestation, poor waste management practices
leading to water pollution, and climate change are
expected to exacerbate the challenge of providing access
to safe water.
The proportion of households with access to improved
sanitation varies greatly among the small Pacific island
countries (Figure 2.4). Coverage is below 50% in nearly
40% of the islands. Sanitation systems in the Pacific
islands rely principally on pit toilets and septic tanks.
Contamination of water supplies caused by inadequate
sanitation, along with other sources of pollution, low
water availability and the use of poor quality
groundwater as drinking water, leads to outbreaks of
diarrhoea, cholera and other infectious diseases, such as
hepatitis and typhoid. Installation of affordable sanitation
systems and the introduction of social programmes
focused on behavioural change are needed in small
island communities to improve water quality and
human health.
Figure 2.4 Access to improved sanitation, by country, 2006

100

88

87
70

65
47

40
20
0

Source: WHO/SOPAC, 2008.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

40

46

Coverage (%)

Coverage (%)

100

ethnic communities. Social friction
between families and villages, for instance,
can hinder efforts at cooperation,
especially when members of ethnic groups
want to work only with their own leaders.
In other cases, non-landowners may be
indifferent to the sensitivities of
landowners (SOPAC, 2007).

100 100 100

80
60
40
20

96

90
71

67

62
49

45
33

32

25

0

Source: WHO/SOPAC, 2008.

29

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 30

2. Asia and the Pacific
The figures on water supply and sanitation clearly
demonstrate the need for regional improvement to meet
the MDGs. However, the lack of priority on water and
sanitation issues in national development strategies, along
with the inadequacy of budgetary resources allocated to
the water sector, jeopardize the progress made by Pacific
island countries as regards the MDGs. Forecasts indicate
that in most parts of the Pacific region, problems resulting
from increasing demand for water and increasing
pollution of water may be much more significant than the
expected effects of climate change (Hay, 2000).
The Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Barbados Programme of Action (BPoA+10) has
emphasized that water and sanitation should be given
high priority on global and national agendas during the
‘Water for Life’ Decade, especially within small island
developing states. The Mauritius Declaration of 2005
highlighted water management and water access issues
in Pacific island countries.
Vulnerability to water natural hazards: Pacific island
countries are susceptible to floods, droughts and
cyclones. Droughts are particularly dangerous as they
affect the most vulnerable communities, such as those
occupying marginal environments (ESCAP, 2000).
Among the most widely used coping strategies are
measures taken by individual households to conserve
freshwater supplies and seek substitutes. Ideally, water
management plans should address the inevitability of
climate variability so that droughts do not necessarily
require emergency response (SOPAC, 1999). This
necessitates adequate hydrological data for analysis and
design, as well as financial resources. But there is a
significant lack of national capability for conducting
water resource assessments in the South Pacific countries,
and capacity-building is needed.
Floods are also a significant hazard, especially in high
Pacific island countries of volcanic origin. The hazard is
greatest when the islands are within the zone affected by
cyclones and associated extreme precipitation. Yet in
many island countries, flood forecasting systems are either
non-existent or not functioning due to poor maintenance.
Tropical cyclones are more frequent in the western and
central Pacific than in the eastern Pacific. The very high
wind speeds of cyclones are often accompanied by
extremely intense rainfall and storm surges, which can
destroy buildings and coral reefs, damage crop trees, cause
coastal flooding and erosion, and pollute water supplies. It
is considered likely that climate change will result in
increased cyclone wind speeds and even more damaging
storm surges. Several island countries have taken
initiatives to develop disaster management plans, often in
response to particular disasters. However, resource
constraints and the lack of coordinated national response
plans continue to reduce the effectiveness of countries’
preparedness, for example in Papua New Guinea.

30

Conclusions
Small island developing states in the Pacific face many
constraints, including their small size and remoteness,
the limited availability of freshwater, increasing
population and insufficient human and financial
resources. These, coupled with vulnerability to climatic
conditions, sea level rise and the degradation of water
quality due to inadequate sanitation and waste disposal,
present tough challenges for water resource
management. Failure to give adequate attention to water
and sanitation issues in national development strategies
hampers the region’s ability to meet the MDGs and deal
with climate variability and change.
References
Hay, J.E. 2000. Climate change and small island states: A popular summary of
science-based findings and perspectives, and their links with policy.
Presented at 2nd Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) workshop on
climate change negotiations, management and strategy, Apia, 26 July
– 4 August.
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat/South Pacific Applied Geoscience
Commission (PIFS/SOPAC). 2005. Pacific Cooperation Plan: Preliminary
Sector Analysis for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. Suva, PIFS/SOPAC.
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC). 1999. ENSO Impact
on Water Resources in the Pacific Region: Workshop Report. Nadi, Fiji,
November 1999. (Miscellaneous Report 336.)
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC). 2002. Pacific
Dialogue on Water and Climate: Synthesis Report. Prepared by Tony
Falkland, Marc Overmars and David Scott.
www.adb.org/water/Operations/Partnerships/Synthesis-ReportPacific-Dialogue.pdf (Accessed November 2008.)
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC). 2007. Mobilising
People towards Integrated Water Resources Management: A Guide in
Community Action, Live and Learn Environmental Education. Suva,
SOPAC. (Joint Contribution Report 191.)
Taulima, F. 2002. Water management in Tuvalu with special emphasis on
rainwater harvesting: Case study presented as part of Theme 1, Water
Resources Management. Pacific Regional Consultation Meeting on
Water in Small Island Countries, Sigatoka, Fiji, 29 July – 3 August.
UNESCO. 1991. Hydrology and Water Resources of Small islands, a Practical
Guide. Prepared by A. Falkland (ed.) and E. Custodio. Paris, UNESCO.
(Studies and reports on hydrology No 49.)
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP). 2000. Pacific Islands Background Information, Ministerial
Conference on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific,
Kitakyushu, Japan, September. http://www.unescap.org/
mced2000/pacific/background (Accessed November 2008.)
White, I. et al. 2007. Society-Water Cycle Interactions in the Central Pacific:
Impediments to Meeting the UN Millennium Goals for Freshwater
and Sanitation. Proceedings of RIHN 1st International Symposium
Water and Better Human Life in the Future, Kyoto, Japan, 6–8 November.
World Bank. 2000. Cities, Seas and Storms: Managing Change in Pacific Island
Economies - Vol. IV: Adapting to Climate Change. Washington, DC,
World Bank, Papua New Guinea and Pacific Island Country Unit.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTPACIFICISLANDS/Resources/4-VolumeIV+Full.pdf
World Health Organization/South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission
(WHO/SOPAC). 2008. Sanitation, hygiene and drinking-water in the
Pacific island countries: Converting commitment into action.
Geneva/Suva, WHO/SOPAC.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 31

Pakistan

Pakistan:
the Cholistan
desert
The presence of a semi-nomadic population and
2 million head of livestock in the middle of a fragile
desert ecosystem is encouraging the government
to explore new ways to improve livelihoods by
increasing availability of water resources through
capture, storage and treatment.
Setting the scene
Cholistan is the largest of four major deserts of Pakistan.
It is bordered on the south by the Thar desert in Sindh
province and on the east by the Rajasthan desert in India
(Map 2.4). The Cholistan desert covers about 26,000 km2,
which corresponds to 26% of the 110,000 km2
of the country’s total desert area and 3% of its overall
surface area. Typical Cholistan vegetation consists of
species adapted to a limited water supply. They provide
fodder for the inhabitants’ livestock and protect the
soil against wind erosion. Over the years, continued
overgrazing and cutting of shrubs and trees for firewood
and temporary shelters have reduced the vegetative
cover, so that only about 20% of it remains.1
State of the resource
and use: rainwater
harvesting and
migration
While most of the rainfall
is received during the
monsoon months of
July through September,
smaller quantities of
rainfall sometimes occur in
winter. The average annual
rainfall in the desert ranges
from 100 to 200 mm.
Consequently, freshwater
availability is very limited.
There are no perennial or
ephemeral streams, and
most of the groundwater
is saline with a medium
to high range of dissolved
solids that make it
generally unfit for drinking

(Akram and Chandio, 1998). High salt concentration
also makes groundwater impossible to use even for saline
agriculture without costly treatment. Because of the
extreme aridity, the local people and their livestock are
migratory (PCRWR, 2004). The only source of freshwater
for about 110,000 inhabitants and their approximately
2 million head of subsistence livestock is the occasional
rainfall. Fortunately, the average annual potential of
300 million m3 for rainwater harvesting is more than
sufficient to satisfy the combined water demand of the
people and livestock (Table 2.3). To make the best use
of this potential the herders have found ponds known
locally as tobas. These store runoff water for use during
the dry periods. Harvested rainwater is also stored for
household use in large circular or rectangular tanks
called kunds.
National legislation and responsibilities
In Pakistan, the provision of water for agriculture,
industry and households has historically been the
responsibility of provincial governments. However,
provision of drinking water for the inhabitants of deserts
and their livestock has not received much attention at
this level. When runoff rainwater collected in tobas does
not last through the dry season, the inhabitants migrate
with their livestock to the edges of the desert, where
perennial sources of water are available. These migrations
impose severe physical hardships on families and create
financial risks due to loss of livestock.
With Pakistan’s population growing and the need to
produce more food increasing, the national planning
and development agencies are turning their attention to
the vast expanses of the deserts. To provide more water

Map 2.4 The Cholistan desert

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Cholistan
Desert (Pakistan) Case Study,
prepared in 2008 by the Pakistan
Council of Research in Water
Resources.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

31

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 32

2. Asia and the Pacific

Box 2.3 Prospects for using renewable energy to desalinate water
Saline groundwater bearing dissolved
minerals in amounts ranging from 400 to
20,000 parts per million is abundantly
available at shallow depths throughout
most of the Cholistan desert. Using reverse
osmosis membrane technology, salt
content can be lowered to levels that are
acceptable for drinking and household

use. The Pakistan Council of Research in
Water Resources has built a desalination
plant at the Dingarh Research Station that
can treat up to 50 m3 (50,000 litres) per
day at a unit cost of about 1 Pakistani
rupee (US$0.01). This is affordable for
drinking water but quite high for livestock
and other agricultural use. The long term

and enhance water use efficiency, projects aimed at
improving rainwater harvesting and reducing
evaporation loss have been initiated. At the same time,
to assure the economic development of the people living
in the Cholistan desert, integrated approaches such as
improved rainwater collection and rangeland
management, as well as use of saline groundwater for
fish production, are being studied and implemented to
maximize benefits from water, land and livestock.
The main challenges
Health concerns: Kunds are concrete structures built to
store rainwater for human consumption. There are about
200 kunds in the Cholistan desert. Generally, the stored
water stays clean unless there are external contaminants.
Analysis of water samples from several kunds showed that
water was being polluted by human and livestock waste
transported in runoff.
Drought and water availability: There is no reliable
hydrometeorological data from which to draw
conclusions about the frequency and duration of
droughts. Estimates based on the recollections of
longtime residents of the Cholistan desert indicate,
however, that droughts are quite common and can last
from a few months to a few years. Because of the limited
availability of surface and groundwater resources, locals
and government officials are working together to
develop the potential of rainwater harvesting to meet
current water needs and provide for future economic
development. Various storage units, such as tobas, kunds
and ponds, are in place. However, while tobas remain
abundant, only 600 of the 1,600 existing ones are

increasing trend in the price of fossil fuel,
combined with the availability of large
amounts of solar energy and heat in the
desert, argue strongly for research to find
ways of using solar and thermal energy
with reverse osmosis membranes to obtain
drinkable water from saline groundwater
in the desert.

functional due to high sedimentation rates. Kunds are
less susceptible to this kind of problem, but water quality
issues limit their use. To increase storage capacity and
reduce contamination, the government has built ponds
equipped with slow sand filters, which have performed
well. This has increased rainfall storage to 4 million m3
per year. Given the 14 million m3 in water supply
capacity of wells, available water resources are sufficient
to meet the annual water demand of inhabitants and
their livestock. Nevertheless, the global scenario of
climate change and climatic variation and their effect on
water resource availability, coupled with the increasing
price of fossil fuel (mainly used for pumping), has
prompted the government to consider low cost solutions
based on renewable energy sources (Box 2.3).
Conclusions
In an arid environment where there can be as few as
three rains a year, freshwater resources become critical
not only for socio-economic development but also
simply for survival. While Pakistan’s government has
been making efforts to find good-quality groundwater
and create rainwater storage units in parts of the
Cholistan desert, water scarcity persists because of the
size of the desert, the poor quality of the groundwater,
high evaporation rates, contamination, the low storage
efficiency of tobas and the reduction in their capacity
due to siltation. Severe water scarcity forces the people
of the Cholistan to migrate with their herds in pursuit
of water and grazing land, which entails social and
economic hardships. Although authorities have carried
out projects intended to diversify the economy, animal
husbandry remains the main source of livelihood. The

Table 2.3 Rainwater availability and estimated water demand in the Cholistan desert
Population1

1990
2000
2005
2006
2007

Livestock3

(million)

Human water
demand2
(million m3)

0.08
0.10
0.12
0.12
0.12

0.50
0.670
0.76
0.78
0.80

(million)

Livestock water
demand4
(million m3)

Available potential
for water storage
(million m3)

Surplus water available
for other uses5
(million m3)

1.52
2.04
2.30
2.36
2.40

11
15
17
17
18

215
273
220
369
227

204
258
203
352
208

1. Population is based on actual figures.
2. Human water demand is estimated at 18 litres per person per day.
3. The number of livestock is estimated at 20 head per capita.
4. Livestock water demand is estimated at 20 litres per animal per day, on average, for small and large ruminants; actual demand may be less than the calculated value.
5. The number indicates remaining freshwater potential that can be tapped if the rainwater harvesting capacity is improved.

32

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 33

Korea
success of integrated approaches designed to boost the
inhabitants’ health and the economic opportunities
available to them, while also improving the quality and
availability of water, will require determination and
continuous support on the part of the government.

Republic of
Korea: the
Han River
basin
Efforts to respond to new pressures and
expectations stemming from the economic success
of this developed country include water sector
reforms, while measures to address shifts in
demand and competition between upstream and
downstream interests would benefit from the
presence of a central coordinating mechanism.
Setting the scene
The Republic of Korea is located at the eastern tip of the
Asian continent, where it is bounded on the north by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In the east it is
characterized by high mountain ranges, whereas the west
is composed of flat coastal plains. The annual average
precipitation is about 1,200 mm, 70% of which falls
during the flood season from June to September. The Han
River basin, located in the centre of the Korean Peninsula
(Map 2.5), accounts for 23% of the territory of the
Republic of Korea and is the country’s largest river basin,
covering some 23,000 km2. The Han River region is divided
into the main Han River basin and the Imjin River basin;
this case study focuses only on the Han River basin.1

References
Akram, M. and Chandio, B. A. 1998. Conjunctive use of rainwater and saline
groundwater for desertification control in Pakistan through agroforestry and range management. Journal of Arid Land Studies, Vol. 7S,
pp. 161–4.
Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR). 2004. Pre-project
socio analysis of 25 selected settlements in Cholistan desert. Islamabad,
PCRWR. (Publication No. 130/2004.)
Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources (PCRWR). 2009.
Cholistan Desert (Pakistan) Case Study.

a rapid increase in heavy storm frequency and an
increase in storm intensity. The number of heavy storms
associated with intense rainfall of 100 mm per day or
above went from 222 in 1971–1980 to 325 in 1992–2001.
In addition, the number of rainy days has decreased
while precipitation has increased, which means greater
likelihood of floods.
State of the resource
Annual renewable water resources in the Han River basin
are estimated at 16 billion m3. As of 2003, 8.5 billion m3
of this amount was actually in use. Owing to the high
rate of urbanization, the household sector – which
accounts for 2.8 billion m3 (33% of overall consumption)
– is the number one source of consumption, followed
by agriculture (1.6 billion m3 or 19%) and industry
(0.8 billion m3 or 9%). The remaining 3.3 billion m3 is
allocated for environmental purposes. The quality of
surface water varies by location, with downstream Seoul
being the worst. However, implementation of the
Environmental Water Management Master Plan should
make a big difference throughout the basin: it aims to

Map 2.5 The Han River basin

The capital, Seoul, one of the world’s largest cities, is
located in the Han River basin. The population of the
basin, now 41% of the national total, almost tripled
between 1966 and 2005, from about 7 million to almost
20 million. Nevertheless, urban areas account for just 1%
of the basin. Forests make up 78%, cultivated areas 16%,
and grasslands and water bodies 5%. The Han River basin
is considered the heart of South Korea.
Climate change and variability: fewer rainy days
but heavier storms
Statistical analysis of rainfall data in the Han River basin
reveals two noticeable changes since the early 1970s:
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted from
the draft Han River Basin Case Study Report, prepared in 2008 by the Ministry of
Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs (formerly Ministry of Construction and
Transportation).

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

33

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:23

Page 34

2. Asia and the Pacific

Box 2.4 Equity tools: water use charges and basin management funds
The quality and quantity of water
resources, as well as land development
decisions, have always been sources of
contention between upstream and
downstream users. What usually happens
is that tighter restrictions are imposed on
upstream users, who may suffer financial
losses due to land regulation practices
meant to preserve water quality for
downstream uses. Meanwhile,
downstream users usually have more
flexibility in their use of water and land

resources. This situation violates the
principle of equity.
In the Republic of Korea, the ‘polluter pays’
principle is reinforced by the ‘user pays’
principle, which requires downstream
residents to pay additional water use
charges. Collected charges have been used
to create basin management funds,
beginning in the Han River basin in 1999,
(Table 2.4), and in three other basins in
2002. The funds have been used since

2003 to actively support water quality
improvement projects, community
awareness programmes and the
installation and operation of environmental
facilities. By the end of 2004, some
US$350 million (515.6 billion won)*
had been spent on community support
projects and US$545 million (804.6 billion
won) on the installation, operation and
maintenance of environmental facilities.
* US$1 equalled about 1,475 won as of December 2008.

Table 2.4 Han River water use charges, 1999–2006, in million US$ (won)
1999
18.8
(27,675)

2000
118.9
(175,358)

2001
156.4
(230,688)

2002
167.3
(246,741)

2003
182.1
(268,644)

bring drinking water source quality to ‘good’ or ‘better’
(based on biochemical oxygen demand) by 2015 by
increasing the number and capacity of wastewater
treatment facilities. To promote more efficient use of
water resources in the city of Seoul, wastewater recycling
and rainwater collection are required by law.
Agricultural water use in the Han River basin accounts
for about 10% of water use for agriculture in the
Republic of Korea. Rice fields alone consume 70% of the
total. As the Han River basin receives some 74% of its
annual runoff in just four months, storing water is
crucial for meeting year-round needs. Consequently,
there are 724 reservoirs, primarily serving the
agricultural water requirements in the basin. Of these,
127 meet the international standards for large dams. The
increase in agricultural water withdrawal is expected to
be stabilized or even reversed as a result of the long term
master plan for water resources, which forecasts a
reduction in cultivated area. In parallel, to minimize
water loss in agriculture, a plan for irrigation channel
improvement and agricultural water management
automation is being implemented. As of 2003, almost
40% of the irrigation channels had been rehabilitated,
and the share is expected to reach 55% by 2011.
The Republic of Korea has a much larger water footprint
than figures suggest: statistics indicate it is the world’s
thirteenth largest importer of virtual water, and number
five in terms of net imports of virtual water, taking both
imports and exports into account (Hoekstra and Hung,
2002). Some 74% of its virtual water imports are in the
form of grain.
Access to water and sanitation facilities improved
rapidly as what is now the Republic of Korea became
industrialized. By the end of 2007, 92.1% of the
population had access to safe drinking water, compared
with 18% in 1945. Access to sanitation facilities
increased from 6% in 1979 to 85.5% at the end of 2007.
34

2004
192.4
(283,732)

2005
206.3
(304,326)

2006
229.1
(337,908)

Total
1,271.2
(1,875,072)

Subsidized water rates and extended grace periods before
service cutoff, available to the poor and disadvantaged,
help assure a minimum standard of living for everyone.
Three multipurpose dams and eight hydroelectric dams
are located in the Han River basin. The Government of
the Republic of Korea has identified energy efficiency as
a key priority and has started promoting an increase in
the share of renewable energy in overall energy
production, setting a goal of 5% by 2011. Hydropower,
one of the most conventional forms of renewable energy,
is getting a boost through measures aiming to increase
the capacity and performance of existing facilities. In
2006, the share of hydropower in overall energy
production was 1.4%, down from 5.3% in 1980.
While the rapid increase in agricultural, industrial and
municipal water consumption in the Han River basin has
been slowing, the environmental value of water is
getting more political attention and the share of water
for environmental purposes is increasing. Since the
beginning of the 2000s, this positive trend has been
reflected in policies and in various large river
environment restoration projects. Implementation
of water use charges and creation of watershed
management funds also helped increase water use
efficiency, especially in industry, and protection of water
resources was improved as well (Box 2.4).
Although the Han River basin is well endowed with
water resources and no shortage is expected in the near
future, the overall picture is different in the rest of the
country. In the past, increased demand could be met by
developing new water resources, but conditions no
longer allow this. Although agricultural and industrial
water use is expected to fall, there is no national or
regional coordinating institution capable of
redistributing and reassigning traditional water rights to
different sectors. This lack seems to be a major obstacle
to optimum use of the resources.
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 35

Korea

Figure 2.5 Variations in the flood damage index, 1982-2003


Flood damage
Property damage

Flood damage index

Affected persons
Flood inundation area







1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Note: The flood damage index for a basin is calculated by taking into account the number of human casualties, property damage and the extent of inundated area. The index
has no unit and its value ranges from 0 to 3.
Source: Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs.

Policy framework and decision-making: Poor
coordination
In the Republic of Korea, water management has not
been adequately decentralized. Local authorities merely
execute policies set by the central government. The lack
of an integrated approach means each ministry works
more or less in a vacuum, developing and executing
work plans without much interaction. Local
governments face complications in executing the
national water management plan because functions and
responsibilities are distributed among a number of
agencies. The main problem lies in the absence of a body
or a mechanism to coordinate the tasks of the
organizations in charge of water resource management.
To address these challenges, since 2000 the water
management system has been undergoing restructuring
towards a more holistic approach promoting
involvement by local governments, public organizations,
the private sector and other stakeholders, including local
communities. Notable outcomes of this reform include
formation of local and basin networks and increased
voluntary river restoration efforts.
A recently proposed Water Management Act, taking
the basin as the principal watershed management unit,
would have provided for the preparation of a national
integrated water resources management plan and
established basin commissions and a national water
management commission. However, the Act did not win
approval in the National Assembly in 2008. A national
commission such as that proposed in the Act could play an
important role in bringing together the agencies responsible
for water management, and thus serve as a platform for
settling conflicts among different land and water users.
The main challenges
Sharing water resources: Two tributaries of the Han River –
the Imjin River and the northern part of the Bukhan River
– are shared between the Republic of Korea and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Although
negotiations are ongoing, South and North Korea have not
yet reached agreement on joint development of common
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

water resources. Meanwhile, upstream water development
efforts are having a negative effect on water availability in
the south. The hydrological properties of certain parts of
the basin have not been studied adequately, mainly
because of the demilitarized zone between the countries.
Although the potential for waterways exists in the Han
River basin, none have been developed due to political and
environmental problems.
Coping with water-related disasters: In the Republic of
Korea, although the extent of floods has decreased thanks
to continuous improvement in flood management, the
economic damage has increased significantly (Figure 2.5).
This is basically due to dense urbanization and encroaching
development on the river’s natural flood plains. Nonstructural measures such as early warning systems have
helped reduce the number of casualties, but the number of
people vulnerable to floods is increasing, not only due to
growth in the urban population but also because the
society is aging, which means more individuals at greater
risk from the impact of frequent flash floods.
Conclusions
The Han River basin is considered the heart of the highly
developed Republic of Korea. Given the availability of
sufficient water resources, the water demand from various
sectors does not pose a critical problem in terms of
quantity, at least for the time being. Rather, the
outstanding issues are at the national level, where a
national commission is needed to coordinate the agencies
responsible for water resource management and the
sharing of transboundary waters. Although current water
sector reforms and a possible future Water Management
Act will address the coordination challenge, dealing with
transboundary issues will require more effort.
References
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Hung, P. Q. 2002. Virtual Water Trade: A Quantification of
Virtual Water Flows Between Nations in Relation to International Crop
Trade. Delft, Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. (Value of Water Research
Report Series No. 11.)
Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs. Forthcoming. Han River
Basin Case Study Report.

35

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 36

2. Asia and the Pacific

Map 2.6 The Walawe River basin

Sri Lanka:
the Walawe
River basin
In an area hard hit by the 2004 tsunami, integrated
approaches and community management of
resources are examples of the tools being applied to
reduce poverty and environmental degradation.
Setting the scene
Sri Lanka is an island country in the Indian Ocean with a
total land area of 65,600 km2. About 78% of its 20 million
inhabitants live in rural areas. The terrain is mostly coastal
plains, with mountains rising in the south-central part.
Rainfall varies greatly, from about 900 mm in parts of the
dry zone to about 6,000 mm in the central hills. The dry
zone, defined as the area that receives less than 2,000 mm
of annual rainfall, covers 80% of the land.1
There are 103 distinct river basins. The Walawe River
basin, located in the south-east, has an area of 2,500 km2.
Covering 4% of the total land mass of the country, it is
one of Sri Lanka’s biggest basins (Map 2.6).
Recent water resources development has linked some
adjacent small river basins to the Walawe basin. Thus, the
total area covered in this study is 3,300 km2 and includes
the Malala Oya, Kachchigal Oya and Karagan Oya.
The study area has a population of about 650,000. To
address poverty, the Sri Lankan Government has begun
paying more attention to industrial and commercial
development of the region.
Climate change and variability: much less rainfall
for agriculture
Nationwide, statistical analysis indicates that air
temperature increased by 0.016ºC per year between 1961
and 1990. A similar rise was observed in the Walawe
basin, which lies in the dry zone. A decline in rainfall is
mostly noticeable during the north-east monsoon and
the second inter-monsoon period, which bring the bulk
of the rainfall to the dry zone. Measurements covering
the last 50 years show that rainfall has decreased by at
least 18% at some stations and by as much as 42% at
others. Nevertheless, there is still a debate revolving
around climate change and other external factors
affecting water availability. As about 45% of the
employed population is in agriculture, the changes to
rainfall and runoff patterns are having a pronounced
impact not only on water availability but also on farm
livelihoods. The impact is most pronounced on small1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted from
the draft Walawe River basin (Sri Lanka), prepared in 2008 by the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development.

36

Mo

u nta in

s

scale water diversions in the upper Walawe basin and on
small tank cascade systems, which usually depend on
rainwater for their supply and do not have much
carryover storage.
State of the resource and water use
The annual flow of the Walawe River is 1.5 billion m3,
or 3% of the country’s total renewable water resources.
Agriculture is the biggest water user in Sri Lanka. In the
Walawe basin, more than 95% of the total volume of
water diverted is for irrigation. To address the high level of
water consumption, programmes are being put in place to
improve efficiency through better scheduling,
participation of stakeholders in water management,
augmentation of water supply to small reservoirs,
improvement of groundwater recharge and rehabilitation,
and modernization of irrigation systems. High yielding
rice varieties with a shorter growth period have been
developed locally to reduce water use. Although limited,
some improvements in efficiency have been observed as a
result of these efforts. In the mid-1980s attempts to
introduce a fee for irrigation water ended in failure. As the
issue is socially and politically sensitive, the government
is not keen to repeat the experiment. But some farmer
organizations collect fees from their members, which are
used to improve irrigation systems.
Irrigation and other developments have brought
environmental problems, such as contamination and
unsustainable use of groundwater, loss of cropland within
coastal wetlands due to salinity, and degradation of coastal
ecosystems. Excessive drainage has prompted residents to
open lagoons to the sea. The drainage and artificial sea
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 37

Sri Lanka

Box 2.5 Community participation in water project management
Because rural facilities tend to be relatively
small and widely dispersed, it is difficult for
centralized agencies to manage them. A
more appropriate approach is to actively
involve the beneficiary communities in the
management of their own water resources.
To this end, Sri Lanka recently established
independent, voluntary community-based
organizations (CBOs) to manage rural water
projects serving a population of 6,000 or
fewer. The CBOs are formed during the

early planning stages, and capacity-building
is carried out to enable them to take over
responsibility for operations and
maintenance once the system is
operational. Among projects promoting
community management of rural water
supply in the Walawe basin are the
Community Water Supply and Sanitation
Project and the Third Water Supply and
Sanitation Project. CBOs fund operations
and maintenance of these projects through

tariff structures specially formulated for each
individual system. In rural and small-town
piped water systems, the tariffs aim for full
cost recovery, and in some cases may be
higher than the national water tariff. Some
CBOs have already managed to recover
about 20% of the capital cost. The
achievements thus far of CBOs are
promising, and their contribution lessens
the government burden in achieving the
relevant MDG targets.

outlets have caused fluctuations in salinity. In addition, the
drainage has resulted in siltation and decreased the lagoon
area. Chemicals contained in agricultural runoff have also
contributed to the deterioration of water quality. All these
factors combine to adversely affect fish populations and
thereby the livelihoods of those who depend on fisheries
and tourism. These negative observations have been
confirmed in several coastal wetlands, including Bundala
National Park, the first Sri Lankan wetland listed as a
protected area under the Ramsar Convention.

involvement programmes are being developed to
improve the situation (Box 2.5). Overall the country is
on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goal
concerning access to safe drinking water and improved
sanitation.

The recently concluded Uda Walawe Left Bank
Development Project introduced innovative water
management measures that should address some of these
problems. The measures include night storage reservoirs
to minimize drainage losses from the irrigation system.
Other successful technological innovations in the
Walawe basin that have the potential to be replicated
elsewhere in the country include the Mau Ara and Weli
Oya development projects, where the storage capacity of
small village reservoirs was used in lieu of larger storage
structures.

Policy framework and decision-making
Policy-making in Sri Lanka’s water sector has been
only moderately successful. Studies in the early 1990s
identified policy gaps and institutional problems in
the sector, including much overlap among a multiplicity
of institutions and laws. Since 1996 several attempts
to prepare a national water resources policy have
been made, but progress stalled around 2005 before
a comprehensive policy was produced. Despite
substantial policy development in such allied sectors
as environment, agriculture, and the management of
watersheds, rainwater and disasters, the policy gaps make
it difficult to adequately address the important issues of
deteriorating water quality, the need to regulate water
extraction and the lack of full stakeholder participation
in water resources management.

Hydropower generation was the main source of energy
production in Sri Lanka until a few decades ago. However,
frequent droughts since the late 1990s have made
hydropower a less reliable source, and electricity
generation has shifted towards petroleum-intensive
operations. Nevertheless, proposals have been prepared to
make maximum use of the hydropower potential of the
water infrastructure. There are four hydroelectric power
plants in the Walawe basin, with total installed capacity of
about 130 MW, representing about 10% of the country’s
overall installed hydropower capacity. In 2006, 78% of the
households in Sri Lanka had access to electricity.
District values indicate that access to safe drinking water
in the Walawe basin ranges from 73% to 83%, which
compares well with the national average of 85%.
However, as piped water is not available around the
clock in several locations and there are quality problems
during dry periods, those percentages represent an
optimistic upper limit. In 2006, about 92% of Sri Lanka’s
population had access to improved sanitation, and
estimates for the study area ranged from 85% to 95%.
Rural settlements have less drinking water and sanitation
coverage than urban settlements, but community
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Current water consumption in industry is not significant
in the Walawe and adjacent basins, though there are
plans for major industrial development that could
increase industrial water demand in the future.

Consequently, Sri Lanka does not yet have a national
plan formulated on the basis of integrated water
resources management planning and development. The
new Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning Project,
launched in August 2008, is expected to address some of
these concerns by formulating a master plan for national
water use.
In the Sri Lankan agricultural sector, farmer participation
in decision-making at project level has improved over
the years, resulting in better accountability and greater
transparency in use of funds. In the case of the Walawe
basin, the Mahaweli Water Panel manages water
resources to achieve optimum benefit from irrigation as
well as from hydropower. It decides water allocation for
irrigation from the reservoirs of hydropower facilities.
Though farmers and households are not directly
represented in real-time decision-making, their interests
are usually covered by the service delivery agencies.
37

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 38

2. Asia and the Pacific
Coordination among stakeholders is critical in the
Walawe basin because of the area’s substantial
contribution to agriculture, hydropower generation,
water-related risk management and expected industrial
development. Case studies from Sri Lanka in the first and
second editions of the World Water Development Report
also highlighted this issue (UN-WWAP, 2003; UNESCOWWAP, 2006a, 2006b).
The main challenges
Healing the wounds: The worst disaster of recent times,
the Asian tsunami of 2004, devastated the coastal regions
of the Walawe basin. Prior to the tsunami, Hambantota
district, which forms the downstream portion of the
Walawe basin, accounted for 5.5% of the fishing fleet
and 12.9% of total marine fish production in Sri Lanka.
In addition, about 93% of the people working in the
fisheries lived in coastal areas, which greatly increased
the tsunami’s impact on the sector.
Official statistics indicate that the tsunami affected
16,994 families, caused more than 3,067 deaths and left
963 people missing in Hambantota district. Total damage
to the district was estimated at US$220 million. More
than 90% of the fishing fleet and 3.9 million m2 of
farmland were affected. Today, most of the fishing fleet
and housing have been restored, together with public
infrastructure.
In addition to the rebuilding, several developments in
policy and institutional development can be observed.
A disaster management law was enacted in 2005, and
institutions have been strengthened. Also, community
participation in disaster management is now actively
promoted in the Walawe basin. Through such activities,
flood-prone areas and vulnerable families in the coastal
plains have been identified. Emergency action plans
have been developed with the participation of the
communities involved.
Poverty reduction, showing signs of improvement:
Poverty is a general problem in Sri Lanka. Although the
share of the population living on less than US$1 per day
was only 5.6% in 2001–2004, 41.6% of the population
lives below US$2 per day. In the poorer areas of the
country, such as the east and south, where the Walawe
basin lies, the poverty rates are higher than the national
average. The percentage of population below the poverty
line ranges from 13% to 33% in the Walawe basin, while
the national average is 15.2%.
In the last 50 years, thanks to major investments in rice
production, provision of health facilities, safe drinking
water and improved sanitation, the infant mortality rate
has been reduced and life expectancy has increased.
Studies in the Walawe basin indicate that water resource
development has helped reduce poverty levels. However,
despite a declining percentage of poor households over
the last decade, current statistics indicate that Sri Lanka
is not on track to achieve the MDG target on poverty by
2015; poverty remains a major challenge.
Safeguarding public health: Some areas of the Walawe
basin were almost unpopulated for centuries due to
38

malaria. Government-sponsored campaigns to address
the problem have made noteworthy gains. For example,
the number of cases was 591 in 2006, down from
210,000 in 2000. Furthermore, while malaria claimed
76 lives in 2000, no deaths were reported in 2006.
On the other hand, the incidence of water-related
diseases such as Japanese encephalitis, leptospirosis
(rat fever) and dengue have increased significantly in
recent years. Reports show that leptospirosis resulted in
150 deaths from January to September 2008, including
patients from the Walawe basin. Furthermore, Ratnapura
and Hambantota districts in the Walawe basin are
identified as being high risk areas for dengue, where
the incidence of disease has increased by 35% over the
corresponding period in 2007. In 2008 there were
18 dengue-related deaths. Continuous and persistent
national and international input is needed to combat
these water-related health problems.
Capacity-building: The Sri Lanka National Water
Development Report (UNESCO-WWAP, 2006a),
prepared for the second World Water Development
Report, concluded that a substantial amount of
international investment had been made in
infrastructure development. However, funding in several
water-related subsectors, such as irrigation management,
water quality monitoring, pollution control and water
related research, is not adequate. Serious investment
in research and capacity-building is considered the most
urgent priority, as it will make the earlier investments
sustainable.
The knowledge gap in the water sector is a constraint
for water resource management. Although noteworthy
changes in climate and weather patterns are being
observed, scientific conclusions about trends and future
scenarios are not being drawn. Recent studies have
exposed the inadequacies of the existing databases in
this regard. Similar gaps exist concerning water-related
issues. Although water quality problems are believed to
be responsible for some ailments peculiar to agricultural
areas in the dry zone, it is not clear what type of
pollution is causing them, and hence effective action
to control the pollution is not being taken. The gaps in
databases and research outputs constitute a constraint
on mobilization of the community, policy-makers and
decision-makers to meet water challenges. These issues,
as well as deficiencies in access to data and its
dissemination, are highlighted in the earlier World
Water Development Report case studies cited above.
Conclusions
The major challenge in the Walawe basin is to address
environmental problems while assuring the sustainable
socio-economic development essential for alleviating
poverty. Successful but isolated water sector innovations
in the basin give hope for the future; however,
nationwide problems, such as gaps in capacity and
the knowledge base as well as the absence of any
comprehensive water policy, seriously handicap the
country in its ability to address current challenges
and make the adaptation needed to cope with future
pressures from climate change and climatic variation.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 39

Uzbekistan
References
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Mahaweli Development. Forthcoming.
Walawe River basin (Sri Lanka) Case Study Report.
UNESCO-World Water Assessment Programme (UNESCO-WWAP). 2006a.
Sri Lanka National Water Development Report (in full). Water, a
Shared Responsibility: The United Nations World Water Development
Report 2. Paris/Oxford, UNESCO/Berghan Books.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/ images/0014/001476/147683e.pdf
UNESCO-World Water Assessment Programme (UNESCO-WWAP). 2006b.
Sri Lanka National Water Development Report (summary). Water, a

Shared Responsibility: The United Nations World Water Development
Report 2. Paris/Oxford, UNESCO/Berghan Books.
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr2/case_studies/pdf/sri_lanka.pdf
United Nations-World Water Assessment Programme
(UN-WWAP). 2003.
Ruhuna Basins Case Study. Water for People, Water for Life: The United
Nations World Water Development Report. Paris/Oxford, New York,
UNESCO/Berghan Books. www.unesco.org/water/wwap/
case_studies/ruhuna_basins/ruhuna_basins.pdf

late 1980s as the main Aral Sea (a saltwater lake) shrank, lies
largely in northern Uzbekistan. The population of around
27 million (2007) occupies a land area of 447,400 km².
Uzbekistan is a dry country with a continental climate.1

Uzbekistan:
the Aral Sea
basin
Regional cooperation and moves towards efficient
water use are the keys to recovering from loss of
livelihoods, mass migration, rampant pollution and
ecosystem damage resulting from unsustainable
irrigation practices and other legacies of the past.
Setting the scene
Uzbekistan is located in Central Asia, bordered by
Afghanistan and Turkmenistan to the south, Kyrgyzstan
and Tajikistan to the east and Kazakhstan to the west and
north (Map 2.7). The South Aral Sea, which formed in the
Map 2.7 Uzbekistan

Climate change and variability: higher
temperatures, more rainfall, increased flood risk
The Aral Sea basin contains over 14,752 glaciers with
a total area of some 1,043 km2. The ones located in
Uzbekistan account for 1.1% of the total glaciated area
in Central Asia. Recent assessments indicate that the
country’s glaciers and ice reserves are receding. Since
1957 the glaciers have shrunk by almost 20%, losing
104 billion m3 of water. A fluctuation in water resources
ranging from -7% to +3% is forecast for the near future,
which falls within the range of normal variability.
An expected rise in ambient temperatures is likely to
be accompanied by higher rainfall, potentially causing
a 30% to 35% increase in floods by 2030.
Another negative impact of increasing temperatures will
be higher evaporation rates and a likely rise in
agricultural water consumption of up to 10%.
State of the resource
and water use:
unsustainable
agriculture is
predominant
The bulk of freshwater
resources in Uzbekistan
comes from the Syr Darya,
a river originating in
Tajikistan; the Amu Darya,
which flows in from
Kyrgyzstan; and, to a lesser
extent, the Kashka Darya
and Zarafshan rivers.
Available freshwater
resources in Uzbekistan are
estimated at 67 billion m3
per year. Of this amount,
55.1 billion m3 comes
from surface waters and

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Uzbekistan
Case Study Report (unpublished),
prepared in 2008 by the Institute of
Water Problems at the Academy of
Sciences.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

39

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 40

2. Asia and the Pacific
7.8 billion m3 from groundwater. The rest is reclaimed in
the form of return water from leaking irrigation channels
and infiltration from irrigated fields, which collects in
localized depressions.
Agriculture plays an important role in the economy,
employing over 60% of the population. Although only
10% of the 444,000 km2 of arable land is irrigated, the
irrigation efficiency is low, so this water demand
amounts to 92.5% of overall annual water consumption
in Uzbekistan (Table 2.5).

Table 2.5 Water use, by sector, 2001
Water use

Annual demand
(billion m3)

Share in overall
consumption (%)

Agriculture

52.10

92.5

Households

2.90

5.2

Energy production

0.12

0.2

Industry

0.77

1.4

Fisheries
Total

0.40

0.7

56.29

100.0

With demand for water growing in all sectors, it will be
impossible to meet the combined needs in the medium
term. Projections based on existing consumption trends
indicate there could be a water deficit of up to 14
billion m3 by 2015. Although the growth in household
and industrial water demand could be met through
increased efficiency, the need to reduce agriculture’s
overall share is clear. Despite a decision of the Cabinet
of Ministries not to revise water allocation to the various
sectors for 15 years, a regulation adopted in May 2007 is
aimed at developing a programme of water conservation
and efficient use of water resources.
Policy framework and legislation
The main legislation governing water management is the
1993 Law on Water and Water Use. Uzbekistan is in the
process of adopting a series of measures intended to
improve water supply so as to promote employment and
better living standards. In 2002, Uzbekistan developed
the Concept of Sustainable Water Supply of the Regions
of the Republic of Uzbekistan, which sets forth Principal
Directions of Water Management and Amelioration
Measures for 2008–2011. These directives envisage major
improvement in land use through better drainage, an
increase in agricultural water supply through
modernization of irrigation, and the introduction of
integrated water resources management.
The main challenges
Mass migration: Mass population movement in the Aral
Sea basin began as early as 1966 when a major
earthquake destroyed much of Uzbekistan’s capital,
Tashkent. From then until the collapse of the Soviet
Union in 1991, mass migration was mainly due to
compulsory movement of labour from overpopulated
regions to new development areas. Since 1991, ethnic
and environmental factors have played increasingly
important roles in shaping migration. Deteriorating
40

environmental conditions, combined with recurring
drought, have resulted in agricultural and fisheries
production declining by as much as 50%, spelling
economic disaster for almost 3 million people (including
those in areas of Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan near the
Aral Sea) whose main source of income was agriculture.
Aggregate losses in Uzbekistan associated with mass
migration from provinces near the Aral Sea between
1970 and 2001 are estimated to be above US$20 million.
Many people still living in the high-migration areas
suffer protein and vitamin deficiencies resulting from
malnutrition and extreme poverty. In addition, since the
migrants have generally been young, the birth rate has
decreased significantly.
Environmental degradation: Uzbekistan faces pressing
problems due to water pollution and environmental
degradation. Unsustainable irrigation projects, introduced
during the Soviet period, have irreversibly damaged the
Aral Sea and its basin. Continuing use of similar practices
since the collapse of the Soviet regime poses a still greater
danger for local people’s livelihoods. Pollution and other
environmental contamination are causing major public
health problems, and diseases stemming directly from
exposure to untreated water and toxic waste are on the
rise. Direct discharges of wastewater containing high
concentrations of pesticide, fertilizer, and industrial and
household waste have rendered much of the surface
water unfit to drink. In addition, nearly 38% of
groundwater reserves are now unusable.
Inefficient use of water in irrigation, combined with
ineffective drainage systems, has flooded large areas of
land with a mixture of fresh and polluted return water.
Aerial photos taken in 2005 reveal pools of semicontaminated water, covering as much as 800 km2 in all.
On the other hand, these areas have become diverse and
flourishing ecosystems, which contribute to the region’s
socio-economic development through recreational uses
as well as fishing, hunting and reed collection. Yet
because there is no legislation regulating their
management, these ecosystems have no economic or
environmental status and are at risk from invasive
species, gradual salinization and eutrophication
(nutrient pollution).
Allocation of transboundary water resources: the
need to set common priorities
Following the Second World War, as part of the regional
socio-economic development plan under the Soviet
regime, the water resources of the major transboundary
rivers, the Amu Darya and Syr Darya, were mainly
allocated for irrigating vast tracts in the Aral Sea basin.
Water resources development projects were prioritized
to meet irrigation needs. In the 1990s, the potential of
the Syr Darya-Narin basin was almost fully developed
to assure a constant flow of 32 billion to 33 billion m3,
or 94% of the river’s natural regime. The Amu Darya
was also modified to maintain a flow of 60 billion to
64 billion m3. The regional development plan also relied
on hydropower generation to meet electricity needs in
Central Asia, although this was considered only a side
benefit because agriculture contributed more to the
region’s GDP.
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 Asia (f) 3:Layout 1

25/2/09

18:24

Page 41

Uzbekistan
After the Central Asian countries became independent in
1991, water management problems began to surface.
They largely stem from differences in the needs and
priorities of the five Aral Sea basin countries: Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
Most notably, a shift in upstream countries towards
using water for hydropower generation has upset the
balance for areas needing irrigation water. The water
administration agencies of the five countries urgently
need to come up with a sustainable water management
framework that favours socio-economic development
and a stable water supply without ignoring the ecological
needs and priorities required to offset the environmental
catastrophe caused by previous practices.
Conclusions
Unsustainable use of water resources in Uzbekistan since
the mid-20th century, carried out as a part of a larger
Aral Sea basin development plan, has caused irreversible
damage in terms of water quality and ecosystem

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

degradation. The damage has rendered many soil and
water resources unusable, seriously threatening the
livelihoods of Uzbeks and leading to major population
movements. Although environmental protection and
sustainable socio-economic development remain
priorities in the national agenda, the sheer scale of the
problems, combined with economic difficulties, leaves
the government short of solutions. Transboundary water
resources, long the lifeline of extensive irrigation in
Uzbekistan, now pose quantity and quality challenges
due to rampant pollution and changing priorities in
upstream countries. Development of national plans and
establishment of regional cooperation, along with
international assistance, are necessary to assure
sustainable development while reversing environmental
damage, to the extent possible.
References
Institute of Water Problems, Academy of Sciences. 2008. Uzbekistan Case
Study Report. (Draft.)

41

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 43

3

Europe and
North America
The world’s wealthiest region is not immune to waterrelated problems. The members of the European Union
are making efforts to implement the strict rules and
high standards imposed by various directives, including
the Water Framework Directive, which poses special
challenges even for the most industrially advanced.
While various climate change scenarios project reduced
rainfall, especially in the Mediterranean basin, overall
water quantity does not appear to be an immediate
concern. The issues highest on national agendas are
usually flooding, water quality and ecosystem
protection.
The six European case studies presented in this
companion volume to the third edition of the World
Water Development Report also reveal the impact of
scale issues, especially in dealing with urban areas.
In the case of Istanbul, in particular, authorities face
the challenge of solving water-related problems in a
megalopolis of 12 million inhabitants straddling
two continents.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

ESTONIA
The Baltic state is an example
of socio-economic
development related to efficient
water use. 44

FINLAND AND THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION: the Vuoksi
River basin
Effective transboundary
cooperation has helped secure
the well-being of inhabitants
and the environment. 47

ITALY: the Po River Basin
Agriculture, tourism and
industry play key economic
roles, but insufficient
enforcement puts sustainability
of water resources and the
environment at risk. 51

THE NETHERLANDS
Vulnerability to climate change
and increased flood risks have
promoted new approaches to
managing water resources. 55

SPAIN: the Autonomous
Community of the Basque
Country
Adaptation to potential effects
of climate change is at the core
of policy development. 58

TURKEY: Istanbul
Significant investment in
infrastructure and better
enforcement of regulations are
part of a multidimensional
response to exponential urban
growth. 61

43

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 44

3. Europe and North America

Figure 3.1 Trend of annual mean air temperature at Võru
and Ristna monitoring stations, 1951–2006

Estonia
Increasing prosperity, water use efficiency and close
adherence to European Union requirements
characterize this Baltic Sea state.
Setting the scene
Estonia, located on the Baltic Sea and Gulf of Finland, is
bordered on the south by Latvia and on the east by the
Russian Federation (Map 3.1). It is a flat country, with
plains along the coastline and uplands, and many lakes
in the southeast. Its population of 1.3 million (2007) is
dispersed across an area of 45,227 km². There are over
1,500 islands and islets, two of which, Saaremaa and
Hiiumaa, are big enough to be considered counties.
Although the life expectancy is over 70, the population
is steadily declining due to a low birth rate.1
Climate change and variability: some warming
expected
Several studies have been carried out to estimate
the effect of climate change on water management.
Statistical evidence suggests that annual mean air
temperature increased during the second half of the
20th century by 1.0 to 1.7°C at various locations in
Estonia. The greatest warming has been observed in the
south-east (Võru) and the lowest in the north-west
(Ristna) (Figure 3.1).
The warming effect has not
been equally distributed
throughout the seasons:
the most significant
changes have occurred
during the first five
months of the year, with
that in March being the
most significant. Over the
last 50 years, the average
monthly temperature in
March has risen by
between 3 and 5°C. The
models for climate change
suggest that winters will be
milder, leading to a more
rapid snow-melt, an earlier
spring with reduced runoff,

Annual mean air temperature (°C)

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
1951 1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996 2001 2006
Võru
Trend line (Võru)

Ristna
Trend line (Ristna)

an extension of the dry period in summer and a likely
increase in autumn precipitation. Especially in dry
periods, these variations might cause significant water
deficit in rivers fed by groundwater. So far, however, the
results lie well within normal observed climatic
variations (JRC, 2005).
Analysis of data from 1949 to 2004 shows that the number
of days with sea ice has decreased significantly at all
monitoring stations except those on the southern coast of
the Gulf of Finland. The most substantial decrease was
observed at the westernmost stations on the Baltic coast
(Jaagus, 2006). Some models indicate winters could be icefree by the end of the 21st century, even in the Gulf of
Finland (HELCOM, 2007). The shortening of the period of
ice cover, together with increased frequency of winter
storms, will have a strong impact on coastal ecosystems.
The most marked coastal changes in Estonia have resulted
from a combination of big storms, high sea levels induced

Map 3.1 Estonia

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Estonia Case
Study Report, prepared in 2008 by
the Ministry of the Environment.

44

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 45

Estonia

Box 3.1 Setting a fair price for water
social factors are taken into consideration
to make it affordable for the general
public. For example, in 2007, average net
household income was US$460 per month
and average per capita water
consumption was 2.8 m3; the monthly
cost corresponds to 1.3% of average
household income. In rural areas, where
income levels tend to be lower, the
percentage is higher but still in line with
the acceptable EU level.

While an effort is made to reflect the
economic value of water in various uses,

by storm surges, ice-free seas and unfrozen sediment.
An extremely strong storm like Gudrun in January 2005
could cause substantially larger changes to the depositional
shores in western Estonia than all the storms over the
entire preceding 10 to 15 years (Kont et al., 2003).
On the other hand, Estonia is not likely to be seriously
affected by global sea level rise, which would be
counteracted by uplifting caused by tectonic movement.
State of the resource and water use: substantial
decrease in water consumption
Estonia’s annual average surface water availability
is 12 billion m3 and the groundwater potential is
3.2 billion m3. The rivers are characterized by short flow
distances and low flow rates. Only 10 rivers are longer than
100 km. The longest is the Võhandu (162 km) and the
largest is the Narva, with a catchment area of 56,200 km2,
only about one-third of which is within Estonia.
Of Estonia’s approximately 1,200 lakes, half have a surface
area of less than 0.03 km2. The largest, Lake Peipsi,
covering some 3,500 km2, is the fourth largest lake in
Europe. It was the subject of in-depth case studies in the
first and second editions of the World Water Development
Report (UN-WWAP, 2003; UNESCO-WWAP, 2006).
Water consumption has decreased significantly since
Estonia regained its independence in 1992 (Figure 3.2). For
a quick comparison, combined water use in 2006 was half

that of 1992. Between 1992 and 2007, agricultural water
consumption decreased by almost a factor of seven, and
the average price of water increased nearly 25 times
(Box 3.1). Daily per capita water consumption fell from
188 litres in 1992 to 90 litres in 2007 (Figure 3.3). The
main reasons for the abrupt decrease in overall water use
were the introduction of a water use charge, an increased
unit price, the closure of a pulp factory in the capital,
Tallin, adoption of water saving technology in industry,
and reductions in numbers of livestock and in agricultural
production after the system of collective farms collapsed.
Groundwater resources are used mainly for municipal
water supply and to some extent in industrial processes.
In line with the price increase and deployment of water
saving technology, groundwater consumption decreased
by one-third from 1992 and amounted to 50 million m3
in 2006.
Reductions in agricultural area, animal husbandry and
certain industrial activities have resulted in a decreased
contaminant load and a general improvement in surface
and groundwater quality. At the same time, Estonia’s
economic indices have improved. The unemployment
rate has been halved since 2000 and GDP has more than
doubled since 1995. Better water management through
increased efficiency in water use in all sectors has
enabled Estonia to achieve a strong decoupling of water
use and economic output, which in turn has helped
boost the economy.
Figure 3.3 Trends in household water
consumption, 1992–2007

Figure 3.2 Trends in sectoral water use, 1992–2007

200

Water consumption (m3)

250
200
150
100

12
10

150
8
100

6
4

50
2
0

Industry

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

Household

Daily use per inhabitant (litre)

Annual use per inhabitant (m3)

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

0

1992

50

1992

Water use (million m3/year)

300

0

As an incentive to revive the agricultural
sector, however, water used for irrigation
is not charged for or taxed. Although this
has not had an impact on water quantity,
in areas where agricultural activities are
concentrated water quality is
compromised, and the dissolved nitrate
concentration in water has returned to
near 1992 levels.

Cost per m3 (Estonian kroon)

Within the last 15 years, Estonia has taken
major steps towards applying the full cost
recovery principle and the polluter pays
principle. In 2007, the average price of
water was US$0.96 per cubic metre for
households and US$1.16 for businesses.
The respective average wastewater
charges were US$1.15 and US$1.64.

Per unit cost

Agriculture

Note: 1 Estonian kroon = US$0.087 (December 2008).

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

45

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 46

3. Europe and North America

Thermal power plants burning oil shale account for 92%
of the country’s electricity production. Until recently,
about 90% of overall surface water extraction was used
for cooling these plants at the main power generation
complex in Narva. However, thanks to reduced electricity
demand, the use of water saving technology and a
substantial increase in the water extraction charge, the
rate of abstraction has decreased by half. The share of
renewable forms of energy, including hydropower, has
been minimal, accounting for about 1.7% of total
electricity production in 2006. But, as required by the
European Union (EU) accession agreement, Estonia has
undertaken to raise the share of renewables to 5.1% by
2010. Thus, significant growth in this energy subsector
is expected, especially for wind turbines.
Policy framework and decision-making: following
the EU example
The Water Act is the main law establishing the
regulatory framework of water resource management
in Estonia. It takes an integrated water resources
management approach, and states that while the main
responsibility for the use and protection of water
resources lies with the central government, local
governments have the authority to take temporary
measures within their jurisdictions, if necessary,
regarding the use of water resources.
Water management issues in Estonia are dealt with under
several plans of differing time scales. Long term goals
and objectives, up to 2030, are set forth in the Estonian
National Environmental Strategy. The Estonian National
Environmental Action Plan for 2007–2013 contains
detailed actions to achieve the short and medium
term goals.
As a member of the European Union, Estonia bases its
water management planning on the guidelines of the
Water Framework Directive (WFD) and other EU directives
regulating the use and protection of water resources
and the environment. As the WFD requires, water
management is based on management plans compiled
for eight river basin subdistricts forming three main river
basin districts. Compiling the plans is a complex process.
It includes general characterization of the districts,
identification of pressures, the setting of monitoring
standards for assessment of the status of surface and
groundwater resources, establishment of environmental
objectives, identification of the measures necessary to bring
water bodies to ‘good’ status and to supply the population
with drinking water of good quality, and procedures for
reporting back to the European Commission.
The Minister of the Environment established a
Commission on Water Resource Management to
coordinate and supervise water management planning.
The commission includes representatives of relevant
ministries, along with scientists and other experts. Subbasin water management plans are overseen by working
groups that include representatives of the Ministry of the
Environment and of county environment services, along
with relevant experts. Working groups, established by a
decree of the Minister of the Environment, coordinate
46

the implementation and updating of the management
plans. Representatives of other relevant stakeholders can
participate in the meetings on cases in which they have
an interest.
In achieving the WFD objectives, water supply and
sanitation development plans have a very important
role. Upon accession to the EU, Estonia undertook to
ensure by the end of 2010 that the appropriate
wastewater collection and treatment was in place for all
wastewater collection areas whose waste load was more
than 2,000 population equivalents, and, by the end of
2013, that all communities of more than 50 people were
supplied with safe drinking water.
The main challenges
Chemical contents of groundwater: Drinking water
often fails to meet quality requirements due to the
presence of substances such as manganese and
ammonium. Although these minerals affect the sensory
properties of water (taste, colour, odour), they pose no
direct threat to human health. In some parts of Estonia,
the groundwater also contains excessive amounts of
fluorine and boron. There is an effort to regulate mineral
content: drinking water purification plants are being
improved, with the installation of technology to remove
such minerals, and the infrastructure is being renovated
where necessary.
Eutrophication of lakes: The main problem facing
Estonia’s multiple lakes, including many impounded
lakes, is eutrophication. Many lake ecosystems are
endangered due to overgrown vegetation that
significantly reduces the oxygen content in water during
summer and winter, with a devastating impact on fish
populations. The status of Lake Peipsi has been assessed
as moderate, and that of the country’s second largest
lake, Lake Võrtsjärv, as good. Studies regarding the
environmental status of small lakes have revealed that
out of 68 lakes, 3 were in a poor state, 17 were in
moderate condition and the rest were ranked as good or
very good.
Hydromorphological alteration of rivers: Due to the
decrease in agricultural pollution and more efficient
wastewater treatment, the water quality of Estonian
rivers has improved significantly in the last 15 years. At
present only a few rivers and their biota are limited by
poor quality. However, additional effort is needed to
improve fish migration in rivers where numerous small
dams without fish passes now impede their passage.
Conclusions
As an EU member country endowed with sufficient water
resources, Estonia does not have many water
management problems. The initial economic difficulties
that followed independence have been diminishing since
the late 1990s and industrial production has increased in
almost all branches since 2000. Although climate change
scenarios point to potential alteration in the flow
regimes of rivers and in recharging of groundwater
reservoirs, this does not seem to pose a serious problem
for socio-economic development in Estonia. Drinking
water quality, sanitation and environmental protection
are being handled in line with strict EU legislation.
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 47

Finland and the Russian Federation

References
Jaagus, J. 2006. Trends in sea ice conditions in the Baltic Sea near the
Estonian coast during the period 1949/1950-2003/2004 and their
relationship to large scale atmospheric circulation. Boreal Environment
Research, Vol. 11, pp. 169–183.
Joint Research Centre (JRC). 2005. Climate Change and European Water
Dimension: A Report to European Water Directors. Steven J. Eisenreich, ed.
European Commission-JRC, Ispra, Italy.
Helsinki Commission (HELCOM). 2007. Climate Change in the Baltic Sea
Area: HELCOM Thematic Assessment in 2007. Baltic Sea Environment
Proceedings, No. 111.
Kont, A., Jaagus, J. and Aunap, R. 2003. Climate change scenarios and the
effect of sea-level rise for Estonia. Global and Planetary Change, Vol. 36,

Finland and
the Russian
Federation:
the Vuoksi
River basin
Through concerted efforts, water quality has been
significantly improved in the basin since the 1970s,
when large amounts of untreated industrial waste
were being dumped into waterways. Today, both
the water quality and the environmental status
are much better. However, increasing industrial
activities in the Russian Federation may pose a
renewed risk of some degradation.
Setting the scene
The Vuoksi is a transboundary river that flows 150 km
from Lake Saimaa in south-eastern Finland to Lake
Ladoga in north-western Russia. The Vuoksi River basin
extends between these two lakes and covers an area of
4,100 km2 (Map 3.2). It is part of the much larger basin
through which the Neva River flows to the Baltic Sea.
Human activities have divided the Vuoksi basin into two
independent parts. The northern part, the Lake Vuoksi
sub-basin, is not connected to Lake Saimaa. This case
study examines only the southern part, through which
the Vuoksi River passes.1
Average precipitation in the region is 775 mm per
year and the mean annual temperature is around 3.2°C.
The period without frost lasts from April to October.
Up to 70% of annual precipitation falls during this
period, mostly in August. The total population is about
80,000 people, of whom at least 52,000 live in towns in
the Russian part of the basin.
Climate change and variability: sparse population,
reduced risks
At national level, certain climatic trends are observed in
both Finland and the Russian Federation. For example,
over the last 150 years, the yearly average temperature in
Finland has risen by 1°C (Finnish Ministry of Agriculture
and Forestry, 2005); during the 20th century, the
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

No. 1–2, pp. 1–15.
Ministry of the Environment. Forthcoming. Estonia Case Study Report.
UNESCO-World Water Assessment Programme (UNESCO-WWAP). 2006. Lake
Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe. Water, a Shared Responsibility: The United
Nations World Water Development Report 2. Paris/Oxford,
UNESCO/Berghan Books.
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr2/case_studies/pdf/lake_peips
i.pdf
United Nations-World Water Assessment Programme (UN-WWAP). 2003.
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe, Estonia and the Russian Federation.
Water for People, Water for Life: The United Nations World Water
Development Report. Paris/Oxford, New York, UNESCO/Berghan Books.
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/case_studies/peipsi_lake/peipsi_lake.pdf

increase was 0.7°C (Carter, 2007). March to May was
the period that saw the greatest increase in monthly
mean temperatures, ca. 1.5ºC (Pöyry & Toivonen, 2005).
Moreover, there was a statistically significant increase
of 1°C in winter temperatures between 1961–1990 and
1971–2000 (Finnish Meteorological Institute, 2006).
In the Russian Federation, the mean annual ambient
temperature increased by about 0.4°C between 1990
and 2000 (Roshydromet, 2005).
In Finland, the rising mean temperature has led to a
decrease in the duration of the snow cover and in the
amount of snow in southern Finland. Fluctuations in
precipitation remain within the range of climatic
variability, however (Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and
Forestry, 2005). To address the inevitable socio-economic
impact of climate change and variation, Finland
prepared a National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate
Change (2005). The strategy describes the likely effects of
climate change for a range of sectors and outlines actions
and measures to improve the capacity to deal with them.
It also aims at reducing negative effects and taking
advantage of the opportunities climate change may offer.
In the Russian Federation, out of 11 anomalous winters
in the last 109 years (i.e. with more than a 2°C deviation
from the annual average), eight were observed in the last
30 years. In addition to warmer winters, climatic changes
observed in the Russian Federation include increased
evaporation in warmer periods combined with unchanged
or decreased precipitation, a higher number of droughts,
alteration of the amounts and periods of water discharges,
and changes in ice conditions (Roshydromet, 2005).
In 2005, under the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change, the Russian Federation adopted an action
plan on implementation of the Kyoto Protocol to mitigate
the effects of climate change (Ministry of Economic
Development and Trade of the Russian Federation, 2006).
Not many water-related disasters on a big scale have
been observed in or around the Vuoksi River basin.
Nor has a link between climate change and water-related
disasters been clearly identified. Nevertheless, scenarios
for the basin and its surroundings project a rise of 3 to
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft Vuoksi River Basin Case Study Report, prepared in 2008 by the
Finnish Environment Institute and the Center for Transboundary Cooperation,
St. Petersburg.

47

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 48

3. Europe and North America
4°C in temperature and a
Map 3.2 The Vuoksi basin
10% to 25% increase in
annual precipitation
between 1971–2000 and
2071–2100. Extreme runoff
is expected to be more
frequent and winter floods
are likely to become more
severe (Silander et al.,
2006). The discharge
volume of the highest
flood recurring about once
in a 250 year period could
rise from 1,100 m3 per
second to as much as
1,400 m3/s by 2100, and
the water level in Lake
Saimaa could increase by
almost a meter during such
floods (Veijalainen, 2006).
Over the same period, the
duration of snow cover
could decrease from 150
days to 30. Overall, climate
change in the Vuoksi River
basin is likely to make
water-related disasters –
both floods and droughts –
more frequent and costly
for society. However, as the
basin is sparsely populated and has abundant water
resources, the impact at basin level is not expected to
be critical.
State of the resource and water use
The Vuoksi River has an annual water potential of some
20.4 billion m3. The part of the basin that lies in Finland,
although very limited in extent (10% of the overall basin
area), contributes almost 94% of the average flow.
The Vuoksi River basin also contains several freshwater
lakes. On both the Russian and Finnish sides of the basin,
groundwater resources exist but are of limited capacity
(0.03 billion m3 and 0.001 billion m3 per year, respectively)
(VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003).
The abundance of surface water resources means that
meeting water demand is usually not an issue in the
Vuoksi River basin. However, during severe droughts,
low water levels can affect fish farms, water transport,
industrial and household water supply (with intake

pipes not reaching the water level), and recreational
activities (Box 3.2).
Most parts of the Vuoksi River basin are in a natural
state and unpopulated. On the Russian side, 76% of
the basin is forested, 17% is used for agriculture and
7% for other purposes. The main towns in the Russian
part of the basin are Priozersk (pop. 21,000), Svetogorsk
(pop. 15,600), Kamennogorsk (pop.12,000) and
Lesogorsk (pop.4,000). The small part of the basin area
that is located in Finland is centred on the town of
Imatra (pop. 29,000) (VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003).
Industry is a leading water user in the Vuoksi River basin.
Industrial production in the region grew steadily during
the 20th century before declining in the recession of the
early 1990s, then started to recover after 1997
(VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003). In the Russian part of the basin,
industrial water consumption is 66 million m3 per year
(2004), close to 80% of which is used by the pulp and

Box 3.2 Recreational activities in the Vuoksi River basin
With its abundant water resources,
numerous lakes and islands, good water
quality and extensive shorelines offering
vast and peaceful natural areas, the Vuoksi
River basin is one of the most popular
areas for recreation in the north-western
part of the Russian Federation. The Vuoksi
River itself is not used for large-scale goods

48

or public transport as dams block the
upper part of the river. However, residents
and tourists in Finland and the Russian
Federation use the river for boating. The
water quality of the river has greatly
improved since the 1970s, and fish of the
salmon family have been introduced on
the Finnish side, which has become very

popular for recreational fishing. As the
local standard of living has risen, other
leisure activities, such as swimming, hiking
and boating, have become more popular
and are likely to contribute increasingly to
the economy of the region.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 49

Finland and the Russian Federation
paper industry. In the Finnish part, annual industrial
water use is around 210 million m3 (2007): 17 million m3
directly withdrawn from the Vuoksi River and the rest
from Lake Saimaa. As on the Russian side, most of the
water on the Finnish side is used by the pulp and paper
industry (99%), with the metal industry accounting for
most of the rest. Despite increased production, industrial
water use has been declining in Finland thanks to higher
productivity and water recycling. In fact, water
consumption in 2007 was 50% lower than in 1974.
Access to drinking water is widespread. In towns, more
than 80% of residents are connected to centralized cold
and hot water infrastructure and sewer networks
(VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003). In rural areas, wells are quite
common for providing drinking water. In some places in
the Russian part of the basin, however, private wells are in
poor condition and their water quality is not always
adequate or has not even been analysed. Overall,
municipal water consumption in the basin amounts to
about 2.7 million m3 per year, of which around 60% is
withdrawn from surface waters (VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003). By
2015, municipal water use in the basin is expected to have
decreased by up to 4.5% because of a reduction in water
loss and decline in population. As adequate wastewater
treatment is lacking in some settlements, however, ground
and surface water pollution is likely to be a problem.
Farming and animal husbandry are mainly practised
in the Russian part of the Vuoksi River basin to assure
local self-sufficiency. The extent of the cultivated area,
including pasture land, is 77 km2. The sector seems to
be recovering from the effects of the recession that ended
in 1997 (VIVATVUOKSIA, 2003). Due to the climate
of the basin, agricultural land is excessively damp and
requires drainage. This in turn has led to phosphorous
contamination of water resources because of fertilizer
use (Kondratyev et al., 2007). Although the potential
impact of climate change on agriculture in the Vuoksi
River basin has not yet been fully studied, there are
indications that rising temperatures may lead to
increased production. Such a change could translate
into higher water demand and fertilizer consumption,
potentially aggravating surface and groundwater
pollution. Finland’s response to such pressures is guided
by the European Union (EU) Water Framework Directive,
to which it adheres as an EU member. Similarly, policy
in the Russian Federation calls for adoption of modern
agricultural methods that help reduce nutrient loads to
the environment.
The four hydropower plants in the basin (two in each
country) harness about 93% (2.5 TW) of its hydropower
potential. As construction of new dams is not considered
profitable, the preferred option for increasing energy
production is to renovate existing facilities. Energy
demand in the basin is expected to grow as economic
development of the region intensifies and industrial
production increases. However, thanks to the adoption
of more energy efficient methods and processes, the
growth in energy demand is not likely to be substantial.
The hydropower plants on the Vuoksi River lack fish
passages. To reduce their environmental impact, Finnish
hydropower companies are obligated to release 1,125 kg
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

of lake trout every year, mainly in the section of the river
that lies between the two dams, but also in Lake Saimaa.
Water management and transboundary
cooperation
As a member of the European Union, Finland bases its
water resource policies on the Water Framework
Directive. In the Russian Federation, the 2006 Water
Code sets the framework for all water-related legislation.
The integrated water resources management approach
has been adopted in both countries. Thus they consider
the river basin as the basic unit in planning and
management, while ensuring that different water uses
are taken into consideration. Sustainability of water
resources and stakeholder participation in decisionmaking are also viewed as important principles in water
policy. While public participation in decision-making is
well organized in Finland, there are implementation
problems in the Russian Federation. In addition, overlap
in the responsibilities of various Russian Federation
administrative bodies has complicated the process by
hindering inter-agency cooperation on environmental
protection and natural resources management.
Regarding management of shared waters, since its
establishment in 1964 the Finnish-Russian Commission on
the use of transboundary watercourses has played a
significant role in the Vuoksi River basin. The commission’s
co-chairs are representatives of the Finnish Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry and the Russian Federation
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. With
three working groups – on the use of water resources, on
fisheries and on water quality and monitoring – the
commission monitors activities that could affect
transboundary waters and assesses the compensation
required in the event of damage caused by either party.
The main challenges
Reducing water pollution: The pulp and paper industry
is responsible for most of the organic and nutrient
pollution in the Vuoksi River basin, whereas the mining,
chemical and metal industries generally release
considerable amounts of heavy metals into the river.
Initial measures to treat industrial wastewater were taken
in the 1960s and such action continued into the 1970s.
As a result, industrial effluents have significantly
decreased and water quality in the river has improved.
For example, the loading of suspended solids and
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in the Finnish part
of the river has declined by 90% since the early 1970s
(Figure 3.4). A major metal processing plant situated on
the banks of the Vuoksi River on the Finnish side has
adopted the ISO 14001 environmental management
system (Ovako, 2008). Overall, while some minor
industries and enterprises still do not treat their
wastewater, most others have quite efficient wastewater
treatment systems. As a result, not only has water quality
improved, but valuable fish species have been observed
returning to the river.
In the Russian Federation, the total point-source load
into the Vuoksi River in 2006 was estimated at
1.4 tonnes/day (t/d) of suspended solids, 1.4 t/d of BOD,
49

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 50

3. Europe and North America

Figure 3.4 Annual means of daily industrial and
municipal point-source loading in the VuoksiSaimaa area in Finland
m3/d

2500

200
180

2000

160
140

1500

120
t/d
100 t/d

100
1000

80
60

500

40
20

BOD7, t/d

Suspended solids, t/d

CODCr, t/d

Production, 100 t/d

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

0

1974

0

Wastewater, 1000 m3/d

Conclusions
Even in years when rainfall is below average, the water
potential of the Vuoksi River basin is large enough to
meet all water demand without significant problems.
The main concerns have been the increasing human
impact on water quality and the need to regulate the
flow regime. Water quality has improved remarkably
since the 1970s, creating better conditions for the use
and protection of the water resources. In cases of severe
floods and droughts, the flow regime can be (and has
been) adjusted through cooperation based on the needs
of all communities involved. Since the end of the 1990s
recession, the region’s economy has been improving. It
will be critical for sustainable practices to be adopted,
especially in the part of the basin that lies in the Russian
Federation: such action can crucially affect overall water
quality in the basin in the years to come.

Notes: The industrial loading is from pulp and paper mills. Results are from an area 8 km
from the border with the Russian Federation. BOD7 = BOD demand of a wastewater

References

sample, measured over seven days’ exposure. CODCr = chemical oxygen demand.

Carter, T. R. (ed.). 2007. Assessing the Adaptive Capacity of the Finnish
Environment and Society under a Changing Climate: FINADAPT, Summary
for Policy Makers/Suomen kyky sopeutua ilmastonmuutokseen: FINADAPT,
Yhteenveto päättäjille. Finnish Environment Institute, Helsinki.
http://www.ymparisto.fi/download.asp?contentid=64914&lan=EN
(Finnish Environment 1/2007, in Finnish and English, accessed December
2008.)
Federal Service of Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring
(Roshydromet). 2005. Strategic prediction for the period of up to 20102015 of climate change expected in Russia and its impact on sectors of
the Russian national economy. Moscow, Roshydromet.
wmc.meteoinfo.ru/media/climate/Strategic%20prediction_2015.pdf
(Accessed December 2008.)
Finnish Environment Institute/Center for Transboundary Cooperation. 2008.
Vuoksi River Basin Case Study Report. Helsinki/St Petersburg, Finnish
Environment Institute/Center for Transboundary Cooperation. (Draft).
Finnish Meteorological Institute. 2006. Climatological statistics for the normal
period 1971-2000. http://www.fmi.fi/weather/climate_6.html (Accessed
December 2008.)
Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. 2005. Finland’s National Strategy
for Adaptation to Climate Change. Helsinki, Ministry of Agriculture and
Forestry.
http://www.mmm.fi/attachments/5enfdAPe1/5kghLfz0d/Files/CurrentFil
e/MMMjulkaisu2005_1a.pdf). (Accessed December 2008.)
Finnish-Russian Commission. 2007. Venäjän ryhmän ilmoitus vuonna 20062007 suoritetuista toimenpiteistä rajavesistöjen veden laadun suojelemiseksi
likaantumiselta. [Official report of the Russian group concerning water
protection measurements made in 2006-2007.] Helsinki, Joint FinnishRussian Commission on the Utilization of Frontier Waters. (Minutes of 45.
meeting, appendix 5. 28.-29.8.2007.)
Kondratyev, S., Ignatyeva, N., Grineva, E., Smirnova, L. and Wirkkala, R.-S.
2007. Phosphorus load on the Vuoksi River and its catchment –
preliminary analysis. Laita, M. (ed.), Water Management and Assessment
of Ecological Status in Transboundary River Basins. (Reports of the Finnish
Environment Institute 32/2007.)
Ministry of Economic Development and Trade of the Russian Federation.
2006. Complex Plan of Actions to Implement in the Russian Federation
of the Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
http://www.economy.gov.ru/wps/wcm/connect/economylib/mert/welco
me_eng/pressservice/eventschronicle/doc1116234296469 (Accessed
December 2008.)
Mitikka. S., Wirkkala, R.-S. and Räike, A. 2004. Transboundary waters between
Finland and Russia – key issues in water protection. Timmerman, J. G.,
Behrens, H. W. A., Bernardini, F., Daler, D., Ross, Ph. and van Ruiten,
C. J. M. (eds.), Proceedings: Monitoring Tailor-Made IV. International
workshop on information on sustainable water management, from local to
global levels. St Michielsgestel, Netherlands, September.
Ovako. 2008. Environment certificates.
http://www.ovako.com/index.asp?r=578 (Accessed December 2008.)
Pöyry, J. and Toivonen, H. 2005. Climate change adaptation and biological
diversity. Helsinki, Finnish Environment Institute.
www.ymparisto.fi/download.asp?contentid=45300&lan=en (Finnish
Environment Institute Mimeographs 333/FINADAPT Working Paper 3,
accessed December 2008.)

Source: Mitikka et al., 2004.

0.47 t/d of nitrogen and 0.12 t/d of phosphorus (FinnishRussian Commission, 2007). In general, for Russia, the
sharpest decrease in Vuoksi River pollution came during
the 1990s recession. In recent years the pollution load
has started to increase again.
In the Russian part of the basin, about 73 million m3 of
wastewater is produced per year. Of this, 13 million m3 is
cooling water. The rest is treated in the wastewater
treatment plants of large industrial enterprises
(VUOKSIAGAIN, 2006). The Russian Federation requires
permits and environmental impact assessments for
actions that could negatively affect water resources or
ecosystems. In addition, one objective in the Long Term
Development Strategy for Water Economics is to
rationalize industrial water use over a 20 year period.
Mitigating floods and droughts through joint action:
The natural discharge in the Vuoksi River is usually
large enough to provide water for all users. If
exceptionally high floods or intense droughts are
forecast, however, the flow is regulated, under the
Discharge Rule for Lake Saimaa and the Vuoksi River,
to alleviate socio-economic damage.
Administered by the Finnish-Russian Commission, the
Discharge Rule is an effective allocation mechanism that
takes the interest of both countries into account.
Decisions about changes in the discharge are jointly
taken, and the damage one country may suffer as a result
is compensated by the other. The Discharge Rule has
been successfully applied since it came into force in
1991. Flood peaks have been lowered six times since
then and low water levels in Lake Saimaa normalized
three times. The key reason for these adjustments is to
prevent flood damage to industrial facilities situated on
the shores of Lake Saimaa. During two of the floods,
discharge control caused a deficit in hydropower
production on the Russian side. In accordance with the
Discharge Rule, Finland paid the Russian Federation the
agreed compensation for this damage.
50

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 51

Italy
Silander, J., Vehviläinen, B., Niemi, J., Arosilta, A., Dubrovin, T., Jormola, J.,
Keskisarja, V., Keto, A., Lepistö, A., Mäkinen, R., Ollila, M., Pajula, H.,
Pitkänen, H., Sammalkorpi, I., Suomalainen, M. and Veijalainen, N. 2006.
Climate change adaptation for hydrology and water resources. Helsinki,
Finnish Environment Institute.
http://www.ymparisto.fi/download.asp?contentid=53794&lan=en
(Finnish Environment Institute Mimeographs 336/FINADAPT Working
Paper 6, accessed December 2008.)
Veijalainen, N. 2006. Ilmastonmuutoksen vaikutus kerran 250 vuodessa
toistuviin tulviin Vuoksen vesistössä. [Effect of climate change on the
floods with a recurrence period of 250 years in the Vuoksi drainage
basin.]. (Draft.)

VIVATVUOKSIA. 2003. The Sustainable Use of the Water Resources and
Shore Areas of the River Vuoksi: Tacis CBC Small Project Facility
TSP/RL/0103/039. Wirkkala, R.-S., et al. (eds.) (Final report.)
VUOKSIAGAIN. 2006. Guidance for the Land Use of the Shore Areas and the
Water Protection of the River Vuoksi: Finnish-Russian Cross Border Cooperation Project of the Finnish Ministry of the Environment. Smirnova, L. J.,
Gutman, N. S., Tshikidovskaja, N. D. and Wirkkala, R.-S. (Final report.)

Alpine in the mountainous north to cool temperate in
the Apennines in the south. The flat central region is
characterized by a continental climate. Average
precipitation varies from a maximum of 2,000 mm in
the Alpine range to slightly less than 700 mm in the
eastern plains, with an annual average of 1,100 mm.

Italy: the Po
River basin
Although national regulations for water use and
protection of the environment and water resources
are in place, their local implementation and
enforcement are generally insufficient. This poses
many risks for the Po River basin, which generates
nearly 40% of national GDP through intensive
industry and other economic activities.
Setting the scene
The Po River basin extends from the Alps in the west to
the Adriatic Sea in the east (Map 3.3) and covers an area
of 74,000 km2. While 5% of the basin lies in Switzerland
and France, most of it is situated in northern Italy. This
is where the basin is the largest, its main channel the
longest (650 km), and its
discharge the biggest.1
Map 3.3 The Po River basin
The Po basin is home to
some 16 million people
(2001), and extends over
24% of Italy’s territory.
The regions of Piedmont,
Aosta Valley, Liguria,
Lombardy, Veneto, Emilia
Romagna and Tuscany lie
partially or completely
within it, as does the
Autonomous Province
of Trento. The climate is
variable, ranging from

Climate change and variability:
raining less and getting warmer
Meteorological records indicate that the total number
of rainy days in Italy decreased by 14% from 1951 to
1996. The decrease was most pronounced in winter.
The amount of rainfall also declined, especially in central
and southern Italy. In addition, during the same period,
persistent droughts grew more frequent.
Similar trends have been observed in the Po River basin.
Average annual rainfall has diminished there by 20%
since 1975 (Figure 3.5), and the average yearly discharge
at Pontelagoscuro, near the lower end of the river, has
fallen by between 20% and 25%.
Analysis of data covering 130 years (1865–1996)
reveals that declining rainfall was accompanied by
increases in both minimum winter and maximum
summer temperatures. In northern Italy, where the

1

The maximum discharge measured
to date at Pontelagoscuro, at the
lower end of the Po River basin, was
10,300 m3 per second, during the
flood of 1951.
2
Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Po River
Basin Case Study, prepared in 2008
by the Po River Basin Authority.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

51

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 52

3. Europe and North America
area in Italy, and accounts for 36% of the country’s
agricultural production. Accordingly, agriculture has
the highest water demand of any sector in the basin,
withdrawing nearly 17 billion m3 per year. About
11,000 km2 of the cultivated area is irrigated, almost
exclusively (87%) from surface watercourses. Irrigation
networks are mainly composed of open channels,
though pressurized systems are also used, chiefly for high
value crops. Overland flow is commonly practised in
almost half the irrigated areas. Rice, which has high
water demand, is grown on over 20% of the irrigated
land. Nationwide, about 40% of agricultural production
and more than 60% of agricultural exports depend on
irrigation (Bazzani et al., 2002, citing ANBI, 1992).

Figure 3.5 Yearly cumulated rainfall in the Po River
basin, 1975–2006
1600
1400

Inflow (mm)

1200
1000
800
600
400

0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

200

Note: Excludes the area lying beyond Pontelagoscuro.
Source: Tibaldi et al., unpublished.

Po River basin lies, maximum temperatures increased by
nearly 0.6°C and minimum temperatures by 0.4°C. The
warming effect was 0.2 to 0.3°C higher in central and
southern Italy.
The change in average temperatures has accelerated the
melting of glaciers in the Alps. In 2005, at 2,500 metres
of altitude, the spring snow-melt period started 15 days
earlier than in 1990 (Caracciolo, 2007). The overall
extent of glaciers in the range as a whole shrank by 49%
between 1850 and 2000, from 4,474 km2 to 2,272 km2
(CGI, 2006), and glaciers in the northern Italian Alps
decreased from 525 km2 in 1961 to 482 km2 in 1989, a
decline of 8% (Biancotti and Motta, 2000). The increase
in temperatures has also accelerated desertification,
especially in central and southern Italy.
State of the resource
The amount of available freshwater resources in the Po
River basin is estimated at 77.7 billion m3. Table 3.1
provides the breakdown of water use by sector. The basin
is economically important for Italy, as 38% of the
country’s GDP is generated there, thanks to extensive
industrial activity complemented by farming, animal
husbandry and tourism (Figure 3.6).
Agriculture in the Po River basin is highly developed,
accounting for more than half of the land use in the
basin. In fact, at 30,000 km2 it is the largest cultivated
Figure 3.6 Socio-economic indicators of the Po River basin
compared with the rest of Italy, 2003

The Po River basin is also urbanized, and home to
28% of Italy’s population. Lombardy, Piedmont and
Emilia Romagna are the most populated regions and
have a concentration of economic activities (Table 3.2).
Milan and Turin are the main urban and industrial
agglomerations. The basin’s residents enjoy universal
water supply and sanitation coverage. However, some
30% of the water in the drinking water network goes
unaccounted for, and steps are being taken to
minimize leakage from the water supply and
sanitation infrastructure.
Meeting growing energy needs is one of the most
important requirements for assuring sustainable socioeconomic development in the Po River basin. To harness
the hydroelectric potential of the basin, 890 dams have
been built. The Po basin accounted for 46% of national
hydroelectric production in 2004, and 48% of total
national electricity consumption as of 1994.
Policy framework and decision-making: delayed
implementation of the EU Water Framework Directive
At national level, the Royal Decree of 1933 recognized
water resources as a public good. In 1989, Law 183
established the river basin as the basic unit within
which all regulatory actions concerning water resource
management, water pollution control and soil
protection are to be coordinated for economic and social
development and for environmental protection. The law
also established major basin authorities and entrusted
them with planning responsibilities (Box 3.2). In 1994,
Law 36 introduced a reform under which municipal
Table 3.1 Annual water consumption by sector, 2006

100
80
%

60
40

63
48 52
37

20

42

38

76

64

62

58

Type of use
72

62
38

36
24

28

0
Energy
Industry
consumption*

Workforce

Livestock Agricultural Agricultural
production surface area

Po River basin region

* 1994 value

52

Rest of Italy

GDP

Population

Volume
withdrawn
(billion
m3/year)

% from
% from
surface water groundwater

Municipal

2.5

20

80

Industry*

1.5

20

80

Farming and
livestock

16.5

83

17

Overall

20.5

71

29

* Excludes electricity generation.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 53

Italy
Table 3.2 Regional population distribution by number of
inhabitants and share within the Po River basin
Region
Emilia Romagna
Liguria

Resident
population

% of basin
population
13.78

2,193,177
107,459

0.68

Lombardy (capital: Milan)

9,014,287

56.63

Piedmont (capital: Turin)

4,211,128

26.46

97,861

0.61

1,504

0.01

119,548

0.75

15,916,707

1.08

Autonomous Province
of Trento
Tuscany
Aosta Valley
Veneto
Total

100.00

Source: Adapted from Istat, 2001.

utilities were aggregated into Optimal Territorial Areas
(OTAs), which are responsible for the management and
supply of water services such as wastewater treatment,
sanitation and drinking water provision. OTAs also have
to draft Optimal Territory Plans (OTPs), which analyse
the availability of water resources and plan for their
current and future use. Basin authorities have the
responsibility of verifying that the OTP is coherent
with basin plans and objectives.
Legislative Decree 152 was introduced in 1999 to protect
water resources by preventing and reducing pollution
and improving water quality. It also required regions to
classify water bodies (i.e. surface, ground and coastal
waters) and establish limits for the pollution loads that

can be discharged into the environment. The Water
Protection Plan, which directly complements the basin
plan required by Law 183, is the main instrument for
implementing the laws enacted by Legislative
Decree 152. This decree is considered a forerunner of the
EU Water Framework Directive of 2000, as it also aims for
a comprehensive action framework for water resources
protection by introducing measures for specific uses (e.g.
drinking water, bathing water) and for specific sources of
pollution, such as agricultural and industrial effluents.
In 2006, a consolidated text on environmental
protection, Decree 152, was approved. It includes
rules for waste management, strategic environmental
assessment and environmental impact assessment
procedures, and water resources protection and
management, as well as for dealing with
environmental damage. The part concerning water
resources protection and management formally adopts
the contents of the EU Water Framework Directive, for
example by creating river district authorities and
assigning them the task of producing river basin
management plans. As of October 2008, however,
Legislative Decree 152 of 1999 was still in effect
because the 2006 decree had not yet been implemented.
The main challenges
Quality and quantity issues: The Po River is subject to
extensive regulation. In some stretches, its flow is reduced
to a trickle during the months of high consumption. The
deficit in water availability creates tension among users
and aggravates quality-related problems. However, in
spite of these water quantity and quality issues, there are
no national or regional plans for reducing high water
consumption in agriculture. Although technological
improvements have been introduced, low efficiency

Box 3.3 Role and structure of the Po River Basin Authority
National river basin authorities, whose
members include representatives of
the central and regional administrations,
have as their main role the preparation
of basin plans, which aim to protect water
resources, mitigate hydrogeological risks
(such as floods, landslides and erosion,
including that of river banks) and promote
sustainable use of water resources in an
environmentally conscious way. The Po
River Basin Authority and five other
national river basin authorities (along
with a pilot basin authority) were
created by Law 183 in 1989.
The Po authority is composed of the
secretary general, an institutional
committee, a technical committee and a
technical-operational secretariat. As the
main decision-making body, the
institutional committee comprises

representatives of several ministries (Public
Works/Environment, Territory/Agriculture,
Forestry/ Cultural Assets), the presidents
of the regional councils in the basin, and
the secretary general. The institutional
committee supervises the implementation
of the basin plan. The technical
committee, chaired by the secretary
general and formed of experts and
regional representatives, is the consultative
body of the institutional committee.
The secretary general, who is elected by
the institutional committee, plays a central
role in the basin authority by overseeing
and coordinating its activities and
directing the secretariat. The secretariat
drafts the basin plan in cooperation with
the technical committee. The institutional
committee then adopts it as a project
proposal. The proposal is published in the

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

official gazette and regional newspapers
so all stakeholders may comment.
The regions analyze all comments
collected within their jurisdiction and send
a revised basin plan to the institutional
committee for adoption. Some experts
have criticized the public consultation
stage as a weak link, since the regions
do not have to make an analytical
evaluation of the comments, the period
for comments is limited, and the entity
doing the review is usually the one that
helped design the project plan (CABRIVolga, n.d.). After a second approval by
the institutional committee, the basin
plan is passed to the national level for
final validation by the National Council
of Ministers. Although the basin plan has
an implementation period of three years,
there is no fixed schedule for reviewing
progress or outcomes.

53

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 54

3. Europe and North America
irrigation methods are still widely used, particularly in
rice farming (Zucaro and Pontrandolfi, 2005).
Pollution: Surface and groundwater quality is affected by
industrial, agricultural and household pollutants.
Excessive organic content in surface water causes
eutrophication in rivers with low flow rates and in lakes.
Although a network of wastewater treatment facilities
has stopped further degradation of water quality, it has
not been sufficient to reverse the process. Groundwater
resources continue to contain high concentrations of
nitrates due to fertilizer use in agriculture, while
excessive exploitation has caused salt intrusion into
coastal aquifers and, in some places, ground subsidence.
Disconnect between planning and implementation:
For the most part, these problems stem from the current
management approach in the Po River basin. Although
only the Po River Basin Authority is responsible for basinwide planning (Box 3.3), other institutions (regions,
provinces, city councils, etc.) are in charge of implementing
the authority’s plans. Their actions, however, have been
fragmented and mainly focused on local interests (WWF,
2003). At national level, water issues are still regulated
mostly by Legislative Decree 152 (1999), which delegates
government responsibilities to regions. Each region has the
right to make its own laws, and shares the responsibility for
local implementation with the provinces (subunits of the
regions). The 2006 decree incorporating the EU Water
Framework Directive has yet to be implemented.

References
Associazione Nazionale delle bonifiche, delle irrigazioni e dei miglioramenti
(ANBI). 1992. L’uso irriguo delle acquae. Rome, ANBI.
Bazzani, G., Di Pasquale, S., Gallerani, V. and Viaggi, D. 2002. Water Policy
and the Sustainability of Irrigated Systems in Italy. St. Paul, Minn., Center
for International Food and Agricultural Policy (CIFAP).
www.ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/14401/1/wp02-10.pdf (CIFAP
Working Paper WP02-10, accessed November 2008.)
Biancotti, A. and Motta, L. 2000. L’evoluzione recente ed attuale dei ghiacciai
italiani. Atti conv. Su: L’evoluzione del clima in epoca storica. Società
Italiana di Geofisica, Roma, 5–6 December.
CABRI-Volga. No date. The Po Basin Water Board, Italy: Case Study.
http://cabri-volga.org/DOC/D3-CaseStudies/CaseStudyPoBasin.doc
(Accessed December 2008.)
Istat. 2001. 14° Censimento della popolazione e delle abitazioni 2001.
http://www.istat.it/censimenti/popolazione (Accessed December 2008.)
Zucaro, R. and Pontrandolfi, A. 2005. Italian Policy Framework for Water in
Agriculture. Presented at OECD Workshop on Agriculture and Water:
Sustainability, Markets and Policies, 14–18 November, Adelaide and
Barmera, South Australia.
www.oecd.org/secure/docDocument/0,2827,en_21571361_34281952_
35584805_1_1_1_1,00.doc (Accessed November 2008.)
Po River Basin Authority. Forthcoming. Po River Basin Case Study. (Draft.)
Caracciolo, R. 2007. Presentation at National Conference on Climatic
Changes, Rome, 12–13 September.
Comitato Glaciologico Italiano (CGI). 2006.
http://www.disat.unimib.it/comiglacio/comitatoglaciologico.htm
(Accessed December 2008.)
Tibaldi, S., Agnetti, A. Alessandrini, C. Cacciamani, C. Pavan, V. Pecora, S.
Tomozeiu, R. and Zenoni, E. Unpublished. Data presented at the
conference Il cambiamento climatico nel bacino del Po: variabilità e
trend (climatic changes in the Po River basin: variability and trends),
Parma, Italy, 16 July 2007.
WWF. 2003. WWF Water and Wetland Index: Critical Issues in Water Policy
across Europe. Results overview for the Po River Basin (Italy).
http://assets.panda.org/downloads/wwipoitaly.pdf (Accessed November
2008.)

Overall, regulations for water use and for protection
of the environment and water resources are in
place, but implementation is weak and enforcement
is generally lacking.
Conclusions
The Po River basin is a strategic region for the Italian
economy, with significant agriculture, industry and
tourism sectors, employing 42% of the national
workforce and generating 38% of the national GDP.
However, the high level of regional development has put
heavy pressure on water resources and led to degradation
of surface and groundwater quality. Increasing efficiency
in agriculture is an issue that still needs to be addressed.
Although policy tools for managing and safeguarding
water resources are in place at national level, there are
problems with the implementation and enforcement of
rules and regulations at regional level. Installing a legal
framework for application of the EU Water Framework
Directive, and making greater efforts to develop a basinwide vision agreed by all stakeholders, are among
available options for safeguarding the resources of the Po
River basin for future generations.

54

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 55

The Netherlands

Map 3.4 The Netherlands

The
Netherlands
Adapting to the reality of climate change and
increased risk from floods has meant overturning
centuries of reliance on big engineering solutions,
returning land to nature and integrating risk
management into policies based on stakeholder
participation.
The Netherlands is located in western Europe,
bordered by Belgium to the south, Germany to
the east and the North Sea to the north and west
(Map 3.4). Geographically, the Netherlands is a flat,
low lying country formed by the estuary of four
important European rivers: the Rhine, the Meuse,
the Ems and the Scheldt. Two-thirds of the country is
threatened by flooding. Through history, the country
has defended itself against threats posed by water,
building dikes and dams, canalizing rivers and
reclaiming land from the sea. Today, about 9.6 million
of its inhabitants (60% of the population) live below sea
level, and about 70% of the country’s GDP is generated
below sea level (Netherlands Water Partnership, 2006),
thanks to a 3,500 km primary flood defence system
composed of dikes and sand dunes.1

Figure 3.7 Temperature variation in De Bilt, 1900–2005,
and the four climate scenarios for 2050

Climate change: the danger of floods and a
rising sea
In 2006, the Royal Netherlands Meteorological
Institute (KNMI) announced the results of a new
study based on four climate change scenarios from
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(Figure 3.7). The projections for 2050 include
temperature increases of up to 2.9°C, the possibility of
as much as 14% more precipitation in winter, and hotter
summers with fewer rainy days but up to 27% more
extreme rainfall events. These changes are likely to
increase the flow of rivers in winter and the probability
of longer dry periods in summer.
Besides a currently projected absolute rise in sea level
of 35 to 85 cm by 2100, allowance needs to be made
for land subsidence in the west, which will make the
relative sea level rise even greater. Accordingly, the
Governmental Delta Committee advised in 2008 that
the Netherlands should prepare for an overall sea level
rise of 0.65 to 1.30 metres by 2100.
These changes will have a definite impact on flood
protection measures, water resource availability, the
Notes: The thick black line represents the 30-year moving average of observed temperatures.
Coloured dashed lines connect each climate change scenario with the baseline year, 1990.
The grey band represents year-to-year variation derived from the observations. G denotes a
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft Netherlands Case Study Report, prepared in 2008 by the Unie
van Waterschappen.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

scenario with moderate temperature change and W a scenario with higher temperatures. De
Bilt, a municipality in Utrecht province, is where KNMI is based.
Source: van den Hurk et al., 2006

55

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 56

3. Europe and North America

Table 3.3 Water use by sector, 2005
Water abstraction (million m3)

Water use (million m3)

Total

Groundwater

Surface water

1,256

766

490

0

0

0

0

52

37

15

99

37

15

47

Industry and
refineries

3,375

220

3,155*

3,616

220

3,155

241

Power plants

9,771

1

9,770*

9,773

1

9,770

2

481

1

480

1,279

1

480

799

Tap water
companies
Agriculture

Other
companies and
households

Total

Groundwater Surface water

Tap water

* Cooling water.
Source: Statistics Netherlands.

environment and the economy. The Delta Committee
has drawn up an integrated vision, including risk
management and investment components, to help the
country cope better with climate change.
State of the resource and water use
Although there are some local water shortages, the
presence of large rivers such as the Rhine and its
tributaries, as well as the Meuse, ensures that water
quantity and water allocation to various sectors are not
generally an issue in the Netherlands (Table 3.3). Only
9% of the total annual renewable water resources is used.
In recent years, however, periods of low river flow have
become more frequent and tended to last longer. Recent
studies indicate that water level and water quality and
control may be most severely affected during the
summer, when longer dry spells are expected. Water
shortages and decreasing quality would affect
agriculture, navigation, the energy sector (cooling water),
nature and tourism. Consequently, the Dutch water
management system could face a new challenge of
having to allocate freshwater to priority areas. Current
national priorities for freshwater allocation are based on
minimizing irreversible damage and economic losses.
Policy framework and decision-making
Responsibility for the management of natural water
systems in the Netherlands and for protecting residents

from flooding is largely allocated to the Waterschappen
(regional water authorities or water boards) (Box 3.4).
The 26 current Waterschappen constitute a fourth form of
government body in the Netherlands, alongside the
central, provincial and municipal governments.
These decentralized public authorities focus on water
quality and quantity, water management and flood
protection, and wastewater treatment. They are also
active in environmental development. (Issues
concerning spatial planning and the environment are
first vetted by provinces and municipalities.) Sanitation
is the joint responsibility of municipalities, which deal
with the sewage systems, and the Waterschappen, which
focus on wastewater treatment. In addition, water supply
companies are responsible for delivering safe drinking
water. Groundwater is the responsibility of the provinces.
The main challenges
Floods: Floods have always been a major threat in the
Netherlands. They can come from storm surges from the
sea, high river discharges after heavy rain or snow-melt
upstream, or intense local rainfall.
One of the worst floods in Dutch history took place in
1953. A combination of a high tide and a severe
windstorm overwhelmed the sea defence structures on
the North Sea coast. The extensive flooding caused major

Box 3.4 History and functions of the Waterschappen (water boards)
The history of the Waterschappen goes back
to the 13th century. People, mostly farmers,
living in the low lying areas of the
Netherlands felt the need to organize to
improve their living conditions. Over time
the Waterschappen merged, usually because
of extreme circumstances and disasters such
as floods. For example, in 1950 there were
around 2,500 Waterschappen. After a major
flood in 1953 and high river levels in 1993
and 1995, the number went down, and is

56

currently 26. The mergers are a response to
the increased efficiency and professionalism
needed to deal with the growing
complexity of water management.

group gets from work the Waterschap is
doing, the larger its contribution to the
budget and the more seats it has on
the Waterschap.

The Waterschappen are based on
stakeholder participation. They allow local
communities to play a direct role in
development. The Waterschappen function
around the three principles ‘interest, pay,
say’: that is, the more benefit an interest

In 2007, the 26 Waterschappen together
had some 11,000 employees and a
combined budget of €2.4 billion to manage
about 3,450 km of primary dikes, 55,000
km of watercourses, 7,000 km of roads and
390 treatment plants.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 57

The Netherlands
socio-economic losses. More recently, flooding on the
Rhine and Meuse rivers in 1993 and 1995 caused
hundreds of thousands of people to evacuate homes in
low lying areas. Similarly, excessive rainfall in 1998, 2001
and 2002 caused problems in certain areas. These events
served as a warning that future floods could have even
more disastrous results due to their increasing frequency,
magnitude and intensity combined with the very dense
land use and population behind the embankments.
Such considerations led the government to take a new
approach and make spatial planning an integral part
of water management. One significant result was a
programme to make more ‘room for the river’. In this
context, a set of measures was adopted, including
deepening the flood plains, moving dikes further from
the river, lowering groynes and enlarging river beds.
The aim is to create a ‘comfort zone’ for the river.
Unfortunately, ever-increasing urbanization and likely
climatic changes mean these measures by themselves
will not fully address the problem.
Consequently, the Netherlands has also made
substantial investments in real-time monitoring,
scenario development, flood forecasting and data
collection to increase preparedness and provide early
warning. In addition, innovative and comprehensive
risk management policies and strategies are being
based on the key principles of resistance, resilience
and adaptation. This approach, unlike previous
practices, considers reinforcing dikes to be a viable
option only when other measures are judged too
expensive or inadequate.
To limit economic losses associated with floods, a riskbased cost-benefit analysis method is being developed
to identify the most cost-effective measures. These
include accepting a higher frequency of inundation or
controlled inundation in certain areas, or even change
in land use. The risk-based approach supports local
decision-making while allowing for future spatial
planning on a larger scale.
In addition to its national plans and legislation, as a
European Union member the Netherlands is meeting its
obligations under the Flood Directive and the overall
Water Framework Directive.

and strategies based on the principles of resistance,
resilience and adaptation.
Table 3.4 Total cost of water management, 2007

Ministry of
Transport, Public
Works and Water
Management

Cost
(million euros)

% of total

1,405

27

165

3

Municipalities

1,100

21

Waterschappen

2,453

48

Total

5,123

100

Provinces

Conclusions
Throughout the centuries, the Netherlands has defended
itself against water-related threats through structural
solutions that made it possible to live and work below
sea level. However, the impact of climate change on
national security, the economy, livelihoods and the
environment is weakening the country’s resilience
against the increasing intensity of extreme events and
calls for new responses. Rising sea level, land subsidence,
more pronounced variation between wet and dry
seasons, an increase in river levels due to intense rainfall,
and increasing water demand during warmer summers
are just some of the challenges requiring appropriate
adaptation strategies. Acting on the advice of the Delta
Committee, authorities are already taking measures
relying on a mix of spatial planning, risk analysis and
technical innovation. Stakeholder consultation and
public participation remain the core of any solution.
References
Netherlands Water Partnership. 2006. Water in the Netherlands 2004–2005
and Riool in Cijfers [Sewerage Statistics] 2005–2006. Waterland Water
Information Network. www.waterland.net (Accessed December 2008.)
Unie van Waterschappen. Forthcoming. Netherlands Case Study Report:
Climate Change and Dutch Water Management. The Hague, Unie van
Waterschappen (Association of Water Boards).
Van den Hurk, B., Klein-Tank, A. et al.. 2006. KNMI Climate Change Scenarios
2006 for the Netherlands. De Bilt, Netherlands, Royal Netherlands
Meteorological Institute. (Scientific Report WR-2006-01.)

Expanding and maintaining the water
infrastructure
For centuries the Dutch have invested in building
structures to mitigate extreme events and regulate water
levels and supply in accordance with each sector’s needs.
Such structures are as expensive to maintain as to
construct. Table 3.4 shows the annual costs covered by
the Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water
Management, the Waterschappen and provincial and local
government for flood defence and water management.
Although the country has these complex structures in
place and keeps up with the cost of maintaining and
expanding them, it is increasingly clear that complete
safety and security can never be guaranteed. Faced with
this reality, the government is implementing measures
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

57

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 58

3. Europe and North America

Spain: the
Autonomous
Community
of the
Basque
Country
With a long history of floods and a risk of drought,
Basques know how important it is to plan ahead
while protecting ecosystems and water quality.
Building on a new regulatory framework in line
with European Union directives, they are
implementing strategies to anticipate, mitigate and
manage these risks, along with new ones linked to
climate change and variability.
Setting the scene
The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country is
located in the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula along
an Atlantic coastline of 209 km (Map 3.5). Its population
of 2.1 million (2005) is dispersed over 7,234 km2 of very
mountainous territory. On the slopes facing the sea, an
Atlantic climate brings moderate temperatures and
abundant rainfall. In the interior, the climate is more
Mediterranean, characterized by hot, dry summers and
scant precipitation. The region has been enjoying steady
economic growth and a per capita income that is higher
than the European Union (EU) average.1
The second edition of the
World Water Development
Report included a case
study on the Basque
Country (UNESCO-WWAP,
2006). The present case
study builds upon the
findings of the previous
one. It emphasizes current
policy development efforts,
which include strategies to
mitigate the effects of
climatic variation and
climate change and a legal
and political framework for
the full implementation of
integrated water resources
management with
stakeholder involvement.

Climate change and variability: looking ahead
Although no statistically significant changes have been
observed in the hydrological cycle so far, the Basque
Sustainable Development Environmental Strategy 2002–
2020 plans for and reflects the current understanding
that the uncertainties introduced by climatic variation
and climate change translate into a potential risk to the
environment and socio-economic development. The
Basque Climate Change Office was established to address
this potential risk, and the Basque Plan to Combat
Climate Change was drafted in 2006 (Box 3.5). As part of
this effort, the Basque Water Agency has initiated an indepth study to determine what measures related to water
resources need to be taken in the event of variation from
current climatic conditions over 2011–2040. The study
will allow the agency to further improve its database on
impacts and to align itself with the best international
practices for adapting to climate change.
State of the resource and water use
Of the 24 major river basins in the Basque Country, 14 empty
into the Atlantic Ocean and the rest flow towards the
Mediterranean Sea, with the Cantabrian Mountains forming
the Atlantic-Mediterranean divide. For the rivers that empty
into the Atlantic, major industrial and urban development
on the river banks and pollution caused by these activities are
the main and most extensive pressures. The high
topographical relief of the region, for example, makes it
possible for effluents to spread easily.
Another major source of pollution is agriculture, including
forestry. It is largely practised in the Mediterranean basins,
which account for some 4,500 km2 or 62.4% of the Basque
Country territory. Of this area, about 850 km2 is cultivated;
meadows and pasture cover around 1,500 km2 and the

Map 3.5 The Basque Country

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Autonomous
Community of the Basque Country
Case Study Report, prepared in 2008
by the Basque Water Agency and
UNESCO-Etxea.

58

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 59

Spain

Box 3.5 Methodology for assessing the cost of climate change in the Basque Country
The Department of Environment and
Territorial Management of the Basque
Country Government has developed a
methodology for analyzing the impact of
climate change on the Bilbao metropolitan
area. The methodology makes it possible to
calculate the economic costs associated
with climate change and to select costefficient adaptation measures.
The methodology contemplated three
possible scenarios: a basic scenario (current
situation), a reference scenario (a future
projection not taking climate change into
account) and a climate change scenario
(basically, the reference scenario

incorporating climate change criteria).
Mean annual damage in the basic scenario
was put at between €224.65 million and
€275.09 million, with the bulk of the cost
involving residential properties. It should be
noted that the economic damage caused
by floods in August 1983 was equivalent to
around €930 million (in 2005 prices).
Mean annual damage in the reference
scenario ranged from €229.25 million to
€281.27 million, and that in the climate
change scenario from €358.46 million to
€439.77 million (in 2005 prices).

between the cost estimated in the climate
change scenario and that in the reference
scenario – was between €129.21 million
and €158.50 million. By anticipating the
problem and taking appropriate adaptation
measures, the city of Bilbao could reduce
the cost of damage incurred by a
hypothetical flood by more than 50%. This
conclusion led to establishment of the
interdepartmental Basque Climate Change
Office in January 2006. The office was
responsible for drafting and launching the
Basque Plan to Combat Climate Change.

Thus, the variation in costs attributable to
climate change – that is, the difference

Source: Ministry for Environment and Territorial Planning.

remaining land is used for timber production. Current
water demand for agriculture amounts to 34.94 million m3
per year, which corresponds to 9.14% of total water
consumption in the Basque Country. The agricultural
sector is not a significant contributor to GDP, but its
environmental impact is getting more pronounced
through increasing pollution in both surface and
groundwater, due especially to the nitrates in fertilizers.
Furthermore, pesticide concentrations in water resources
occasionally exceed standards.
Industry plays a dominant role in the Basque Country
economy, accounting for some 28% of overall water
withdrawals (91 million m3) and, in 2007, 29.8% of
GDP (Eustat, 2008). Initiatives under the 2002–2020
environmental strategy aim to reduce the high contaminant
load in industrial effluents.
Overall, freshwater demand is much lower than the
available supply. Nevertheless, interbasin water transfers
are made to alleviate local water stress. For example, the
Zadorra, Ullibarri and Urrunaga reservoirs in the Ebro
region link to the Undurraga reservoir in the north and
provide water to the Bilbao-Bizkaia Water Consortium,
which supplies water to several municipalities, most
notably Bilbao, the largest city in the Basque Country.
The hydroelectric sector comprises a little over
100 plants, most of them mini-hydropower stations with
no significant regulation. There may be potential to
develop hydropower further. In its 2010 Energy Outlook,
issued in 2001, the Basque Country Government states its
intent to improve energy efficiency to save energy,
diversify sources of energy production, increase the level
of self-sufficiency in energy production and substantially
reduce the environmental impact of energy production.
With its climatic, geographical and topographical features,
the Basque Country is very rich in flora and fauna: over
3,000 plant species and 400 vertebrate species. The 2006
Water Act of the Basque Country specifies that the minimum
flow reserved for environmental purposes is not classified as
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

water use and needs to be taken into account in basin
planning. Some 20.3% of the territory (1,470 km2) lies within
the Network of Protected Natural Spaces, including natural
parks and the Urdaibai Biosphere Reserve. The network
includes many areas linked to aquatic environments that
have been declared Sites of Community Importance under
the European Council Habitats Directive.
Policy framework and decision-making: coming into
line with EU directives
Spain’s 1985 Water Act defines water as a state owned
asset. Under the Act, river basins crossing territories
of multiple autonomous communities are managed
by 15 river basin agencies known as hydrographic
confederations. The Basque Country Government is
mainly responsible for the basins that are confined to its
territory. However, under a 1994 decision it also plays a
functional role as regards the intercommunity basins on
its territory, although the river basin confederations
remain the principal decision-making bodies.
The Basque Country is obliged to comply with the
EU Water Framework Directive, which sets priorities
for the protection and improvement of all water
resources and aquatic habitats. The 2006 Water Act
aims to establish the mechanisms necessary to put
relevant EU policies into practice, including the creation
of a regulatory framework. The Act also led to the
establishment of the Basque Water Agency, which began
operating in January 2008 and is the central instrument
for implementing water policy in the Basque Country.
The Basque Country Water Act also allows for a
participatory approach in decision-making. The Basque
Water Agency has initiated comprehensive consultation
with sector representatives and the public to lay the
foundation for an all-inclusive water management
policy. Two advisory bodies, the Users’ Assembly and the
Basque Country Water Council, work with the Basque
Water Agency in this participatory process. The Users’
Assembly includes representatives of the Basque
Parliament, the Basque Government, the Basque water
59

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 60

3. Europe and North America
operators and other local governments and institutions.
The Water Council broadens the participation to other
stakeholders, such as municipalities and representatives
of environmental conservation groups.
The 2006 Water Act also deals with valuing water.
Cost recovery is assured through the setting of tariffs
differentiated by use. Because the management system
in place is efficient, water services can recover a high
percentage of their costs. In addition, an ecological tax
is imposed to deter polluters, reduce water consumption
and support the conservation, protection and restoration
of the environment, including aquatic ecosystems.
The tax is also aimed at funding measures to maintain
environmental services and achieve good ecological
conditions for water bodies, in compliance with the
EU Water Framework Directive.
In July 2008, the Basque Country Government Council
established a solidarity initiative supporting sub-Saharan
countries’ efforts to meet the water and sanitation targets
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In so
doing it agreed to allocate 5% of the ecological tax
revenue for this purpose (see section 15.5 on sustainable
financing in the third edition of the World Water
Development Report).
The main challenges
Floods: Due to its topographic features and abundant
rainfall, the Basque Country experiences frequent flood
alerts. Bilbao alone has recorded 39 events classed as
natural disasters. Early records of floods in the region
date back to the 15th century. More recently, large-scale
floods occurred in October 1953, June 1975, June 1977,
August 1983, July 1988 and February 2003. The 1983
flood, in particular, claimed 34 lives and caused damage
amounting to about €930 million.
To minimize socio-economic risks associated with floods,
the Basque Water Agency has produced flood risk maps
illustrating the extent of floods over the last 10, 100
and 500 years. They are used to establish land use criteria
based on flood vulnerability. In 2007, the European
Union passed a directive concerning the evaluation
and management of flood risks. In support of this
directive, a Spanish Royal Decree in 2008 incorporated
risk management into public water management. Such
policy measures are backed up by structural measures,
including construction of drainage channels in highly
urbanized areas, demolition of structures that cover
rivers and obstruct flow (e.g. obsolete bridges and
abandoned hydraulic structures such as water wheels
and dams), rehabilitation of river beds and improvement
of drainage capacity.

60

Drought: Although drought is unexpected and
exceptional in the Basque Country, it is within the
natural range of climatic variation. Two prominent
drought periods took place from 1940 to 1950 and from
1989 to 1990. To minimize the environmental, economic
and social effects of drought, a hydrological plan and the
Special Action Plan in Situations of Urgency and Possible
Drought, known as PES (Plan Especial de actuación en
situaciones de alerta y eventual Sequía), were approved
for the Ebro and Norte basins in 2007.
Basque Country administrative bodies are adopting
various mechanisms to improve water supply and
demand management under normal conditions and
to deal with extreme episodes of drought with as little
disruption to water supply as possible. These measures
will be used to counterbalance the possible effects
of climate change, especially in areas with the drier
Mediterranean climate. To this end, the Basque Country
Government has carried out research projects on
increasing efficiency in the current use of water and
harnessing additional resources, under both normal and
extreme conditions. Examples include connecting intraand intercommunity basins and modifying the use of
reservoirs and groundwater abstraction in line with
prevailing climatic conditions. Of particular note is a
series of studies on improving water supply to the
metropolitan areas of Bilbao and the Basque Country
capital, Vitoria-Gasteiz.
Conclusions
As the second edition of the World Water Development
Report concluded, the central challenge for the Basque
Country is to define and successfully implement a series
of case-specific and efficient programmes to protect and
improve the status of valuable water resources and
associated ecosystems. This is being done through the
2006 Water Act, which enforces relevant EU legislation
while creating the legal framework for active
involvement of all stakeholders. Basque Country
authorities are also working on institutional
development to plan for and mitigate potential risks
associated with climate change and variability. The
establishment of the ecological tax not only helps
protect the environment but also, through the solidarity
initiative, allows Basque officials to set a precedent for an
innovative funding mechanism to support developing
country achievement of the water and sanitation targets
of the MDGs.
References
Basque Water Agency/UNESCO-Etxea. Forthcoming. Autonomous Community
of the Basque Country Case Study Report. (Basque Water Agency:
www.uragentzia.net)
Euskal Estatistikar-Erakundea (Eustat). 2008. Press release on Basque Statistical
Yearbook 2008. Vitoria-Gasteiz, Eustat.
UNESCO-World Water Assessment Programme (UNESCO-WWAP). 2006. The
Autonomous Community of the Basque Country. Water, a shared
responsibility: The United Nations World Water Development Report 2.
Paris/Oxford, UNESCO/Berghan Books.
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr2/case_studies/pdf/basque_country.pdf

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 61

Turkey

371.4
301.8
295.1
312.5
355.1

267.6
297.9
293.3

175.2

288.5
241.5

207.6

248.7

238.9

189.9

66.7

150.0

172.9

142.2

274.4

224.4
331.7
264.0
362.5

191,0

200.0

194.9

300.0
275.2
250.0

181.6
204.9

350.0

315.2
282.6
212.2
251.1
229.7

100.0

Background
Istanbul, located in north-western Turkey, has a
population of over 12 million (Turkish Statistical
Institute, 2007). Home to 17.6% of the country’s
population, it is the largest city in Turkey and one of the
25 largest in the world. Uniquely, by virtue of its
situation straddling the Bosphorus strait, it has a
presence on both the European and Asian continents
(Map 3.6).1
Climate change and variability: anticipating
problems
Although the data do not indicate a clear declining trend
in rainfall in Istanbul and its surroundings (Figure 3.8),
extreme events – especially droughts – seem more
pronounced than in the past. In 2006, the measured
rainfall of 66.7 mm was the record low for the previous
50 years, a period during which the average was
257.2 mm per year. Furthermore, the water level in
reservoirs serving the city was just 45% in 2004, and
plummeted to around 25%
in 2007 and 2008 (ISKI,
Map 3.6 Istanbul
2008). Officials at Istanbul
Water and Sewerage
Administration (ISKI),
using the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Control scenario
of a 2°C temperature
increase by 2030, have
estimated the likely
decrease in total reservoir
capacity due to higher
evaporation rates. Their
calculations revealed that
the water potential of the
city might drop by as
much as 14% over the
next two decades. This

50.0

Rainfall (Dec-Feb)

2003-04

2001-02

1999-00

1997-98

1995-96

1993-94

1991-92

1989-90

1987-88

1985-86

1983-84

1981-82

1979-80

1977-78

1975-76

1973-74

1971-72

1969-70

1967-68

1965-66

1963-64

1961-62

1959-60

0.0
1957-58

In coping with the challenges and demands of a
megalopolis suffering the effects of an unplanned
urban boom, officials are relying on significant
infrastructure investment, public information
campaigns and better enforcement of city planning
regulations.

2005-06
2006

Turkey:
Istanbul

Rain (mm)

400.0

362.8
291.8
287.8
340.5
346.6
368.7
354.0
241.3
213.6

450.0

287.7
329.6
254.0
220.9
220.1

500.0

432.2
405.2
346.6

467.7

Figure 3.8 Combined rainfall in Istanbul for December,
January and February, 50 year average

50 year average

projection, coupled with water demand scenarios,
indicates that the onset of a water crisis is likely by 2030.
In response, remedial actions are being taken, ranging
from water saving campaigns (Box 3.6) to projects
transferring water to Istanbul from as much as 150 km
away.
State of the resource: monitoring, water transfer
and expanded treatment facilities
Water to meet the needs of metropolitan Istanbul comes
from the Marmara and Melen basins, whose combined
water potential (including artificial storage) amounts
to about 3.34 billion m3. Groundwater resources are
limited; their annual potential is around 0.175 billion m3.
To protect this precious resource, regulations prohibit
the drilling and operation of wells without obtaining
a permit. Depending on quality, some groundwater
resources are mainly used for drinking water supply
while others meet water needs in industry. However,
uncontrolled settlement and over-abstraction have

1

Except where otherwise noted,
information in this case study is
adapted from the draft Istanbul Case
Study Report, prepared in 2008 by
ISKI and DSI.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

61

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 62

3. Europe and North America

Box 3.6 Water saving campaigns
Given climatic variation and the lower
than average rainfall of recent years,
water saving campaigns are now
considered an important measure for
raising awareness among Istanbul
residents about climate change and its
impact, and for promoting sustainable
use of the limited freshwater resources.
For example, the ‘Don’t Waste Your Water’
campaign, a joint effort of the Turkish

Foundation for Combating Soil Erosion,
for Reforestation and the Protection of
Natural Habitats (TEMA) and the Istanbul
Metropolitan Municipality, proved quite
effective. It resulted in a decline in daily
water consumption from 2.35 million m3
to 1.9 million m3 by promoting basic
water saving methods that households can
apply. ISKI estimated that 18 million m3 of
water was conserved during the course of
the campaign.

diminished groundwater levels and led to saltwater
intrusion in coastal areas. The decline in the water table
due to unsustainable abstraction ranges from 30 metres
to as much as 150 metres in some areas. Both surface
and groundwater quality is monitored through 51 observation stations scattered throughout the two basins.
In 2007, the amount of water resources in use was
1.42 billion m3. This means 40% of the water potential is
being exploited, on average. However, geographic and
seasonal disparities in the distribution of water resources,
coupled in recent years with severe drought, have
necessitated interbasin water transfer projects to provide
more water where needed in Istanbul. For example, the
Melen Project Phase I, which became operational in
December 2007, supplies an additional 0.27 billion m3 of
water per year. With the full realization of similar
projects, some 66% of the potential water resources
would be made available for use.
As of 2007, ISKI operated six large water treatment plants
and a number of smaller units. ISKI’s master plan for
water, which included construction of treatment plants,
was based on projections of population growth and an
accompanying increase in water demand. However, the
projections proved to be overestimates, and the
treatment plants currently operate at 61% of capacity.
Although the existing plants can keep up with
population growth in the near future, new facilities are
being planned and constructed to assure the long term
needs of the Istanbul metropolitan area.
Some 0.2 billion m3 of treated wastewater is discharged
from Istanbul into the sea every day. To make more
efficient use of water resources and cope with periods of
drought, water recycling plants are being planned, with
the first one expected to be operational in 2009.
Institutional mechanisms for water and sanitation
service provision
In its long history, Istanbul has served as the capital
of many great civilizations. During the time of the
Ottoman Empire (ca 1299–1922), water structures dating
from Roman times were improved and extended, and
aqueducts, reservoirs, wells and cisterns were added to
improve freshwater supply to a growing population.
After 1923, when the Republic of Turkey was founded,
62

Such campaigns also pave the way
towards implementation of the EU Water
Framework Directive, which focuses
heavily on the need to keep the public
well informed about water management
issues and to devise participatory
approaches for solving problems.
Source: Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration

the Istanbul Water Administration (ISI) took over
responsibility for managing the city’s water resources.
Intensive internal migration to Istanbul resulted in a
population boom and unplanned urbanization in the
shape of shanty towns on the outskirts of the city.
These conditions, which made it all but impossible
for the ISI to meet everyone’s water and sanitation
needs in a city astride two continents, necessitated the
establishment of institutions with the financial and
human resources needed to cope with the challenges.
Today, ISKI and the General Directorate of State
Hydraulic Works (DSI) are the main institutions
responsible for developing water resources for Istanbul.
DSI was founded in 1954 and is responsible for planning,
managing and developing all water resources in Turkey.
ISKI, founded in 1982, is charged with setting up
and maintaining water and sanitation infrastructure,
managing surface and groundwater resources for
domestic and industrial use, collecting, treating and
disposing of wastewater, and protecting water resources
from pollution. It is also responsible for river
rehabilitation within greater Istanbul.
Although investment by both institutions has helped
address water-related problems in Istanbul, a lack of
coordination among various agencies dealing with water
management in the city, combined with a complex and
fragmented division of authority that makes it difficult
to enforce regulations, is a critical issue that stands in the
way of effective water governance.
The main challenges
Service coverage and expansion of the metropolitan
area: In 1900, Istanbul was one of the few cities in the
world with a population of 1 million, and it took almost
70 years for this number to double. However, with the
onset of east to west migration in the mid-1970s, the
population more than quadrupled in just 20 years’ time,
reaching some 6.6 million in 1990. Since then the
population has again almost doubled, making Istanbul
one of the world’s 25 most populous cities. Most of its
estimated 12 million people live on the European side. In
2004, the borders of the city were extended significantly,
increasing ISKI’s service area from 1,972 km2 to
5,342 km2 (or 6,500 km2 if one includes the basin areas
outside the provincial borders). These figures make clear
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3Europe & NA (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:26

Page 63

Turkey
the sheer magnitude of the challenge involved in
providing basic water and sanitation services to the city.
However, thanks to significant investment, which
especially gained momentum from the mid-1990s to
total US$3.6 billion between 1994 and 2004, the water
supply and sanitation infrastructure has improved
considerably. Water storage capacity, for example,
increased from 0.59 billion m3 in 1994 to 1.17 billion m3
in 2005. In addition, ISKI formulated the Water Master
Plan in 2004 to address long term needs to 2040 by
taking into account population estimates, water demand,
water resources availability, water purification and
sewerage work, etc. The plan includes new large water
supply projects, such as pipelines to bring water from the
Asian side to the European side (e.g. the Melen Project),
to meet projected demand (Altınbilek, 2006).
River improvement and environmental protection:
River improvement projects are necessary to ameliorate
the quality of urban life and protect residents from
socio-economic hazards associated with flooding.
They become even more critical in densely populated
settlements like Istanbul, where the rate of infrastructure
expansion cannot keep up with the increase in demand
stemming from continued internal migration. Such
unplanned growth also creates serious problems with
enforcement of urban planning rules and building codes.
Many projects have aimed to restore the quality of rivers
that had turned into open sewers, especially during the
1990s. Unfortunately, due to a lack of financial resources,
only 313 km of the 1,825 km of streams within the
boundaries of the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality
have so far been improved.
The best example of environmental restoration in
Istanbul concerns the Golden Horn. Once the pearl of
Istanbul, the Golden Horn became an environmental
disaster after its surroundings turned into an unplanned
industrial zone housing docks, factories and warehouses.
By 1985 around 700 industrial plants and 2,000
workshops had been opened along the Golden Horn.
Hundreds of thousands of tonnes of waste were dumped
directly into the waterway every year, gradually
destroying all aquatic life. Finally, in the late 1980s, the
Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Government and
ISKI joined forces to save the Golden Horn by
constructing wastewater collectors, tunnels, pumping
stations, wastewater treatment plants and related
utilities, thus revitalizing the environment of the area.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

The Golden Horn Environmental Protection Project,
with a total cost of some US$650 million, received first
prize in 2002 from the World Association of the Major
Metropolises (Altınbilek, 2006).
Unplanned urbanization: Unplanned urbanization
through illegal construction is a serious problem in
Istanbul. It entails risks of socio-economic losses,
especially if structures are built in flood prone areas like
those near river embankments. Such settlements are
either not connected or illegally connected to water
supply and sanitation infrastructure. Illegal connections
can lead to water pollution, environmental degradation,
and discontinuity in service provision due to resultant
malfunctioning of local infrastructure. The combination
of these factors often leads, in turn, to health problems.
As part of an effort to prevent illegal urban development
in protected water basins, ISKI uses remote sensing
technology to run a basin information system for
periodic monitoring of structural changes in its service
area. The system has allowed municipal authorities to
detect illegal construction in a relatively short time and
to intervene accordingly.
Conclusions
Istanbul is one of the great metropolitan areas of
the world, but it is suffering from unplanned and
accelerating urbanization. Seasonal and geographic
variations in water availability, coupled with pollution
and wasteful water use, put the resource under everincreasing pressure. The authorities are working seriously
to address quality issues and improve the coverage of
water supply and sanitation services. Nevertheless, there
is still some progress to be made in terms of service
provision, public awareness raising, implementation of
laws and regulations, and the much needed political will
to move forward.
References
Altınbilek, D. 2006. Water Management in Istanbul. Water Resources
Development, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 241–53.
Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration (ISKI). 2008. Barajların Doluluk
Oranları [Water level in reservoirs].
http://www.iski.gov.tr/web/statik.aspx?KID=1000717 (Accessed
December 2008.)
Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration (ISKI)/General Directorate of
State Hydraulic Works (DSI). 2008. Istanbul Case Study Report. (Draft.)
Turkish Statistical Institute. 2007. 2007 Nüfus Sayımı Sonuçları [2007 census
results]. http://www.scribd.com/doc/1250825/TUK-Adrese-Dayal-NufusKayt-Sistemi-2007-Nufus-Saym-Sonuclar (Accessed October 2008.)

63

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 65

4

Latin America
and the
Caribbean

LA PLATA RIVER BASIN
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay
The combined effect of land
use changes and climate
variability could lead to socioeconomic losses. 66

BRAZIL AND URUGUAY:
Lake Merín basin
A shared vision could pave the
way for integrated water
resources management in a
basin under pressure. 71

Overall, Latin America is the richest region in terms of
available freshwater resources per capita. The two
transboundary case studies, involving Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, were conducted
in areas endowed with abundant water resources and
spectacular biodiversity. Fertile land assures food
security while waterways allow transport of goods to
regional and international markets. The richness of the
region is, however, under increasing human and
climatic pressures. Progress towards reaching water- and
sanitation-related Millennium Development Goals, wide
recognition of the concept of integrated water resources
management, and a decrease in poverty are a few of the
encouraging signs that the region will be able to
overcome these pressures.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

65

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 66

4. Latin America and the Caribbean

Map 4.1 La Plata River basin

1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft La Plata River Basin Case Study Report, prepared in 2008 by
Víctor Pochat.

66

◆
◆
◆

✱

◆

✱

◆

✱

✱
✱

✱
▲

✱

◆
◆

◆

◆

✱ ✱✱
✱✱

◆

◆

✱

▲

✱

✱

✱

✱
✱

◆
◆

✱

◆

◆

◆

✱
✱

◆

✱

◆

An upward trend in rainfall has been observed in the south
of subtropical Argentina since the 1960s and in southern
Brazil and northern Argentina since the mid-1970s. Analysis
of the mean discharge in the Paraná, Paraguay, Uruguay and
La Plata sub-basins shows a similar trend. Measurements
taken at Corrientes station on the Paraná River indicate
increases of 16% in annual rainfall and 35% in discharge.
The trend is thought to be linked partly to changes in land
use, such as deforestation and increased soybean cultivation
in Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina.

◆

Climate change and variability
The regional climate is significantly affected by El NiñoSouthern Oscillation (ENSO), which is accompanied by
heavy rains, often resulting in catastrophic flooding. This
large-scale global event produces complex variations that
have a major impact on the climate and, consequently, on
the basin’s hydrology, and that greatly affect its population
and economy.

◆

The second edition of the World Water Development Report
included a comprehensive assessment of the water resources
of the basin (UNESCO-WWAP, 2006). The present case study
builds upon those findings.

◆

With its extensive geographic coverage, La Plata River basin
is highly variable topographically, ranging from 4,000 metre
high mountains in north-western Argentina and southern
Bolivia to almost sea level southern plains in Argentina and
Uruguay. Rainfall similarly varies, from less than 700 mm
per year in the western Bolivian highlands to more than
1,800 mm per year along the Brazilian coast in the east.

State of the resource and water use
In terms of freshwater potential, the Paraná River is the
most important in La Plata River basin, with a mean
annual flow of about 17,100 m3 per second (m3/s) at
Corrientes. The Uruguay River has a mean annual flow of
about 4,300 m3/s, while the Paraguay River has the lowest
capacity, with a mean annual flow of some 3,800 m3/s at
Puerto Pilcomayo (UNESCO-WWAP, 2006). The basin is
also rich in groundwater resources. The Guaraní aquifer,
shared by all five countries except Bolivia (Table 4.1), is
one of the world’s largest groundwater reservoirs,
extending over 1.19 million km2 and having an estimated
capacity of 37,000 billion m3. Of this, 40 billion m3 to
80 billion m3 per year is exploited, mainly in Brazil for
consumption in over 300 cities.

◆
✱

◆

Setting the scene
Extending over 3.1 million km2, La Plata River basin is the
second largest river system in South America and the fifth
largest in the world. Shared by Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay, it covers about one-fifth of South
America (Map 4.1). With over 100 million inhabitants,
close to 50 big cities and 75 large dams, La Plata River basin
is at the core of the region’s socio-economic activities,
which generate around 70% of the per capita GDP of the
five basin countries.1

An important impact of climate change and climatic
variation is expected to be on water availability for
agriculture, with the effects varying considerably by
location. For example, existing water supply problems in
northern Argentina may worsen, necessitating changes in
crop type and cultivation frequency, as well as better
irrigation and drainage methods. Conversely, agricultural
water supply in south-eastern Brazil is expected to increase
(Magrin et al., 2007).

◆

The frequency and magnitude of extreme hydrological
events have been increasing in the economic centre of
South America over the last 40 years as a consequence
of major land use changes and climatic variability,
with significant social and economic costs.

In addition, floods have been more frequent in La Plata
River basin. Twelve of the 16 biggest monthly discharges
ever recorded on the Paraná River have occurred since the
1970s; they included catastrophic ENSO events in
1982/1983, 1991/1992 and 1997/1998. Similar trends are
observed for the Paraguay and Uruguay rivers. For
example, two-thirds of the major floods in Paraguay’s
capital, Asunción, which is located near the Paraguay
River, were recorded in the last quarter of the 20th century.
For the Uruguay River, the 16 greatest daily discharge
peaks were recorded after 1970. All these significant
variations can be associated with climate change.

◆

Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil,
Paraguay
and Uruguay:
La Plata River
basin

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 67

La Plata River basin

Table 4.1 Distribution of the Guaraní aquifer in La Plata basin
Country

Share of aquifer (%)

Argentina

19

Brazil

71

Paraguay

6

Uruguay

4

Of the overall agricultural area in La Plata River basin, the
share of irrigated land is relatively low, varying from 2% in
Paraguay to 15% in Uruguay. On the other hand, in all the
basin countries agriculture holds the largest share of overall
water consumption: from 62% in Brazil to 96% in Uruguay
(FAO, 2004). Extensive rice production, and agricultural
development projects undertaken since 1996, underlie this
phenomenon; rice is one of the main irrigated crops in the
basin. Moreover, increased average annual rainfall, coupled
with the promotion of soybeans as the key crop, has
resulted in expansion of agriculture, especially towards
historically arid and semi-arid zones. Total combined
soybean production in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil and
Paraguay is expected to rise by about 85% by 2020. Changes
in land use and the potential effects of climate change could
lead to salinization and desertification in the basin.
With regard to efforts under the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) to halve the proportion of people suffering
from hunger, Uruguay met this target in 2003, but the other
basin countries have yet to do so (Table 4.2).
In general, poverty indicators are trending downwards in
the basin countries (Table 4.3). From a reference year of
2002, Argentina has taken a significant leap forwards in

alleviating poverty. The progress made by Brazil, although
modest in appearance, represents some 6 million people
lifted out of extreme poverty (ECLAC, 2007b).
Industrial water demand varies among the four main subbasins. Demand is highest in the Paraná River sub-basin due
to the major industrial areas in Brazil’s São Paulo state and
the Buenos Aires-Rosario region in Argentina. Although
large rivers like the Paraná have a high self-cleaning
potential, contamination by industrial, agricultural and
household effluents is causing major environmental
degradation, especially along the banks of the lower Paraná.
Urbanization is one of the biggest drivers of change in La
Plata River basin. From the 1960s to the early 2000s, the
share of urban dwellers in the region’s population
increased from about 45% to 86.6%, mainly through
internal migration. In general, access to safe water
coverage is better in urban than in rural areas (Figure 4.1).
However, the data in the figure represent best case
scenarios. Problems stemming from poorly maintained
infrastructure and intermittence of service provision
mean actual service is generally much poorer. In Uruguay,
for example, water loss ranges from 46.2% to 54.4%
(Gobierno de la República de Uruguay, 2001). Urban-rural
discrepancies are also observed in access to improved
sanitation. The gap in access to sanitation services in
all basin countries except Uruguay varies from around
10 percentage points to more than 40 (Figure 4.2). Lack of
Figure 4.1 Population with access to safe drinking water,
2004
100

98

80

Table 4.2 Progress towards halving hunger
% of undernourished
people in total population

%

Country

1990–1992

2001–2003

Argentina

2

3

1.5

Bolivia

28

23

0.8

Brazil

12

8

0.7

Paraguay

18

15

0.8

Uruguay

7

3

0.4

0

Bolivia

Brazil

Paraguay

Rural areas

100
80

Extreme poverty (%)

2005

2006

2002

2005

2006

Argentina

45.4

26.0

21.0

20.9

9.1

7.2

37.1

34.7

9.0

n.a.

Brazil

37.2

36.3

33.3

13.2

10.6

Paraguay

61.0

60.5

n.a.

33.2

32.1

n.a.

Uruguay

15.4

18.8

18.5

2.5

4.1

3.2

Note: n.a.: not available.
Source: ECLAC, 2007b.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Uruguay

Figure 4.2 Population with access to improved sanitation
services, 2004

2002

n.a.

Argentina

Source: ECLAC, 2007a.

Country

63.9

68
57

20

Table 4.3 Progress in alleviating poverty

62.4

68

Urban areas

* A ratio of 0.5 or lower signifies achievement of the MDG target.
Source: FAO, 2006.

Bolivia

80

60
40

Ratio
2001–2003/
1990–1992*

Poverty (%)

100 100

99

96

95

%

100

94

93
83

60

99

83
64

60

40
37

20
0

22

Argentina

Bolivia

Urban areas

Brazil

Paraguay

Uruguay

Rural areas

Source: ECLAC, 2007b.

67

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 68

4. Latin America and the Caribbean

Box 4.1 Meeting growing energy needs with biofuel production
Access to electricity, in terms of
percentages of households and persons
served, is high in La Plata River basin,
varying from 64.4% in Bolivia to 96.5%
in Brazil (IEA, 2006). Although nonrenewable sources make up the bulk of
energy production in the basin, oil use
fell and natural gas consumption rose
between 2002 and 2005. While the use
of renewable energy sources decreased
during the same period, biofuel use grew,

thanks mainly to the strong development
of the ethanol industry in Brazil (Ruiz
Caro, 2007).
Brazil is one of the world’s major
biofuel producers, and the first to
make ethanol from sugar cane. In 2005,
Brazil accounted for 47.9% of world
ethanol output (IEA, 2006). Producing
ethanol from sugar cane generally puts
less pressure on land and water resources

sewage treatment facilities means effluents are often
directly discharged into streams that are used as a water
source downstream. Shanty towns in periurban areas
suffer the most: water and sanitation coverage is lower or
non-existent in these areas. This situation, in turn,
increases the risk of water-related disease. Unfortunately,
problems related to slums in the region are reported to
have worsened since the 1980s (Von Cappeln, 2002).
Energy production in La Plata River basin is mainly
based on non-renewable sources (Figure 4.3). However,
hydropower, whose potential in the basin is huge, has a
considerable share in electricity generation in all five
countries. Indeed, Paraguay depends almost entirely on
hydropower for its electricity generation, and dams on
the Paraná River generate about 46% of the electricity
used in Brazil (CIC, 2004a). Roughly 60% of the basin’s
hydropower potential is exploited. Among more than
100 hydropower plants in the basin (including those
under construction), some are bilateral projects, such as
Itaipú (Brazil and Paraguay), Yacyretá (Argentina and
Paraguay) and Salto Grande (Argentina and Uruguay).
Biofuel also plays a role in the energy supply, especially
in Brazil (Box 4.1).
Waterways in La Plata River basin have been navigated
since the 16th century. The Paraguay and Paraná rivers
form a natural north-south transport corridor,
connecting the five riparian countries to the Atlantic

Figure 4.3 Breakdown of energy supply: renewable and
non-renewable sources, 2004

Energy source share (%)

100
80

84,6
65,2
54
46

40

34,8

20
8,7

Argentina

15,4

Bolivia

0,4

Brazil

Non-renewable

68

Ocean. The Hidrovía Paraguay-Paraná project, a
waterway that would run from Puerto Cáceres in Brazil
to Nueva Palmira in Uruguay, was proposed in the late
1980s because of the continuous maintenance
requirements of the natural corridor.
The Hidrovía would be a complex navigation system
allowing year-round navigability by ships and barge
trains. The aim is to promote regional development by
reducing goods transport costs, improving links with
commercial centres and providing landlocked Bolivia
and Paraguay with a sea outlet (UNESCO-WWAP, 2006).
However, the project would entail extensive dredging,
construction of dikes and levees, and channel
straightening. The environmental impact of the work
could prove to be extensive and diverse. In particular,
the project could significantly modify the flow regime
of the Pantanal, the world’s largest freshwater wetland,
risking serious damage to the site. Such a change would
affect not only biodiversity, but also water levels at the
confluence of the Paraná and Paraguay rivers. Other
issues include the risk of alteration of natural aquifer
systems and increased water contamination should the
waterway lead to growth in the local population, in
commercial and industrial activities and in irrigation
(UNESCO-WWAP, 2006).
Another key navigation corridor in the region, which
would be linked to the Hidrovía, is the 2,400 km TietêParaná waterway in Brazil. It facilitates transport of up to
2 million tonnes per year of grain and other goods
between states in Brazil and between Brazil and the other
La Plata River basin countries.

99,6
91,3

60

0

than maize or other crops used for
the purpose. Soil productivity in sugar
cane fields is preserved by recycling the
nutrients in sugar mill waste. In addition,
most sugar cane production in Brazil does
not require irrigation. Moreover, ethanol
combustion emits 90% less CO2 than
the burning of conventional fuels such
as gasoline (IEA, 2006).

Paraguay

Renewable

Uruguay

Policy framework and decision-making
Since 2006, Argentina has progressed in its preparation
of a national water resources plan, which involves
collaboration between the central and provincial
governments and that of the Autonomous City of Buenos
Aires. The plan sets forth actions to improve water quality
and quantity, to better manage demand from the various
sectors and to mitigate the impact of extreme events.
An important change in the water sector has been the
renationalization of several water supply and sanitation
services that were privatized in the 1990s. The move
involved cancelling the contract of an international
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 69

La Plata River basin
company serving the Buenos Aires metropolitan area,
home to about one-third of the country’s population.
To maintain continuity of water and sanitation services,
the government created another company, in which it
holds 90% of the stock (NotiSur, 2006).
Bolivia created the Ministry of Water (Ministerio del Agua)
in January 2006 with the overarching aim of protecting the
inhabitants’ right to water. The move came in response to
strong popular reaction against private water companies in
2000 and 2005. Henceforth, all water companies operating
in Bolivia are to be public companies, and are expected to
follow an efficient and transparent public model. The
ministry is in charge of (a) protecting and managing
Bolivia’s water resources, including monitoring the
cumulative impact of mining and oil production;
(b) improving irrigation; and (c) providing water supply,
sanitation and solid waste management services. The
ministry also aims to respect traditional knowledge and
customs and to protect cultural diversity. Meanwhile, the
government is considering a proposed law on water and
sanitation services. Under the title ‘Water for Life’, this new
legal framework would replace the current water regulating
agency with a decentralized one. It would also reform water
supply provision to better integrate municipalities and
users and to prioritize social values (Alliance for
Democracy, 2006).
In January 2006, the National Water Resources
Council of Brazil approved the national water resources
plan to establish guidelines and public policies aimed
at increasing the quantity and quality of the water
supply and improving demand management. The plan
adopts a river basin approach and considers water to
be a public good, a position essential in promoting
sustainable socio-economic development. The plan,
which is based on broad consultation with the public
and water sector representatives, establishes guidelines,
programmes and goals for the period to 2020
(MMA-SRH, 2006).
In June 2007, Paraguay passed a Water Resources Law
defining water as a public good. It guarantees access to a
minimum quantity of drinking water per day, holding
this to be a human right. The exact amount is to be

determined by the Ministry of Public Health. The Law
exempts water use for households and small familyowned businesses from charges. Provision of water
for other purposes will depend on the availability
of resources and will be taxed accordingly. The Law
promotes respect for indigenous customary rights and
highlights the minimum volume of water required to
sustain ecosystems (Arrieta, 2007).
Discussions about water privatization in Uruguay led to
amendment of the Constitution in October 2004. The
charter now guarantees public access to water supply and
sanitation services as a fundamental right, and stipulates
that social considerations should be given priority over
economic factors in setting water policy. The
Constitution prohibits for-profit corporations from
supplying water for human consumption (Alliance for
Democracy, 2006).
The main challenges
Health: Lack of proper sanitation infrastructure and
inadequate wastewater treatment are the main causes of
water-related infections in La Plata River basin. Among
the major waterborne diseases in the basin (Table 4.4),
diarrhoea is by far the most widespread. Yellow
fever re-emerged in Paraguay during the summer of
2007/2008, affected Argentina and Brazil as well, and
claimed 25 lives in a month’s time (PAHO, 2008a and
2008b; Secretaria de Vigilãncia en Saúde, 2008). It was
the most severe outbreak since the 1960s, leading the
basin countries to agree on common action criteria
(CC-RMS, 2008).
Environment: La Plata River basin is rich in terrestrial
and aquatic biodiversity, but it is under increasing
pressure. The initial World Water Assessment Programme
case study (WWAP, 2007) identified population growth,
road development, expansion of agricultural land,
mining and large-scale water development projects
(dams, waterways and irrigation projects) as particular
sources of pressure. They have resulted in a decrease in
the overall quality of the basin environment and created
persistent problems, such as erosion of productive land,
silting of waterways and reservoirs, soil and water
pollution and loss of habitat for fish and wildlife.

Table 4.4 Cases of waterborne diseases by country, 1998–2005

Diarrhoea

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil*

Paraguay

Uruguay

951,480 (2003)

315,786 (2005)

260,000 (2002)

41,450 (1999)

n.a.

Cholera

12 (1998)

467 (1998)

753 (2000)

4 (1998)

Malaria

122 (2003)

23,552 (2005)

5,514 (2003)

1,392 (2003)
148 (2005)

Dengue

135 (2003)

4,095 (2005)

21,913 (2004)

Leptospiosis

201 (2004)

n.a.

1,353 (2003)

Leishmaniasis
Yellow fever

748 (2002)

1,735 (2000)

7,633 (2003)

56 (2005)

62 (2003)

n.a.

n.a.
86 (2004)
n.a.

0
90 (2003)
n.a.
20 (2002)
n.a.
n.a.

Notes: * Data for states of La Plata River basin only.
n.a. : not available.
Sources: PAHO, 2004; Ministerio de Salud y Ambiente de la Nación Argentina/OPS, 2005; Sistema Nacional de Vigilancia Epidemiológica de Argentina, 2003; Sistema Nacional de
Información en Salud de Bolivia, 2005; Ministerio da Saúde, 2004; Ministerio de Salud Pública y Bienestar Social del Paraguay, 2005, Ministerio de Salud Pública de la República Oriental
del Uruguay, 2002.

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

69

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 70

4. Latin America and the Caribbean
Problems related to eutrophication have been observed
in some reservoirs. At the Salto Grande dam, for
example, a significant phosphorus load resulting from
the use of agrochemicals promotes algae growth in
summer when discharges are lower, affecting water
quality and availability (Chalar, 2006). Another serious
environmental problem is that some lotic ecosystems are
becoming lentic2, or almost lentic, leading to larger
ecotones, the transition areas between adjacent
ecosystems – a change entailing destruction of terrestrial
habitats and existing ecosystems. In general, all the basin
countries have regulations on the protection of water
resources and associated ecosystems, but the
effectiveness of implementation and enforcement varies.
Risk management: The increase in the frequency and
magnitude of extreme hydrological events in La Plata
River basin since the mid-20th century, resulting from
changes in large scale climatic systems and in land use at
regional level, has had fundamental repercussions for
risk prediction and mitigation (CIC, 2004b).
Floods have inflicted significant socio-economic costs on
the basin. In Argentina, for example, flood-related
damage associated with ENSO events in the 1980s and
1990s was estimated at US$2.6 billion, and 235,000
people were evacuated (CIC, 2004d). In the state of Santa
Catarina in Brazil, ENSO-related flooding in 1983 caused
significant damage along the Paraná River and led to an
8% drop in the state’s GDP. Between 1983 and 1993,
flood losses in União da Vitória, a city located on the
Iguaçu River in Brazil, totalled over US$110 million
(CIC, 2004a). The El Niño event of 1983/1984 in central
Uruguay affected over 40,000 people in more than
70 cities and caused losses estimated at over US$1 billion
for the entire La Plata River basin (CIC, 2004c).
Overall, measures addressing extreme hydrological
events in the region are heavily biased towards structural
solutions. Non-structural measures such as warning
systems are not functioning effectively. The basin
countries are still attempting to reach agreement on the
definition of extreme hydrological events, including
rainfall and river discharges; such a definition is
important for reservoir operations, irrigation regimes and
flood warnings. In addition, urban planning and basin
management need to be integrated with extreme
hydrological event management; otherwise it is difficult
to limit socio-economic damage from such events.
Conclusions
La Plata River basin has become a regional centre
of attraction, concentrating the socio-economic
development of the five riparian countries. However, this
development comes at the cost of spreading shanty
towns and increasing problems with water supply,
sanitation and health in urban areas, as well as
degradation of water quality and ecosystems. At the
same time, climate change and climate variability pose
potential risks for an agricultural sector that serves
2

‘Lotic’ ecosystems are characteristic of fluvial water bodies, such as rivers,
streams and springs. ‘Lentic’ refers to the ecosystems of still water bodies,
such as lakes, ponds and swamps.

70

the dual purpose of feeding a growing population and
providing raw materials for biofuel. Given the increased
frequency and magnitude of water-related hazards,
cooperation among the basin countries is vital, as is
the implementation of well-planned policies supporting
both structural and non-structural measures to mitigate
the hazards. New legislation across the region
emphasizes the social dimension of water, defining it as a
public good and guaranteeing access to it as a human
right, while recognizing its central role in sustainable
socio-economic development. Nevertheless, additional
efforts are necessary, at national and basin level alike, to
address other issues in the region, most notably poverty.
References
Alliance for Democracy. 2006. Looking South: Uruguay and Bolivia Lead the
Way. Justice Rising, Vol. 2, No. 2, p. 13.
http://www.thealliancefordemocracy.org/pdf/AfDJR22.pdf (Accessed
November 2008.)
Arrieta Q., L. 2007. Water Related Legislation in Latin America.
http://www.nahrim.gov.my/pdf/ToT/Conference%20Session%202/3.%2
0Water_Related_Legislation_in_Latin_America%20LLAVE.pdf (Accessed
December 2008.)
Chalar, G. 2006. Dinámica de la eutrofización a diferentes escalas temporales:
embalse Salto Grande (Argentina-Uruguay). Galizia Tundisi, J. et al.
(eds.) Eutrofização na América do Sul: Causas, conseqüências e tecnologias
de gerenciamento e controle [Eutrophication in South America: Causes,
Consequences and Technologies for Management and Control]. São
Carlos, Brazil, Instituto Internacional de Ecologia.
http://limno.fcien.edu.uy/pdf/Chalar2006EscalasTemporalesSaltoGrande.pdf (Accessed November 2008.)
Comité Coordinador de la Reunión de Ministros de Salud del Mercosur
(CC-RMS). 2008. Acta Nº 01/08: Reunión extraordinaria del Comité
Coordinador preparatoria de la XXIV Reunión de Ministros de Salud del
Mercosur. Puerto Iguazú, Argentina, February.
http://www.mspbs.gov.py/miscelaneas.php?codigo=2 (Accessed April
2008.)
Comité Intergubernamental Coordinador de los Países de la Cuenca del Plata
(CIC). 2004a. Bases conceituais para a visão dos recursos hídricos na porção
brasileira da bacia do rio da Prata: termo de referência. Buenos Aires, CIC.
Technical document elaborated by Dias Coelho, M. (coord.), Souza
Lima, G. and Petrelli, M. Jr.
http://www.cicplata.org/marco/pdf/vision_3a/brasil/visao_brasil_01_a_0
4_final.pdf (Accessed November 2008.)
Comité Intergubernamental Coordinador de los Países de la Cuenca del Plata
(CIC). 2004b. Eventos hidrometeorológicos extremos: Caracterización y
evaluación de métodos de predicción de eventos extremos de clima e
hidrología en la Cuenca del Plata. Programa Marco para la Gestión
Sostenible de los Recursos Hídricos de la Cuenca del Plata en relación a los
efectos hidrológicos de la variabilidad y el cambio climático. Componente 2a:
Definición del Sistema de Predicción Hidroclimática. Buenos Aires, CIC.
Technical document elaborated by Marengo, J. (coord.), Menéndez, A.,
Guetter, A., Hogue, T. and Mechoso, C.
http://cicplata.org/marco/pdf/prediccion_hidroclimatica_2a/tema_3_eve
ntos_hidrometeorologicos_extremos.pdf (Accessed November 2008.)
Comité Intergubernamental Coordinador de los Países de la Cuenca del Plata
(CIC). 2004c. Visão dos Recursos Hídricos da bacia do Rio da Prata. Visão
regional. Programa Marco para la Gestión Sostenible de los Recursos
Hídricos en la Cuenca del Plata. Buenos Aires, CIC. Technical document
elaborated by Tucci, C.
http://cicplata.org/marco/pdf/vision_3a/vision_integrada.pdf (Accessed
November 2008.)
Comité Intergubernamental Coordinador de los Países de la Cuenca del Plata
(CIC). 2004d. Visión para el desarrollo sostenible de la cuenca del Plata y su
relación con los recursos hídricos. Informe Nacional de Argentina. Buenos
Aires, CIC. Technical document elaborated by Mugetti, A. (coord.).
http://www.cicplata.org/marco/pdf/vision_3a/argentina/argentina_vision
_01_a_03.pdf (Accessed December 2008.)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2007a Anuario
Estadístico 2007. Santiago de Chile, CEPAL/ECLAC.
http://www.eclac.cl/cgibin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/8/32598/P32598.xml&xsl=/de
ype/tpl/p9f.xsl&base=/tpl/top-bottom.xslt (Accessed December 2008.)

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 71

Brazil and Uruguay
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 2007b.
Social Panorama of Latin America. Santiago de Chile, ECLAC/CEPAL.
http://www.eclac.cl/cgibin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/9/30309/P30309.xml&xsl=/dd
s/tpl-i/p9f.xsl&base=/tpl/top-bottom.xslt (Accessed November 2008.)
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2006. World Energy Outlook 2006. Paris,
IEA. http://www.iea.org/textbase/nppdf/free/2006/weo2006.pdf
(Accessed November 2008.)
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2004. FAO Statistical Yearbook
2004. Rome, FAO.
http://www.fao.org/es/ess/yearbook/vol_1_2/site_en.asp?page=cp
(Accessed November 2008.)
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). 2006. FAOStat: Food Security
Country Profiles. Rome, FAO.
http://www.fao.org/countryProfiles/water/default.asp?lang=en (Accessed
November 2008.)
Gobierno de la República Oriental del Uruguay. 2001. Análisis sectorial de
agua potable y saneamiento: Uruguay. PIAS serie análisis sectoriales.
Washington, DC, Organización Panamericana de la Salud.
http://www.bvsde.paho.org/eswww/fulltext/analisis/uruguaya/uruguaya.
pdf (Accessed December 2008.)
Magrin, G., Gay García, C., Cruz Choque, D., Giménez, J. C., Moreno, A. R.,
Nagy, G. J., Nobre, C. and Villamizar, A. 2007. Latin America. Parry, M.,
et al. (eds.), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessmentreport/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-chapter13.pdf (Accessed November 2008.)
Ministerio do Meio Ambiente, Secretaria de Recursos Hídricos (MMA-SRH).
2006. Plano Nacional de Recursos Hídricos. Brasilia, MMA-SRH.
Ministerio de Salud y Ambiente de la Nación Argentina/Organización
Panamericana de la Salud (OPS). 2005. Indicadores básicos: Argentina
2005. Buenos Aires, Ministerio de Salud y Ambiente.
Ministerio da Saúde. 2004. Plano Nacional de Saúde (PNS): Um Pacto pela
Saúde no Brasil. Brasilia, Ministerio da Saúde, Secretaría Ejecutiva,
Subsecretaria de Planejamento e Orçamento.
Ministerio de Salud Pública y Bienestar Social del Paraguay. 2005. Boletín
epidemiológico semanal. Asunción, Ministerio de Salud Pública y Bienestar
Social, Dirección de Vigilancia de Enfermedades Transmisibles.
Ministerio de Salud Pública de la República Oriental del Uruguay. 2002.
Situación de leptospirosis en Uruguay. El diario médico. Montevideo,
Salud Hoy.
NotiSur. 2006. Argentina: Government rescinds contract with Aguas Argentinas,
renationalizes water service. Albuquerque, NM, Latin America Data Base.

http://www.thefreelibrary.com/ARGENTINA%3a+GOVERNMENT+RESCI
NDS+CONTRACT+WITH+AGUAS+ARGENTINAS%2c...-a0144164403
(Accessed May 2008.)
Panamerican Health Organization (PAHO). 2004. Basic Country Health Profiles
for the Americas 2002. Washington, DC, PAHO/Organización
Panamericana de la Salud.
http://www.paho.org/English/DD/AIS/cp_index.htm
Panamerican Health Organization (PAHO). 2008a. Yellow fever in Argentina.
EID Updates: Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases, Region of the
Americas. http://www.paho.org/english/AD/DPC/CD/eid-eer-2008-0331.htm (Accessed April 2008.)
Panamerican Health Organization (PAHO). 2008b. Update of yellow fever in
Paraguay and Argentina. EID Updates: Emerging and Reemerging Infectious
Diseases, Region of the Americas.
http://www.paho.org/english/AD/DPC/CD/eid-eer-2008-03-13.htm
(Accessed April 2008.)
Pochat, V. Forthcoming. La Plata River Basin Case Study Report.
Ruiz Caro, A. 2007. La seguridad energética de América Latina y el Caribe en el
contexto mundial. Santiago de Chile, Comisión Económica para América
Latina y el Caribe.
http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/3/32123/lcl2828e.pdf (Serie
Recursos Naturales e Infraestructura, Nº 128; accessed November 2008.)
Secretaria de Vigilãncia en Saúde. 2008. Situación de Fiebre Amarilla.
Diciembre 2007 a marzo 2008. Reunión de Ministros de Salud del
Mercosur. Simposio Mercosur Fiebre Amarilla. Puerto Iguazú, February.
http://www.mspbs.gov.py/varios/simposio/Anexo%20III-B%20Brasil.ppt
(Accessed December 2008.)
Sistema Nacional de Vigilancia Epidemiológica de Argentina. 2003. Casos
notificados de enfermedades epidemiológicas. Buenos Aires, Dirección de
Epidemiología.
Sistema Nacional de Información en Salud de Bolivia. 2005. Boletín semanal
de vigilancia. La Paz, Ministerio de Salud y Deportes.
UNESCO-World Water Assessment Programme (UNESCO-WWAP). 2006. Case
Studies: Moving towards an integrated approach. Water, a shared
responsibility: The United Nations World Water Development Report 2.
Paris/Oxford, UNESCO/Berghan Book.
http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr2/pdf/wwdr2_ch_14.p
df (Accessed November 2008.)
Von Cappeln, J. 2002. Documento sobre los recursos hídricos: Uruguay 2002.
Montevideo, Dirección Nacional de Hidrografía. (Technical document.)
World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP). 2007. La Plata Basin Case
Study. Final Report. April 2007.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001512/151252E.pdf
(Accessed November 2008.)

Map 4.2 Lake Merín basin
ins
unta
Mo
çu
Piratini
gu
n
C a Pinheiro
Machado

Grande

Treinta General Enrique
Martinez
y Tres
Olimar Grande

Chico

Cebollati

José Batlle
y Ordonez

Lascano

Mariscala

Ca

ra p e

M

i
nta
ou ▲

Cana
l San G

Sub-basin

Chui
Chuy

Ramsar site
National Park

San Luis,
San Miguel
Velazquez

Aigua

Basin

Santa Vitoria
do Palmar

u is

◆

bollati
Ce

OCEAN

Sudeste
M. Vicencio

Cebollati

nL
Sa

AT L A N T I C
Lake
Cuenca Mangueira

José Pedro
Varela

URUGUAY

Marasco

Sarandi

◆

G

h i
l l a

c

Olimar

Lake Merin

Tacuari

Vergara

Santa Clara
de Olimar

Cerro
Chato

Rio Grande

Santa Isabel

Jaguarão

Rio Branco

r Tupambae

onzalo

Arroio
Grande

Ne

g

Gra BRAZIL
nd
e Arroio

Tacuari

u

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Herval

d e
a n

C

Setting the scene
Lake Merín is a freshwater body shared by Uruguay and
Brazil. Covering an area of some 5,000 km2 (Map 4.2), it
is the second largest lake in South America, after Lake
Titicaca in the Andes. The Lake Merín basin extends
about 63,000 km2 on the Atlantic coast of South
America. It lies in the temperate zone, with a subtropical
climate and annual rainfall of 1,200 to 1,500 mm. Much

Pedro Osorio

Lake de
los Patos

Pelotas

Cerrito

Basilio

Yaguaron

Melo

ro

San Gonzalo

on
u ar
Yag

The ecological and economic riches of this region
are under human and climatic pressure, while a
deteriorating hydrological monitoring network
makes accurate assessment complicated.

Pedras
Altas
Acegua
Isidoro
Noblia

Turuçu

i
atin
Pir

Brazil and
Uruguay:
Lake Merín
basin

Biosphere reserve

Lake
Negra

Natural reserve
Swamp

ns

513 m
Cerro Catedral

Castillos

City

Lake of Castillos
30 km

International
boundary

71

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 72

4. Latin America and the Caribbean
of the rain falls from June to September, while November
to December is usually the driest time of the year. The
section of the basin that lies in Uruguay covers around
18% of the country. The part that lies in Brazil accounts
for about 20% of the state of Rio Grande do Sul.1
The Lake Merín basin is part of a much broader region
of pampas – extensive flat plains typically covered by
grasslands, wetlands and forests, forming an important
part of the South American landscape. With an area of
some 270,000 km2, the pampas extend into Argentina,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
The western part of the basin includes five departments
of Uruguay with a combined population of around
400,000. The eastern part is home to some 1.2 million
people, representing 12% of the population of Rio
Grande do Sul, in 15 municipalities.
Climate change and variability
Climatic data for Uruguay reveal an increasing trend in
rainfall, especially in summer and spring. Also rising are
minimum temperatures throughout the year, although
the average temperature in summer is decreasing
(AIACC, 2006). Studies of climate change scenarios for
Uruguay point to likely increases in temperature, rainfall
and sea level, as well as the frequency and intensity of
extreme climatic events such as strong winds, heavy
rains, hailstorms and other water-related hazards. The
temperature could rise by as much as 0.5°C by 2020
and 2.5°C by 2050. The projected sea level rise of as
much as 65 cm by 2100 would affect the lagoons and
coastal wetlands of the Lake Merín basin and associated
ecosystems that are vulnerable to related saltwater
intrusion. The effects in the state of Rio Grande do Sul
in Brazil would likely be quite similar.
From an economic perspective, Uruguay is more
vulnerable than Brazil to problems induced by climate
change because the region containing the Lake Merín
basin generates 70% of the country’s GDP. The economic
activities there include extensive rice production, animal
husbandry, forestry, tourism, maritime transport and
various manufacturing industries. The Program of
General Measures for Mitigation and Adaptation to
Climate Change in Uruguay identifies agricultural
production (food security), freshwater resources,
ecosystems and public health as especially vulnerable
to the effects of climate change (Ministry of Housing,
Territorial Planning and Environment, 2007).
Research by the Brazilian Agricultural Research
Corporation (EMBRAPA) and the Applied Meteorological
and Climatic Centre of Investigation for Agriculture
indicates a likely temperature increase of up to 1ºC as
early as 2020. This could have substantial implications
for agricultural output in Brazil, as coffee production
could fall by between 15% and 24%, soy bean
production by 14%, rice by 4% and corn by 2%
(Steinmetz et al., 2007).
1

Except where otherwise noted, information in this case study is adapted
from the draft Lake Merín Basin Case Study, prepared in 2008 by Carlos María
Serrentino.

72

Aside from potential effects of climate change, existing
climatic variation linked to El Niño and La Niña events
have a significant impact on freshwater availability, as
these cycles introduce considerable fluctuation in rainfall
levels. Generally El Niño brings abundant rainfall while
La Niña years are associated with drought, which affects
not only crop and livestock production in the larger
region where the Lake Merín basin lies, but also
hydropower and wind energy generation. Here again,
Uruguay is more exposed to these risks, as it relies almost
entirely on hydropower for electricity generation.
State of the resource and water use: agriculture is
dominant
In spite of climatic variability, the water resources in the
Lake Merín basin are enough to meet demand in the near
term. Making accurate long term water resources assessment
is quite difficult, as the hydrometeorological monitoring
network in the basin is of limited coverage and its quality
has deteriorated since the 1970s because of declining
funding and maintenance.
Consumption patterns can nevertheless be established
sufficiently to identify agriculture as the sector dominating
water use in both parts of the basin. On the Brazilian side,
97% of annual withdrawal is used for irrigation. During the
summer months, especially in January, agricultural water
use intensifies, reaching almost 99% of overall demand.
Of this amount, 66% comes from the Merín-São Gonçalo
basin, where vast paddy fields are common. The situation is
quite similar on the Uruguayan side of the basin, where
over 1,000 km2 of paddies produce 70% of Uruguay’s annual
rice crop, and demand for irrigation water represents 99.8%
of overall water consumption. Rice is the mainstay of the
regional economy, generating far more revenue than
livestock. It is grown not only to satisfy local needs but,
in Uruguay, is among the top three exports by value.
Nationally, irrigation accounts for 59% of overall water
withdrawal in Brazil, followed by households with 22% and
industry with 19% (Netto, 2005). In Uruguay as a whole,
the corresponding shares are 80%, 16% and 3.4% (adapted
from Chao et al., 2007).
Inland waterways are an important and economical
means of moving goods in the Lake Merín basin, and in
the context of the Southern Common Market (Mercosur).
For example, rice and forestry products from Uruguay are
transported through the eastern part of the Mercosur
Waterway from La Charqueada, in Uruguay’s Treinta y Tres
Department, to the Atlantic port of Rio Grande in the
Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul for access to regional
and international markets.
Further waterway development could help the regional
economy not only by improving goods transport but
also by increasing ecotourism, as waterways provide easy
access to impressive wildlife habitats and other sites of
environmental significance, although such development
would itself have environmental implications.
Brazil and Uruguay have been successful to varying
degrees in advancing water supply and sanitation coverage.
Uruguay has achieved universal access to safe water and
WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 73

Brazil and Uruguay
improved sanitation. In Brazil, however, sanitation coverage
and, to a lesser degree, water supply continue to be
problems, especially in rural areas (Figure 4.4). Thus, while
the priority in Uruguay should be on allocating the funds
necessary to maintain universal coverage, further steps
are needed in Brazil to improve access to water supply
and sanitation. A new federal water and sanitation law
in Brazil (2007) aims at increasing investment so as to
achieve universal access. Although no specific assessments
are available for the Lake Merín basin, its water supply
and sanitation coverage is believed to be similar to the
national levels.
Figure 4.4 Access to safe water and improved sanitation
in Brazil, 2006

100
80
%

97

91

84

60

77
58

40

37

20
0

Urban

Rural
Water supply

Overall
Sanitation

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2008

Policy framework and decision-making
Brazil’s 1934 Water Code provides the framework for
all of the country’s water-related legislation. Under the
Federal Constitution of 1988, the states are responsible for
all surface water resources except those lying in more than
one state, which the federal government controls. This
division results in implementation problems, as rivers under
federal jurisdiction cannot be managed effectively without
taking state-controlled rivers into consideration.
The National Water Law (Law 9.433) of 1997 established the
National Water Resources Policy (NWRP) and the National
Water Resources Management System (NWRMS). The Law
identifies water as a public good, a limited natural resource
with an economic value, and gives priority for water use in
the event of drought to human and animal consumption.
The NWRP takes the river basin as the basic unit for water
resources planning and management. A key aspect of the
policy document is that it requires decentralization of,
and public participation in, water resources management
(Aquastat, 2000).
The NWRMS, under the Ministry of the Environment,
implements the NWRP. It is made up of the National
Council on Water Resources, the National Water Agency,
the River Basin Committees, the River Basin Water Agencies
and relevant NGOs.
The National Council on Water Resources is the highest
organization in the NWRMS hierarchy. It is responsible for
formulating the National Water Resources Plan. The plan,
CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

which provides guidelines on how the NWRP is to be
applied, is itself put into operation by the National Water
Agency, ANA (Agência Nacional de Aguas). The ANA is an
executive branch of the Ministry of the Environment but
with administrative and financial autonomy.
The six national-level River Basin Committees include
representatives of the federal, state and municipal
governments, water users and civil society organizations.
The committees promote and coordinate intersectoral
actions regarding basin-related issues. The River Basin
Agencies, which are still being formed, will function as
the secretariats of the committees.
At state level, Rio Grande do Sul also applies the principles
of access to information and a participatory approach in
decision-making related to water resources. The State Water
Resources System (Sistema Estadual de Recursos Hídricos),
established in 1997, deals with water resources management
in Rio Grande do Sul. It includes the formation of basin
committees, which are involved in decision-making: one
such committee deals with the Lake Merín basin and
São Gonçalo channel. The system also requires the state
to report regularly on the quantity and quality of
freshwater resources.
In Uruguay, the Water Code of 1978 provides the general
legal framework for water resources management. The code
assigns responsibility for the management of surface and
groundwater resources to the national government and
departmental authorities. It is complemented by laws
setting forth provisions specific to various sectors, such as
agriculture and industry.
The Uruguayan Constitution was amended in October
2004 by national referendum to identify water resources
as public property and recognize access to drinking water
and improved sanitation as a fundamental human right.
The constitutional reform also promoted integrated
water resources management (IWRM), calling for
public participation in planning and for management of
water resources at basin level. A new Law on Access to
Information (Law 18.381), promulgated in October 2008,
is in line with this reform.
Institutions charged with elaborating and implementing
water resources management policy, setting priorities for
water use and establishing user fees in Uruguay include
the National Water Authority and the National Water and
Sanitation Administration (under the Ministry of Housing,
Territorial Planning and Environment) in cooperation with
the Ministry of Public Works and Transport. The National
Water and Sanitation Policy, which is pending approval, is
expected to include environmental preservation and
protection among its aims. Like the similar policy document
in Brazil, it will provide for all stakeholders, including
local communities, to have a role in planning and
decision-making.
Both Brazil and Uruguay are following up on the
recommendations in the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation regarding IWRM and water efficiency
plans. In Brazil, the 1997 National Water Law enshrined
such IWRM principles as decentralized water resources
73

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 74

4. Latin America and the Caribbean

Box 4.2 Ecological importance of Lake Merín
The lake and surrounding wetlands
comprise one of the major transboundary
watersheds in the Americas, supporting a
great diversity of flora and fauna,
including a large proportion of the
region’s endemic species and many
species of migratory birds. On the
Uruguayan side, Bañados del Este is a
Ramsar wetland and UNESCO biosphere
reserve known for its rich biodiversity and
wildlife. In addition, BirdLife International
has identified the southern shore of the
lake as a globally important endemic bird

area. On the Brazilian side, the Taím
ecological reserve is part of the UNESCO
Atlantic Rainforest biosphere reserve.
In addition, the basin is the subject of a
1977 bilateral treaty on cooperation and
resource use. It envisions ‘harmonization
... of the studies, plans, programs and
projects necessary for achievement of joint
works designed to improve utilization of
natural resources’ (Article 3b), and ‘the
defense and suitable use of mineral, plant
and animal resources’ (Article 4e).

management and stakeholder participation as a part of the
National Water Resources Policy. Since then Brazil has taken
concrete steps to ensure that these principles are applied
in practice, and hence it has met the Johannesburg
requirement. In Uruguay, although the Constitution
provides for stakeholder participation, decentralization
and the basin approach in water management, wide scale
implementation is still lacking.
The main challenges
Environmental impact of economic development:
Rio Grande do Sul is the fourth richest state in Brazil
(SEMA, 2007), attracting both investment and labour
with a diversified economy based on crops (chiefly
soybeans, wheat, rice and corn), livestock, leather and
food processing, textiles, lumber, metallurgy, chemicals,
and, since the 1990s, petrochemical products and
telecommunications. On the Uruguayan side of the
Lake Merín basin, the major sources of income are
rice, livestock and forest products. Both sides also have
tourism activity thanks to the rich ecology and beach
resorts in the basin.
Until recently, the pampas and other areas with rich
biodiversity were relatively undisturbed, aside from
livestock grazing. However, in the last 20 years the
spread of irrigated and mechanized rice growing has
caused extensive land transformation and led to conflicts
over natural resources, while pollution from industry,
agriculture and human settlements has degraded the
water quality (Box 4.2). Many species of animals,
especially birds, are threatened as the marshlands are
increasingly converted to grazing and cultivation
without any attempt to preserve wildlife. Among other
species threatened with extinction are the otter, the
coypu and the crocodile (UNESCO, 2008). Increased use
of waterways and future waterway development plans
might also have repercussions on ecosystems in the area.
Poverty and hunger: Brazil has one of the stronger
economies in Latin America, yet poverty is still a socioeconomic challenge: in 2006, over 30% of the
population was poor (see Table 4.3 in La Plata River basin
case study). Since 2002, Brazil has helped lift some
74

Since the 1970s, however, the dramatic
expansion in rice cultivation has
encroached on wildlife habitats. An
expansion of plantation forests (pine and
eucalyptus) and tourism development (on
the Uruguayan side) have also had a
significant impact on the ecosystems of
the basin. To maintain healthy ecosystems
and protect biodiversity, an integrated
approach to conservation and
development is urgently needed.
Source: Adapted from de Sherbinin, 2005.

6 million people out of extreme poverty (ECLAC, 2007).
Nevertheless, the incidence of poverty remains daunting,
especially in rural areas, where a key factor is extreme
inequality of land tenure, notably in the semi-arid northeast. In general almost 80% of the rural population –
about 30 million people – lives in poverty. Poor rural
communities face even harder challenges than the urban
poor due to inferior water supply and sanitation
coverage (IFAD, 2008). The situation in Uruguay stands
in some contrast to that of Brazil, with poverty affecting
18.5% of the population as of 2006 (see Table 4.3 in La
Plata River basin case study). Similarly, as regards the
target in the Millennium Development Goals of reducing
by half the share of the population suffering from
hunger, Uruguay had met the target by 2003 while in
Brazil that same year 8% of the population was
undernourished (see Table 4.2 in La Plata River basin
case study).
Thus, poverty and basic water supply and sanitation
coverage are still of some concern in part of the Lake
Merín basin, although rising income from rice
cultivation, tourism and industry is alleviating the
situation to some extent.
Conclusions
The Lake Merín basin is well endowed in freshwater
resources. Agriculture, industry, ecotourism and
waterway transport are helping boost the economy of
the basin, creating job opportunities and improving the
livelihoods of many, including the poor and
disadvantaged. However, these activities also contribute
to environmental degradation in the area, especially in
the absence of measures to ensure that regulations are
enforced. Climate change scenarios indicate risks to the
socio-economic well-being of people living in the basin,
mainly stemming from the likely impact on agriculture
and tourism. Uruguay is more vulnerable than Brazil to
the impact of climate change, as the area containing the
Lake Merín basin generates 70% of its GDP. Stronger
bilateral cooperation in the basin to improve integrated
management of water resources, alleviate poverty and
assure sustainability of ecosystems would be beneficial.

WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 3

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 75

Brazil and Uruguay
References
Aquastat. 2000. Brazil country profile. Rome, Food and Agriculture
Organization.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries/brazil/index.stm
(Accessed December 2008.)
Assessment of Impacts and Adaptation to Climate Change in Multiple
Regions and Sectors (AIACC). 2006. Adaptive responses for the mixed
crop/livestock production systems in the Argentinean-Uruguayan
Pampas (LA 27).
Chao, R., Macedo, E. and Batista, L. 2007. El Agua en Uruguay [Water in
Uruguay]. Asociación Cultivadores de Arroz: Revista [Rice Growers
Association Review], No. 48.
http://www.aca.com.uy/publicaciones/revista_48_agua_en_uruguay.htm
(Accessed December 2008.)
de Sherbinin, A. 2005. Remote Sensing in Support of Ecosystem Management
Treaties and Transboundary Conservation. Project on Remote Sensing
Technologies for Ecosystem Management Treaties, US Department of
State, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs Initiatives. http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/rstreaties/AIAA6thWorkshop.pdf (Accessed December 2008.)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 2007.
Social Panorama of Latin America. Santiago de Chile, ECLAC/CEPAL.
http://www.eclac.cl/cgibin/getProd.asp?xml=/publicaciones/xml/9/30309/P30309.xml&xsl=/dd
s/tpl-i/p9f.xsl&base=/tpl/top-bottom.xslt (Accessed November 2008.)
IFAD. 2008. Rural Poverty in Brazil. Rural Poverty Portal,
http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/web/guest/country/home/tags/brazil
(Accessed December 2008.)

CASE STUDY VOLUME: FACING THE CHALLENGES

Ministry of Housing, Territorial Planning and Environment. 2007. Program of
General Measures for Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change in
Uruguay. Montevideo, Unidad de Cambio Climático [Climate Change
Unit], Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente [Environment
Department], Ministerio de Vivienda Ordenamiento Territorial y Medio
Ambiente.
Netto, O. 2005. Introduction of the Brazilian National Water Resources Plan.
(Management of transboundary water resources in Brazil). Lima,
International Symposium on Integrated Water Management in
Transboundary River Basins.
Serrentino, C. M. Forthcoming. Lake Merín Basin Case Study.
State Environment Secretariat (SEMA). 2007. Annual Report. SEMA, Porto
Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
Steinmetz, S., Wrege, M. S., Herter, F. G. and Reisser Jr, C. 2007. Impacto das
mudanças climáticas na fruticultura de clima temperado e nas culturas
anuais em Terras Baixas. Paper presented at SEMA workshop on Rio
Grande do Sul no contexto das Mudanças Climáticas.
UNESCO. 2008. Station écologique de Taim (Rio Grande do Sul). World
Heritage Tentative Lists Database.
http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/42 (Accessed December 2008.)
World Health Organization (WHO)/United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
2008. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: Special Focus on
Sanitation. New York/Geneva, Joint Monitoring Programme for Water
Supply and Sanitation.

75

WWDR3 LA & Carib (f):Layout 1

25/2/09

18:28

Page 76

Photo captions and credits
Bangladesh
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: Children in a periurban settlement near Dhaka,
surrounded by highly polluted water
Cameroon
Photographer: iStockphoto.com
Caption: A village in northern Cameroon

Pakistan (the Cholistan desert)
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: Drawing water from a well
Republic of Korea (the Han River basin)
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: The Han River

China (the Yellow River basin)
Photographer: Baohua Dong
Caption: Sand and snow on Weigele Glacier in the
A’nyemaqen Mountains

Spain (the Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country)
Photographer: Manuel Díaz de Rada
Caption: The Nervión River in the Old Bilbao district of
Bilbao

Estonia
Photographer: Harry Liiv
Caption: The Kasari River in the Käntu-Kastja Natura
2000 area

Sri Lanka (the Walawe River basin)
Photographer: Pamoda Imbulana
Caption: Paddy fields in the Walawe River basin,
downstream of Samanalawewa

Finland and Russian Federation (the Vuoksi River
basin)
Photographer: Arto Hämäläinen for the VIVATVUOKSIA
project
Caption: The Vuoksi River

Sudan
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: Delivering water

Italy (the Po River Basin)
Photographer: Beppe Bolchi for the Po River Basin
Authority
Caption: The Po River flowing through Turin
Lake Merín basin
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: A cattle egret in the Pantanal wetland, Brazil.
La Plata River basin
Source: Jacques Descloitres, MODIS Land Rapid Response
Team, NASA/GSFC
Caption: The mouth of La Plata River taken from space
The Netherlands
Photographer: Daan Zuiderwijk for UvW
Caption: Primary flood defence, Harlingen, Waterschap
Fryslan
Pacific Islands
Photographer: Thomas Jensen
Caption: A splashing moment in Vanuatu

Swaziland
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: Hippopotamuses by a lake in Mlilwane game
park
Tunisia
Source: UNESCO Photobank
Caption: A salt lake
Turkey (Istanbul)
Source: iStockphoto.com
Caption: Istanbul and the Bosphorus Bridge
Uzbekistan
Source: Wikimedia Commons
Caption: A vessel stranded on the former Aral Sea bed
near the city of Aral
Zambia
Source: Wikimedia Commons
Caption: A village dwelling

