FIGHTING HUNGER WORLDWIDE

The World Food Programme’s Year in Review, 2010

Contents
3

2010 in review

7

responding to Disaster
Haiti
Pakistan
Niger

16

Changing Lives
Connecting Farmers
Maria Desideria Sanchez – P4P

Nourishing the Future
Phoebe Anne Akelo – The First 1,000 Days
Marie Anika – 1,000 Days Plus
Narkhol Babamuratova – Green Initiatives

22

Preparing for Disaster
Emergency Preparedness and Response

27

Innovating
Vouchers and Cash Transfers

31

Celebrating success
Cape Verde - Handing Over
Hunger Numbers

34

seeking Partners
Private Partnerships
Project Laser Beam
Freerice

38

WFP in numbers 2010

All figures are in US dollars

Cover:
This young girl’s home disappeared when floods washed away the
entire village of Kacha Sen in Pakistan’s Punjab province in August, 2010.
She waits in temporary shelter on high ground above the floodwaters,
surrounded by some of the food assistance supplied by generous donors
and delivered by WFP to millions of Pakistanis displaced by the unusually
heavy monsoon rains that devastated the country in 2010.
Photo: WFP/Rein Skullerud

WFP/Barry Came

Helicopters were vital in delivering life-saving
food assistance to Pakistanis cut off by monsoon
floods that destroyed roads and bridges across
the country. Here, bags of wheat flour are
being delivered to isolated communities in
Pakistan’s sindh province.

1

WFP/Amjad Jamal

Close to one-fifth of Pakistan was submerged
by the floods that struck the country in 2010,
complicating WFP’s struggle to provide muchneeded food assistance. trucks, helicopters,
hovercraft, even mules helped us reach as many
as six million hungry people.

2

IN

T

wo massive calamities bracketed 2010.
The year began with an earthquake in
Haiti and drew to a close with one-fifth
of Pakistan submerged under a tidal wave
of floodwaters. In Haiti, 35 seconds of violent
tremors on 12 January killed 220,000
people, injured another 300,000 and left
millions more homeless. On the other side
of the world, an unusually ferocious
monsoon season washed away the
livelihoods of 20 million Pakistanis as
incessant rains spawned steadily rising
floods that cut a swath of destruction from
the Himalayas to the Arabian Sea.

2010

REVIEW

3

Disasters on a lesser scale punctuated the rest of the
year, not least in the eastern regions of Africa’s arid
Sahel. Drought gripped the area, blistering the
landscape, withering crops and evaporating
waterholes. Particularly hard hit was Niger, where
child malnutrition rates soared to alarming heights
and hunger threatened nearly half the country’s
15 million people.

We focused on providing the right nutrition in the first
1,000 days of life – from the womb to two years of age
– to lay the foundations that help a child grow into a
healthy adult. For children over 2, our 1,000 days plus
approach supported school meals programmes
that provided a nutritious meal or snack to more than
21 million children last year. Both approaches are
investments in the next generation.

WFP responded as it always does, providing
emergency food assistance to those who needed it
most in Haiti, Niger, Pakistan and all of the other
places where disasters – both natural and manmade – struck in 2010.

WFP’s continuing search for innovative hunger solutions
also represents an investment in the future. The
Purchase for Progress (P4P) initiative gathered
pace during the year, connecting increasing numbers
of smallholder farmers to markets. Project Laser
Beam, an ambitious venture to pool public and private
sector resources to combat child malnutrition, moved
closer to implementation. Two of our more promising
innovations – vouchers and cash transfers – were
expanded and rolled out in 15 more countries in 2010,
often involving the most recent technological advances.

As the United Nations frontline agency in the fight
against hunger, WFP brought food assistance during
the year to more than 109 million people – the second
highest number on record – in 75 countries around
the world. Some 89 million of those beneficiaries –
82 percent – were women and children.

Cutting edge technology also figured heavily in the
sophisticated tools WFP deployed throughout the year
to prepare communities for disasters and limit
their impact.

Not all of that food was employed for emergency relief.
Some was used to support a wide array of programmes
helping communities build better futures by bridging
the gap between immediate relief and longer term
recovery. Other supplies were deployed to meet a range
of specific targets, most notably to help people no longer
able to afford to feed themselves because of persistent
high food prices.

Technology played a key role as well in WFP’s global
outreach as the agency established a solid presence
in cyberspace. In the course of the year, WFP
attracted tens of thousands of new supporters via
Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and its other ventures
in the rapidly developing world of social media.

Ultimately, the goal for all our operations was the
same – to lend a helping hand to the world’s chronically
hungry, whose numbers declined in 2010 for the first
time in 15 years but still reached a staggering
925 million people.

WFP is now developing its online community into an
innovative digital platform to spread WFP’s message
and raise funds to support WFP’s operations.
The aim, in short, is to add an array of social media
instruments to WFP’s ever expanding toolbox,
increasing the range, flexibility and effectiveness
of the agency’s struggle to find lasting solutions
for the world’s hungry people.

Good nutrition remained central to WFP, whose
programmes ensure that the weak and the vulnerable
get the right food at the right time to lead healthy
and productive lives.

4

WFP/Rein Skullerud

Despite the floods, WFP continues to deliver food
assistance to people in Pakistan’s northern swat
valley displaced by conflict that occurred before
the monsoon season emergency.

5

WFP/Photolibrary

Unloading vital food
assistance for isolated
villagers in the mountains
of northern Pakistan

6

RESPONDING
TO DISASTER

H aItI
Hundreds of thousands of Haitians started to settle
in makeshift camps. With houses and livelihoods
destroyed, they had to start over and relied on food
provided by WFP. By the time general food distributions
finally ended in April, almost 4 million people had
received these life-saving supplies. “The operation
helped avert a national food crisis,” says Myrta Kaulard,
WFP’s country director in Haiti.

On 12 January, 2010, at 16:53, 35 seconds of violent
tremors changed the face of Haiti. Millions of Haitians
became homeless overnight as thousands of houses were
turned to dust by goudou goudou – the onomatopoeic
name Haitians have given to the earthquake.
Less than 24 hours after the quake, WFP was already
distributing emergency food rations, but a catastrophic
event of this magnitude required a massive response.
The task was immense.

Haitians also took matters in their own hands. At the
école Rosalie Javouhey in Port-au-Prince, students
started coming back a few days after the earthquake.
“They were looking for comfort,” recalls Sister Marie
Bernadette, the principal. “But they were also looking
for something to eat.” There were no classes, but it
didn’t matter. WFP provided food and, every day, Sister
Marie Bernadette cooked for her students.

Port-au-Prince, the capital city, and several other towns
and villages were shattered. Rubble was everywhere.
Many roads were impassable. With the airport and the
port badly damaged, a new approach would be needed
to bring food and relief items to millions of people
who had lost everything.

When the new school year started in October, WFP
was ready to increase its support for Sister Marie
Bernadette’s students and all of the other children
enrolled in the government’s National School Meals
Programme. More than a million children received
a hot nutritious meal at school every day. “If the students
don’t eat,” says the Sister, “they can’t see, they can’t
hear, they can’t learn.”

The UN’s Logistics Cluster, which WFP led on behalf of
the entire humanitarian community, grew into an
enormous operation. A humanitarian corridor was set up
in the neighbouring Dominican Republic to facilitate the
flow of goods into Haiti. Between January and April,
several hundred truckloads of food and other relief items
made their way on the roads between the two countries.
WFP staff coordinated the reception of cargo at the
airport and at the port.

7

WFP/Rein Skullerud

A major worry involved the impact on children too
young to go to school, as well as their mothers. “There
was a real fear that malnutrition rates could explode,”
says Darline Raphael from WFP’s nutrition unit in
Haiti. WFP tackled the problem by adopting an
innovative strategy based on prevention and
treatment. Blanket distributions of nutritious foods
fortified with vitamins and minerals were organized
for children under 5 years old, nursing mothers
and pregnant women.
WFP school meals:
“If the students don’t eat,
they can’t see,
they can’t hear,
they can’t learn.”

Shinaude Auguste was one of them. The young mother
living in a camp outside the town of Leogane says
the nutritious food really helped her one-year-old
daughter. “I knew she was getting the vitamins she
needed to grow up into a healthy adult,” she says.
As the year progressed, nutrition interventions grew
more targeted as WFP pursued the goal of providing
the right food at the right time to ensure children a
healthy start in life. Children under 5, expectant and
nursing women continued to receive assistance, but
the focus for fortified foods shifted to treatment of
children suffering from moderate acute malnutrition.

with an eye on the upcoming hurricane season, tackled
longer term tasks involving watershed management
and agricultural rehabilitation.
By the end of the year, WFP had undertaken more than
160 separate cash- and food-for-work projects, each
aimed at improving food security, supporting
reconstruction efforts, and building resilience in disaster
prone areas. The projects also allowed participants
to purchase food and other basic commodities for
their families.

In April, WFP moved out of straightforward disaster
relief and into a longer term recovery phase. We halted
general food distributions and shifted operations
towards programmes using food assistance to help
the country recover from the disaster.

“I bought chickens and banana trees to restart my
business,” says Jesula Coriolan, who earned money
working on a WFP-sponsored project to restore and
reinforce river banks in Leogane. The same river
had overflowed after Hurricane Tomas last November,
flooding Jesula’s house and killing the fruit trees and
animals upon which she depended to earn a living.

With food insecurity on the rise, WFP needed to find
a way to reach more people. Jobs were also badly
needed, so we expanded our employment programmes
by hiring workers, paying them in food or cash or
a combination of both.
In the immediate aftermath of the quake, thousands
of Haitians had been hired to clean canals and ditches
to prevent flooding during the rainy season. Thousands
more were subsequently put to work removing the
mountains of rubble that clogged the streets of
Port-au-Prince and other towns. Other work teams,

WFP’s work in Haiti is far from over. In 2011, all
programmes are continuing at full pace to provide food
assistance to the most vulnerable, support Haiti’s efforts
to sustain the recovery and supply logistical services
to the humanitarian community.
8

WFP/Stephanie Tremblay

rebuilding after the earthquake: Farmers hack a
road out of the hillsides under a WFP food-forwork project to link the community of Jacquot
Merlin with the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince.

9

WFP/Amjad Jamal

Pakistanis struggle to cope
with the slow motion
disaster that unfolds as a
tidal wave of floodwaters
gradually engulfs much
of the country.

10

PakIstan
When rain fell hard across Pakistan in late July 2010,
nothing seemed very out of the ordinary at first. It was
monsoon season, and heavy rains were expected.

before their eyes. Camped out on river banks and along
roads, in the grounds of schools and mosques, they
needed shelter, clean water and other vital supplies.

But these were no ordinary monsoon rains. By the time
their full ferocity was spent over a month later, nearly
2,000 people were dead, about one fifth of the country
was under water and 20 million people had seen their
lives turned upside down.

It soon became clear that WFP would need to provide
food rations to about seven million people as soon as
feasible. Offices in Lahore and Karachi suddenly
expanded; new offices in Multan, Sukkur and Hyderabad
were rapidly established.

From the Himalayas in the north to the Arabian Sea
in the south, the floodwaters had cut a swathe of chaos
and destruction, submerging some of Pakistan’s most
productive agricultural land, cutting vital supply lines
and washing away the livelihoods of those who could
least afford it.

Young children and women were the priority. From the
outset, supplies of specialised nutritious foods were
included in the general ration to help fight malnutrition,
a scourge across the flood zone even before the waters
hit. We distributed high-energy biscuits and
micronutrient-enriched supplementary food products,
including a locally produced highly nutritious chick pea
paste – Wawa Mum – developed by WFP.

The disaster unfolded in slow motion. So vast was
the scale of flooding that television pictures struggled
to capture its impact. This was no earthquake, tsunami
or cyclone, but a daily recurring and ever-expanding
tidal wave.

The monumental scale of the crisis placed acute stress
on WFP’s procurement and logistics teams. Although
grain for the operation was available within Pakistan,
it still needed to be milled, bagged and transported. Other
foodstuffs needed to be brought in by sea to Karachi,
while air charters delivered the urgently required
specialised nutrition products.

For WFP, the immediate challenge was to draw on
existing emergency response infrastructure in the
north-west, where the floods struck first, while
anticipating as far as possible how new needs would
emerge further south, as the waters raged to the sea.
At the same time, WFP leadership was needed in the food,
logistics and emergency telecommunications clusters
as part of the overall humanitarian response.

A special operation to provide logistics and
telecommunications support was a vital component
of the WFP response in Pakistan. With so much of the
country under water, helicopters were the only way
to reach communities cut off for weeks on end.

In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, WFP’s ongoing
assistance to victims of conflict had created a wide
network of humanitarian hubs, many of them stocked
with food supplies that could be moved immediately
to flood victims. Within four weeks, three million people
had been reached with lifesaving food supplies.

At its height, WFP’s air operation was using 10 imported
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS)
helicopters, as well as others made available by Japan,
Pakistan and the US military. Close to 3,500 missions
were flown in total, transporting more than 12,200 metric
tons of food and other emergency humanitarian goods
for almost 20 different organizations, providing supplies
to an estimated one million people who were inaccessible
other than by air.

But the number of people needing food assistance
continued to soar. Many had seen their food stocks,
seeds, livestock and even their homes washed away
11

Pakistan is a complex operating environment where
security for WFP staff and beneficiaries is a constant
concern. Five WFP staff were killed in a suicide bombing
of the Islamabad office less than a year before the floods
hit. Despite the threat of attack by extremists and
against a background of ongoing political violence
in the country, we rolled out operations across even
the most dangerous part of the flood zone.

Where markets were functioning properly, cash and
voucher projects allowed WFP to provide assistance
to flood victims while at the same time stimulating the
badly hit local commercial sector.
As the flood response fanned out across the affected
area, we continued providing lifesaving food assistance
to 1.3 million people affected by conflict and insecurity
in northwest Pakistan.

In some areas, particularly in the south, flood waters
stood for months. For most people, however, the first
priority was to get home and start rebuilding their lives.
The most needy received WFP assistance to support this
process, while food-for-work projects were a central
feature of the early recovery strategy, helping clear
irrigation channels and rehabilitate other agricultural
infrastructure.

WFP Pakistan is now the organization’s largest operation
in Asia. Even before the floods, WFP was providing
assistance to about 10 million people in the country.
The underlying issues of poor nutrition, poverty and
insecurity continue to undermine progress towards
finding full food security for all. The floods of 2010
made a heavy dent in progress towards that goal.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

the worst flooding in more
than 80 years destroyed crops
and livelihoods in some of the
best agricultural lands in
Punjab province.

12

stacking bags of wheat flour in
Charsadda in northwestern Pakistan
destined to feed tribal peoples who have
moved into the area to escape not floods
but military conflict further north

WFP/Rein Skullerud
13

n Iger
At the height of the punishing drought that ravaged
Niger last summer, Hadiza Souraji often ran completely
out of food. “Many times we would just go out into the
bush and take some leaves from the trees to cook for the
children,” recalls the 25-year-old mother of four, who
range in age from 18 months to 6 years old. “But it made
the children ill. It was terribly hard.”

when family food stocks are exhausted ahead of the
October harvest. A key element in the operation was
specifically designed to help millions caught in the same
hunger trap as Hadiza and her family.
It targeted 670,000 children who were in the first
1,000 days of their lives – the critical period from
womb to 2 years of age when the right nutrition lays
a firm foundation for a child to grow into a healthy
adult. Each child under 2 received every month a
nutrient-packed basket of food – vegetable oil, sugar
and a blend of corn and soya enriched with infusions
of essential vitamins and minerals.

WFP eventually came to Hadiza’s rescue, mounting
a major operation to deliver food assistance to almost
half of the 15 million inhabitants of the drought-stricken
West African nation. The operation was launched in
August at the peak of Niger’s traditional ‘lean season’,

AFP/Sia Kambou
14

To ensure that the nutritious food reached its
intended target rather than being shared with hungry
siblings and parents, the children’s families received
a ‘protective’ monthly ration. Four million family
members received 50 kg of cereals, 5 kg of pulses
and a litre of oil.

Nearly six million people received WFP assistance during
the emergency in 2010. More than 140,000 metric tons
of food commodities were distributed, including about
80,000 metric tons in August and September alone.
Although most recipients were children under 2
and their families, WFP also delivered help to almost
70,000 others, mainly children under 5 and pregnant
and nursing mothers through a targeted supplementary
feeding programme for moderate acute malnutrition.
We also assisted caregivers for children receiving
treatment for complications of severe malnutrition.

In the village of Sadakaram, 900 km east of Niamey,
the country’s capital, the first child to receive the
ration was Hadiza’s 18-month-old daughter, Absatou.
“Today is a good day for me and my family,” said a
much relieved Hadiza at the time. “I don’t even want to
think about what would have happened without this.”

WFP’s operation helped to avert a severe food crisis in
the country, provoked in large part by a lethal drought
that consumed the eastern Sahel, parching the landscape,
drying up livestock watering holes, and destroying much
of the harvest.
After the November harvest, WFP replaced food rations
entirely, substituting cash to allow vulnerable households
to buy their own food. This measure boosted incomes,
enhanced beneficiaries’ purchasing power and, not
incidentally, dissuaded family members from sharing the
nutritional rations of young children.
By the end of the year, there were encouraging signs of
progress. The harvest was good, with cereal production
up 60 percent over the previous year. Admissions
to therapeutic feeding centres dropped. And child
malnutrition rates also declined. National surveys
published in December found global acute malnutrition
among children under 5 had fallen to 15.5 percent from
16.7 percent, still marginally above the 15 percent
emergency threshold but an improvement nonetheless.
In 2011, WFP activities in Niger focus on tackling the root
causes of the emergency that overtook the country in
2010. WFP is also working closely with the government
on the structural changes needed to finally break Niger’s
recurring cycles of food and nutritional crises.

Women sell ever diminishing supplies
of food at the market in niamey as
drought destroys niger’s harvests,
raising the looming threat of hunger
for close to half of the country’s
15 million people.

15

CHANGING
LIVES

WFP/Gustavo Casula

Maria Desideria sanchez
with her daughter: “now
I enjoy farming again.”

C onneCtIng FarMers
agricultural markets and become competitive players
in those markets.

M arIa D esIDerIa s anCHez – P4P
Maria Desideria Sanchez, known to her family and friends
as Desiderina, is a farmer – not by choice but simply
through lack of opportunity or alternatives. “I never really
had a chance to do anything else,” shrugs the 51-year-old
Honduran. “Farming was something I was born into.”

Since P4P’s launch in 2008, WFP has established
links with 630 farmers’ organizations, representing
800,000 farmers around the world. More than
120,000 metric tons of food has been contracted in
20 countries. Some 50,000 people, mostly smallholding
farmers, have undergone the training that is a key part
of the programme, acquiring skills in organization
management, farming techniques, quality control,
post-harvest handling and many other areas.

For more than 20 years, Desiderina has worked the fields
in Los Posos in the mountainous Lempira region of
western Honduras. She grows maize and beans and coffee
on three manzanas of land, roughly two hectares. Even in
good years, it’s a struggle, especially for a single mother
with five children and one grandchild to feed.

It did not take long for Desiderina to realize the benefits
after she joined the programme last year. “Before P4P,” she
says, “I sold my crops to a coyote (farmers’ slang for local
traders). They don’t care about the quality of my grain; they
would just come to my door and pay me cash for anything I
had to sell. They didn’t give me a very good price, but I was
just glad to be able to sell my grain to someone.”

So Desiderina did not hesitate when, at a meeting
organized by her local farmers’ association, she
glimpsed the promise of a better life through WFP’s
Purchase for Progress, or P4P. The programme
connects farmers to markets. Every year WFP spends
hundreds of millions of dollars buying food, more than
80 percent of it in the developing world. Under P4P,
WFP uses its considerable heft as a major global food
purchaser to help smallholder farmers access

Desiderina’s participation in P4P now guarantees
an alternative market for her grain – and a better price.

16

WFP/Amjad Jamal

a Pakistani child eating
a packet of Wawa
Mum, a locally
produced chick pea
paste developed by
WFP that packs all the
vitamins and minerals
young children need
to grow into
healthy adults

17

n oUrIsHIng
Unlike the coyotes, P4P requires processed grains,
involving extra costs for farmers who do not possess
the required machinery. For Desiderina, it’s not a
problem.”I don’t mind that I have to rent equipment
to process my grain,” she says. “With P4P, I know
I will be able to sell my crop for a fair price. They
demand high quality, but they also provide good training
for me and the other farmers so that we will be able
to get access to better markets.”

tHe

F UtUre

P Hoebe a nne a keLo – t He F Irst 1,000 D ays
Even if she were not expecting her first child, Phoebe
Anne Akelo’s days would be long and tiring. The 25-yearold wakes every day at 6:00 at her home in Kisumu in
Nyanza Province in southwestern Kenya. After preparing
breakfast and doing some household chores, she leaves
at 7:00 for her job as a hairdresser at a local beauty
salon. By 18:00, she’s home again, preparing dinner.
As Phoebe’s pregnancy progressed, she found the long
hours on her feet at the hair salon more and more
exhausting. Her health began to deteriorate. She lost
weight, grew anaemic and often felt so weak that she
occasionally suffered fainting spells.

Desiderina has not missed a single training session
or workshop since she joined the programme. And P4P
has managed to resolve an issue she once considered
beyond her reach. Desiderina’s crops never provided
much excess income, not even when supplemented
by the cow or two she usually raises. She has not been
in a position to apply for credit, nor has she been
willing to mortgage home and land for fear of falling
into irrecoverable debt.

But Phoebe’s health rapidly improved once she
enrolled in a Mother and Child Health Nutrition
Programme operated by WFP at the Lumumba Health
Centre in Kisumu. “At the hospital, we received food
and were taught how to take care of ourselves,” she
remembers. “They taught us what’s best to eat for us
and for our baby.”

As a result, Desiderina has never had sufficient funds
to buy fertilizers or any of the other agricultural aids
needed to expand her crop yields much beyond her
usual annual harvest of 100 quintals (10,000 pounds)
of maize.

The programme that Phoebe joined in Kenya is similar
to scores of others that WFP operates around the world,
all designed to ensure that women and children get the
right nutrition to lead healthy and fruitful lives. WFP
works with mothers and young children to deliver
nutritious food during the critical first 1,000 days
of life – from the womb to 2 years old – that determines
whether a child will reach his or her full potential,
starting during pregnancy.

But P4P supplies her with hybrid seeds, insecticides,
pesticides and herbicides. “Now I enjoy farming again,”
says Desiderina. “I am glad I finally have a chance
to learn new techniques and attend trainings because
I know that with the help of P4P, I am going to more
than double my harvest, and improve my life
as well.”

We provide a range of food products, including a tried
and tested blend of corn and soya flour that is
fortified with more than 20 essential vitamins and
minerals. The government and our other partners
provide health services.

18

M arIe a nIka – 1,000 days plus

In Phoebe’s case, the programme quickly worked its
magic. The young woman’s health returned. She gained
weight, climbing from 52 to 56 kg. Her anaemia
disappeared as her iron – or haemoglobin – rose to
normal levels. Her fainting spells vanished. “Now that
I am receiving the CSB (corn-soya blend) porridge,
I can go to work feeling much better,” she says. “My baby
is growing and, thanks to WFP, I’m hoping to have
a healthy pregnancy.”

Marie Anika is eight years old and says she would like
to work in a bank when she grows up. She has never
actually been in a bank but her aunt has told her about
them and she thinks they sound interesting.

WFP/Rein Skullerud

For the moment, Marie Anika is living with her parents
and sister in a tent where their old home used to stand
before the earthquake struck Haiti. It is located
on a small hill overlooking the école Rosalie Javouhey
in Port-au-Prince. The earthquake claimed the lives of
21 pupils and damaged or destroyed many classrooms.
Like most of the students, Marie Anika does not always
get to eat at home – there simply isn’t enough money for
that. That’s why she so looks forward to getting a daily
hot meal at school. “I really like eating at school,” she
says. “It would be terrible if we didn’t get a meal at
school. I really wouldn’t like that.”
The basic ingredients – rice, beans and oil – are provided
by WFP as part of its contribution to the government’s
Programme National de Cantines Scolaires (National
School Meals Programme).

Phoebe anne akelo:
“thanks to WFP,
I am hoping to have
a healthy pregnancy.”

“They’d simply be too weak to study if they weren’t able
to eat something at school,” says the principal, Sister
Marie Bernadette. “It’s important for them to have a meal
here, since most of them come from very poor families.”
In Haiti last year, WFP fed more than one million school
children in situations similar to those facing Marie Anika.
Around the globe, we fed more than 21 million school
children in 2010, aiming to provide the right nutrition
at the right time for children over the age of 2.
The 1,000 days plus approach to nourishing future
generations complements WFP’s parallel programme
delivering the right nutrition during the crucial

19

Along with the apricot sapling, 47 other baby trees
are now growing in the small plot of land in rural
Tajikistan where Narkhol and her family live. Once
mature, the trees will provide a lifetime’s supply of
fruit and nuts to enhance the family’s diet, augment
the family’s income and improve the productivity
of the family’s land.
WFP/David Orr

More than 1,300 other poor Tajik families share the
same good fortune, thanks to an initiative launched by
WFP. To offset the environmental impact of WFP’s fleet
of more than 1,000 diesel-guzzling Land Cruisers, we
embarked on a tree-planting project in Tajikistan, where
livestock grazing and firewood harvesting had long ago
denuded the country of forest cover.

Marie anika:
“I really like
eating at school.”

1,000-day window of opportunity at the beginning of
life. The nutritious, healthy daily school meals provide
parents with a strong incentive to send their children
to school, and allow children to focus on their studies
rather than their empty stomachs.

At the same time, poor rural families in Tajikistan
needed help achieving household food security, which
led to a happy marriage between WFP’s new green
initiative and the agency’s long-standing food-fortraining programmes.

Young girls in particular stand to benefit by staying in
school. Doing so gives them a better education and tends
to raise the age at which they marry and have children.
Studies suggest there’s a financial bonus, too. An extra
year of primary school boosts a girl’s eventual wages
by 10 to 20 percent; an extra year of secondary school
by 15 to 25 percent.

With a $300,000 donation from WFP, almost
150,000 fruit and nut trees were planted in Tajikistan
in 2010. Recipients included more than 1,300 of the
country’s most vulnerable families, who received
six month’s training in the care and cultivation of 10
different varieties of trees, everything from apricots
to almonds, pomegranates to pistachios.
When the trees finally start bearing fruit, families like
Narkhol’s should be more food secure, as well as more
financially stable. Studies indicate that a single apple
tree can quadruple a poor family’s income.

n arkHoL b abaMUratova – g reen I nItIatIves
She may be stooped and require a cane, but Nakhol
Babamuratova manages to move with an agility that
belies her 90 years. And when she kneels to inspect the
slender apricot sapling newly planted in her garden,
there’s a twinkle in her eyes. “These trees are our future,”
says the tiny matriarch. “Even if we have to wait years
for the fruit, they will remain here for our children
and our grandchildren.”

Narkhol’s grandson, 24-year-old Shadman, looks
forward to that moment. “It’s going to make a big
difference for all of us when we start selling our fruit,”
he says.

20

WFP/Heather Hill

Narkhol Babamuratova:
“These trees are our future.”

21

PREPARING
FOR DISASTER

e MergenCy P rePareDness
anD r esPonse
Large scale images of the area around the badly flooded
Manchar Lake area were gathered, with resolutions
measuring highly detailed features on the ground. These
were then combined with images from two satellites
owned by NASA to show the extent of the flooding.

Planes, helicopters, trucks and ships are most likely
to come to mind when people think of how WFP gets
food to those in need. But how does WFP know exactly
where to go first when one-fifth of a country is under
vast lakes of water, communications are down and
local maps date from colonial times more than half
a century ago?

This highly-skilled work was done by a dedicated team
from ITHACA, whose experts work round-the-clock shifts
for WFP during major emergencies. They take the latest
available images and other scientific data like precipitation
forecasts, and create highly visual, user friendly maps that
are as up to date as possible. When time is one of the
biggest enemies in a disaster, this is crucial.

That was Pakistan in August 2010. Millions were
suffering and the clock was ticking.
WFP turns to innovations in technology and to the
relationships it has nurtured to get the information
it needs. For Pakistan, this meant working with the
Italian and American Space Agencies – Agenzia
Spaziale Italiana and the US National Aeronautics
and Space Adminstration (NASA) – as well as the
Turin-based research institute ITHACA, a pro bono
partner of WFP’s Emergency Preparedness and
Response Branch.

The maps ITHACA produced of Manchar Lake were so
clear and operational that they showed WFP staff the key
places where flood waters were abating faster than others.
“This allowed us to really plan ahead,” says Carlos Veloso,
our emergency coordinator in Pakistan at the time.
“We could calculate that in a few days time we would be
able to reach this place or that by road, and so we could
divert our helicopters ahead of time to other places in
need, saving time and money and – most importantly –
lives. This kind of technological help, having access
to ‘eyes in the sky’, is invaluable in an emergency
the size and scale of Pakistan.”

Humanitarian protocols provide for the special
activation of satellite and other remote sensing
systems in cases of dire emergency. So the first
step was asking the Italian Space Agency to activate
a constellation of satellites known as Cosmo-SkyMed,
especially for Pakistan.
22

WFP/Amjad Jamal

a hungry victim of the
Pakistan floods receives
a bag of wheat flour
donated by the
european Union and
delivered by WFP.

23

building back better: Participants
in a WFP food-for-work project
sculpt a road on a Haitian
landscape rendered notoriously
unstable by deforestation and
extreme weather.

As Haiti is mountainous with little natural forest left,
the land is unstable. In extreme weather, homes and
crops are often washed away. Advance planning was
critical in preparing for the upcoming hurricane season
in the wake of the 2010 quake.

We are also using advanced technical mapping
techniques to help people recover after an emergency
and prepare better for future disasters. This is
especially important in countries like Haiti where
natural disasters strike repeatedly, each time pushing
people deeper into poverty.

Multi-Risk Vulnerability Analysis played that role. It
helped WFP prepare for and mitigate the impact of
flooding on a country already devastated by the worst
natural disaster in its history.

When Haiti’s earthquake struck, WFP had already
pioneered an innovative mapping method – MultiRisk Vulnerability Analysis – in that country.
The technique combines scientific data from past
natural disasters with information about places
where WFP knows from its own experience that
people can be hungry. Statistics are added on top
to show how people make a living and what their
natural environment is like. These analytical layers
result in graphic pictures of places people are most
likely to suffer food insecurity when another
disaster strikes.

Soon after the earthquake, hundreds of thousands of
homeless people from Port-au-Prince began moving
out to the countryside. Aware of the strain this would
place on impoverished rural communities, we quickly
added population movements and information about
the agricultural cycle to its mapped analysis. It could
then target areas where the harvest hadn’t yet come in,
but where there were more mouths to feed.
24

WFP/Stephanie Tremblay

On the other side of the world in Afghanistan, the
specific problems are different but many issues
are the same – poverty, harsh weather, instability
and threats to local food production. Multi-Risk
Vulnerability Analysis provides programme planners
with a clearer picture of livelihoods and natural
hazards in the country.

As drought looked to be a problem at the start of the
2010 winter, snow cover and rainfall were monitored
and analysed on maps produced by WFP’s emergency
preparedness and mapping experts.

WFP/Challiss McDonough

Longer winters and increasing
droughts are making it difficult
for Afghan farmers to know
when to plant.

For some time, Afghan farmers have been telling
WFP that later winters and more drought is making
it harder for them to know when to plant their
important winter wheat crop. Poor harvests have
often been the result, prompting in turn outbreaks
of hunger.

Remote sensing gave mappers the baseline picture.
Seen from the sky, if the images were sandy in colour
then no wheat was growing; if they were green, then
the news was better. Once we could see the next harvest
from above, WFP could prepare to help farming
communities with targeted, timely interventions
and prevent hunger from taking a serious hold.
25

WFP/Abeer Etefa

executive Director Josette sheeran
and the “sahtein” electronic swipe card
that provides nearly 50,000 Palestinians
with digital food
26

INNOVATING

v oUCHers

anD

C asH t ransFers
Like many others, she is not immune to the psychological
burdens involved in the struggle to make ends meet under
difficult circumstances.

For Nisreen Abu Hammad, it’s a question of dignity.
To be sure, the 25-year-old widow appreciates WFP’s help
in feeding her three young children. But she is also aware
that accepting food assistance can present its own
challenges in the West Bank city of Hebron in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

“The vouchers don’t just provide the food assistance that
my children are so dependent on,” she says, “they also
preserve my dignity. I can shop for the items I need at the
time that I need them – without people knowing that
I am getting food aid.”

Nisreen is an enthusiastic supporter of one of WFP’s more
promising recent innovations – an electronic voucher
system that provides some of the most vulnerable
Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip with
“digital food”. Participants redeem electronic coupons in
selected shops through a blue swipe card called sahtein –
“bon appétit” in Arabic. It allows them to purchase a more
diversified range of food items – fresh milk and eggs for
example – than those normally available in a traditional
WFP food basket.

In 2010, WFP’s electronic voucher system assisted
32,000 people in the West Bank and more than 15,000 in
Gaza. “These vouchers are a symbol of hope,” says
Executive Director Josette Sheeran. “Everybody wins. The
child wins because she gets the nutrients and vitamins that
she needs. The shop-owner wins because people buy these
food items from his shop. And all these products have to
be locally procured so the dairy farmers and the local
millers all win, creating jobs and opportunities.”

The system also permits WFP to address hunger in
situations where food is available but unaffordable or, as in
the specific case of Hebron, inaccessible. With 216 military
checkpoints hindering movement, even as routine a chore
as grocery shopping can prove difficult in the divided city.

Since vouchers were introduced in 2008, WFP has been
using them with increasing frequency around the world,
often instead of straight cash transfers. While vouchers can
be redeemed as food items or “spent” in selected shops,
cash transfers provide targeted beneficiary groups – poor,
hungry people – with money to spend as they wish. The
vast majority, according to recent surveys, tend to spend
that extra cash on food.

“Food distributions are usually far from my home,”
says Nisreen, “but with these vouchers I can go to
a neighbourhood shop just like anyone else.” This
semblance of normality is important for Nisreen.
27

WFP’s use of vouchers and cash transfers is rising
steeply. The number of projects has increased seven-fold,
climbing from five in 2008 to 35 in 2010. Over the same
period, the value of the projects rose from $5.4 million
to $140 million, reaching 4 million people. The range
has also expanded to include responses to natural
disasters (Haiti, Pakistan); urban economic shocks
(Afghanistan, Burkina Faso); rural chronic child
malnutrition (Uganda); seasonal food insecurity
(Bangladesh, Malawi); and support to special groups
(refugees in Syria).

had all participated in WFP cash-for-work projects,
earning money in return for work rebuilding homes
and communities destroyed by calamities, most
notably the typhoons that repeatedly pummel the
Philippines.

As a result of its growing experience, WFP is now a
leading player in the use of vouchers and cash transfers
to deliver food assistance, and we continue exploring
creative ways to employ the two tools.

Rose Marie Estee certainly likes the idea. Her home
was completely destroyed in 2009 by Typhoon Ketsana.
Now she lives under a makeshift roof of plastic sheeting
beside a sewage ditch. WFP paid her 240 pesos,
roughly $5.50, for taking part in a cash-for-work
project cleaning the debris left behind in schools and
other public buildings when the floodwaters receded.

“It becomes like a digital wallet, almost a bank
account,” says Stephen Anderson, WFP country
director for the Philippines. “Our surveys show that
beneficiaries are spending up to 70 or 80 percent of
the cash on food. So that’s a good thing.”

Last October, WFP launched a pilot project in the
Philippines specifically designed to leverage the Filipinos’
celebrated penchant for communicating by SMS text
messages on their ubiquitous mobile telephones.

“The credit’s on my phone,” says Rose Marie as she
enters a grocery shop in the Manila suburbs. “I’m
going to use it to buy some chicken and some milk.
My family is going to like that.”

Families began receiving text messages that they
could “cash” like cheques to buy food. The recipients

WFP/Jeffrey Lorenzo

WFP/Jeffrey Lorenzo

rose Marie estee
uses her mobile
telephone to buy
chicken and milk
for her children.

WFP sends money by
sMs texts on mobile
telephones in the
Philippines.

28

WFP/Amjad Jamal

WFP’s kash Cards in Punjab bring
flood families back to markets.
29

WFP/Lori Waselchuk

an 11-year-old girl at Monte grande
Primary school in Cape verde, where
the national government and WFP have
been providing a hot daily meal
for schoolchildren for more
than three decades

30

CELEBRATING
SUCCESS

C aPe v erDe – H anDIng o ver
“The activities of WFP have contributed greatly to the
success of the Cape Verdean education system, the fight
against poverty and the promotion of social inclusion,”
said Cape Verde Prime Minister José Maria Pereira
Neves at a celebration in Rome in September marking
the transfer of the programme.

Cape Verde crowned more than 30 years of collaboration
with WFP in 2010 by taking full ownership of the
country’s national school meals programme, joining
the ranks of 35 other countries around the world that
have reached similar milestones.
The school meals programme in Cape Verde started in
1979, not long after the island nation, scattered across
a small archipelago in the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of
Africa, gained independence in 1975. At that time, Cape
Verde relied entirely on WFP for financial, operational
and logistical support. But in 2007, the government
began managing and implementing the programme,
with its share of the funding gradually increasing from
15 percent until it reached 100 percent last year.

“Without the work of WFP, the school meals programme
would not exist. School meals allow us to improve
children’s nutrition, which adds to the development
of human capital in Cape Verde. This is a strong
investment in the future, one that we hope will
strengthen social cohesion and enhance the quality
of life for Cape Verdeans.”
At the same ceremony, WFP Executive Director
Josette Sheeran described the Cape Verdean
government’s commitment to school feeding as an
“exemplary success story we can all be proud of and one
we’d like to replicate around the world.”

It is the first country in central and west Africa to
undergo the transition to complete national ownership of
school feeding programmes, although eight other African
countries are among the 35 nations that have succeeded
in accomplishing the same objective since 1993.

A daily meal at school is an effective means to help
children develop healthy minds and bodies, an
investment in their future and in the future of their
country. Around the world, WFP has been implementing
school feeding programmes for 45 years. It currently
provides a daily meal or snack for more than 21 million
children in more than 60 countries.

The change reflects Cape Verde’s steady economic and
social advancement since independence. The country
not only graduated from the list of Least Developed
Countries three years ago, but is also on track to achieve
most – if not all – of the UN’s Millennium Development
Goals by 2015.
31

WFP/Giulio d'Adamo

Cape verde takes control
of its national school meals
programme, crowning
30 years of collaboration
with WFP. executive
Director Josette sheeran
celebrates the event
at a ceremony in
rome with vera
tavares, one of the
programme’s
success stories.

In Cape Verde, the programme fed 85,000 children
last year. In the 30 years that it has been operating in
the country, it has helped to boost national enrolment
rates to among the highest in Africa. Hundreds of
thousands of children have been reached.

says Vera. “I was always hungry when I came to
school, but then I would eat my afternoon meal and
it would give me the strength to keep on going.
I really don’t think I would have made it without
those meals.”

Vera Tavares is one example. She was first enrolled
in a WFP programme in 1990, when she was seven
years old. Today, she is a college graduate working as
an accountant at Cape Verde’s Ministry of Education,
earning enough to help support her mother and her
younger brothers and sisters. But she still remembers
how those school meals in primary school helped
to shape her life.

Vera’s younger siblings eventually replaced her in
the school meal programme, and her mother left the
fields to take a better job as a cook in a school
canteen. “WFP has been present in my house and
life for so long that I cannot imagine how it would
be without it,” she says.
While WFP will no longer be operating school meals
activities in Cape Verde, we will continue working in
the country, helping to improve the programme’s cost
effectiveness, coverage and local food procurement.

“Whenever I see kids eating their lunches at school,
it reminds me of when I was little and did the same,”

32

WFP/Marcus Prior

at stara school in the
kibera slum in nairobi,
children receive food
in WFP red cups as part
of the agency’s school
meals programme.

H Unger n UMbers
For the first time in 15 years, the number of chronically
hungry people in the world declined in 2010, dropping
by 98 million from 1.023 billion in 2009 to 925 million
last year.

numbers,” says Executive Director Josette Sheeran.
“But this is no time to relax. We must keep hunger on
the run to ensure stability and to protect lives
and dignity.”

Most of the decrease occurred in Asia, where there
were 80 million fewer hungry people in 2010, but the
numbers also fell in sub-Saharan Africa, with 12 million
fewer going hungry.

Despite the nearly 10 percent drop in 2010, there were
still more hungry people in the world last year than
before the economic and food price crises of 2008 and
2009. Food prices also began to rise as 2010 drew
to a close, foreshadowing new obstacles in the effort
to reduce global hunger.

WFP’s efforts played a role in the decline but the major
reasons involved a more favourable economic climate –
especially in developing countries – and a fall in both
international and domestic food prices since 2008.

Of the eight Millennium Development Goals solemnly
agreed by the United Nations in 2000, the first goal
pledged to halve the proportion of hungry people from
20 to 10 percent by 2015. With five years to go, that
proportion currently stands at 16 percent.

“Vigorous and urgent action by nations and the world
has been effective in helping to halt the galloping hunger

33

SEEKING
PARTNERS

P rIvate PartnersHIPs
WFP’s support from the private sector continued to
gather momentum during 2010. Cash contributions
from private donors – corporations, individuals,
foundations, NGOs and others – rose by 37 percent over
the previous year, climbing from $105 million to almost
$144 million. WFP’s Private Partnerships Division
became the agency’s sixth-largest donor last year.

illustration of how private sector fundraising activities
can influence institutional donors.

“The private sector – both in contributions and
expertise – is changing our breadth and depth in
fighting hunger,” says Nancy Roman, WFP’s Director
of Communications, Public Policy and Private
Partnerships.

Overall, WFP raised more than $8.7 million online,
while growing its online subscriber list from 50,000
in 2009 to nearly 290,000 in 2010.

Outreach to individual donors through WFP’s website
was a priority in 2010, with a view to fundraising
and attracting supporters interested in learning
more about hunger.

Both in emergencies and beyond, individual donors
remain important for WFP in the fight against hunger.
We continue to seek strategic alliances with industries
that share the agency’s core competencies in logistics,
nutrition, information technology and other areas.
At the same time, WFP also pursues partnerships and
campaigns that can tap into the power of individual
consumers, both for raising funds as well as awareness.

More than half the donations last year arose in
response to emergencies, especially the two major
disasters that unfolded during the year – the
earthquake in Haiti and the floods in Pakistan.
Donors were especially quick to respond to the tragic
events in Haiti. Within five days of the quake, WFP
had raised close to $5 million from corporate and
individual donors, mostly online. Halfway around the
world in Thailand, a partnership between WFP and
a local television channel mobilized more than
$5 million in contributions from the public for the
victims in Haiti. It also triggered an in-kind donation
of $10 million worth of rice – providing a graphic

As in previous years, the largest consumer fundraising
campaign remained Yum! Brands’ annual World
Hunger Relief campaign, which has been a key
partnership for WFP since 2007. To date, the campaign
has raised about $44 million for WFP and has educated
millions of consumers about WFP and the problem
of global hunger.
34

the yum! brands campaign
featured in this poster has raised
more than $40 million for WFP.

35

P roJeCt L aser b ea M
In 2010, Unilever, the consumer goods corporation,
launched a series of cause-related marketing
campaigns in 10 countries. Among the more
successful were campaigns in Germany and
Switzerland, where Unilever brands partnered with
a prominent supermarket chain to raise more than
$445,000 through product sales and deliver WFP’s
message to consumers in hundreds of stores.

The ambitious Project Laser Beam (PLB) initiative,
which pools public and private sector time, energy
and money to tackle child malnutrition, drew new
partners as it took root during 2010. WFP and its
corporate partners – DSM, the Global Alliance for
Improved Nutrition (GAIN), Kraft Foods and Unilever
– began rolling out the project in 2011 in the two pilot
countries of Indonesia and Bangladesh, home to the
world’s fifth and sixth highest rates of child
malnutrition.

WFP’s key partnership with the life science and
nutrition company Royal DSM of the Netherlands
was renewed in 2010. DSM has provided more
than $8 million in cash, nutritional products and
technical expertise since 2007, and has been crucial
in transforming WFP’s nutrition strategy. DSM has
funded 10 WFP consultants in HIV/AIDS and
nutrition. It has also helped develop new nutritional
products, including vitamin- and mineral-enriched
corn-soya blend formulas and micronutrient
powders tailored to different populations and
environments.

To maximize the impact, interventions will be
implemented in one targeted area in each of the
two countries.
A contribution from DSM is allowing a Bangladeshi
research institute to explore developing a highly
nutritious, locally-sourced food product for children
aged six to 23 months. GAIN is currently contributing
through its expertise in performance management.
Kraft has committed up to $2 million for use in
Bangladesh over five years, most likely in support of
projects involving street food carts, homestead food
production and nutrition education. And Unilever is
funding a two-year school meals programme in
Bangladesh targeting about 100,000 of the most
vulnerable school children.

WFP’s relationship with its first Asian private sector
partner, LG Electronics, broadened in 2010. The
company already supports WFP school meals
programmes in Kenya and environmental
restoration projects in Ethiopia. In 2010, LG
expanded its support beyond the Horn of Africa to
include Bangladesh and Cambodia, raising the value
of the partnership to $6 million. Also in Asia, WFP
signed agreements with Kookmin Bank, our first
and longest running private sector donor from the
Republic of Korea. Since Kookmin’s first became
a donor in 2006, the bank has donated nearly
$900,000 in support of WFP projects in Indonesia
and Cambodia.

The project’s ultimate goal is to dramatically reduce
child malnutrition through a practical, focused,
results-oriented model for public-private
partnerships. Corporations contribute their
knowledge and resources as well as the impetus of the
private sector to add value to the expertise and
experience of WFP and the other participating
governments, UN agencies and NGOs.

WFP’s partnership with PepsiCo, first established in
2008 to help WFP improve performance-monitoring
and information-sharing tools, deepened in 2010
with the launch of a new information technology
platform and training programmes for key staff.

Once the founding corporate partners’ work concludes
at the end of the five-year pilot phase, the goal is that
a locally sustainable model will be in place, ready for
swift replication anywhere malnourished children
need help in getting a healthy start to life.
36

WFP/James Giambrone

Free rice being distributed at
sanischare Camp in nepal to
help feed more than 100,000
refugees from bhutan

F reerICe
category in the 15th annual Webby Awards. The
game was the brainchild of John Breen, a Harvardeducated computer programmer who has
developed a number of humanitarian websites,
including the award-winning Hunger Site. He came
up with the idea for Freerice as a way to help his two
sons prepare for university exams and later
expanded the concept into a platform with two
goals – to provide an English vocabulary to
everyone for free and provide free rice to feed
hungry people through WFP. Breen donated
Freerice to WFP in 2007.

It is the world’s only online vocabulary game dedicated to
feeding hungry people. For every correct answer, the site
donates 10 grains of rice through sponsored advertising.
As of April 2011, it has raised enough rice to feed more
than 4.6 million people for a day.
Since launching the second generation version in
September 2010, Freerice has attracted 1.2 million players
every month.
In recognition of the site’s achievements, Freerice
was selected as an Official Honoree in the games

37

WFP IN NUMBERS 2010

WFP DeLIvereD 4.6 MILLIon MetrIC tons oF FooD assIstanCe to 109.2 MILLIon PeoPLe In 75 CoUntrIes
Beneficiaries included:
89 million
15.4 million
2.1 million
51.2 percent
2.7 million
66.1 million
21.1 million
48.5 percent
8.5 million
2.5 million
2.9 million
24.3 million

women and children
internally displaced people
refugees
of beneficiaries were women or girls
women received additional nutritional support
children were assisted in WFP operations
schoolchildren received school meals and/or take-home rations
of children enrolled in school meals programmes were girls
malnourished children received special nutritional support
people affected by HIV and AIDS in 41 countries received WFP support
people were assisted through cash and vouchers programmes
people received WFP food as an incentive to build assets, attend training,
strengthen resilience to shocks and preserve livelihoods

People reached in top five countries (with percentages):
Pakistan:
Ethiopia:
Sudan:
Afghanistan:
Niger:

16,126,000
9,910,305
9,234,074
6,556,047
6,168,641

38

14.8 percent
9.1 percent
8.4 percent
6.0 percent
5.6 percent

WFP/Laura Melo

a nepalese man prepares
rice for fortification with
micronutrient powders
from DsM to enrich the
diet of bhutanese refugees.

39

WFP/Rein Skullerud

40

WFP distributed food at tabarre Issa
re-location camp on the outskirts of
Port-au-Prince in Haiti, one of dozens
scattered around the country
providing temporary housing for
millions displaced by the
January 2010 earthquake.

To stay informed via email updates, sign up at wfp.org/join

Division of Communications, Public Policy
and Private Partnerships
via Cesare giulio viola, 68/70 - 00148 rome, Italy
tel.: +39-0665131 • Fax: +39-066513-2840
email: wfpinfo@wfp.org

Printed by Quintily SpA – Rome, Italy – May 2011

To support our work, please go to wfp.org/donate

