GLOBAL REPORT
2018

F I N A N C I A L

|

O P E R A T I O N A L

|

S T A T I S T I C A L

GLOBAL
REPORT
2018

CONTENTS

CONTENTS

The Global Report presents the work carried out by UNHCR in 2018 to protect and improve the lives of tens of
millions of people of concern—refugees, returnees, internally displaced people, stateless persons, and others of
concern. It highlights the year’s achievements, as well as challenges faced by the organization and its partners, in
attempting to respond to multiple life-threatening crises and ever-growing humanitarian needs.

OVERVIEW
OF 2018

REGIONAL
THEMATIC
SUMMARIES CHAPTERS

8

62

172

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S

172 Safeguarding
fundamental rights

4

8

UNHCR IN 2018
UNHCR’s mission with key
data and achievements

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

14

Foreword by the High
Commissioner
34

12

The Special Envoy’s message

Working in partnership
UNHCR’s evolving approach
to strengthen and diversify
partnerships to help deliver
on its mandate

62

Africa

84

The Americas

Global Strategic Priorities
Priority areas of concern for
UNHCR in 2018

122 Europe

36

Funding UNHCR’s
programmes

60

Map of populations of
concern to UNHCR as of
December 2018

224 Building better futures

202 Emergency preparedness and
response

226 Solutions
- Voluntary repatriation
- Local integration
- Resettlement
- Complementary pathways
for admission to third
countries

174 Ensuring access to protection
- Partnerships
- Asylum procedures
- Alternatives to detention
- Addressing and responding
to mixed movements
- Central Mediterranean route
- Climate change and disaster
displacement
184 Protection responses
- People at heightened risks
- Integrity
- Identity management,
registration and profiling

OVERVIEW OF 2018

200 Responding with
lifesaving support

193 Preventing and ending
statelessness

209 Preventing, mitigating and
responding to sexual and
gender-based violence
211 Expanding cash-based
interventions

229 Access to quality education
240 Livelihoods and economic
inclusion
246 Finding alternatives to camps
248 Access to energy and
environmental protection

102 Asia and the Pacific

214 Meeting the basic needs of
people of concern
- Shelter and settlement
- Public health
- Food security and nutrition
- Water, sanitation and
hygiene

140 Middle East and North Africa

ANNEXES

252 Member States of UNHCR’s
Executive Committee and
Parties to the Refugee and
Statelessness Conventions
254 Acronyms

162 Operational support and
management

Global Focus audience in 2018

The Global Focus website is UNHCR’s main operational reporting platform for donors.
Regularly updated, it complements and augments information in the Global
Report with greater detail on UNHCR operations, data on key operational
themes and objectives, and in-depth information on UNHCR’s budgets,
funding and expenditure. It contains also a glossary of technical terms used
throughout this publication.

2 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

480,000

19,500

145,000

in 2018

per month (+16%)

downloaded

page views

visits

documents

12,000

documents
downloaded

per month (+30%)

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 3

MISSION

74.8M

MISSION

People of concern to UNHCR worldwide

3.5M

UNHCR IN 2018

The largest numbers of
pending cases were in

Asylum-seekers
pending cases

4%

Mission

UNHCR’s primary purpose is to safeguard the rights
and well-being of refugees. In its efforts to achieve
this objective, the Office strives to ensure that
everyone can exercise the right to seek asylum and
find safe refuge in another State, and to return home
voluntarily. By assisting refugees to return to their own
country or to settle permanently in another country,
UNHCR also seeks lasting solutions to their plight.
UNHCR’s Executive Committee (102 Member States
as of October 2018) and the UN General Assembly
have authorized involvement with other groups. These
include former refugees who have returned to their
homeland, internally displaced people, and persons

who are stateless or whose nationality is disputed. As
of December 2018, 91 States are parties to the 1954
Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons
and 73 to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness.
The Office seeks to reduce situations of forced
displacement by encouraging States and other
institutions to create conditions which are conducive
to the protection of human rights and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. In all of its activities, it pays
particular attention to the needs of children and seeks
to promote the equal rights of women and girls.
The Office carries out its work in collaboration with
many partners, including governments, regional
organizations, and international and nongovernmental organizations. It is committed to the
principle of participation, believing that refugees and
others who benefit from the Office's activities should
be consulted over decisions which affect their lives.

Global Presence

20.4M Refugees

(Refugees and IDPs)

Refugee populations by region of asylum
Europe

3% Venezuelans

5%
Asylum-seekers

displaced abroad

2% Others of concern

Africa

31%

5%

AFFILIATE WORKFORCE*

16,672

12,088

4,584

Global workforce by category

Global presence by region

Gender breakdowns of UNHCR workforce

40% 60%

59% 41%

57% 43%

Affiliate
workforce*

International

21%

55%

Field

8%

Africa

2.7M

27%

Syria

Afghanistan

Refugees

South Sudan
50

3.9M
Stateless persons*
A reported 56,400 people who
were formerly stateless or of
undetermined nationality acquired
nationality or had their nationality
confirmed in 24 countries. The
actual number of stateless
persons is higher, but a true figure
remains difficult to obtain.

2.9M
Returnees
(Refugees and IDPs)
Unresolved conflicts and insecurity
in countries of origin presented
major constraints for returns and
their sustainability.

41.4M IDPs

40

Many IDPs were in protracted situations
characterized by critical protection and
humanitarian conditions.

45% were in three countries
30
6.2M
Syria

7.8M
210,947
Syria

40%

136,155

South Sudan

87,544

Somalia
Colombia

Top 3 largest IDP returns

4.5M

20

Americas

The Democratic
Republic of
the Congo

90%
HQs 10%

60

2.3M

2.6M Venezuelans displaced abroad
1.2M Others of concern

12%
Field

13%

Middle East and
North Africa

IDPs

10%

Global

Turkey

14% 18%

6.7M

HQs

27%

HQs

Europe

Other

21%

57% coming from three countries

Stateless*

Top 3 largest refugee returns

STAFF MEMBERS

Asia
and Pacific

Americas 3%

(pending cases)

UNHCR is present in 131 countries with offices in 501 locations
GLOBAL WORKFORCE

70

For the first time, refugees under UNHCR’s mandate
exceeded 20M.

Returnees

The High Commissioner for Refugees is mandated by
the United Nations to lead and coordinate
international action for the worldwide protection of
refugees and the resolution of refugee problems. As
of December 2018, 149 States are parties to the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and/or
to its 1967 Protocol.

The Americas: 1.3 million
Europe: 1.2 million
Africa: 484,224

National

52%

* UNVs, individual contractors and consultants hired through UNOPS or directly, deployees, secondees and interns.

Asia and Pacific

12%

Middle East and
North Africa

22%

* Includes 906,635 Myanmar refugees in
Bangladesh and 125,000 stateless IDPs in
Myanmar who are also counted in refugee
and IDP populations.

944,958
Iraq

444,655
Philippines

306,246
CAR
10

4 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 5

MISSION

MISSION

Key data and achievements in 2018

Core relief items
Unit: billion

FINAL BUDGET

CONTRIBUTIONS

EXPENDITURE

$8.220

$4.184

$4.226

14%

Funding gap

43%

Private donors

22%

10%

1%

11%

Pillar 4 IDPs

14%

3%

UN Regular Budget

1%

10%

13%

93 countries

($502M in 2017)

(compared to 2017)

Implemented CBIs

3.4M refugees

134,540

13,602

provided with shelter in
planned settlements

Tents

Refugee Housing Units

Delivered in 39 countries

in 27 operations

Shelter

Governments and
the European Union

Softly earmarked

$568M

Pillar 2
Stateless

$4.710*

Unearmarked

Pillar 3
Returnees

3%
Earmarked

19 airlifts

worth of core relief items delivered to
39 emergency-affected countries

Cash-based interventions

UN pooled funding
and intergovernmental
donors

Tightly earmarked

Over $34M

Pillar 1 Refugees

82%

86%

*Funds available: contributions (voluntary contributions and UN Regular Budget); carry-over; other income and adjustments

Building better futures
Safeguarding fundamental rights

Resettlement

Registration

2.4M

7.2M individuals

biometric registrations in 2018

biometrically registered by the end of
2018, mainly in Africa (48%) and in the
Middle East and North Africa (38%)

Partnerships

$1.407B
allocated to
partners

666 national NGOs
195 international NGOs
199 government partners
17 UN agencies

33%
of global expenditure
to partners

Responding with lifesaving support

Emergency deployments
285 from UNHCR
135 from standby partners

6 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

81,337

55,680

refugees in need
of resettlement

resettlement submissions
to 29 countries

UNHCR-facilitated
departures to 27 countries

Top 5 countries of origin

Top 5 resettlement countries
1 United States of America 29,026

1 Syrian Arab Republic

2 Canada

2 Democratic Republic of the Congo 21,807

14,264

28,189

3 United Kingdom

6,286

3 Eritrea

4,288

4 Sweden

4,967

4 Afghanistan

3,995

5 France

4,926

5 Somalia

3,066

Education

Emergencies

10 active emergencies

1.2M

5 new emergency declarations
in 2018
Cameroon
Chad
The DRC
The North of Central America
The Venezuela situation

61%

23%

1%

of refugee children
attend primary school

of refugee children
attend secondary school

of refugee youth attend
university

Livelihoods and economic inclusion

75 countries

1.8M

implemented livelihoods and economic
inclusion initiatives

beneficiaries (people of concern and
members of host communities)

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 7

OVERVIEW | FOREWORD BY HIGH COMMISSIONER FILIPPO GRANDI

A moment
of transition

In the course of 2018, conflict, persecution
and civil strife continued to uproot millions of
people, in harrowing circumstances. In many
parts of the world, the politics around refugee
and migration issues became more
acrimonious and polarized, with direct
consequences for the lives of many refugees
who were denied refuge, separated from
family members, or pushed back to situations
of danger. Yet at the same time, a groundswell
of solidarity was evident. Long-standing host
countries stood firm in their commitment to
protection principles and humanitarian values,
and people across all walks of life came
together to welcome and support refugees,
including in countries where official policies
became more restrictive.

The plight of refugees and migrants moving
in mixed flows—exploited, imprisoned and
even enslaved while undertaking perilous
journeys—called for resolute action and
practical solutions, even as insecurity and
other restrictions often limited our scope of
action, in Libya and elsewhere. An average
of six people lost their lives each day trying
to cross the Mediterranean, with search and
rescue capacities reduced and
governments failing to agree on predictable
disembarkation arrangements.

For UNHCR and its partners, 2018 brought
many challenges. In the first part of the year,
we faced a race against time to stabilize
conditions for Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh, ahead of the monsoon season.
The Venezuela crisis reverberated across an
entire region, as a growing number of
destitute and vulnerable people sought
stability and refuge beyond its borders.
Hostilities in Yemen intensified, exposing
millions to hunger; and the number uprooted
by recurrent conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African
Republic also soared. Countries such as
Cameroon, Ethiopia and Nicaragua were
affected by new or accelerating displacement.

© UNHCR/Charlotte Allan

8 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Grace, 27, from Uganda leads a life skills class on
sewing machines for men and women from the
refugee and host communities at Bidibidi Refugee
Settlement in Uganda.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 9

OV E R V I E W I F O R E W O R D BY H I G H C O M M I S S I O N E R F I L I P P O G R A N D I

OV E R V I E W I F O R E W O R D BY H I G H C O M M I S S I O N E R F I L I P P O G R A N D I

© UNHCR/Andrew McConnell

This was also a moment of transformation.
On 17 December 2018, the Global Compact
on Refugees was affirmed by the United
Nations General Assembly, presenting a
new set of opportunities to translate the
principle of responsibility-sharing into
concrete action, building on a growing
number of positive examples of the
application of the Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework.

UN Refugee Chief Filippo Grandi talks to a young returnee in the ruins of Souran in the Syrian Arab Republic.

Millions of internally displaced people
returned home in Iraq and Syria, often to
widespread destruction and hardship, while in
Afghanistan, Somalia and other long-standing
displacement situations, the scope for
solutions remained very limited. By the end
of the year, the number of people of concern
to UNHCR around the world—asylum-seekers,
refugees, returnees, the internally displaced
and stateless—had reached 74.8 million people,
the highest figure ever.
Amidst these challenges, with the support
of committed donors, and working closely
with generous host countries and other
partners, UNHCR continued to be present
in the field—saving lives, securing
protection and helping build a future for
millions of refugees, internally displaced
and stateless persons. Some 39% of our
workforce was assigned in “hardship” duty
stations, often in insecure environments,
separated from their families. We made

10 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

significant investments in strengthening the
integrity of our programmes, through new
risk management measures and additional
oversight capacities, and implemented a
range of prevention and response measures
in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse,
and sexual harassment.
Record funding commitments made for
2018 at our pledging conference in
December 2017 were an important
expression of confidence in our programmes.
The amount pledged—more importantly,
the flexible funding pledged—placed us
on a solid footing to commence our 2018
programmes and paved the way to a
record year for voluntary contributions.
All told, UNHCR received $4.184 billion in
contributions. When added to carry-over
and other amounts, UNHCR had funds
available to it of $4.710 billion but, in the
face of growing needs, this still left a
funding gap of 43%.

The Compact presented an important
opportunity to broaden the base of support
for refugees and make it more predictable,
to accelerate the shift away from outdated
camp-based response models; to drive
refugee inclusion in local communities;
to mobilize development resources, civil
society and the private sector; and to
refocus attention on solutions.

take decisions and direct resources in a
quick and nimble way. This work is aligned
with the UN Development System reforms
that are now being rolled out, in which we
are fully engaged.
With the affirmation of the Compact, we
now have a framework to transform our
response to major refugee situations
around the world, including by broadening
the base of support beyond traditional host,
donor, and resettlement countries, and
making it a truly “whole-of-internationalcommunity affair”. The first Global Refugee
Forum, to take place in December 2019,
will offer an unprecedented opportunity to
showcase, and further galvanize, innovative
and tangible ways of applying the principles
of solidarity and equitable burden- and
responsibility-sharing in practice.
At this moment when division and
intolerance have gained ground in many
parts of the world, it is critical that we
are able to demonstrate, in practical,
meaningful ways, that international
cooperation and multilateralism still work.
By giving substance to the Compact, and
working together to translate its promise
into action, we can do just that—and
help strengthen cohesion and build
opportunities for millions of uprooted
people and hosting communities
worldwide.

Making this work requires adaptation,
innovation and the ability to influence and
shape responses on the ground. This is
the driving rationale behind UNHCR’s
internal transformation process, and the
regionalization and decentralization phase
that we launched in 2018. Our aim is
to ensure that we have strong and
empowered country operations, with the
authority and weight of our organization
behind them, able to engage a wide range
of partners, build and implement strategies,

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 11

OV E R V I E W I S P E C I A L E N VOY

OV E R V I E W I S P E C I A L E N VOY

Angelina Jolie, the UNHCR
Special Envoy
A year after the fighting to liberate it ended,
West Mosul lies abandoned, ruined and
apocalyptic. The streets are eerily quiet:
hundreds of thousands of former residents
of the city are living in camps or nearby
communities because there is nothing for
them to go back to. In streets that look
entirely uninhabitable, small numbers of
shell-shocked families are clearing the
rubble of their homes with their bare hands,
braving the concealed explosives left
behind. Even worse than the physical ruin
of the city, even worse than the sundering
of its cultural fabric, is the damage done
to the emotional well-being of its people.
The injustices done to them and the suffering
they endured at the hands of their occupiers
is impossible to quantify.
At another time in history, would we have
reacted differently to what happened in
Mosul? Would we have reacted as we did
after the liberation of Europe after World
War II, flooding it with assistance to rebuild
and recover? I thought of the survivors of
chemical weapons attacks, of hospital
bombings, of the organized rape and
deliberate starvation of civilians that are all
features of contemporary conflicts, and

asked myself, have we become numb to
human suffering? Are we guilty of
performing a form of collective moral triage,
selectively choosing when and where we
will defend human rights, for how long and
to what degree?
In Mosul, I felt I was standing at a ground
zero of foreign policy failures over the last
decade. But also in a place that represents
the human capacity for survival and
renewal, and the stubborn endurance of
universal values in individual hearts. I think
of a father I met, and his joy that his two
young daughters are able to go to school
again. Penniless and without a roof over
their heads, he spoke as if he had no more
treasured possession than their report
cards. There would be no more profound
symbol of victory than every girl in Mosul
being able to go back to school and excel.
Not a single family I met in West Mosul
asked me for anything. They are not
counting on our assistance. Mosul can trace
its history back 3,000 years—I am sure its
people will overcome those three years of
terror. But how much better it would be if we
saw their recovery as our joint endeavour.

The above are excerpts from the Special Envoy’s original article published in the
HuffPost. In addition to her mission to Iraq, the Special Envoy also carried her advocacy
and voice to Jordan, to the Republic of Korea, and to the Venezuela situation.

12 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Andrew McConnell

A Letter
From Mosul

“I felt I was standing at a ground zero of foreign policy failures over the last decade.
But also in a place that represents the human capacity for survival and renewal, and the
stubborn endurance of universal values in individual hearts.”—Mosul, Iraq, June 2018.

“If we’ve learned anything from the last decade in the
Middle East and Afghanistan, it is that if ‘liberty’
is not followed by effective support to ensure stability,
then the cycle of violence only continues.”
—Angelina Jolie, UNHCR Special Envoy

Appointed Special Envoy in 2012, Angelina Jolie undertakes advocacy and represents UNHCR and the High
Commissioner at the diplomatic level, and engages with decision-makers on global displacement issues. Through
this work, she has helped contribute to the vital process of finding solutions for people forced to flee their homes.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 13

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

WO R K I N G I N PA RTN E RS H I P

Working in
partnership

© UNHCR/Duniya Aslam Khan

Rwamwanja refugee settlement, Uganda. An 11-year-old boy rides
around on the bike which he and his friends have made of wood.

14 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

The engagement of a broad range of actors,
including those beyond the traditional
humanitarian sphere, is critical to mobilizing
effective responses and pursuing solutions
to forced displacement and statelessness.
This means strengthening existing
partnerships, but also pursuing new ones
that can help foster innovative approaches
to protection, assistance and solutions.
Practicing “new ways of working” such as
strengthened humanitarian-development
cooperation, is key and fundamental to the
broader United Nations reform efforts,
particularly in relation to the reform of the

United Nations development system
and centrally linked to pursuing the
2030 Agenda.
In 2018, UNHCR contributed to field-driven
initiatives to identify and work towards
collective outcomes, allowing UNHCR and
its partners to capitalize on comparative
advantages and mandates, transcending
longstanding silos, with a positive impact
on operations. A key objective remained
for UNHCR—ensuring that protection stays
central to these efforts, be they from a
humanitarian, development or peace angle.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 15

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

refugee displacement, no single actor can
operate in isolation. UNHCR’s own work
would not be possible without the
contributions of all its many partners.

2018 – THE YEAR OF
THE GLOBAL COMPACT
ON REFUGEES
2018 came to a close with the historic
affirmation by the UN General Assembly of
the Global Compact on Refugees.

The Global Compact builds upon this by
setting the scene for a more systematic and
predictable engagement with a broader
range of stakeholders from the outset, to
capitalize on their respective expertise,
capacities and resources.

After a year of extensive dialogue with
Member States, international organizations,
civil society, the private sector and other
experts, UNHCR launched formal
consultations on the first—or “zero”—draft
of the Global Compact in February 2018.
Extending over six sessions, these
consultations were instrumental in the
development of the Global Compact before
it was proposed by the High Commissioner
in his 2018 annual report to the United
Nations General Assembly.

With strong partnerships essential for
sustainable and comprehensive responses,
UNHCR engaged a wide range of
actors—States, development actors,
international organizations, UN entities,
the private sector, financial institutions,
NGOs, academics, diasporas and civil
society, to name a few—throughout the
consultations and in developing the text.

“Refugee crises call for a global sharing of responsibility,
and the Compact is a powerful expression of how we work together
in today’s fragmented world.”
—Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The text was informed by experience in
applying the Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework (CRRF), initiated in
15 countries in follow-up to the New York
Declaration, as well as lessons learned and
ideas generated from other historical and
current refugee situations. It also drew on
thematic discussions which had explored
actions to be taken to bring about the kind
of comprehensive refugee responses
envisaged by the New York Declaration,
with arrangements for their reinforced
operationalization outlined in the Compact.

16 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

While acknowledging the primary
responsibility and sovereignty of States,
the Global Compact recognized—in both
substance and process—that transforming
the collective response to refugee
displacement and solutions would require
a broader and more diverse coalition of
support and action.
The essential role of all stakeholders in driving
policy, influencing public opinion, providing
protection and lifesaving assistance, or
facilitating solutions, is not new. Indeed, with
an issue as complex and far-reaching as

UNHCR ensured the voices of refugees
and host communities were included in
developing the Compact, recognizing that
responses are most effective when they
actively and meaningfully engage those they
are intended to protect and assist. Given the
diversity of experiences among refugees,
those who contributed represented only a
part of the refugee community, but their
involvement was nonetheless vital in
identifying key issues and providing a
“sounding board” for the development of
people-oriented reception, protection and
solutions policies.
The engagement of development actors was
also key, recalling the need for humanitarian
assistance and development aid to
complement each other. Equally, the
importance of promoting solutions that build
on local economies and address the needs

of affected host communities, the majority
of which are in developing countries, has
rightly gained greater prominence.
In addition to generating ideas to be included
in the Global Compact’s programme of
action, UNHCR’s partners were instrumental
in sharing good practices. Indeed, many
States and organizations have long been
pursuing comprehensive responses in
different countries and regions where
refugees are hosted. Their experiences
helped to highlight both the challenges and
opportunities to consider in the development
of the Global Compact, and in providing
examples of innovative approaches to be
replicated or built upon in the future.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 17

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

The Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework in 2018
Two years into the application of the CRRF,
valuable good practices and lessons learnt
have been collected on the practical
application of comprehensive responses
that can be adapted across countries
and regions when operationalizing the
Compact, as of 2019.
The experience of some CRRF countries
which pioneered the Framework ahead
of the affirmation of the Compact
demonstrates the value of early
engagement of donors, recalling that for
donors to adjust strategies and priorities in
line with the CRRF they, too, require time to
build understanding and ensure alignment.
Refugee-hosting countries have noted the
need for further flexibility and predictability
in funding mechanisms, with complementary
humanitarian and development support,
and greater transparency in relation to

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

Official Development Assistance (ODA),
which would support government and NGO
stakeholders in longer-term planning and
prioritization, and to maintain political
support for comprehensive approaches.
Experiences in CRRF countries show that
there are substantive changes in the
approach of some donor States. Some of
these include: taking longer-term
perspectives on displacement; focusing
on livelihoods and economic inclusion,
supporting the efforts of host governments
for inclusion of refugees into national service
delivery; and demonstrating willingness to
work across host and refugee communities,
thereby ensuring that development gains are
shared across both communities.
For example, the European Union, Germany,
Japan and the Republic of Korea were
among the first donors to coordinate their
humanitarian and development funding, and
make significant additional contributions

Global Compact for Refugees | Objective 1 | Ease pressures on the
host countries involved.
Governmental donors and the EU exceeded their 2017 humanitarian funding levels
to UNHCR in 2018 (see the chapter on Funding UNHCR’s programmes). However,
diversity remained largely confined to the private sector.
More broadly, over the past three years, members of the OECD Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) have contributed ODA bi-laterally or through pooled
funds to international organizations to programmes and projects supporting refugees
and host communities with $25.98 billion and an addition of $2.99 billion in 2018
(noting that final year-end figures for 2018 are not yet available). ODA growth between
2015 and 2017 showed a steady increase, with DAC members mostly indicating their
ODA would remain the same or increase in the future.
Over the same three-year period, the percentage of development funds going to
refugee-hosting contexts increased, from 23% in 2015 to 29% in 2017, and
21 DAC members are integrating issues related to refugees into their development
policies. Along with members of the DAC, rising engagement from multilateral
development banks was noted. This will not only be catalytic in drawing in other
development partners, but also indicates a trend toward greater involvement in
refugee-hosting contexts on the development side.

18 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Development actors
In 2018, the UN Secretary-General highlighted the CRRF as one of the most concrete
expressions of the “new way of working”. UNHCR’s cooperation with the World Bank is an
example of how complementary partnerships can leverage additional funds to support host
countries, host communities, and refugees. UNHCR does not itself undertake development
activities but seeks to influence and encourage additional financing to support the efforts of
national governments to address refugee situations. In line with the Global Compact, UNHCR
played a catalytic role in bringing humanitarian and development actions closer together to
address the longer term challenges of forced displacement.
Further financing is required to meet the commitments made in the New York Declaration.
Some CRRF countries are or will have greater access to expedited concessional finance that
has the specific objective of increasing self-reliance for refugees and host communities.
However, only a select set of CRRF countries have access to the World Bank IDA 18 refugee
and host community sub-window, although they may qualify for other relevant financing.
To date, 14 countries have been determined eligible for this World Bank funding.
Lastly, although there has been progress in some CRRF countries in areas such as
collaboration in industrial zones, joint job programmes or other livelihood schemes that employ
or benefit people from both host and refugee communities, the main successes have been in
policy. Examples of such include the Jordan Compact and the Ethiopia Jobs Compact, where
multinationals have been willing to invest capital in businesses and services which benefit both
refugees and host communities. There has also been increased collaboration with private
sector investors in certain CRRF countries and an increased focus on private sector
approaches, particularly the role private sector actors can play in facilitating income
opportunities for refugees and host communities, and financial inclusion.

towards host communities and refugees
through development funding, supporting
area-based approaches in line with
priorities of national and local authorities.
Similarly, development actors at the country
level are adapting their approach to refugee
hosting areas. Development donors such as
ADA (Austria), BMZ (Germany), DANIDA
(Denmark), DEVCO (EU), Enabel (Belgium),
JICA (Japan), KOICA (the Republic of Korea),
the Netherlands, and Sida (Sweden) scaled
up activities and brought longer-term
investments and a sustainability lens to
the response.
DANIDA, for example, is dedicating up
to 60% of its country programme to the

humanitarian-development nexus with the
new Northern Uganda Resilience Initiative.
Sida is building the capacity and the
systems of Uganda’s hospitals to reduce
neonatal mortality. Since December 2016,
more than 130,000 pregnant women and
550,000 children under five in both refugee
and hosting populations have been
assisted through UNICEF’s Health Systems
Strengthening project. The EU Trust Fund
for Northern Uganda, run through an NGO
consortium led by the Danish Refugee
Council and bilateral agencies such as
Enabel has made progress in securing
an income for over 6,650 beneficiaries.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 19

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

During planning for comprehensive
responses, experience demonstrated the
need for close attention to the gaps between
government policy and service delivery,
often requiring a deeper analysis of policy
implementation and structural and procedural
issues in addition to legal and policy
frameworks. For example, in the majority of
CRRF countries refugees have the right to
work but, nonetheless, may not be fully
benefitting from these more inclusive refugee
policies. In some contexts, restrictions such
as on freedom of movement may hamper
self-reliance or access to national services
which require movement outside camps
or other designated locations of residence.
As a result of structural economic and
administrative or cultural barriers to the
labour market, in practice, refugees’
participation might be effectively reduced
or impeded.
National ownership and leadership has
proven to be the most critical factor driving
the success of CRRF application, including
in Afghanistan, Chad and Rwanda, which
became CRRF countries in 2018. In several

countries, the CRRF approach and wideranging partnerships across government,
UN Agencies, donors and NGOs has
facilitated a “whole-of-government” approach
and provided fora to agree on programmes
of work and strategies that link to
government priorities. In all countries, the
CRRF has leveraged existing formal
mechanisms to ensure an integrated
government response.
In Latin America, for example, States
implementing the regional Comprehensive
Refugee Response Framework for Central
America and Mexico (known as the MIRPS,
which has national chapters containing a
“whole-of-government” response) showed
strong leadership building on and extending
pre-existing regional agreements.
Much of the success and momentum of the
CRRF roll-out in Uganda has been driven by
its ownership of the CRRF through a high-level
Steering Group within the Government with
wide stakeholder representation including
local authorities, as well as refugees and
host communities.

© UNHCR/Diana Diaz

An innovative approach to
self-reliance transforms lives
in Ethiopia
Since 2012, a UNHCR and IKEA Foundation project in
Dollo Ado, Ethiopia, has created opportunities for refugees
and the host community to work together, learn and earn
a living. 1,000 hectares of previously barren land are now
farms that boast crops such as watermelon, tomatoes and
corn. Investment in education will allow future generations
to sustain this initiative. Local businesses are also
flourishing thanks to access to microfinance, allowing
farmers to sell their crops. This project owes
its success to the vision of the Government of
Ethiopia and the collaborative efforts of local
and regional authorities.

20 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Global Compact for Refugees | Objective 2 | Enhance refugee self-reliance.
There is a growing recognition of the potential social and economic contributions
refugees can make in their host countries, when permitted to do so. A more inclusive
policy and legal approach by hosting States supported by increased investment by
development actors can generate development gains in key SDGs for host
communities as well as refugees. Refugee-hosting countries overall moved
considerably towards more inclusive policies, with progress noted across most
countries since September 2016. This included new refugee laws and regulations
guaranteeing the rights of refugees and expanding refugee access to national
systems and services.
Ethiopia’s revised refugee law is an example, one of the most progressive pieces of
refugee-related legislation in Africa, adopted shortly after the agreement on the
Global Compact on Refugees. Chad announced it would roll out the CRRF in May,
and by June the Ministry of Education announced that 108 schools in 19 camps and
refugee sites across the country had become official Chadian schools. Similarly,
refugee schools in Kakuma, Kenya, were registered as public schools with the Ministry
of Education.
In Costa Rica, refugees and asylum-seekers have been included in the “My First Job”
initiative, aiming to stimulate the private sector through a subsidy system for those
hiring people of concern, especially youth and people living with vulnerabilities. In
Zambia, UNHCR’s partner UNCDF worked with the Bank of Zambia to change policy
on what is an acceptable form of ID for opening a bank account, and Government-issued
Refugee Certificates and refugee ID cards are now accepted as valid “know your
customer” documents by financial service providers.
Importantly, refugees participate in CRRF facilitation mechanisms (Steering Groups
and Secretariats) in Djibouti, Ethiopia and Uganda, and have been extensively
consulted in places like Costa Rica, Mexico and Panama. Some States also started
incorporating refugees into planning processes in 2018. In Central America, this was
through specific and detailed commitments in the MIRPS, with greater integration in
planning stages a key element of the “whole-of-society” approach.
On more sensitive areas, such as freedom of movement for refugees and
encampment, varying degrees of progress have been made, although across all
contexts some progress is noted from previously held positions.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 21

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

Against a 15-year trend of gradual and
consistent increases in the numbers of
individuals resettled (albeit with annual
fluctuations), submissions in 2018 were on
a par with the average level for the period.
As part of the global commitment to more
equitable and predictable responsibilitysharing in the New York Declaration,
Member States expressed an intention to
provide resettlement places and other legal

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

pathways for admission on a scale to meet
the annual needs identified by UNHCR.
The Emerging Resettlement Countries
Joint Support Mechanism and the Global
Refugee Sponsorship Initiative are
important efforts seeking to expand not
only the base of countries participating
in resettlement schemes but also the
pathways and number of places available.

On returns, the trend these past few years
has been the numbers of people voluntarily
repatriating—the preferred option for most
refugees—are far outweighed by the
numbers being forced into displacement,
or the numbers in protracted displacement.
More detailed assessments of countries of
origin and the relative safety for returns is

needed as, for example, refugees may leave
countries of asylum with deteriorating
protection conditions, not because of
significant improvements in their country
of origin, but because there is marginally
better security in the country of origin than
the country of asylum.

Global Compact for Refugees | Objective 3 | Expand access to third-country
solutions.

Global Compact for Refugees | Objective 4 | Support conditions in countries
of origin for return in safety and dignity.

Resettlements since the adoption of the New York Declaration are lower despite the
upward trends over the last decade. Accompanying this decline have been multiple
initiatives to expand opportunities for third-country solutions by both Member States
and UNHCR (see the chapter on Building better futures). The development of the
three-year strategy (2019-2021) on resettlement and complementary pathways foreseen
in the Global Compact will be critical in attempts to reverse this decline.

Addressing the root causes of forced displacement, including peacebuilding in countries
of origin, represents the key challenge towards achieving this objective of the CRRF.
This requires political investment and enhanced stabilization and development efforts
from regional and international actors. Although limited voluntary returns occurred
during the year in CRRF countries, regional approaches to drivers of displacement and
instability, such as the MIRPS in Central America, IGAD’s “Nairobi Declaration and Plan
of Action on Durable Solutions for Somali Refugees and Reintegration of Returnees in
Somalia”, and the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees are crucial in accelerating
solutions in countries of origin.

There has been some progress, however. Some traditional resettlement States—including
Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom—expanded or are expanding the
numbers of refugees they resettle. The pool of States with resettlement programmes is
also expanding thanks to a number of emerging resettlement countries, strengthened
and consolidated through the Emerging Resettlement Countries Joint Support
Mechanism. This was launched at the Leaders’ Summit on Refugees, and provides a
platform to facilitate strategic support and capacity-building efforts for the development
of robust and sustainable resettlement programmes in new resettlement countries. The
Mechanism is already providing support to Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay.
Access to resettlement is also being facilitated through the establishment and expansion
of private and community sponsorship programmes for refugees. The use of evacuation
transit facilities—both as a protection tool for refugees in need of urgent or emergency
resettlement and as an alternative site for refugee processing—has expanded. Examples
of such are the Emergency Transit Mechanism in Niger, and the Protection Transfer
Arrangement programme in Central America.
The situation around the Mediterranean led to UNHCR calling in October 2017 for States
to provide 40,000 resettlement places for the 15 asylum countries along the central
Mediterranean route as part of the recently-established Core Group for Enhanced
Resettlement and Complementary Pathways along the Central Mediterranean Route.
Thanks to the collective efforts of States, UNHCR received 39,698 places out of the
40,000, an important demonstration of how collective efforts can contribute to
responsibility-sharing.

22 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

A “whole-of-government”, multi-stakeholder
approach, as reflected in the CRRF, requires
an investment of time and leadership
by host governments to bring together
diverse stakeholders and build a shared
understanding. Factors such as leadership
and political commitment from the highest
levels of government, openness to policy
reform, and international and multilateral
agencies’ commitment to new ways of
working all contributed to contextually
appropriate realizations of comprehensive

responses. There is a growing recognition
of the potential social and economic
contributions refugees can make in their
host countries, when permitted to do so.
Inclusive policy and legal adjustments by
hosting States supported by increased
development investments can positively
impact socioeconomic conditions for host
communities as well as refugees.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 23

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

The main goal of UNHCR’s vast network of partnerships is to ensure better outcomes for
people of concern by combining and leveraging complementary resources and working
together in a transparent, respectful and mutually beneficial way. These partnerships also
underpin UNHCR’s engagement in inter-agency fora and processes, where mutual
understanding and strong alliances help ensure that refugees, returnees, stateless persons
and IDPs are adequately prioritized.

UN reform

UNHCR Guidance
Note on the 2030
Agenda

UNHCR contributed to several of the key UN
reform efforts of 2018. As part of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Core
Group, UNHCR played an active part in the
finalization of the Management Accountability
Framework which articulates the mutual
accountabilities between Resident
Coordinators and UN Country Team
Representatives. The Office remained
constructively engaged in
the design of the new United Nations
Development Assistance Framework with
a view to ensuring effective collective UN
support to countries in their efforts to achieve
the SDGs. As co-Chair with WFP of the
Business Innovation Strategic Results Group,
UNHCR worked to meet targets relating to
greater integration of agencies’ back offices,
expanding use of common premises and
operationalizing mutual recognition of policies.
Moreover, UNHCR was an active member of
the Joint Steering Committee to advance
Humanitarian and Development Collaboration
chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General,
designed to resolving systemic bottlenecks
for collaboration with specific focus on several
key priority countries and regions.
UNHCR also supported enhanced UN
conflict prevention and mitigation efforts as
part of the Secretary-General’s peace and
security reforms. The Office played a regular

24 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

and substantive role in the weekly Deputies
and Executive Committee meetings;
remained active in the sustaining peace
architecture, including through review of
proposals to the Peacebuilding Fund; the
preparation of system-wide guidance on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace; and,
through strengthened engagement with the
permanent and non-permanent members of
the Security Council on matters affecting
people of concern. Importantly, the Office
led the Secretary-General’s mandated
inter-agency group on statelessness to
revise the Guidance Note on Statelessness;
create strategies for priority countries;
research nomadic groups; and improve
methodology and data for global estimates.

United Nations Agencies
UNHCR participated in a wide variety of
inter-agency fora and strengthened its
partnerships with other agencies, in line
with its commitment to the SDGs, the New
York Declaration and the Global Compact.
The SDGs are the cornerstone of UN
engagement and the UN system has been
aligning its programmes to support the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The great promise of the SDGs is that no
one is left behind, and refugees, IDPs and
migrants are identified as groups that are
included in this commitment. The SDGs are
owned and implemented by governments,

which UNHCR stands ready to support in
line with their priorities and in areas where
the Office has expertise.
Central to the 2030 Agenda is identifying
and overcoming obstacles to allow
marginalized populations to contribute to,
and benefit from, inclusion in sustainable
social and economic development
processes. This is of particular importance
to UNHCR, which issued a “Preliminary
Guidance Note on the 2030 Agenda” in
2017. Reflecting on 2018’s experience,
UNHCR updated the Guidance Note to set
out its normative and operational support to
refugees, IDPs and stateless persons within
the overall framework of the SDGs. In the
new Note, UNHCR will pursue inclusion
and partnerships (notably with other
UN Agencies) to plan and deliver the
Office’s contributions to the SDGs. All field
operations are to engage in the UN’s efforts
in support of the SDGs, particularly in
relation to the inclusion of marginalized
populations. A positive example of this
comes from the 2018-2022 UNDAF for
Kenya, where refugee priorities were
integrated for the first time.
Similarly, there was extensive work on
SDG 16.9 as part of the #IBelong Campaign
to End Statelessness.
There was effective inter-agency coordination
in preparing and responding to emergencies.
The analysis on early warning, early action
and readiness issued by the IASC’s reference
group identified early actions around risks
of very high concern. A unified response to
the Ebola outbreak, for instance, allowed for
the identification and securing of high-risk

contact points in Uganda. UNHCR also
helped develop the IASC “humanitarian
system-wide scale-up” protocols, which
replaced the “humanitarian system-wide
emergency activation-Level-3 response”.
Partnership with WFP was key in promoting
food security and self-reliance for people of
concern in particularly dire drought-prone
contexts such as Cameroon, Chad and
Ethiopia. In December 2018, UNHCR, OCHA,
UNICEF and WFP agreed on key principles
for a common cash platform, which can
include other interested agencies, in line
with Grand Bargain commitments.
Partnership with WFP also resulted in joint
principles for targeting assistance and a
global data sharing agreement.
Strengthening self-reliance was also the
main objective of UNHCR’s partnership with
ILO, in efforts to include refugees in national
health systems as well as offering them
personal development and economic
opportunities in their countries of asylum.
Working with UNICEF, UNHCR provided
refugees access to education on the same
grounds as their host communities to avoid
the “lost generations” of conflict, for instance
by expanding certified accelerated
education programming for both refugee
and host community youth in Africa and Asia.
Collaboration with both UNICEF and IOM
was crucial in identifying the needs and
advocating safeguards for vulnerable
people, with a specific attention to
unaccompanied or separated children
on the move.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 25

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

NGOs
UNHCR worked with 861 national and
international NGOs as partners, as
implementing agencies, and as fellow
advocates for the rights of displaced
people and stateless populations. Of the
$1.407 billion UNHCR disbursed to partners,
some $1.194 billion, or 85%, was provided
to NGOs, including $554.7 million to
666 national NGOs (see Funding UNHCR’s
programmes for more details).
UNHCR NGO
Innovation Award

UNHCR’s Partner Portal was converted into
an inter-agency portal in November 2018.
It supports common due diligence
processes that reduce the administrative
burden on partners and enhance efficiency
as they only need to register once to access

“The Girls’ Takeover”
To celebrate International Day of the Girl
Child, Plan International and UNHCR arranged
“The Girls’ Takeover” when, for one day, Sandy Alqas
Botros, a 19-year-old Iraqi refugee now living and studying
in Germany, took over the functions of UNHCR’s Assistant
High Commissioner for Operations.

26 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

three of the largest UN Agencies (UNHCR,
UNICEF, and WFP). Since the conversion
took place, 26 new partners entered into
partnership agreements with UNHCR. The
Office and UNICEF also harmonized their
auditing method for common partners,
using a risk-based approach established
by UNHCR.

different value chains. For example,
refugees and host communities in
Dollo Ado, Ethiopia, reaped the benefits
of pionieering investment from the IKEA
Foundation, and the partnership with the
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation focused
on innovative solutions in health, water,
sanitation and hygiene.

Private sector

A new private sector global campaign
began, a virtual solidarity walk where
people reach a communal target of

UNHCR continued to look to the private
sector for ever greater financial support, as
well as to contribute to providing solutions
for refugees and host communities.
Individual donors, corporations, foundations
and philanthropists were increasingly
prominent partners, contributing with
funding, in-kind donations, technical
expertise, creativity and innovation to
deliver critical programmes and raise
awareness to and engagement on the
refugee cause.
The private sector now often provides
products and services that refugees and
host communities need. It spurs economic
growth. It invests in technology. It employs
refugees directly and indirectly throughout

© Chayanon Panyathiraphong

UNHCR’s Partner
Portal

The annual NGO consultations—one of the
largest such UN-organized events—focused
in 2018 on “Putting people first”. On this
occasion, UNHCR launched the “UNHCR
NGO Innovation Award”. The two winners,
SINA Loketa from Uganda and Artemisszió
from Hungary, were chosen for the
innovative ways of improving the lives of
people of concern.

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

2 billion kilometres through fitness apps
or online, representing the cumulative
distance walked by refugees globally
each year.

2 Billion
Kilometres To
Safety - The new
private sector
global campaign

At the same time, funds from the private
sector provided a growing source of mostly
unearmarked income, giving flexibility in
how and where these funds can be used,
and allowing UNHCR to diversify its sources
of funding (see Funding UNHCR’s
programmes for more details).

UNHCR appointed its first two Patrons
in recognition of their advocacy and
awareness-raising work on behalf of
millions of refugees
Her Royal Highness Princess Sarah Zeid of Jordan was
appointed Patron for Maternal and Newborn Health. She
has championed the needs and rights of mothers and
newborns in fragile and humanitarian settings. Her role will
also help highlight the results of the work jointly conducted
between UNHCR and the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation to save newborn lives.
The Venerable Vudhijaya Vajiramedhi, a highly respected
Thai Buddhist monk, was appointed UNHCR’s Patron for
Peace and Compassion. He has supported the Nobody Left
Outside shelter campaign, and is particularly focused on
using his title to advocate for peaceful co-existence
between refugees and host communities.
A Patron is a prestigious honorary title given to those who
support UNHCR and refugees by dedicating valuable time
to disseminate information and knowledge about refugees.
The role is to influence public opinion, change negative
attitudes towards refugees and engage others to support
UNHCR’s work.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 27

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

Engaging with the public – global
campaigns

#WithRefugees
Coalition

Cities
#WithRefugees

#WithRefugees
Solidarity Map

The #WithRefugees campaign marked its
third year on 20 June 2018—World Refugee
Day—showcasing the positive actions
made around the world to help mitigate
fear, intolerance and growing xenophobia
towards refugees. Cities, companies,
universities, foundations, faith-based
organizations, youth groups and millions
of people came together in support of the
refugee cause with more than 30 million
worldwide expressions of solidarity, and
1.8 million petition signatures calling for
all refugees to have access to school, the
possibility to work, and to have a safe place
to live.
By World Refugee Day 2018, UNHCR was
able to bring together a coalition group of
over 450 members, many of whom are
refugees themselves, and a commitment to
promote tolerance and respect for people
forced to flee. Examples of initiatives by
coalition members included United World
Colleges’ aim to enrol up to 100 refugee
students a year at its 17 colleges worldwide,
AirBnB’s tool to enable hosts to provide
free, temporary accommodation to refugees,
and IKEA Switzerland’s offer of internships
as a gateway to employment.
UNHCR also launched Cities
#WithRefugees, inviting cities and local
authorities all over the world who are
working to promote inclusion, support
refugees and bring communities together
to sign a statement of solidarity
#WithRefugees. Fifty cities had joined this

28 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

coalition by World Refugee Day, and over
120 by the “High Commissioner’s Dialogue
on Protection Solutions in Urban Settings”
in December. Other campaign highlights
included the launch of the #WithRefugees
Solidarity Tour, which helped amplify the
impact of over dozens of national and global
solidarity events in more than 45 cities, and
the #WithRefugees Solidarity Map
showcasing all the incredible work and
innovation taking place around the world
for and by refugees.
UNHCR’s Goodwill Ambassadors and high
profile supporters were generous with their
influence and popularity in building
compassion and support for the refugee
cause. By mobilizing fans, generating
empathy, drawing media and social media
attention, helping UNHCR engage with
government and private sector decisionmakers, shedding a spotlight on the human
stories behind the sometimes overwhelming
statistics, they made a difference in the lives
of the people UNHCR serves. They also
played a role in fundraising, with over
$2 million raised, notably $1.5 million from
an event hosted by Cate Blanchett.
Goodwill Ambassadors helped secure large
corporate donations in 2018. For instance,
a portion of the proceeds from the global
release of Khaled Hosseini’s “Sea Prayer”
went to UNHCR, in addition to all author
proceeds (the first donation raised
$265,000). Examples of their commitment,
work and impact are included throughout
this Report.

From the UNHCR Archives: World Refugee Year, 60 years on…
In September 1958, the United Nations General
Assembly approved the institution of World Refugee
Year, an ambitious attempt to promote awareness of the
refugee situation, encourage donations and find
permanent solutions for different refugee crises. The
campaign was coordinated by UNHCR and UNRWA, was
launched in June 1959, and consisted of both political
and diplomatic activity.
UNHCR’s Archives documents this huge effort, which
included events and exhibitions, and the release of
photos, individual stories, pamphlets, publications and
movies, which in many ways foreshadowed the advocacy
work that continues to this day. UN Special
Representative Claude de Kémoularia visited 45 States
to advocate for the refugee cause. Worldwide media
coverage was a success, thanks also to the commitment
of celebrities like Yul Brynner and Brigitte Bardot.
An important mention goes to the Stamp Plan: on 7 April 1960 a stamp, depicting a stylized
refugee sheltered by two hands, was issued by 70 postal authorities to raise money and attract
public attention. Designed by Danish designer, Olav Mathiesen, this emblem would go on to
become the official UNHCR logo.
The impact of World Refugee Year was considerable and multi-level. Thanks to generous
donations, UNHCR’s Camp Clearance Programme in Europe was totally financed, giving the
chance of a new life for the over 30,000 European refugees still living in camps 15 years after
the end of World War II. New States acceded to the 1951 Convention and took action to resettle
categories of refugees—such as persons with special needs—to whom this option had been
denied. World Refugee Year showed that a great awakening of public and individual conscience
to refugee situations and their resolutions was possible in 1959, just as it is today.

“The tremendous gap between the needs of humanitarian programmes in all parts
of the world and the resources available to implement them is a constant challenge
to the conscience of more fortunate members of mankind.”
—Sadruddin Aga Khan, UNHCR Chargé de Mission and later High Commissioner.
UNHCR’s Archives occupies 13 kilometers of shelving, while its digital archives comprise some
10 million documents. The Records and Archives Section safeguards this globally and
historically unique collection and uses a state-of-the-art system to preserve digital materials.
The Archives contain a wealth of detail about important events including,
for example, records from the 1956 Hungarian uprising—the first major emergency in which
UNHCR became operational—as well as of UNHCR’s role as lead UN Agency in the former
Yugoslavia in the 1990s.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 29

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

Sport is recognized in the Global Compact
on Refugees (Art. 44) as a tool for social
development, inclusion, cohesion, and
well-being, particularly for refugee children,
adolescents and youth. Partnerships with,
amongst others, the Asian Football
Confederation, the Badminton World
Federation, the English Football
Association, the FC Barcelona Foundation,
the Football Club Social Alliance,

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

the International Olympic Committee (IOC),
Jesuit Worldwide Learning, Peace and
Sport, and the Taekwondo Humanitarian
Foundation provided resources and
expertise in sports programming. At the
IOC’s Olympism in Action Forum in Buenos
Aries in October 2018, UNHCR, the IOC and
Terre des Hommes launched the “Sports
for Protection toolkit”, a practical guide for
sports programming in forced displacement
settings.

The Nansen Award
Since its establishment in 1954, few
humanitarian honours possess the rich legacy
of UNHCR’s Nansen Refugee Award, which
acknowledges individuals, groups and
organizations for their dedication and outstanding work
on behalf of forcibly displaced people.
In 2018, Dr. Evan Atar Adaha, a surgeon from South Sudan,
was honoured as the laureate of the Award. Dr. Atar is the
only surgeon as well as the medical director at Maban
Referral Hospital, a 120-bed facility in Bunj, in Maban
County, serving a population of more than 200,000, and
the only functioning surgical facility in Upper Nile State.
The Award recognized Dr. Atar’s tireless efforts to bring
health care to the neediest in a tense and volatile region
of South Sudan.

Refugee coordination
Refugee response plans (RRPs) provide
a comprehensive picture of identified
needs, the impact on host communities,
operational strategies, and financial
requirements. The regional RRPs
included the requirements of 218 partners
in 22 countries appealing for more than
$8 billion under the leadership of Regional
Refugee Coordinators, with the Syria
Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan
(the 3RP) co-led by UNHCR and UNDP.
More than $4.574 billion was mobilized
for these crises.
A key lesson integrated from 2018 is RRPs
need to evolve from purely emergency to
more comprehensive responses, including
a focus on mid- to long-term solutions. The
3RP has been an important example in this
as, since its inception, it adopted bi-annual
planning cycles to good effect. Building on
this experience, the 2019 RRPs prepared in
2018 are two-year plans covering 2019 and
2020 integrating emergency response and
resilience efforts.

This approach was instrumental in
developing the Regional Refugee and
Migrant Response Plan for the Venezuela
situation, which is co-led by UNHCR and
IOM. This Plan employs a distinct regional
platform approach to meet the full breadth
of needs faced by the affected population
and the countries hosting them. In addition,
UNHCR participated in similar inter-agency
plans for Bangladesh and Burkina Faso, the
former jointly coordinated by UNHCR, IOM,
and the UN Resident Coordinator.
To improve financial tracking for RRPs
and refugee responses in general, UNHCR
developed the Refugee Response Financial
Tracking Dashboard. This online tool
compiles inter-agency budget and funding
information for all RRPs since 2012 and is
now the main platform for financial tracking
for inter-agency refugee responses.

Refugee
Response
Financial
Tracking
Dashboard

In addition to its involvement in RRPs,
UNHCR participated in 19 of the
22 humanitarian response plans led by
Humanitarian Coordinators, out of
which it coordinated 14 refugee chapters.

Four regional winners were also honoured with a Nansen Refugee Award certificate.
Ms. Samira Harnish, Founder and Executive Director of Women of the World, based in Salt Lake City, Utah in the
United States of America; Reclaim Childhood, an organization based in Jordan which uses sports to empower
refugee women and girls; Ms. Tuenjai Deetes, a Thai activist devoted to improving the lives of stateless hill tribe
communities in Northern Thailand; and Mayor Andreas Hollstein and the volunteers of the town of Altena,
Germany for their innovative approach to the integration of refugees.

REGIONAL REFUGEE RESPONSE PLAN

Inter-agency
funding received
(USD)

Funding level

Burundi

391,196,905

130,985,091

33%

DRC

547,049,611

185,207,443

34%

156,586,701

78,418,703

50%

South Sudan

1,379,415,957

694,606,917

50%

Syria 3RP

5,608,951,510

3,485,165,365

62%

TOTAL

8,083,200,684

4,574,383,519

57%

Nigeria

30 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Inter-agency
budget
(USD)

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 31

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

OV E R V I E W I W O R K I N G I N PA R T N E R S H I P

Decentralization – building the UNHCR of tomorrow
© UNHCR/Mary-Sanyu Osire

and assist people of concern; to advance
strategic partnerships at the point of
delivery, particularly with development
actors; and to engage more closely
consistently with States and other actors
at the national and regional levels.

Multi-year, multi partner strategies
The development and implementation of
multi-year, multi partner (MYMP) strategies
in 22 operations* has facilitated new
strategic alliances and a much broader
coalition of partners. The strategies have
also helped in defining UNHCR’s role and
specific contributions to the application of
comprehensive responses at country level,
bringing comparative advantages to resolve
protection and solution challenges in a
sustainable way for people of concern.

Inside Doro, South Sudan’s largest refugee camp, Benamoyo primary health care centre is the newest of two such establishments offering
comprehensive primary health care services to more than 59,000 refugees, and to members of the host community. UNHCR ensures a
constant supply of drugs, an ambulance for referrals, and technical and supportive supervision to staff.

In 2018, UNHCR launched a decentralization
process to build strong and empowered
regional presences and country offices,
and move authority closer to the point of
delivery. This decision reaffirmed UNHCR’s
strong commitment to remain a fieldoriented organization placed as close to the
point of delivery as possible so as to better
understand and respond to the needs of
people of concern. It also reflects broader
United Nations reform efforts—the Global
Compact, the Grand Bargain, reforms to
development, peace and security, and the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda to
promote greater efficiencies within the
UN system.

operations to make appropriate decisions
without unnecessary delay; respond faster
and more flexibly, especially at the onset of
large-scale emergencies; change how funds
and resources are prioritized and invested;
and strengthen operational integrity by
capturing context-specific knowledge
and translating it into viable programmes.
As part of this process, by the end of
2019, Bureaux will be moving to the field
and equipped with stronger capacities
in the areas of strategic planning and
management, external engagement,
protection, operations support and
coordination to support the country
operations.

Throughout 2018, a Change Team within
UNHCR designed a process to move
decision-making and accountability closer
to the point of delivery; empower

Starting in 2019, and completed by the end
of 2020, these reforms will allow UNHCR to
become a stronger and more reliable
partner in the collective effort to protect

32 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

theories of change that align with national
priorities and inter-agency frameworks.
The pursuance of MYMP strategies was
bolstered by the November 2018 launch of
the Solutions Capital Initiative, a donor pact
aiming to catalyse the implementation of
MYMP strategies in Costa Rica, Ecuador,
Ghana, Kenya, and Malawi. Through
strengthened systems, tools and guidance,
MYMP approaches will be better monitored
and evaluated, including the use of a theory
of change and greater focus on outcomes.
* The operations are Algeria, Brazil, Cameroon, Chad,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Ghana, Ethiopia,
Ecuador, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uganda, Ukraine, and the Regional Office for Northern
Europe.

In 2018, UNHCR conducted a lessons
learned exercise. Institutionalization of a
MYMP approach, the exercise found, will
need a broad set of changes to existing
systems and business processes, as well as
structured support to field operations over
a number of years.
The lessons will be integral for the revision
of UNHCR’s results-based management
(RBM) system, which will incorporate several
key changes in operations management
processes, including multi-year
requirements. The future RBM system will
empower UNHCR’s field operations to
develop, implement and monitor multi-year,
context-appropriate protection and solution
strategies and plans for UNHCR and
(implementing) partners’ response, with
focus on collective results. Revision of
UNHCR’s results framework will allow for
greater flexibility to develop context-specific

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 33

OV E R V I E W I G LO B A L S T R AT E G I C P R I O R I T I E S

OV E R V I E W I G LO B A L S T R AT E G I C P R I O R I T I E S

GLOBAL STRATEGIC
PRIORITIES 2018-2019
UNHCR’s Global Strategic Priorities (GSPs)
for the 2018-2019 biennium showcase the
most important areas in which UNHCR
made targeted efforts to improving the
protection of, and seeking solutions for, its
people of concern. They are divided into
two categories: a set of operational
priorities for field operations and a set of
support and management priorities for
core corporate functions.
At the country operations level, UNHCR
strongly advocated the inclusion of people
of concern into national plans, in line with
the SDGs. These efforts were supported by
the stronger alignment of the operational
GSPs with the SDGs, such as in the areas
of gender equality, peace and justice, food
security, health, education, livelihoods,
and water sanitation and hygiene.
The GSPs were increased from eight to
ten—the additional two being on cash and
data—to better reflect how UNHCR took
forward the vision set out in its 2017-2021
Strategic Directions, and to align them with
UNHCR’s commitments under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Grand Bargain.

ACHIEVEMENTS
Sustained efforts on core GSP areas
prompted improvements in several fields
of work. For instance, the operational and
coordination capacity for shelter and cash
assistance was strengthened in several
countries. Cash-based interventions
increased 13% compared to 2017, reaching
$568 million. Over 13,600 Refugee Housing
Units were deployed to 27 operations.
UNHCR as well worked on the inclusion of
refugees into national health insurance
34 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

systems. Enhancing resilience and facilitating
equitable access to health care, UNHCR
rolled out a new integrated refugee health
information system, and began collecting
and analyzing current data from health
services in refugee settings.
UNHCR supported governments undertaking
individual registration of asylum-seekers and
refugees, including completing a joint
verification exercise with the Government of
Uganda for over 1 million refugees. Other key
joint UNHCR-government registration or
verification exercises were initiated in
Bangladesh and Ethiopia. As it stands, over
7.2 million refugees are now registered in
UNHCR’s digital population registration and
identity management ecosystem.
Globally, the enrolment rates of primary
school-aged refugee children improved, with
the percentage of children enrolled rising to
61%. By the end of 2018, targeted
programmes resulted in the enrolment of
an additional 200,000 children (almost 50%
of whom were girls) into primary education
across twelve countries.
Compared to 2017, there was a 16.5% rise in
emergency deployments of trained personnel
(including partners), totaling some 420 people
(285 UNHCR staff and 135 standby partner
staff), reflecting strengthened partnership
and emergency-response capacity to meet
the needs of refugees and people of concern.

CHALLENGES
The onset of new emergency situations
required a reprioritization of funds towards
addressing lifesaving needs in many
operations including in the Americas, where
the exodus of Venezuelans created

significant challenges for neighbouring
countries, as well as States further afield.
Ensuring access to assistance and basic
services was also challenged by the
increasing number of people of concern
on the move.
Access to adequate shelter remained a major
challenge in many operations, despite
notable progress in finding solutions for it.
Notably, deterioration of the Venezuela crisis
escalated the need for shelter in the Americas
where UNHCR focused its response on
cash-based initiatives to respond to the
shelter needs in urban areas as well as
emergency shelter provision at transit sites.

MORE INFORMATION
More detail and context are contained
throughout this publication, in the regional
summaries, and in particular in the matrices
in the thematic chapters. Detailed reporting
on UNHCR’s achievements and challenges
across all GSP areas in 2018 are
available in the detailed progress
report on the Global Focus website.

OPERATIONAL GSPs

UNHCR identified 1.2 million people in need
of resettlement in 2018. By the end of the
year, 81,337 submissions had been made
to 29 countries. UNHCR facilitated the
departure of 55,680 people to 27 countries.

SAFEGUARDING FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

Limited resources resulted in cuts in food
assistance, food security and nutrition
assistance. In eastern Chad for example,
where the situation has been deteriorating
over the past 3 years, several settlements
reported global acute malnutrition rates over
15%, corresponding to emergency levels.

RESPONDING WITH LIFESAVING SUPPORT

Inclusion of children of concern into national
child protection system remained a
challenge. Where such systems functioned
effectively and were accessible to refugees
and other children of concern, key service
providers often lacked the knowledge and
structures to effectively coordinate and
respond to the complex protection needs of
children of concern.
While UNHCR made important progress in
expanding refugees’ financial inclusion and
promoting refugees’ right to work, existing
legal frameworks or practical obstacles,
such as high unemployment and poverty
rates in many host countries, continued
to impede access to safe and sustainable
employment for people of concern.

Favourable
protection
environment

Security from
violence and
exploitation

Fair protection
processes and
documentation

Basic needs and
services
Reducing mortality
International standards
in shelter and WASH

BUILDING BETTER FUTURES

Community
empowerment and
self-reliance

Durable solutions

Building coexistence
and active participation
Education and
livelihoods

SUPPORT AND MANAGEMENT GSPs
Financial management

International protection

Information and
communications
technologies

Coordination

Programme
management

Emergency
preparedness and
response

Mobilization of support

Human resources

Data

Cash

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 35

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

Funding UNHCR’s
Programmes
2018 OVERVIEW
This chapter presents an overview of UNHCR’s
requirements, income and expenditure in 2018. More
detailed information can be found on
UNHCR’s main operational reporting
platform, Global Focus.

TABLE 1

With the total population of concern to UNHCR growing
to 74.8 million people, UNHCR’s global needs-based
budget grew 3% during the year compared to 2017.
Its growth clearly reflected UNHCR’s response to
increasing or worsening crises generating greater
needs for more people in more places.

UNHCR’s final 2018 budget was $8.220 billion, having
increased from $7.508 billion. The increase came from
six supplementary budgets totaling $712 million which
were added during the year.
Total funds available to UNHCR reached $4.710 billion.
This was mainly comprised of voluntary contributions
of $4.117 billion, the assessed contribution of $43 million

from the UN Regular Budget, carry-over of $426.7 million,
and $123.5 million as other income and adjustments.
Expenditure totaled $4.226 billion and the
implementation rate (expenditure over total funds
available) was 90%. Taking total funds available over
the budget, the funding gap was 43%, or $3.510 billion.

| BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE | USD

REGION AND SUB-REGION

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

AFRICA
West Africa

35,361,808
15,270,128
70,296,295
23,795,662
34,649,387
17,886,398
-

58,085,682 294,560,121
16,808,233 152,989,251
128,498,318 1,727,840,784
56,310,762 790,706,912
109,334,463 608,228,501
49,895,535 294,023,494
- 125,004,175
66,424,143

Eastern Europe

Expenditure

15,215,267
5,396,835
7,223,970
2,716,832
1,661,313
689,299
1,896,865
773,952

Budget

2,293,410,213

25,997,415

140,307,489

295,918,463 2,755,633,580

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Expenditure

1,114,600,165

9,576,918

56,952,188

123,014,530 1,304,143,801

Middle East

Budget
Expenditure

Central Africa and the Great Lakes

Budget
Expenditure

Southern Africa

SUBTOTAL AFRICA

Budget

Expenditure

25,814,757
14,595,979
149,483,010
101,933,850

7,965,618
4,709,481
1,175,855
575,977

-

21,556,495
11,863,357

33,780,375
19,305,460
172,215,360
114,373,184

Budget
Expenditure

Latin America

SUBTOTAL AMERICAS

South-Eastern Europe

Budget

Budget

175,297,767

9,141,473

-

21,556,495

205,995,735

Expenditure

116,529,829

5,285,458

-

11,863,357

133,678,644

Budget

203,310,275
71,341,044
6,529,889
3,718,094
26,855,319
13,788,502
280,225,734
190,419,838
13,533,008
9,675,581

599,000
112,947
2,086,110
1,602,031
828,049
612,834
27,801,462
12,490,434
325,133
280,087

89,226,179
33,673,935
-

30,656,971
21,490,463
18,560,861
9,994,773
-

323,792,426
126,618,390
8,615,999
5,320,124
27,683,367
14,401,336
326,588,056
212,905,045
13,858,141
9,955,668

530,454,224
288,943,060

31,639,753
15,098,333

89,226,179
33,673,935

49,217,832
31,485,235

700,537,989
369,200,563

Expenditure
Central Asia

Budget
Expenditure

South Asia

Budget
Expenditure

South-East Asia

Budget
Expenditure

East Asia and the Pacific

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Budget
Expenditure

Northern, Western, Central and Southern Europe

SUBTOTAL EUROPE

North Africa

SUBTOTAL MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

Expenditure

162,653
121,938

29,213,817
17,690,539
-

491,512,289
158,798,810
45,123,828
26,134,632
344,723,858
300,511,519

Budget

841,218,149

10,765,356

162,653

29,213,817

881,359,975

Expenditure

460,494,757

7,137,727

121,938

17,690,539

485,444,961

Expenditure

1,113,663,700
696,660,699
234,162,521
118,428,132

1,313,445
864,277
-

259,200,000
29,369,636
-

862,768,826 2,236,945,971
399,718,905 1,126,613,517
10,658,565 244,821,086
10,010,351 128,438,483

Budget

1,347,826,221

1,313,445

259,200,000

873,427,391 2,481,767,057

815,088,831

864,277

29,369,636

409,729,256 1,255,052,000

Budget

5,188,206,574

78,857,441

488,896,322 1,269,333,999 7,025,294,336

Expenditure

2,795,656,642

37,962,714

120,117,696

465,518,487
435,569,556
239,972,187
235,075,917

-

-

Budget

5,893,697,248

78,857,441

488,896,322 1,269,333,999 7,730,785,009

Expenditure

3,466,302,114

37,962,714

120,117,696

464,425,011
13,242,991
12,000,000
8,088,107

-

-

Budget

6,383,365,250

78,857,441

488,896,322 1,269,333,999 8,220,453,012

Expenditure

3,474,390,222

37,962,714

120,117,696

Budget
Budget

Budget
Budget

Expenditure
SUBTOTAL FIELD

Global Programmes

Budget
Expenditure

Headquarters1

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL PROGRAMMED ACTIVITIES

Operational Reserve

Budget

NAM Reserve2

Budget

JPO

Budget
Expenditure

TOTAL

1
2

36 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

PILLAR 4

2,299,266
1,657,795
5,433,290
3,156,395
3,032,800
2,323,538

Expenditure

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
South-West Asia

PILLAR 3

459,999,206
139,450,477
39,690,538
22,978,237
341,528,404
298,066,043

Budget
Expenditure

Expenditure

THE AMERICAS
North America and the Caribbean

PILLAR 2

EUROPE
185,897,364
115,514,055
1,521,822,200
707,883,656
462,583,339
225,552,262
123,107,310
65,650,191

Budget
Expenditure

East and Horn of Africa

REGION AND SUB-REGION

TOTAL

PILLAR 1

593,782,917 3,547,519,969
-

465,518,487
435,569,556
239,972,187
235,075,917

593,782,917 4,218,165,442
-

464,425,011
13,242,991
12,000,000
8,088,107

593,782,917 4,226,253,549

Includes allocations from the UN Regular Budget as follows: $42,997,200 (budget) and $42,954,251 (expenditure).
“New or additional activities - mandate-related” (NAM) Reserve.					

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 37

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

2018 BUDGET

Supplementary budgets

The Executive Committee, at its 68th session
in October 2017, approved an original global
needs-based budget for 2018 of $7.508 billion.
At its 69th session in October 2018, the
Executive Committee approved a revised
budget of $8.275 billion, incorporating
supplementary budgets of $766.9 million.
The supplementary budget for the South
Sudan situation was subsequently reduced
by $54.9 million, bringing the final
supplementary budget to $712 million and
the annual budget for 2018 to $8.220 billion,
representing an overall budget growth of
3% compared to the final 2017 budget.

With the priorities driving the increase in
UNHCR’s budget coming mostly from the
need to respond to new or worsening crises,
six supplementary appeals, two of which
were revised, were issued. The financial
requirements for these budgets came to 9%
of the programmed activities of $7.730 billion.

CHART 2

| ORIGINAL AND FINAL BUDGETS BY REGION AND PILLAR | 2018

Final budget
$8.220 billion

Original budget
$7.508 billion
Pillar 1 80% | $5.977 billion

Pillar 1

78% | $6.383 billion

Pillar 2 1% | $79 million

Pillar 2

1% | $79 million

Pillar 3 3% | $250 million

Pillar 3

6% | $489 million

Pillar 4 16% | $1.202 billion

Pillar 4

15% | $1.269 billion

Original budget
Final budget
CHART 1

| SUPPLEMENTARY BUDGETS | 2018

South Sudan situation
$38 million | 5%

PILLAR 2: STATELESS PROGRAMME
Millions

Millions

PILLAR 1: REFUGEE PROGRAMME
4,000
3,500
3,000

30
25

2,500

Venezuela situation
$43 million | 6%

35

20

2,000
15

1,500
10

1,000

Democratic Republic of
the Congo situation
$67.6 million | 10%

Syria situation
$259.2 million | 36%

500

5

0

0

Africa

Asia and the
Pacific

Europe

Middle East
Global Headquarters
and
Programmes
North Africa

Africa

Americas

Asia and the
Pacific

Europe

Middle East
Global Headquarters
and
Programmes
North Africa

Total supplementary
budgets
$712 million
PILLAR 3: REINTEGRATION PROJECTS

300

PILLAR 4: IDP PROJECTS

Millions

Millions

Central Mediterranean route
situation | $96 million | 14%

Americas

250

1 ,000

800

200
600

Myanmar situation | $208.2 million | 29%

150
400
100
200

50

0

0
Africa

38 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Americas

Asia and the
Pacific

Europe

Middle East
Global Headquarters
and
Programmes
North Africa

Africa

Americas

Asia and the
Pacific

Europe

Middle East
and
North Africa

Global Headquarters
Programmes

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 39

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

The final budget of $8.220 billion comprised
programmed activities of $7.730 billion.
Programmed activities are defined as
field, global programmes and Headquarters
activities only, excluding reserves and
the Junior Professional Officer (JPO)
programme. Overall programmed activities
increased by $802 million or 12% from
the original to the final budget. This was
an increase of $291 million, or 4%, when
compared to the final 2017 budget for
programmed activities.
Globally, Pillar 1 (refugee programmes)
was the largest component of the budget
for programmed activities, at $5.894 billion
or 76%. It was also that portion of the budget
that increased the most over the year,
by $118 million, or 2% compared to the final
2017 budget. Major increases under Pillar 1

were in South-East Asia ($130.2 million, or
87%) due to the operation in Bangladesh for
the Myanmar situation, in Eastern Europe
($67 million or 17%) due to operations in
Turkey, and in Latin America ($59.5 million,
or 66%) for the Venezuela and North of
Central America situations.
Regionally, the largest budget was in Africa,
at $2.755 billion or 36% of programmed
activities. Within Africa, $1.727 billion, or
63% of the regional budget, was in the East
and Horn of Africa, reflective of a series of
protracted and overlapping crises. The
budget for the Middle East sub-region was
the largest of all sub-regional budgets at
$2.236 billion or 27% of programmed
activities, a reflection of the continuing
crises within the region.

This meant UNHCR had available to it
$4.117 billion in voluntary contributions
against the budgetary needs.
UNHCR’s donor base remained stable, as
did the trends regarding the sources and
type of funding. UNHCR received voluntary
contributions from 142 donors, ranging from

CHART 4

| CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE TOP TEN DONORS | 2018

All other donors | 24% | $999 million

United States of America
38% | $1.590 billion

2018 INCOME
The Netherlands | 2% | $79.5 million
CHART 3

Member States to pooled funds to private
individuals (see Table 3). The main source
of diversity came from the private sector,
where the number of individual donors
increased to 2.1 million from 1.92 million in
2017. UNHCR’s top donors were virtually
unchanged compared to 2017, as was the
percentage of income from the top ten.

| SOURCES OF INCOME | 2018

Denmark | 2% | $82.1 million

The top ten donors
provided $3.185 billion,
or 76%, of all
voluntary contributions

España con ACNUR | 2% | $93.7 million

Governments
and the European Union

United Kingdom | 2% | $99.4 million
Norway | 2% | $100.7 million

$3.607 billion

Japan | 3% | $120 million
Sweden | 3% | $143.3 million
Germany | 9% | $395.9 million

86%
Private donors
$422.7 million

10%

3% 1%

UN pooled funding and
Intergovernmental donors
$111.2 million

UN Regular Budget
$43.0 million

* Contributions exclude $81 million for implementation in 2019.

In 2018, UNHCR raised a record level of
voluntary contributions of $4.141 billion. The
assessed contribution of the UN Regular
Budget accounted for a further $43 million,
bringing total contributions to $4.184 billion.

40 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

The voluntary contributions above included
$81.4 million acknowledged in 2018
for implementation in 2019 and 2020,
and excluded $58.1 million acknowledged
in 2017 for implementation in 2018.

There were notable aspects to some
donors’ support for UNHCR with, in general,
contributions mostly up from those donors
contributing over $20 million. There were
record contributions from the United States
of America and the European Union.
Contributions increased significantly from
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab
Emirates, and there was increased support
from Denmark and Sweden. However,
Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan and the
United Kingdom all decreased.

European Union
11% | $480 million

The timeliness of pledges was similar to that
noted in 2017, with the exception of a
positive increase in early pledges leading
to a higher level of funding by March 2018.
In part, this was due to a record level of
contributions recorded at the pledging
conference for UNHCR in December 2017,
which saw $857 million pledged. By April
2018, the trend was similar to that of 2017
save for the record high level of funds
received by December 2018. With most

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 41

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

funding earmarked, and most earmarked
funding coming in the second half of the
year, this reduced flexibility and imposed
costs and constraints.

UNHCR recorded $269 million, or 6.4%, in
multiyear funding—defined as contributions
for which the implementation period is over
24 months.

Pooled funding rose quite significantly to
$94.1 million, increasing from $38.2 million
in 2017. The Central Emergency Response
Fund contributed $60.1 million, or 64% of
that sum. This remained, however, far below
the record level of contributions received
in 2016, of $146.4 million.

UNHCR also received $36.1 million in in-kind
contributions, including almost $16 million
from private donors. In-kind support included
support for premises, provision of standby
partners, and supply of non-food items.

Chart 3 | LEVELS OF EARMARKING | 2014-2018
Unearmarked funding has increased in absolute terms from $451 million in
2012 to $589 million in 2017, but in percentage terms it reduced from
205 | percent
15 per cent
2012 and 2017
CHART
LEVELS OF to
EARMARKING
| 2012between
- 2018

CHART 6

| TOP TEN SOURCES OF FLEXIBLE FUNDS | 2018

Sweden
16% | 98.2 million
All other donors
27% | $166.1 million

UNHCR received
$617.4 million
in unearmarked funding

Private donors in Italy
3% | $21.2 million
Private donors in Japan
4% | $24.2 million

2018

15

2012

18

40

20

0%

10%

32

20%

Unearmarked

30%

40%

Softly earmarked

27

20

50%

60%
Earmarked

España con ACNUR
13% | $82 million

The top ten donors of
unearmarked funding provided
$451.3 million, or 73%
of all unearmarked funds
Netherlands
8% | $47.1 million

Denmark
4% | $25.5 million
Japan
4% | $26.5 million

United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
7% | $45.3 million

Private donors in the
Republic of Korea | 6% | $38.7 million

Norway
7% | $42.5 million

28

70%

80%

90%

100%

Germany
18% | $132.9 million

Tightly earmarked
Sweden | 2% | $18.6 million

Flexibility of funding
The year saw the continued decline in the
percentages of flexible funding—
unearmarked or softly earmarked funding—
as a portion of UNHCR’s overall income.
Despite Grand Bargain commitments, the
trend remains towards greater earmarking
from donors, with 67%, or $2.768 billion, of
UNHCR’s income earmarked or tightly
earmarked. Flexible funding—unearmarked
and softly earmarked funding—came to
$1.372 billion, but declined to 33% from 35%
in 2017.
Unearmarked funding, which is contributed
without restrictions on its use, came to

42 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

$617.4 million from 81 donors. This was an
increase of nearly 5% on the $588.7 million
received in 2017. Some 56% of UNHCR’s
unearmarked funding was received in the
first quarter of the year, a vital indication of
timeliness and providing the Office with
valuable flexibility.
Softly earmarked funding allowed UNHCR
to use it across a range of countries and
activities in a given region or situation.
UNHCR received $754.6 million in softly
earmarked funding. This was a decline of
nearly 2% from the $768 million received
in 2017.

UNHCR received
$754.6 million in
softly earmarked funding

United States of America
62% | $467.4 million

The top two donors
provided
$600.3 million, or 80%

UNO-Flüchtlingshilfe | 2% | $17.8 million
Denmark | 2% | $17.6 million
Australia for UNHCR | 2% | $17.3 million
Finland | 1% | $11.3 million
Norway | 1% | $9.3 million
España con ACNUR | 1% | $7.6 million
Japan | 1% | $6.6 million
All other donors
6% | $48.3 million

More detailed information on donors
providing flexible funding is available
from the Global Focus website.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 43

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

Private sector income
UNHCR raised $422.7 million from private
donors, with 53% ($225 million) of this
unearmarked. At 10% of voluntary
contributions, the private sector
represented the third largest source of
funding. Around $293 million (69%) was
raised by individuals, and more than
$129 million (31%) from corporations,
foundations and high-net-worth individuals.
The 2018 income represents a 6% growth
compared to 2017. However this was a 4%
shortfall ($17 million) compared to the target,
caused by a variety of reasons such as

CHART 7

challenging political environments which
cultivated populism, xenophobia and
anti-refugee sentiment, as well as an
unstable stock market, which made the
currencies of several countries with UNHCR
supporters volatile compared to the
US dollar. Despite these challenges, private
sector income was in line with the positive
and steady trend recorded over the last
10 years. UNHCR reached close to 2.1 million
donors, with almost 1.3 million committed
giving donors. This was an important step
towards achieving UNHCR’s goal of raising
$1 billion from private partners by 2025.

| PSP CONTRIBUTIONS AND DONOR NUMBERS | 2012-2018

Contributions

Number of donors
2.5

600

1.9
million

500

1.5
million

0.6
million

0.8
million

1.5

1.0
million

1.0

0.5

100

0

0
2012

44 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Number of donors | millions

300

Contributions | USD millions

2.0

1.6
million

400

200

2.1
million

UNHCR’s global network of private sector
fundraising operations includes offices and
National Partners in around 30 fundraising
markets, with ten countries contributing
85% of UNHCR’s private sector income, a
broadly similar breakdown to the top ten
breakdown of the governmental donors.
The largest contributions from the private
sector came from Europe ($182.7 million),
followed by Asia and the Pacific
($109.7 million), the Americas ($47.8 million),
Middle East and North Africa ($39.6 million),
and Africa ($153,600). Importantly, the cost
ratio has been reduced to 30%, meaning
that for every dollar invested in fundraising,
three dollars are returned to fund UNHCR
operations.
The largest donations from corporations,
foundations and philanthropists were from
Education Above All (EAA) Foundation, and
Qatar Charity. The latter gave the largest
contribution from a single private sector
donor, $26 million, multiplying its 2017
donation six-fold. It also took the lead as a
key contributor to UNHCR’s Zakat initiative,
with a ground-breaking contribution of
$10 million. Through EAA’s Educate A Child
Programme, more than one million refugee
and IDP children have been enrolled in
primary school in 12 countries since 2012.
The fashion retailer UNIQLO’s record
in-kind donation benefitted 14 operations
with 5.3 million pieces of clothing.

UNHCR’s private donors supported several
refugee, natural disaster and internal
displacement emergencies. Significant
private sector donations were received
for Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh
($21 million), the Venezuela situation
($2.5 million), the Indonesia Sulawesi
earthquake and tsunami ($3 million, which
covered 80% of UNHCR’s requirements
for the emergency response), and the
situations in the North of Central America
($4.6 million), Syrian Arab Republic (Syria,
$34.6 million), and Yemen ($2.3 million).
UNHCR also continued to mobilize donors
through engaging campaigns. Among the
most successful was the Global Shelter
Campaign “Nobody Left Outside”, launched
in May 2016 in over 20 countries, which
raised over $22 million. UNHCR also
expanded its Ramadan campaign beyond
the Middle East and North Africa region,
reaching 11.7 million people and raising
$3.7 million for Rohingya and Syrian refugees.

2018

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 45

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

UNHCR’s National Partners
With over 1.3 million committed supporters
worldwide and a network of high profile
advocates at both national and international
level, the National Partners are an integral
and powerful link between UNHCR and the
general public. Committed and passionate,
and with wide and strong areas of

CHART 8

partnership and collaboration, the National
Partners used their strong presence on
social media and a wide range of
sometimes innovative tools to help
influence the general public and the private
sector towards the cause of refugees and
other people of concern.

| INCOME FROM NATIONAL PARTNERS | 2018

Australia for UNHCR
9% | $20.4 million
94,917 individual donors
Sverige för UNHCR
10% | $22.2 million
136,486 individual donors

UNO-Flüchtlingshilfe
11% | $25 million
183,032 individual donors

UNHCR’s National Partners
raised $219.3 million,
or 52% of all income from
the private sector.
National Partners raised
$138.3 million in unearmarked
funding, accounting for 61% of all
unearmarked funds raised by
the private sector.

Japan for UNHCR
12% | $25.5 million
139,519 individual donors

Australia for UNHCR | The first market
outside the Americas to launch the Children
on the Run campaign, focusing on children
fleeing gang violence in Central America,
with the appeal surpassing its fundraising
target by 60%, raising over $507,000 and
generating substantial media coverage.
Australia for UNHCR also secured a new
corporate partnership with private health
fund Teachers Health, worth nearly

46 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

España con ACNUR
42% | $93 million
626,114 individual donors

USA for UNHCR
15% | $33.2 million
130,636 individual donors

$360,000 over three years, supporting
neonatal and maternal health in the DRC.
A key advocacy initiative was achieved by
signing up to the #KidsOffNauru campaign,
together with 400 other organizations. The
campaign mobilized over 170,000 people
to sign a petition, which was influential in
the Australian Government’s decision to
evacuate all children in offshore detention
from Nauru.

España con ACNUR (Spain) | A milestone
was achieved by recruiting 123,263 new
committed giving donors, achieving a
year-end figure of 501,262 monthly donors.
Dedicated efforts went into strengthening
brand awareness with the campaign
#SoyUnLocoDeACNUR (“I am crazy about
UNHCR”) and the related ACNUR Loco
Festival educational project. The renewal
of the €1 million La Caixa Foundation
partnership, addressing malnutrition in
emergencies, was noteworthy.
Japan for UNHCR | Acquired new individual
donors through direct mail, raising
$819,000 (15% above target) and achieving
the best results with an appeal for Rohingya
refugees. Japan for UNHCR negotiated
a new 10-year $2 million pledge with
Fuji Optical to mark the partnership’s
35th anniversary. In addition, it secured
a three-year legacy of $1.3 million and
developed new legacy assets showing
the benefit for future refugee generations.
Japan for UNHCR co-hosted World Refugee
Day in Tokyo promoting the #WithRefugees
campaign, and the 13th Refugee Film
Festival in three cities. Goodwill
Ambassador MIYAVI and key sponsors
including Baccarat, Canon, Fuji Optical,
Japan Visual Translation Academy, Sony,
Toyota and UNIQLO supported the festival.
Sverige för UNHCR (Sweden) | Marked
World Refugee Day with the launch of the
#HumanFacts campaign reflecting the 2017
Global Trends, and reaching 20% of the
Swedish population on social media. The
Christmas campaign asked the Swedish
public to help keep displaced people warm
during winter and generated high media
engagement. Income from partnerships
surpassed expectations thanks to donations
from the Einar Belvén Foundation, the H&M
Foundation, Lindex, the Swedish Postcode

Lottery, Weekday (a brand under the H&M
Group), and an in-kind donation from Better
Shelter of 200 Refugee Housing Units for
Zambia.
UNO-Flüchtlingshilfe (Germany) | Focused
on acquiring new individual donors and
scaling up face-to-face programmes.
A stronger emphasis was placed on retaining
existing donors, and an event for major
donors (Das wahre Blau, “The True Blue”)
was launched, designed to bring “the field
to the donor”. Additionally, UNO organized
more events, such as the opening of the
Winter Campaign at the Brandenburg Gate
in Berlin and entered into partnerships to
promote the brand.
USA for UNHCR | Existing partner LDS
Charities donated their largest ever annual
contribution of $3.4 million to support
UNHCR emergency programmes, as well
as their first grant to UNHCR’s education
programmes. New business partners were
secured in 2018, including Microsoft with
$1 million to UNHCR’s Connected Education
Programme in Kakuma, Kenya, and Citizens
of Humanity, a clothing brand that donated
$100,000 through the #WeAreAllHumanity
corporate social responsibility campaign.
USA for UNHCR also ran a middle donor
programme, “Impact Partners”, focused on
high value donor profiles, resulting in
$4.3 million from 3,053 individuals, of which
286 were new in 2018.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 47

Pillar 4
OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

Africa

Middle East and North Africa

Asia and the Pacific

Europe

Americas

Global Programmes

Headquarters

2018 EXPENDITURE

with the largest stateless operation in
the Myanmar situation. Pillar 3 (global
reintegration projects) increased by
$21 million or 21% and accounted for 3% of
total expenditure. The largest reintegration
projects were in Afghanistan, Somalia,
and Syria. Pillar 4 (global IDP projects)
increased by $40 million or 7% compared
to 2017 and accounted for 14% of total
expenditure. Major IDP projects were in
the Middle East and North Africa in Syria,
Iraq and Yemen, followed by DRC and
South Sudan.

Expenditure totaled $4.226 billion with an
implementation rate (expenditure over total
funds available) of 90%.
Expenditure under Pillar 1 (global refugee
programmes) increased by approximately
$76 million or 2% compared to 2017 and
at 82% of total expenditure accounted for
the overwhelming majority of UNHCR
expenditure. Pillar 2 (global stateless
programme) increased by $5 million or
16% compared to 2017 and accounted for
approximately 1% of total expenditure

CHART 10

| EXPENDITURE BY REGION AND PILLAR | USD millions

0

200

400

600

800

1,000

1,200

1,400

Africa
Middle East and North Africa
Asia and the Pacific

Europe
Americas
Global Programmes
Headquarters

Pillar 1

9 | EXPENDITURE
REGIONAND
AND PILLAR
millions
CHARTCHART
9 | EXPENDITURE
BYBY
REGION
PILLAR| USD
| percent
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Pillar 1

Pillar 2

Pillar 3

Pillar 4

Africa

Middle East and North Africa

Asia and the Pacific

Europe

Americas

Global Programmes

Headquarters

Pillar 2

In Africa the decrease aligned with the
budget decrease of 6% between the two
periods, and was mainly due to reduced
basic needs of people of concern under the
South Sudan situation. There was also a
decrease in expenditure in Somalia, due
primarily to the reduced voluntary returns
of Somali refugees. These decreases were
partly offset by expenditure increases in
Ethiopia and Niger. In Ethiopia, the budget
was increased to address the urgent needs
of more than 800,000 IDPs, whilst in Niger
the increase was due mainly to new IDP
situations and the establishment of transit
centres for people of concern returning
from Libya.
Expenditure in the Middle East and
North Africa saw the largest increases in
Syria and Yemen. In Syria, in particular,
emergency support and access to people
of concern in territories gained by the
Government, and which were beyond

0

200

400

600

800

1,000

1,200

Pillar 3

Pillar 4

UNHCR’s reach in 2017, was prioritized.
Pillar 3 (reintegration programmes) and
area-based assistance were also prioritized
to prepare for durable solutions within
Syria. These increases were partially offset
by reductions in Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon.
In Iraq, the drop in expenditure was linked
to the end of some elements of the postMosul response. In Jordan and Lebanon,
winterization had to be reduced to allow
prioritization within Syria.
In Asia and the Pacific, expenditure increased
mainly due to the Myanmar situation.
Decreases took place in the Islamic
Republics of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan.
In Afghanistan, the decreases came from
fewer repatriations than planned; in Iran,
where needs especially under health and
shelter went unmet; and in Pakistan where,
because of reductions in the reintegration
programme, health needs went unmet.

1,400

Africa
48 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Middle East and North Africa

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 49

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

In Europe the major decreases were in
Turkey (shift in the strategy with more focus
in supporting public institutions in responding
to the needs of people of concern) and
Bosnia-Herzegovina (consistent with the
planned reduction in needs). The decreases
were nearly offset by an increase in Greece,
due to increases in the number of people
of concern assisted through cash-based
interventions.
Expenditure in the Americas increased by
$47.6 million or 55% mainly due to the
Venezuela situation, and increased activities
in the NCA affecting Costa Rica, Mexico
and Panama.

TABLE 2

Global programmes increased by
$69.5 million or 19%. Projects such as the
Refugee Housing Unit, Risk Management
2.0, and improvements in cybersecurity saw
increases. Other notable increases were
due to structural changes, such as the
creation of the Division of Resilience and
Solutions. Importantly, additional resources
were allocated for the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse and sexual
harassment. Headquarters expenditure
increased slightly by $3.9 million or 2% and
remained stable at below 6% of overall
expenditure as in 2018.

| UNHCR 2018 TOTAL EXPENDITURE BY SOURCE OF FUNDING | USD thousands

Earmarked

Voluntary cash contributions

Unearmarked

Voluntary
in-kind
Unearmarked contributions

Softly
earmarked
a/

Earmarked

United
Nations
Regular
Budget

Programme
support
costs

Other
income b/

Earmarked voluntary contributions funded
59% of UNHCR operations in 2018, while
softly earmarked and unearmarked
voluntary contributions funded 13% and
8% respectively. At global level, the largest
expenditures funded from earmarked
voluntary contributions were in the Middle
East and North Africa, followed by Africa
and Europe at 41%, 31% and 15% respectively.
No unearmarked funding was used for
Headquarters.
UNHCR earned $213 million in programme
support costs, with $174 million or 82%
spent on Headquarters. The end of year

SOURCE OF FUNDING
Carry-over from prior years

Table 2 displays how UNHCR used its various
sources of income to cover its expenditure,
and usefully highlights how the unearmarked
funding was allocated. Unearmarked
income was allocated throughout the year,
in line with identified priorities and needs,
and according to the overall objectives
of kickstarting emergency operations;
bolstering underfunded operations; and
enabling programmes to implement fully.

TOTAL

surplus of $39 million was allocated to the
five regional operations compared to 2017
where the surplus was only used to fund
expenditures in the Africa region.

Expenditure on partners
UNHCR allocated $1.407 billion to
1,077 partners, which included national and
international NGOs, governments, and
UN Agencies. Of that, some $1.194 billion,
or 85%, was provided to NGOs, including
$554.7 million to 666 national NGOs.
UNHCR moved closer to its Grand Bargain
target of providing 25% of its programme
expenditures to local and national responders
by 2020. In terms of allocation patterns,
the most partners and the greatest sums
allocated were in Africa, where 345 partners
were entrusted with $563.7 million, or 40%
of the global total. Operations that saw major
increases in partner budgets in 2018
included Bangladesh, Libya, Niger and
Syria, whilst there were reductions in
Greece, Iraq, Lebanon and at Headquarters.

FIELD OPERATIONS

Europe

48,408
3,411
29,475
20,563

79,159
23,087
25,890
24,967

779,360
49,854
206,152
366,128

250,166
35,005
84,274
52,104

34,496
16,252
18,225
17,576

10,162
289
940
1,685

30,586
2,039
2,286
2,205

-

71,808
3,742
1,958
217

1,304,145
133,679
369,200
485,445

Middle East and North
Africa

56,799

34,274

1,020,405

115,994

11,218

1,460

1,896

-

13,005

1,255,051

158,656

187,377

2,421,899

537,543

97,767

14,536

39,012

-

90,730 3,547,520

9,294
270

8,747
-

44,003
618

32,267
-

235,930
-

12,100
9,549

174,019

42,954

93,229
7,666

435,570
235,076

Operational Reserve and
"New or additional
activities - mandaterelated" (NAM) Reserve

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Junior Professional Officers
Fund

-

-

8,088

-

-

-

-

-

-

8,088

196,124

2,474,608
59%

569,810
13%

333,697
8%

36,185
1%

213,031
5%

42,954
1%

Africa
Americas
Asia and the Pacific

TOTAL FIELD
OPERATIONS
Global Programmes
Headquarters

TOTAL
%

168,220
9%

Notes:
a/ Includes contributions earmarked at the regional, sub-regional, situation or thematic level.
b/ Includes miscellaneous income, prior year adjustments and cancellations and other internal transfers.

50 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

CHART 11

| UNHCR’s PARTNERS AROUND THE WORLD | 2018
17 UN Agencies
(including IOM)
1% | $15.9 million

199 Government partners
14% | $197.7 million

666 National NGO partners
39% | $554.7 million

$1.407 billion
Total funds entrusted
to 1,077 partners

191,625 4,226,254
5%
100%

195 International NGO partners
45% | $639.3 million

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 51

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

This table shows all voluntary contributions coming from all sources, including from governments and the private
sector in countries supporting UNHCR’s work, and from inter-governmental and pooled funding mechanism. As
such, it is a way of reflecting the financial support to UNHCR from the “whole-of-society” approach. A traditional
donor ranking is available from the Global Focus website using the QR code opposite.
TABLE 3

Monaco
Estonia

United States of America

GOVERNMENT

Argentina
Indonesia

1,589,776,543

Slovakia
PRIVATE DONORS

Sweden
Japan
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Norway
Spain1
Netherlands
Denmark
Canada
Italy
Republic of Korea

Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Switzerland
Kuwait

395,879,891
143,321,967
120,024,776

24,993,018
22,252,372
35,330,815

99,402,652

4,948,010

104,350,661

100,688,853
9,802,571
79,490,708
82,080,067
72,885,485
52,092,336
25,389,456

2,793,600
93,660,956
16,314,899
1,189,562
8,127,899
22,825,186
44,363,833

103,482,453
103,463,527
95,805,606
83,269,629
81,013,383
74,917,521
69,753,289
60,100,994
53,867,089
50,851,194
50,795,043
46,446,046
44,880,323
42,997,200
42,190,275
40,910,994
25,232,571
24,083,632
23,893,713
15,686,221
11,855,165
10,881,855
7,837,963
6,854,732
5,413,497
5,247,210
4,126,785
3,754,796
3,620,636
3,390,340
2,616,586
2,586,956
2,559,700
2,000,000
1,811,782
1,589,667
1,532,577
1,357,363
1,330,653
1,313,820
1,119,687
1,072,173
793,170
755,480
752,128
679,976
627,358
594,267
548,086

480,026,381

60,100,994
32,852,147
8,587,304
49,988,594
42,837,379
43,509,490

21,014,942
42,263,890
806,448
3,608,668
1,370,833
42,997,200

UN Regular Budget
United Arab Emirates
France

38,757,689
39,415,436

3,432,586
1,495,558
25,232,571

Country-based pooled funds3
Finland
Belgium
Ireland
China
Luxembourg

24,083,632
23,891,923
15,680,457
1,232,626
10,881,855

1,790
5,764
10,622,539
7,837,963

Private donors worldwide

6,854,732

UN Peacebuilding Fund4
New Zealand
Thailand

5,413,497
120,000

Mexico

5,127,210
4,126,785
3,754,796

UNOPS
Austria
Hungary
Czechia

3,602,674
3,390,340
2,616,586

17,962

2,586,956
2,559,700

UNICEF
UNAIDS
Russian Federation

2,000,000
1,811,782

IOM

1,589,667
1,532,577

African Development Bank
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Poland
Philippines
Brazil

1,357,363
35,000
33,235

1,295,653
1,280,586
1,119,687

UN-Habitat
Lebanon
Malaysia
Singapore
Iceland
UNDP
WFP
UN Great Lakes Region Cross-Border Fund5
Education Cannot Wait6

52 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

TOTAL

1,627,891,378
480,026,381
420,872,909
165,574,339
155,355,591

Central Emergency Response Fund2
Australia

UN FUNDS

38,114,835

European Union
Germany

INTER-GOVERNMENTAL
BODIES

60,000
752,128

1,072,173
793,170
695,480
679,976
627,358
594,267
548,086

70,971

482,100
60,000
363,002

3,385
415,104

500,000

OPEC Fund for International Development

| TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS | 2018

DONOR

435,038
505,667

337,050

UN Darfur Fund7
Morocco

325,598

UN Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust Fund for
Colombia8
Liechtenstein
Turkey
Malta
Kazakhstan
Romania
Serbia

311,604
304,569
300,000
192,145
161,949
163,907
128,333

33
10,000

123,636
123,131

UN Women
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs

111,713

Oman

108,070

UNESCO
Bulgaria

107,025

Greece
Nigeria
Algeria
Israel
Armenia
Montenegro
Slovenia

63,735
100,000
100,000
98,000
94,593
81,881

102,078
38,254

78,660

Kenya

77,818

Fund to End Violence Against Children9
Lithuania
Chile

71,270
70,000
69,320

UN Trust Fund for Human Security10
Portugal
Kyrgyzstan
Cyprus

65,506
60,256
45,506
44,920

Egypt
Botswana
India
Uruguay
Angola
South Africa
Holy See
Latvia
Costa Rica
Sri Lanka

30,472
7,705
30,000
30,000
19,481
20,000
17,341
15,413
15,000

Azerbaijan
Andorra

12,479
7,200
6,173
5,400
3,951

Ghana
Jordan
Bosnia and Herzegovina

3,000
1,777

Senegal

TOTAL*

5,456

14,588

Burkina Faso
Croatia

22,599

3,126,529,005

422,713,872

483,648,625

150,618,732

506,009
505,667
500,000
485,485
475,104
363,002
337,050
325,598
311,604
304,569
300,033
192,145
171,949
163,907
128,333
123,636
123,131
111,713
108,070
107,025
102,078
101,989
100,000
100,000
98,000
94,593
81,881
78,660
77,818
71,270
70,000
69,320
65,506
60,256
45,506
44,920
30,472
30,304
30,000
30,000
24,938
20,000
17,341
15,413
15,000
14,588
12,479
7,200
6,173
5,400
3,951
3,000
1,777
4,183,510,234

1 Includes a total of $4,649,708 in contributions from other public sources channelled through España con ACNUR.
2 The Central Emergency Response Fund is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see www.unocha.org/cerf/donors/donorspage.					
3 Country-based pooled funds are multi-donor funding mechanisms. For details, see www.unocha.org/ourwork/humanitarian-financing/country-based-pooled-funds-cbpfs.			
4 The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see www.unpbf.org.					
5 The United Nations Great Lakes Region Cross-Border Fund is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see http://mptf.undp.org.					
6 Education Cannot Wait (ECW) is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details see, www.educationcannotwait.org.					
7 The United Nations Darfur Fund is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see http://mptf.undp.org.					
8 The United Nations Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Colombia is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see http://mptf.undp.org.					
9 The Fund to End Violence Against Children is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see www.end-violence.org.					
10 The United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security is a multi-donor funding mechanism. For details, see https://www.un.org/humansecurity. 					
* Excludes $58,075,884 acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and includes $81,433,883 acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 53

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

TABLE 4

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

| IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS | 2018

DONOR

DESCRIPTION

TABLE 4

AMOUNT

Argentina
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Botswana
Brazil
China
Croatia
Czechia
Denmark
Germany
Hungary
IOM
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Luxembourg
Montenegro
Morocco
Nigeria
Poland
Romania
Serbia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

United Arab Emirates

United Kingdom
UNDP

DONOR
Nike EMEA

GOVERNMENTS AND UN FUNDS
Angola

| IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS | 2018

Premises for UNHCR office in Luanda
Premises for UNHCR office in Buenos Aires
Premises for UNHCR office in Yerevan
Premises for UNHCR office in Vienna
Premises for UNHCR warehouse in Baku
Premises for UNHCR office in Gabarone
Premises for UNHCR office in Brasilia
Premises for UNHCR office in Hong Kong SAR (China)
Premises for UNHCR office in Zagreb
Premises for UNHCR office in Prague
Premises for UNHCR office in Copenhagen
Premises for UNHCR office in Nuremberg
Premises for UNHCR office in Budapest:
Global Service Centre and Regional Representation for Central Europe
Aquatabs to the UNHCR operation in Bangladesh
Deployment of standby experts through Irish Aid
Premises for UNHCR office in Rome
Premises for UNHCR office in Almaty
Premises for UNHCR office in Kuwait City
Premises for UNHCR office in Bishkek
Premises for UNHCR office at the University of Luxembourg
Premises for UNHCR office in Podgorica
Premises for UNHCR office in Laayoune, Western Sahara
Premises for UNHCR office in Lagos
Premises for UNHCR office in Warsaw and Refugee Housing Units to UNHCR operations in
Uganda and Iraq
Premises for UNHCR office in Bucharest
Premises for UNHCR office in Belgrade
Premises for UNHCR office in Pretoria
Premises for UNHCR office in Madrid
Deployment of standby experts by Swedish Rescue Services (MSB) to various UNHCR
operations and emergency camp facilities for UNHCR operation in Uganda
Deployment of standby experts to various UNHCR operations and premises for UNHCR
Headquarters in Geneva due to Switzerland’s host-state policy that provides excellent
conditions for international organisations to work effectively
Premises for UNHCR warehouse in Dubai provided through the International Humanitarian
City and transportation services to the UNHCR operations in Bangladesh, Ethiopia and
Indonesia
Deployment of standby experts to various UNHCR operations
Mosquito nets for the UNHCR operation in Chad

SUBTOTAL

Norwegian Church Aid

DESCRIPTION

AMOUNT

Children's footwear for UNHCR operation in Kenya
Tents and Rubb halls to UNHCR operation in Nigeria
Deployment of standby experts to various UNHCR operations
Prefabricated housing to UNHCR operation in Uganda
Women's clothing for the UNHCR operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Deployment of experts by RedR Australia to various UNHCR operations
Shoes to UNHCR operations in Burkina Faso, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda
Satellite equipment to UNHCR Division of Information Systems and Telecommunications
Mosquito nets for UNHCR operations in Africa
Transportation services to UNHCR operations in Bangladesh, Ethiopia and Uganda
Classroom equipment to UNHCR operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya
and in the United Republic of Tanzania

131,240
76,100
2,717,500
638,825
16,100
597,000
1,513,170
29,531
393,388
884,577

30,000
107,100
98,000
62,900
7,200
30,472
33,235
112,624
12,479
38,100
2,598,459
42,451

SUBTOTAL

103,326
15,971,144

3,328,612

TOTAL

36,184,409

Norwegian Refugee Council
Olympic Broadcasting Services
PUMA SE
RedR
TOMS Shoes LLC
UltiSat Inc.
United Nations Foundation
UPS Corporate
Vodafone Foundation

59,696
136,000
196,344
61,949
39,490
60,256
10,753
82,745
25,598
63,735
984,540
103,521
123,333
19,481
366,783
1,192,620

6,334,959

3,120,926
505,000
223,905
20,213,265

PRIVATE DONORS AND NGOs
Better Shelter RHU AB
Danish Refugee Council
Fast Retailing (UNIQLO)

Fuji Optical Co Limited
IKEA Foundation
iMMAP
International Judo Federation
International Table Tennis Federation
Microsoft Corporation

54 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Refugee Housing Units for UNHCR operation in Zambia
Deployment of standby experts to various UNHCR operations
New and used clothing for UNHCR operations in Afghanistan, Angola, Brazil, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, India, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, South Sudan,
Tajikistan, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda and Zimbabwe
Optical package to UNHCR operation in Azerbaijan
Mattresses for UNHCR operation in Syria
Deployment of standby experts to various UNHCR operations
Judo equipment to UNHCR operation in South Africa
Table Tennis equipment to UNHCR operation in Jordan
Computer equipment to UNHCR operation in Kenya

280,821
1,012,500

6,243,120
182,484
990,976
89,500
40,405
12,394
18,188

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 55

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

TABLE 5

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

| PRIVATE DONORS OVER $100,000 IN SUPPORT OF UNHCR | 2018

UNHCR GLOBAL
Educate A Child (EAC) Programme Education Above All (EAA) Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
FAST RETAILING (UNIQLO)

EUROPE

TABLE 6

| TRANSFERS FROM THE 2018 “NEW OR ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES MANDATE-RELATED” RESERVE | USD

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

DENMARK

KUWAIT

1. "NEW OR ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES - MANDATE-RELATED" RESERVE APPROVED BY EXCOM IN OCTOBER 2018

Danish Refugee Council

Alghanim Industries

2. TRANSFERS

Novo Nordisk Foundation

Kuwait Finance House

Pillar 1

Mabarrat Ghanaem Al Khair (MGAK)

THE AMERICAS

Fondation BNP Paribas

QATAR

Mexico

Fondation CHANEL

Qatar Charity

Tadashi Yanai

GERMANY / UNO-FLŰCHTLINGSHILFE

SAUDI ARABIA

Tahir Foundation

BASF Stiftung

AGFUND-Arab Gulf Programme
for Development

IKEA Foundation
International Olympic Committee
Lee Han Shih

UN Fund for International Partnerships
United Nations Foundation

FRANCE

AmazonSmile

Strengthening the operation's capacity to support an increase
in its planned protection and assistance activities

Pillar 2

20,000,000

Pillar 3

Pillar 4

Total

6,757,009

-

-

-

6,757,009

SUBTOTAL

6,757,009

-

-

-

6,757,009

TOTAL TRANSFERS

6,757,009

-

-

-

6,757,009
13,242,991

3. BALANCE AFTER TRANSFERS

International Islamic Relief Organization

ITALY

Tamer Family Foundation

Intesa Sanpaolo

THE AMERICAS
CANADA
Morneau Shepell
Helen G. Morres

MEXICO
AGRORESERVAS, S.C.

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
NETHERLANDS
Dutch Postcode Lottery

The Big Heart Foundation

La Caixa Banking Foundation

UAE Red Crescent Society

Better Shelter RHU AB

Lindex AB

AUSTRALIA / AUSTRALIA FOR UNHCR
BB & A Miller Foundation

USD

DONOR

AMOUNT

DONOR

AMOUNT

Netherlands

801,140

Switzerland

Swedish Postcode Lottery

Denmark

726,318

Australia

SWITZERLAND

Italy

488,036

Austria

Sweden

335,533

Norway

China

320,002

Belgium

Republic of Korea

244,345

TOTAL

6,901,388

The Einar Belvén Foundation

Krueger Foundation

UNITED KINGDOM
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

USD

230,346
182,330
131,866
111,830
91,226
80,831
55,000

LDS Charities

The UPS Foundation

| CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE JUNIOR PROFESSIONAL
OFFICERS SCHEME | 2018

SWEDEN / SVERIGE FÖR UNHCR
H&M Foundation

TOMS Shoes LLC

TABLE 7

Fundación Caja Navarra

Google

Nike

Falcon Trading Group

SPAIN / ESPAŇA CON ACNUR

USA / USA FOR UNHCR
Kuwait-America Foundation

Careem Networks

Japan

2,282,145

France

Germany

820,440

Finland

Asfari Foundation
Said Foundation
The Hands Up Foundation
Vodafone Foundation

JAPAN / JAPAN ASSOCIATION
FOR UNHCR
Fuji Optical Co Limited

THAILAND
Mr. Wanchai Tachavejnukul

56 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 57

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

TABLE 8

OV E R V I E W I F U N D I N G U N H C R ’ S P R O G R A M M E S

| TRANSFERS FROM THE OPERATIONAL RESERVE | 2018

TABLE 8

547,679,512

1. OPERATIONAL RESERVE APPROVED BY THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE IN OCTOBER 2018
2. TRANSFERS FROM THE OPERATIONAL RESERVE
Pillar 2

Pillar 3

Pillar 4

Total

AFRICA

Ethiopia RO
Kenya
Kenya RO
Nigeria
Rwanda

Central Mediterranean route situation
Voluntary repatriation of Somali refugees and
strengthening of Representation Office in Asmara
To support advocacy for all persons of concern
Response to emergency influx of refugees
from Ethiopia
Offices of Regional Refugee Coordinators for
South Sudan and Burundi situations
To address the immediate needs of new
asylum-seekers
Implementation of durable solutions for Rwandan
refugees

SUBTOTAL

845,000

-

-

-

845,000

435,027

-

-

-

435,027

1,957,050

-

-

-

1,957,050

5,383,755

-

-

-

5,383,755

Division of Information Systems
and Telecommunications
Division of Human Resources

Panama RO

and Abuse of authority (SEA/SHA)
3) Additional special staff costs

2,817,150

-

-

-

2,817,150

4,000,000

-

-

-

4,000,000

-

-

3,300,309

-

3,300,309

15,437,982

-

3,300,309

-

18,738,290

2,976,688
375,490
3,352,178

-

-

-

2,976,688
375,490
3,352,178

SUBTOTAL

Response to IDP emergency in the Philippines

SUBTOTAL

-

-

-

1,560,000
1,560,000

1,560,000
1,560,000

5,687,116
5,687,116

-

-

-

5,687,116
5,687,116

1,656,834

-

-

-

EUROPE

Executive Direction and
Management

SUBTOTAL
1) Risk Management 2.0 Initiative
2) Evaluation Service's additional requirements
3) Large-scale Kenya investigation
4) Innovation project's additional programme

Division of External Relations
Division of International
Protection

support costs
5) Legal Affairs Service additional programme
support costs
Additional programme support costs
1) Internal Displacement Transitional Task Team's
requirements
2) Special Advisor on statelessness
3) Additional programme support costs

Division of Emergency,
Security and Supply

1) MSRP upgrade project
2) Global Fleet Management 1
3) Deployment of standby experts
4) Additional UNHCR contribution to joint field security

costs
Division of Resilience and
Solutions

1) Establishment of the new Division of Resilience

and Solutions
2) DAFI and Education Cannot Wait project
3) Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF)

roll out
4) Education Global Programme
Division of Programme Support
and Management

Additional programme support costs

58 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

-

-

-

158,687

283,860

-

-

-

283,860

75,000

-

-

-

75,000

3,333,745

-

-

-

3,333,745

80,000

-

-

-

80,000

42,500,210

-

-

-

42,500,210

-

698,740

3) Change Management's requirements

5)
6)
Division of External Relations

1)
2)

Division of Resilience and
Solutions

additional requirements
Mid-year review
Large scale Kenya investigation
SEA/SHA
Strengthening the needs of the office
Strengthening CRRF and private sector partnerships

1) SEA/SHA
2) Strengthening the needs of the office

698,740

- -

727,530
2,390,615

-

-

-

727,530
2,390,615

444,212

-

-

-

444,212

249,000
73,800
150,619
161,000

-

-

-

249,000
73,800
150,619
161,000

91,402

-

-

-

91,402

148,210
81,000

-

-

-

148,210
81,000

Division of Information Systems
and Telecommunications

Cyber security

3,000,000

-

-

-

3,000,000

1,656,834

Division of Financial and
Adminstrative Management

In-kind contribution for rental of premises

1,946,300

-

-

-

1,946,300

Global Service Center
Budapest

Strengthening the needs of the office

938,819

-

-

-

938,819

GLOBAL PROGRAMMES
Executive Direction and
Management

1) Risk Management 2.0 Initiative
2) SEA/SHA

Division of Human Resources

To increase the capacity of the cash grant programme.

158,687

HEADQUARTERS

4) Independent Audit and Oversight and Internal Audit's

Emergency response to Nicaragua situation
Emergency response to Nicaragua situation

SUBTOTAL

Greece

1) Staff accommodation

4) Strengthening the needs of the office

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
Phillipines

Oracle licences and support fees

2) Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment

THE AMERICAS
Costa Rica

547,679,512

1. OPERATIONAL RESERVE APPROVED BY THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE IN OCTOBER 2018
2. TRANSFERS FROM THE OPERATIONAL RESERVE

Pillar 1
Eritrea

| TRANSFERS FROM THE OPERATIONAL RESERVE | 2018

2,147,396

-

-

-

2,147,396

778,782

-

-

-

778,782

Global Service Center
Copenhagen

Strengthening the needs of the office

298,459

-

-

-

298,459

212,949

-

-

-

212,949

Staff Council

Strengthening the needs of the office

SUBTOTAL
TOTAL TRANSFERS

17,000
11,416,707
78,394,192

-

3,300,309

1,560,000

17,000
11,416,707
83,254,501

229,199

-

-

-

229,199

436,063

-

-

-

436,063

747,075

-

-

-

747,075

191,218

-

-

-

191,218

317,869

-

-

-

317,869

578,520

-

-

-

578,520

13,008,153

-

-

-

13,008,153

3,450,000

-

-

-

3,450,000

818,620

-

-

-

818,620

5,754,132

-

-

-

5,754,132

2,216,069

-

-

-

2,216,069

5,126,226

-

-

-

5,126,226

475,000

-

-

-

475,000

424,813

-

-

-

424,813

3. BALANCE AFTER TRANSFERS

464,425,011

1 This line consolidates several applications reflecting the Global Fleet Management business cycle.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 59

POPULATIONS OF CONCERN
TO UNHCR
Pakistan

Iran

Afghanistan

Bangladesh

Turkey

Germany

5,000,000

Ukraine
Bangladesh*

Country

Myanmar*

1,000,000
500,000
Syrian
Arab Republic

Yemen

Population size

Lebanon Jordan

Refugees

Iraq

Asylum-seekers

Iraq

Returnees (refugees and IDPs)
Stateless persons
Internally displaced people (IDPs)
Others of concern
Venezuelans displaced abroad

[ END DECEMBER 2018]

6,331,669

534,498

Asia
and the
Pacific
4,160,040

3,743

108,776

54,565

6,335,412

643,274

484,224

1,311,654

341,086

Africa
Refugees

20,117,541

33,020

42,917

243,021

4,214,605

6,474,562

2,692,709

20,360,562

176,332

1,247,229

283,845

3,503,284

23,900

17,761

54

211,013

593,814

17,659,084

8,061,972

2,686,705

2,715,426

10,301,960

41,425,147

583,626

-

606,864

197

1,122,239

2,312,926

Stateless persons

711,589

6,892

2,229,401*

533,340

370,761

3,851,983*

Others of concern (5)

Returned refugees

(2)

IDPs protected/assisted
by UNHCR (3)
Returned IDPs (4)

Colombia

USA

Nigeria

Democratic
Republic of the
Congo

318,608

209,090

570,573

71,652

12,987

1,182,910

Venezuelans displaced
abroad (6)

-

2,592,948

-

-

-

2,592,948

TOTAL

26,433,629

12,849,730

9,470,606

11,042,460

14,995,514

74,791,939



Somalia

Uganda

Sudan

Ethiopia
Sudan

TOTAL
POPULATION
OF CONCERN

2,649,792

Asylum-seekers

Colombia

Middle East
and
North Africa

Europe
6,441,542

Persons in
refugee-like situations (1)
Total refugees

South
Sudan

The Americas

The data are generally provided by Governments, based on their own definitions and methods of data collection. A dash ("-") indicates that the value is zero, not
available or not applicable. All data are provisional and subject to change. More information on people of concern to UNHCR in 2018, including statistical trends
and changes of global displacement during the year, can be found in the “2018 Global Trends” report.
(1)

Includes groups of persons who are outside their country or territory of origin and who face protection risks similar to those of refugees, but for whom refugee
status has, for practical or other reasons, not been ascertained.

(2)

Includes refugees who have returned to their place of origin during 2018. Source: country of origin and asylum.

Ethiopia
(3)

Includes IDPs who are in IDP-like situations.

(4)

Includes IDPs protected/assisted by UNHCR who have returned to their place of origin during 2018.

(5)

People of concern to UNHCR not included in the other categories but to whom UNHCR may extend its protection and/or assistance.

(6)

Refers to persons who have left Venezuela as a result of the deteriorating circumstances inside the country, but who have not applied for asylum in the country in which
they are present. As indicated in the UNHCR Guidance Note on International Protection Considerations for Venezuelans (May 2019), UNHCR considers that the majority
of Venezuelan nationals or stateless persons who were habitually resident in Venezuela, are in need of international protection under the criteria contained in the
Cartagena Declaration on the basis of threats to their lives, security or freedom resulting from events that are seriously disturbing public order in Venezuela. In line with
the UN Secretary-General’s Guidance, UNHCR and IOM have been coordinating closely to respond to the outflow of Venezuelans.

*

The stateless population includes 906,635 Myanmar refugees in Bangladesh and an estimated 125,000 stateless IDPs in Myanmar who are also counted in
refugee and IDP populations.

60 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 61

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

Africa

FOREWORD
The African continent continues to host a
significant proportion of people of concern to
UNHCR, with the number of refugees almost
tripling over 10 years—from 2.3 million in
2008, to over 6.3 million by the end of 2018.
Similarly, the number of IDPs has greatly
increased from some 6.4 million IDPs in
2009 to 17.7 million people towards the end
of 2018. Despite this incremental surge in
the African displacement context, fewer
refugees fled their countries in 2018
compared to 2017, with the largest outflows
originating from Northwest and Southwest
Cameroon into Nigeria.
In Africa, five countries alone hosted
4.1 million (or 65%) of the region’s refugees,
and around 20% of the global refugee
population. Refugees originated primarily
from the Central African Republic (CAR), the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),
Somalia and South Sudan. Conflict and
other triggers, such as environmental
degradation, were key contributors in
maintaining situations of forced displacement
around the region.
Moving beyond the initial humanitarian
response, a number of countries hosting
protracted refugee populations took
advantage of available development
resources, such as the IDA18 regional
sub-window for refugees and host
communities, established by the World
Bank, to design projects with a focus on
socioeconomic inclusion, benefitting both
refugees and their host communities. To this
aim, other operations, such as Ethiopia,
Kenya and Uganda engaged with private
donors, the European Union Trust Fund,
© UNHCR/Georgina Goodwin

62 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

A young Burundian refugee stands outside a classroom
at Jugudi Primary School in Nyarugusu refugee camp,
Kigoma Province, western Tanzania. Burundian
schoolchildren and teachers are desperate for
learning resources.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 63

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

Key data and achievements in Africa
and the World Bank’s “Development
response to displacement impacts project”,
which also resulted in the strengthening
of available services for both refugee and
host communities. The trickle-on effects of
these projects are visible and demonstrate
that the strategic inclusion of refugees
in the socioeconomic fabric of their host
communities can have a positive impact
on the broader community at large.
While some 341,100 refugees chose to
repatriate in 2018, the broader identification
of solutions remained a challenge, with
restricted resettlement places and limited
opportunities for local integration through
naturalization. As a number of countries
continued to implement the Comprehensive
Refugee Response Framework (CRRF),
UNHCR observed that new initiatives and
policy changes are happening with the
adoption of the Global Compact on
Refugees providing additional momentum
for innovative solutions, which might serve
as avenues to overcome these current
challenges.
In 2018, UNHCR made concerted efforts
to strengthen its anti-fraud and integrity
systems in several key operations in
the region.

Through its Risk Management 2.0 initiative,
the Office made strides towards optimum
transparency, taking particular care to
inform stakeholders of its risk mitigation
and reduction strategies. Towards this end,
regional workshops were facilitated in
Kenya, South Africa and Uganda, and
multi-functional anti-fraud support missions
were deployed to Burundi, Kenya, the Sudan
and Uganda. UNHCR offices in the region
also implemented specific programmes,
such as sensitization and awareness-raising
activities, and strengthened monitoring
systems to prevent abuse, in line with the
Office’s global commitment to fight against
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Despite the overwhelming needs, the
funding situation in the region remained
a major obstacle for most operations.
In Burundi, the CAR, the DRC and Mali,
low levels of funding required UNHCR to
make difficult choices, prioritizing certain
interventions to the detriment of others.
For example, delaying or interrupting
return services for Chadian and Sudanese
refugees, who opted to voluntarily repatriate
to their countries of origin.

Resettlement
Africa is the region with the highest resettlement needs and departures worldwide
UNHCR resettlement submissions in 2018

36,408

UNHCR-facilitated departures from Africa in 2018

19,327

69%

compared to 2017

Resettlement submissions
worldwide in 2018

Departures worldwide in 2018

45%

35%

22%

compared to 2017

Major countries of origin of
people resettled from Africa
1 DRC

12,742

3 Sudan 1,193
4 Somalia 896

2 Eritrea 3,527

Biometric registration

3,448,188

48% biometrically registered
of total individuals

individuals biometrically
enrolled by the end of 2018

Central Africa
and Great Lakes

East and Horn of Africa

Southern Africa

West Africa

641,568

2,005,272

151,304

650,044

Cash-based interventions
Variation

$63M

$18M

$45M
2017

28%

2018

Refugees living in/out of camps

Raouf Mazou

Refugees*

Director of UNHCR’s Regional Bureau for Africa

Data as of 31st December 2018

% accommodation known % private accommodation**

6,335,400

96.9%

21.5%

% camps + other

78.5%

* includes refugees and people in refugee-like situations
** out of total number of refugees and refugee-like

GLOBAL WORKFORCE
IN AFRICA*: 6,662

69%

31 %

222

62 %

MALE

LOCATIONS

*including 1,526 affiliate workforce staff.

64 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Emergency deployments

Partners and budget allocated

(UNHCR and standby partners)

USD millions

219

$563.7 million allocated to 345 partners
(43% of regional expenditure)
195

FEMALE

BASED IN
HARDSHIP LOCATIONS

76 International NGO partners

$351.9M
2017

2018

$111.8M $95.6

155 National NGO partners
111 Government partners
3 UN agencies/IOM

$4.4M

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 65

REGIONAL SUMMARIES | A F R I C A
REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES | A F R I C A
REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

Despite the nearly threefold increase in the number of refugees over the last decade—from 2.3 million in 2008, to
6.3 by the end of 2018—most countries in sub-Saharan Africa continued to welcome refugees and asylum-seekers.
Five countries alone hosted 65% of the region’s refugees—20% of the global refugee population.

MAJOR SITUATIONS IN AFRICA IN 2018
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
The largest IDP population in Africa, with many parts of the country
subjected to sporadic violence. Despite the peaceful handover of
power in the December Presidential elections, scattered movements
towards neighbouring countries continued, with hopes fading for
voluntary return of Congolese refugees.

720,310

100,000 in 2018

4.5 million
60%

6,630

Refugee returnees

SOUTH SUDAN
Despite a reduction in fighting in parts of the country, due to the
revitalized 2018 peace agreement, the political situation remained
tense and armed conflict caused internal and external displacement.
The South Sudanese are the largest refugee population in Africa and
the 2ⁿ largest globally. It is largely a children’s crisis, with over 63% of
those displaced under the age of 18.

10,700

GHANA
L2
CAMEROON

276,850
37,850 in 2018

2.5 million

in the Lake Chad Basin
581,000 in 2018

Since the conflict began in 2012, the situation reached the highest
recorded level of displacement with more than 1.2 million people
displaced. Some 48,000 refugees fled in 2018 alone. Conflict and
forced displacement remains widespread, impacting previously

640,970

26.4
million
PEOPLE OF CONCERN IN AFRICA

BURUNDI

SOMALIA

UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA

ASYLUM-SEEKERS
RETURNEES (REFUGEES AND IDPs)

ZAMBIA
L1

IDPs
STATELESS PERSONS

MALAWI

OTHERS OF CONCERN

AGE AND GENDER BREAKDOWN
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS

35,180

Refugee returnees

20%

306,250

IDP returnees
40%

387,860
31,910

12%

60+

45,540

18-59

Refugee returnees

12-17
5-11

MALI
158,275

4%

0-4

UNDER 18

57%

120,300
6,680

Refugee returnees

CAMEROON
Violence in the South-West and North-West Regions caused internal
displacement and forced many Cameroonians to seek asylum in
Nigeria. The displaced, most of whom are women and children, face a
grave humanitarian situation in both countries.

SOUTH
SUDAN

UGANDA
DEMOCRATIC
L2
KENYA
REPUBLIC OF
THE CONGO RWANDA
L2

BURUNDI

Insecurity in northern and central Mali destabilized local communities
and prevented returns. The crisis spilled into Burkina Faso and Niger
where armed groups attacked security and civilian targets. The number
of IDPs significantly increased with more than 80,000 internally
displaced in 2018 alone.

CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC

REFUGEES

590,875

Overall security improved, but persistent and severe human rights
concerns generated refugee flows to neighbouring countries, with less
people fleeing Burundi in 2018; 90% decrease compared to 2017.
Nearly a quarter of IDPs are displaced as a result of the social-political
situation. A stagnating peace process and continuing regional tension
was a concern for the stability of the Great Lakes.

ETHIOPIA

L2 / L3

949,650

Refugee returnees

DJIBOUTI

NIGERIA

136,155

THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

killings and attacks against communities, multiplied significantly.

BURKINA FASO

Refugee returnees

2.6 million

CHAD
L2

SENEGAL

1.9 million

NIGERIA
the Boko Haram conflict in north-eastern Nigeria, Cameroon’s Far North
Region, western Chad and south-eastern Niger. Nigeria continues to
host the largest number of IDPs in the West Africa sub-region. Attacks
forced more people to flee internally or abroad, and prevented returns
to Nigeria.

NIGER
L2

2.3 million

SOMALIA
to create an enabling environment for the voluntary return and
reintegration of Somali refugees. With the process of state-building
ongoing, returnees and IDPs faced severe famine, drought and ongoing
insecurity. The majority of IDPs remain in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance.

MALI

43%

Situation

Refugees

Children

Negative trend
compared with 2017

32,750

CRRF country

IDPs

Women

Positive trend
compared with 2017

437,000 *

MYMP country

Returnees

60%

L 1/2/3 Level of emergency

Stable trend
compared with 2017

* OCHA figure. Government estimate: 152,000

11 UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018
66 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 20 1 8

UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018 12
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 20 1 8 67

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

ACHIEVEMENTS
AND IMPACT
Safeguarding fundamental
rights
Promoting a favourable protection
environment

sub-Saharan Africa
implemented the
BIMS system and

22 operations
rolled out
proGres v4.

Most host countries and communities in
sub-Saharan Africa demonstrated positive
and generous attitudes towards refugees
and asylum-seekers. In some instances,
however, core refugee protection principles
were challenged. Certain countries imposed
strict border controls without the necessary
safeguards to uphold the principle of
non-refoulement. UNHCR worked with
governments to strengthen national capacities
to screen refugees and asylum-seekers,
while preserving the right to seek asylum
and protection.
UNHCR engaged with States on a range
of capacity-building and other forms of
support, strengthening government-led
refugee status determination (RSD) processes.
In countries where there were no national
asylum procedures in place, or where
additional support was required, UNHCR
carried out RSD under its mandate.
UNHCR also enhanced its capacity and
cooperation in registration, working with
host governments to improve their
registration systems and data management.
Across Africa, UNHCR rolled out proGres v4;
the Biometric Identity Management System
(BIMS); and the Rapid Application tool that
allows for off-line registration. National
governments were supported to establish
their own registration systems and enhance

68 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

inter-operability between systems. In 2018,
BIMS was deployed to Botswana, Lesotho,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria and Uganda,
bringing to 32 the number of operations in
sub-Saharan Africa using it. ProGres v4
was rolled out to nine operations in 2018,
bringing to 22 the number of countries in
the region using the improved system (see
the chapter on Safeguarding fundamental
rights).
Progress was made in legislative reform,
with the most notable achievement in
December 2018, when South Sudan
acceded to the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees. UNHCR also
welcomed progress on Ethiopia’s historic
refugee proclamation, which will enable
refugees to acquire work permits; access
primary education; obtain drivers’ licenses;
register life events such as births and
marriages; and open bank accounts. Guinea
adopted a new refugee law which enhances
access to education, employment and
durable solutions, especially local
integration. In Niger, a law was enacted to
protect IDPs, bringing it in line with the
African Union (AU) Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally
Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala
Convention), and becoming one of the first
States parties to develop comprehensive
national legislation on internal displacement.
In July 2018, the AU Assembly adopted a
decision declaring 2019 as the year of
“Refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons in the context of the 50th
anniversary of the 1969 Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Convention Governing
the Specific Aspects on Refugee Problems
in Africa”.

Operations throughout the region
prioritized the implementation of UNHCR’s
new Age, Gender and Diversity Policy (see
chapter on Safeguarding fundamental
rights). Protection structures to better
prevent and respond to sexual and

© UNHCR/Ley Uwera

32 operations in

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

gender-based violence (SGBV) and
sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA)
were strengthened, and there was
rapid response to any allegations,
with thorough investigations undertaken.

Ensuring protection and solutions
for IDPs
The number of IDPs in Africa rose
significantly in 2018 from 14.5 to 17.7 million,
with an increase of one million in the first
half of 2018 alone. This rise was mainly
triggered by conflict and insecurity in
parts of the DRC (home to the largest IDP
population in Africa, with more than
4.5 million IDPs, including 2.7 million
children), Nigeria and Somalia. Violence
and human rights violations also caused internal displacement in Burkina Faso,
Cameroon and Ethiopia.
Insurgency in north-eastern Nigeria was the leading cause of displacement for some
2.5 million IDPs in the Lake Chad Basin region, with more than 581,000 people
internally displaced in 2018. UNHCR scaled up its response, working with the
authorities and partners in north-eastern Nigeria to provide displaced people with
legal and psychosocial support (in particular to victims of SGBV), as well as shelter
and basic household items.
In the East and Horn of Africa, while 80% of IDPs were displaced due to conflict,
drought further exacerbated this displacement. In Ethiopia, in addition to the 2.6
million IDPs displaced by conflict, there were further displaced for climate-related
reasons, and in Somalia, 1.4 million of the approximately 2.6 million IDPs were
displaced by the 2016-2017 drought. The majority of IDPs remain in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance, and some 1.3 million IDPs in particular need of improved
shelter and NFI support. In addition to prioritizing the provision of core relief items,
protection and return monitoring, UNHCR also engaged in area-based reintegration
programming in partnership with the Government of Somalia and other stakeholders.
Across the region, UNHCR collaborated in the inter-agency cluster coordination
providing protection, shelter, health care, and camp coordination and camp
management assistance. In 2018, UNHCR led seven out of 10 active shelter clusters for
IDPs. In Cameroon, the CAR, Chad, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and the Sudan, UNHCR led
the shelter and NFI clusters, coordinating the work of 115 partners to provide
$37 million to support 1.2 million people of concern.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 69

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

Reducing and preventing
statelessness and protecting
stateless persons

Internet enhances assistance for
displaced people in remote Niger
Sayam Forage’s remote location in harsh conditions
in the Diffa region has meant that communication
technologies, including phone lines, were not available
in the camp. However, in 2018, through the Refugee
Emergency Telecommunications Sector (RETS)—a
UNHCR-led mechanism for coordinating the communications
technology response in situations of displacement—the
camp now has internet connectivity.

The identification of statelessness in Africa
improved significantly in 2018 through
a range of mapping exercises. UNHCR
supported a country study to gather
qualitative data on statelessness in
South Sudan, as well as a regional study
on East Africa, covering Burundi, Kenya,
Rwanda, South Sudan, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania. Studies and
mapping exercises were also initiated in
some West African countries.

Assistance provided to the community (such as health,
shelter, or education) has been much enhanced by this
connectivity. The work of RETS in Niger has shown that
a simple internet connection can have profound impacts
on the lives of people who have been forced to flee.

Mixed movements

2,200
vulnerable
refugees were
evacuated out of
Libya to the ETM in
Niger, with some
1,000 people being
resettled to third
countries.

UNHCR worked closely with other
stakeholders, such as the AU-EU-UN Joint
Taskforce on migration, to ensure protection
for refugees moving in mixed flows from
Africa along “the northern route” through
Libya to Europe, “the southern route” to
South Africa, and “the eastern route”
towards Gulf countries or neighbouring
African countries. UNHCR successfully
evacuated over 2,200 vulnerable refugees
and asylum-seekers out of Libya to the
Emergency Transit Mechanism (ETM)

Their lives have been reduced to waiting in the heat. Many
must sleep on the ground. But at least now they are safe
in Niger.
“This is a safe place for me. But I would still like to work
and help my mother and brothers in Darfur.”
—Abu Bakr, Sudanese refugee who fled first to
Libya and then escaped to Niger.

70 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

in Niger for individual processing for
resettlement; from there, some 1,000 people
were resettled to third countries.
Expansion of UNHCR’s outreach, including
the provision of services directly or through
partners to people moving towards Libya,
resulted in the increased identification of
people in need of international protection.
In countries such as Algeria, Burkina Faso,
Chad, Egypt, Libya, Mali, Morocco, Niger
and Tunisia, expanded partnerships led to
greater identification and referral, including
the delivery of assistance.

© UNHCR/Jehad Nga

Safe, but in limbo, after the
horror of Libya

Within the framework of the #IBelong
Campaign to End Statelessness by 2024,
regional workshops were organized in the
context of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region. UNHCR partnered
with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) as well as the
Southern African Development Community
and the Economic and Monetary Community
of Central Africa to convene regional meetings
on statelessness, with the latter adopting the
“N’Djamena initiative on the eradication of
statelessness in Central Africa”.
Towards the end of 2018, the AU’s
specialised technical committee on
migration, refugees and IDPs adopted a
draft “Protocol on the specific aspects on
the right to a nationality and the eradication
of statelessness in Africa”, due to be
adopted by the AU Assembly in 2019.
In West Africa, UNHCR worked closely with
ECOWAS institutions and Member States to
implement the 2017-2024 “Banjul plan of
action on the eradication of statelessness”,
supporting the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
for example, in issuing approximately

400,000 birth certificates to children at
risk of statelessness, allowing them to sit
primary school exams as a prerequisite
to accessing secondary education.
Guinea-Bissau also issued nearly
2,000 birth certificates for refugee children
in 2018, as well as adopting a national
action plan to eradicate statelessness.

400,000
birth certificates
were issued to
children at risk of
statelessness by
Côte d’Ivoire.

In Madagascar, progress was also made
following changes in the nationality law,
with more than 1,360 nationality certificates
issued to children not previously registered
as Malagasy citizens, having been born to
Malagasy mothers and foreign fathers.

Responding with lifesaving
support
Emergency response
Given the range of emergencies across the
region, providing essential and lifesaving
services was a priority, with over 80% of the
regional expenditure dedicated to protection
and emergency response. In situations of
emergency response, UNHCR provided
nutrition, health, water, sanitation and shelter
for those fleeing conflict, while promoting
conditions for enhanced livelihoods,
education and employment opportunities
where possible. While UNHCR and its
partners were generally able to access
people of concern to deliver assistance,
in some situations, insecurity prevented or
inhibited delivery of much needed relief.
Out of ten UNHCR-declared emergency
situations worldwide, four–Cameroon, the
CAR, the DRC and the Lake Chad Basin–were
in sub-Saharan Africa, with the first three
having been declared in 2018.
The Level 2 emergency declared for the IDP
situation in Cameroon was later extended

10

Out of
UNHCR-declared
emergency
situations
worldwide,

4 were in

sub-Saharan
Africa.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 71

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

© UNHCR/Roqan Ojomo

Cameroonian refugees flee clashes
and find safety in Nigeria
Violent clashes between military and armed separatists
drove 32,750 Cameroonians over the border, where
funding is needed to provide assistance.

#TEDxKakumaCamp brought
together refugees, activists and aid
workers to break stereotypes
In Kenya, UNHCR supporters added their talents to TEDx
Kakuma Camp, the first ever TEDx event hosted in a
refugee camp. Alongside refugees, Goodwill Ambassador
Emi Mahmoud and supporters Mercy Masika,
Nomzamo Mbatha, Octopizzo and Yiech Pur Biel
participated in the event, while social media
posts by global supporters celebrating the
moment online had over 100,000 combined
engagements.

“There was shooting–they killed my uncle and shot my
cousin.”
—Myriam, Cameroonian refugee in Nigeria.

for the refugee influx into Nigeria. The
response not only aims at providing
emergency food to refugees fleeing from
Cameroon, but also at supporting their
livelihoods in the longer-term.
To scale up the emergency response to the
CAR situation, a Level 2 emergency was
declared in Chad in March 2018 for the
refugee influx from the CAR. A Level 2
emergency was also declared for North Kivu
and Ituri provinces in the DRC, due to the
deteriorating security and humanitarian
conditions amidst the outbreak of the Ebola
virus. UNHCR actively engaged in the
inter-agency Ebola preparedness and

response in surrounding countries, including
by developing cost preparedness and
response planning tools, deploying health
staff, and providing funds to support
country operations. Ebola-prevention
measures in refugee sites, settlements,
and displacement sites were established,
and UNHCR provided protection to the
displaced in Ebola-affected North Kivu.

Meeting basic needs
Cash-based interventions (CBIs) formed an
integral component of UNHCR’s response
throughout the displacement cycle in Africa,
assisting people to meet their basic needs
and, where feasible, providing a stimulus for
economic activity and
longer-term inclusion.

In the Lake Chad Basin, a Level 3 emergency
for the IDP response in Nigeria, as well as a
Level 2 emergency in Cameroon, Chad and
Niger, activated in 2016, remained in place
in 2018 (see chapter on Responding with
lifesaving support).

2018 was a ground-breaking year for the LuQuLuQu campaign in Africa,
with a wide network of supporters advocating and raising funds for
refugees in the region.
In particular, the LuQuLuQu “Step for Safety” walk drew in multiple
supporters and donors from Burkina Faso, Ghana and Kenya.
UNHCR also partnered with African retailers to raise awareness
on the LuQuLuQu campaign in shops. Donations in Nigeria
from the TuBaba Foundation, and DayStar Christian Centre were
also indicative of public interest and potential for growth in
the region.

© UNHCR

#DoltLuQuLuQu campaign brought together
civil society and private sector in support
of refugees

72 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

UNHCR supporters both new and longstanding
visited Ethiopia with UNHCR in 2018, including musician
Betty G and Spanish presenter Jesús Vázquez.
A month-long media campaign followed
Vázquez’s trip, including interviews on
primetime Spanish TV with audiences
of millions.

Somalia, for example, was among UNHCR’s
top 10 cash operations globally, with more
than $13 million in cash distributed to Somali
returnees in 2018. In Niger, UNHCR launched
one of its first emergency interventions
through cash for “hard-to-reach” populations,
reaching some 12,000 IDPs
at the border to Mali, few of whom had
previously received assistance due to the
inaccessibility of their location.

CBIs in the DRC is another example of how
cash assistance is used in an emergency
response, with 126,300 people receiving
cash assistance in 2018–a 261% increase
compared to 2017. In Kenya, the operation
implemented UNHCR’s largest cash for
shelter project, including cash assistance
transfers of more than $1.16 million, reaching
some 32,000 people.
About

Cash-assistance was also provided for
WASH-related needs, with some $650,000
in cash-assistance provided for this purpose
to people of concern in Cameroon, Chad,
the DRC, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia.
Moreover, UNHCR strengthened its
emergency WASH response capacities,
including coordination, implementation,
and monitoring.

30%

of cash
distributed in
Africa went to
Somalia.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 73

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

Local integration
Cash assistance as a stepping-stone for improved
financial inclusion

In Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Mali,
governments took concrete steps to facilitate
local integration for thousands of refugees.
This included the decision to grant
nationality to some 7,100 Senegalese
refugees in Guinea-Bissau; the issuance of
Liberian nationality and identity documents
to 300 Sierra Leonean refugees in Liberia;
and the granting of nationality to nearly
2,000 Mauritanian refugee children in Mali.
The Government of Liberia also granted
some 310 acres of land for the local
integration of Ivorian refugees and started
the implementation of a durable shelter
construction project.

In 2018, UNHCR provided $45 million in cash assistance in Africa and launched
multi-purpose cash programmes in operations such as Cameroon, the DRC, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Niger, Rwanda, Somalia and Uganda. UNHCR also facilitated refugees’ access
to formal bank and mobile money accounts in Cameroon, the DRC, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Niger, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia to encourage savings and access to loans, a
stepping-stone for improved financial inclusion.
In Kenya, where UNHCR facilitated refugees’ access to bank accounts, a bank agent in
Kakuma district reported that almost half of bank account holders, and over 20% of
borrowers in the area, were refugees, with good pay-back rates. The emergency cash
through mobile money covers food, shelter and other basic needs.
UNHCR’s emergency cash transfer mechanism offers a common cash facility in Niger,
which can be tapped into by any other agency and organization for the purpose of
transferring cash to vulnerable populations, including by the clusters, for meeting
critical needs.

During 2018, UNHCR prioritised targeted
support to operations with worrying and
dramatic changes in the food security and
nutrition situations, as well as in situations
with drastically reduced food rations,
including in Cameroon, Chad and Ethiopia.
Over

341,100
refugees chose to
repatriate in 2018,
including

45,540
Burundians from
Tanzania.

Where possible, opportunities for
self-reliance were identified. Strategic
missions were conducted with WFP to
review the food security and nutrition
situation and develop joint assistance
plans in Nigeria and Rwanda.

74 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Building better futures
Voluntary repatriation
A greater number of expressions of intent
to return by refugees were reported in 2018,
with political change often cited as a
motivating factor. Over 341,100 refugees
chose to repatriate in 2018. The largest
number of returns was to Burundi with more
than 45,540 Burundians assisted, largely
from Tanzania. Some 10,700 Somalis
returned from nine different countries of
asylum, despite challenges relating to
drought, food shortages, ongoing insecurity
and a lack of services in some areas,

bringing the number of those who were
assisted to return since December 2014 to
nearly 87,540.
Elsewhere, voluntary repatriation movements
between Chad and Sudan resumed in
November 2018 after the rainy season.
The return of close to 1,800 Sudanese
refugees was facilitated from eastern Chad
to Darfur, while nearly 6,350 Chadian
refugees voluntarily returned from Darfur
to Sila, in eastern Chad. Despite the
precarious security situation in the CAR,
more than 35,180 Central African refugees
were assisted to return from Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, the DRC, Niger,
the Republic of the Congo and Senegal.
UNHCR also supported the return of some
2,800 Ivorian refugees from neighbouring
countries in 2018.

7,100
Senegalese
refugees were
granted nationality
in Guinea-Bissau.

Over the past two years, Tanzania has
naturalized many of the Burundian refugees
who arrived in 1972. However, a joint
verification exercise of UNHCR and the
Government identified the pending cases
of approximately 58,000 Burundian people
of concern (linked to the 1972 Burundian
population), as well as pending cases from
the initial naturalization process. UNHCR
supported the Government to continue the
naturalization process for those who qualify,
as well as resolve protection issues, and
work on alternative stay arrangements.
In the CAR, UNHCR worked with the
Government to support the integration of
the residual caseload of Sudanese refugees
in Bambari (nearly 200 people), who opted
to remain following the voluntary return of
some 1,500 refugees in December 2017.
The Government of Zambia started issuing
temporary residency permits to former
Rwandan refugees—with nearly
1,500 issued thus far—which will facilitate
their stay and participation in the
socioeconomic development of their
host communities.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 75

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

© UNHCR/Sebastian Rich

Providing safety nets for families
across Africa
When Jacqueline arrived at Nduta refugee camp in Tanzania
in 2015, she received from UNHCR an emergency family
shelter, together with mosquito nets from the UN Foundation.
In certain regions in Africa, refugees’ lives are at risk every
day because of malaria. Since 2016, the UN Foundation
has donated almost 800,000 mosquito nets to thousands
of families like Jacqueline’s in sub-Saharan Africa, through
its “Nothing but Nets” Campaign. Thanks to the shelter and
lifesaving supplies like mosquito nets, refugees can enjoy
safety and protection.

Resettlement
Resettlement submissions increased
significantly–by some 69%–compared
to 2017, with more countries offering
resettlement quotas for Africa, including
for the East and Horn of Africa and the
Great Lakes sub-regions. Resettlement
countries also created places for vulnerable

In the Kiziba camp in Rwanda, UNHCR is supporting an
online tertiary education platform that allows refugees
to study towards their associates and bachelor’s
degrees.
The Kepler programme, part of the joint UNHCR-UNICEF
Humanitarian Education Accelerator, uses a
competency-based model and pairs digital content
from an accredited US university (Southern New Hampshire
University) with a team of expert local teachers.
In addition, a focus on internships, on-the-job
learning and professional skills training ensures
graduates are ready to enter the workforce with
the required soft skills needed in leadership,
language and computer literacy.

76 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Antoine Tardy

Bringing tertiary education to
refugees in Rwanda

refugees being evacuated from the
detention centres in Libya through the
ETM in Niger. Departures for resettlement
countries also increased from 15,800 in
2017 to over 19,300 in 2018 against more
than 36,400 resettlement submissions
made in 2018 alone.

The humanitarian–development nexus
In line with the Global Compact on Refugees,
the CRRF is being rolled out in eight countries
in the region: Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Rwanda, Somalia, Uganda and Zambia, as
well as through a regional approach for the
Somali refugee situation, supported by the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development.
Multi-year, multi-partner (MYMP) strategies are
being implemented by 13 countries in the region
as a vehicle for the CRRF in Cameroon, Chad,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali,
Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania and Uganda.
The strategies focus on improving long-term
planning for solutions and protection by
working more concertedly with partners.
Three MYMP countries—Ghana, Kenya and
Malawi—formed part of the Solutions Capital,
a donor pact proposed to enable
operations to fully implement their protection and solution strategies.
Cooperation with the World Bank was strengthened through an increasing
number of joint activities at the field level, including through the IDA18
regional sub-window. Eleven countries were approved for these grants and
concessional loans in 2018, including Cameroon ($274 million towards access to
health care, education, social safety nets, and social and economic infrastructure),
Ethiopia ($202 million towards economic opportunities for refugees and host
communities) and Uganda ($360 million for infrastructure and $335 for water
management to improve service delivery). A number of countries in the East and Horn
of Africa sub-region also benefitted from World Bank “Development response to
displacement impacts” projects.
UNHCR worked with the African Development Bank and host governments on the
implementation of innovative projects benefitting refugee and host communities in
Burundi and Zimbabwe. The European Union Trust Fund also contributed critical
resources aimed at supporting inclusion. A number of bilateral cooperation initiatives
are increasingly looking at refugees and their hosts through the lens of potential
mutual benefits resulting from socioeconomic inclusion.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 77

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
Consequences of underfunding
Critical underfunding was widespread,
especially for the Burundi, the CAR, the
DRC, Mali, Somalia and South Sudan
situations. In the Burundi situation, for
example, shelters were highly inadequate,
health centres struggled to cope with the
number of patients, classrooms were
overcrowded, and capacity to assist
unaccompanied children and survivors of
sexual violence was extremely limited.
Neighbouring countries continued to receive
displaced people from South Sudan despite
overstretched capacities. Notwithstanding
all efforts to provide the most basic services
to young refugees–including lifesaving
assistance for the many unaccompanied
minors and those with special needs, as well
as access to quality education–urgently
required activities to protect large numbers

of unaccompanied minors could not be
carried out due to limited funding. This
situation increased their vulnerability to
protection risks such as early marriage,
forced recruitment, and survival sex.
Refugees across the region were affected
by severe malnutrition and food insecurity
due to conflict and drought. Limited funding
led to cuts in food rations and narrow
targeting exercises. This had a significant
impact on refugees’ protection, health and
well-being as well as social cohesion among
the affected populations. In East Africa, the
nutrition situation in some of the refugee
sites in the region was of severe concern.
Typical coping strategies included skipping
or reducing meals, selling assets to buy
food, taking loans with high interest,
begging, child labour, and engaging in
high-risk activities. Moreover, protection
concerns linked to assistance cuts have
been documented, including SGBV, domestic
abuse and transactional sex of all ages.

Budget
• ExCom original budget:
• Final budget: $2.755

$2.600 billion.

billion.

• Budget increase: $155.2 million / +6%, mainly due to new needs in relation to the
Central Mediterranean route, and the DRC and South Sudan situations.

Expenditure
SOURCE OF EXPENDITURE

Carry-over from prior years

Voluntary contributions

As % of
expenditure
within the region

As % of global
expenditure by
source of funding

48,408
79,159
779,360
250,166
34,496
10,162
30,586
71,808

4%
6%
60%
19%
3%
1%
2%
6%

29%
40%
31%
44%
10%
28%
14%
37%

1,304,145

100%

31%

USD | thousands

Earmarked
Unearmarked
Earmarked
Softly earmarked
Unearmarked
In-kind

Programme support costs
Other income

TOTAL

• Expenditure in Africa represented 31% of UNHCR global expenditure.
•

| USD

60% of expenditure funded from earmarked funding.

• Highest amount of expenditure funded from unearmarked voluntary contributions,
at $34.4 million.

EXPENDITURE IN AFRICA 2014-2018 | USD

• Voluntary earmarked contributions to Africa increased by $102.2 million / +9%
compared to 2017.

1,400
1,200
1,000
800
Pilier 1

600

Pilier 2
Pilier 3

400

Pilier 4

Millions

200

78 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 79

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN AFRICA | USD

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN AFRICA | USD
PILLAR 1
Refugee
programme

OPERATION

PILLAR 2
Stateless
programme

PILLAR 3
Reintegration
projects

PILLAR 4
IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

WEST AFRICA
Burkina Faso

503,114
224,734
9,457,012
3,514,216
733,498
261,297
4,521,642
1,396,589

3,209,285
2,167,943
9,262,523
5,467,086
22,890,000
7,635,099
-

1,125,019
776,564
12,810,943
4,498,701
44,149,721
11,532,968
-

24,650,996
13,814,451
16,551,001
9,525,158
8,085,878
4,421,708
11,580,063
7,190,576
21,599,992
13,353,148
92,783,814
52,539,365
80,400,000
30,469,635
38,908,376
21,675,211

Budget

185,897,364

15,215,267

35,361,808

58,085,682

294,560,121

11%

Expenditure

115,514,055

5,396,835

15,270,128

16,808,233

152,989,251

12%

Expenditure
Côte d'Ivoire

Budget
Expenditure

Ghana

Budget
Expenditure

Liberia

Budget
Expenditure

Mali

Budget
Expenditure

Niger

Budget
Expenditure

Nigeria

Budget
Expenditure

Senegal Regional Office1

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Burundi
Cameroon

Budget
Budget
Expenditure

Eritrea

Budget
Expenditure

Ethiopia

Budget
Expenditure

Ethiopia UNHCR Representation
to the AU and ECA
Kenya

Budget
Expenditure
Budget
Expenditure

Kenya Regional Support Hub

Budget
Expenditure

Somalia

Budget
Expenditure

South Sudan

Budget
Expenditure

Sudan

Budget
Expenditure

Uganda

Budget
Expenditure

Regional activities

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

80 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Budget
Expenditure

Central African Republic

Budget
Expenditure

Congo, Republic of the

Budget
Expenditure

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Regional Office2
Rwanda

Budget
Expenditure
Budget
Expenditure

United Republic of Tanzania

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

140,346,387
73,034,034
26,730,931
9,508,942
5,223,224
3,886,322
311,125,814
146,278,769
4,162,503
1,846,967
190,631,876
102,171,288
7,973,251
7,255,496
79,066,491
33,682,361
120,077,582
85,125,929
218,356,455
60,249,503
415,003,072
184,547,919
3,124,616
296,127

3,003,699
531,928
481,496
385,235
1,505,682
1,006,895
2,033,093
743,129
200,000
49,645
-

58,449,546
20,235,222
11,846,749
3,560,440
-

1,521,822,200
707,883,656

7,223,970
2,716,832

70,296,295
23,795,662

5,634,658
1,668,405
16,628,862
10,477,913
48,868,238
10,928,415
33,704,059
25,037,966
23,662,502
8,198,063
-

Angola
Malawi

148,984,744
75,234,367
26,730,931
9,508,942
5,223,224
3,886,322
327,754,676
156,756,682
4,162,503
1,846,967
191,113,372
102,556,523
7,973,251
7,255,496
186,384,275
64,845,998
155,287,323
111,170,790
255,898,799
72,751,134
415,203,072
184,597,564
3,124,616
296,127

128,498,318 1,727,840,784
56,310,762
790,706,912

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

32,493,678
26,846,607
74,158,771
41,889,346
9,639,982
6,796,906
20,409,168
8,897,448
107,813,396
56,675,298
95,475,730
33,159,109
122,592,614
51,287,549

375,533
284,636
1,285,780
404,663
-

16,985,778
12,603,077
11,143,850
519,597
3,300,309
2,175,059
3,219,450
2,588,664

508,465
470,705
12,377,502
3,969,948
14,643,662
8,275,100
3,170,000
2,884,215
78,634,833
34,295,568
-

33,002,143
27,317,311
86,911,806
46,143,930
41,269,421
27,675,082
23,579,168
11,781,663
198,877,860
91,895,127
98,776,039
35,334,168
125,812,064
53,876,213

462,583,339
225,552,262

1,661,313
689,299

34,649,387
17,886,398

109,334,463
49,895,535

608,228,501
294,023,494

31,012,416
16,950,488
17,501,336
7,713,118
5,626,659
3,801,853
29,123,809
16,858,631
32,279,067
14,729,314
7,564,022
5,596,789

319,555
121,242
1,323,482
478,514
253,828
174,197

-

-

31,012,416
16,950,488
17,501,336
7,713,118
5,946,214
3,923,094
30,447,291
17,337,144
32,279,067
14,729,314
7,817,850
5,770,986

123,107,310
65,650,191

1,896,865
773,952

-

-

125,004,175
66,424,143

2,293,410,213
1,114,600,165

25,997,415
9,576,918

140,307,489
56,952,188

22%
23%

SOUTHERN AFRICA
Budget
Expenditure

Expenditure
Djibouti

Budget
Expenditure

EAST AND HORN OF AFRICA
Chad

PILLAR 2

CENTRAL AFRICA AND THE GREAT LAKES

24,147,881
13,589,717
3,884,705
3,842,999
8,085,878
4,421,708
11,580,063
7,190,576
11,212,450
7,109,498
79,239,374
47,779,367
13,360,279
11,301,568
34,386,734
20,278,622

Budget

OPERATION

PILLAR 1

Budget
Expenditure

Mozambique

Budget
Expenditure

South Africa Regional Office

Budget
Expenditure

Zambia

Budget
Expenditure

Zimbabwe

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

TOTAL

1
2

Budget
Expenditure

295,918,463 2,755,633,580
123,014,530 1,304,143,801

5%
5%
100%
100%

Includes activities in Benin, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo.				
Coordinates activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon.					

63%
61%

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 81

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I AFRICA

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO AFRICA | USD

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO AFRICA | USD

DONOR
United States of America
Germany
European Union
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Central Emergency Response Fund
Japan
Denmark
Sweden
Private donors in Qatar

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

ALL PILLARS

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

10,120,910
5,340,909
3,167,150

649,354,879
66,928,276
7,870,370

25,211,988
20,487,099
59,838,422

4,924,004

Private donors in Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Republic of Korea
Private donors in the United States of America
Belgium
Private donors in the Netherlands
Private donors in Spain
Finland
Switzerland
Private donors in Japan
Ireland
China

41,079,242

1,101,928

25,023,537
21,053,700
16,024,802
9,621,479
8,277,293

60,296
1,868,926

10,157,589
1,589,343
7,775,950
9,797,619
5,164,011
3,135,667
5,725,595
4,623,875
7,625,970
2,064,598
5,113,636
792,267
6,142,561
1,726,236
2,000,000

42,181,170
12,684,214
216,674
1,554,569

1,292,177
160,370

774,293

300,000

620,599

368,114

525,010
2,335,896

360,360

155,178

Country-based Pooled Funds

1,999,999
1,495,627

Australia
United Arab Emirates

Spain
UNICEF
African Development Bank
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Private donors in Australia
Private donors in Sweden
UN-Habitat
Private donors in the United Arab Emirates
Private donors in Switzerland

1,301,552
1,911,710
1,875,792
1,589,667
1,532,577
1,247,805
681,265
1,119,687
1,000,000
889,143

203,167

134,653

UN Great Lakes Region Cross-Border Fund
UNDP

82 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

2,305,293
3,782,148
2,196,653
550,000

48
60,705
945,050

627,358
594,267
223,905

264,000
454,545

Czechia
Private donors in the Republic of Korea

4,683,292
6,575,080
1,921,797
1,165,501
18,819
4,940,007
1,851,852
5,589,431
100,270
2,358,491

88,190
545,181

UNAIDS
WFP

5,306,679
11,959,897
12,399,845
9,630,000
15,167,116
2,017,160
10,223,084
884,525

3,011,643

Luxembourg
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund

684,687,777
92,756,284
75,799,947

DONOR
Private donors in the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

339,934

27,183

37,768,047
28,445,979
27,984,699
23,575,892
17,907,293
15,167,116
13,249,042
11,812,427
10,941,365
9,957,989
9,847,304
9,710,747
8,172,402
8,125,272
7,644,789
7,004,605
6,965,488
6,742,058
6,242,832
4,084,726
3,999,999
3,956,098
3,782,148
3,011,643
2,196,653
2,189,372
1,911,710
1,875,792
1,589,667
1,532,577
1,335,996
1,226,445
1,119,687
1,000,048
949,848
945,050
627,358
594,267
487,905
454,545
367,117

345,447

Education Cannot Wait
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs

250,000

87,050

200,309
265,279
123,131

81,440

108,070
77,818

UNESCO
Fund to End Violence Against Children
Private donors in Norway

76,100
69,320

UN Trust Fund for Human Security

66,368
63,735
54,936
21,385

Private donors in China
Nigeria
Private donors in Denmark
Private donors in Thailand

33,239
50,761

Liechtenstein
Private donors in Kenya
Private donors in Italy

1,500
712

235
854

Private donors worldwide
Private donors in France
Botswana
Angola
Malta

27,531
19,481
14,588

South Africa
Private donors in Burkina Faso

10,000
6,173
5,000

Andorra
Holy See
Private donors in Senegal
Private donors in Ghana

1,777
621

1,009
447
156
14

Private donors in South Africa
Private donors in Lebanon
Private donors in Singapore

TOTAL*

48,016
41,399
40,281
37,230
30,472
30,000

29,621

Private donors in Nigeria

UN Women

ALL PILLARS

1,305

UN Darfur Fund
Private donors in Canada

Canada
France

TOTAL

319,086,519

1,452,547

10,318,752

40,906,490

TOTAL

346,753
337,050
281,748
265,279
123,131
108,070
77,818
76,100
69,320
66,368
63,735
54,936
54,624
50,761
49,516
42,346
41,135
37,230
30,472
30,000
29,621
27,531
19,481
14,588
10,000
6,173
5,000
1,777
1,630
447
156
14

832,487,677 1,204,251,984

*Notes: 						
1
Contributions include 7% programme support costs.						
2
Includes a total of $33.8 million acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $23 million acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation
in 2019 and beyond.						
3
Includes contributions earmarked at a situation overall level to Burundi situation, Central African Republic situation, the DRC situation, Mali situation, Nigeria situation, Somalia
situation and South Sudan situation.						

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 83

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

The Americas

FOREWORD
In 2018, the Americas faced a displacement
situation of complexity and magnitude not
seen in decades. There were 12.8 million
people of concern in the region, including
some 432,000 new asylum-seekers and
nearly 140,000 new IDPs by the year’s end.
The deterioration of the situation in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela alone saw
over 3 million Venezuelans flee to other
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean,
and beyond. This situation had a massive
impact on regional asylum capacities, as
more than half of all asylum claims filed
globally by Venezuelans were submitted in
2018. These characteristics, combined with
the increasing displacement in and from the
North of Central America (NCA), where
thousands, including children, women, and
LGBTI people were targeted by organized
crime, resulted in a greater need for
protection in the region compared to 2017.
Venezuelans fled their homes at an average
of 5,000 people a day, as basic services
such as education and health collapsed,
essential commercial activities were
interrupted and food shortages occurred.
Most Venezuelans fled to Colombia, which
was also grappling with its own internal
displacement situation, with some
7.8 million IDPs across the country. The
NCA suffered from widespread violence at
the hands of gangs and criminal organizations
that used displacement as a means to exert
territorial control. Thousands, mainly from
El Salvador and Honduras, took to the road
in organized “caravans” moving northward
to Mexico and the United States of America
in search of protection and asylum.

© UNHCR/Siegfried Modola

84 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Venezuelan refugees and migrants cross the Simon
Bolivar Bridge, one of seven legal entry points on
the Colombia-Venezuela border, and the largest
entry point with over 30,000 people crossing into
Colombia daily.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 85

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

Key data and achievements in the Americas
As the political situation in Nicaragua
steadily worsened, reports of arbitrary
detention, raids and human rights violations
accompanied thousands as they fled abroad
in search of safety.
States increasingly institutionalised asylum
and refugee management responses in line
with international and regional protection
principles. Asylum applications significantly
increased in the region. However, these
do not reflect the scale of people in need
of international protection and remain
disproportionally limited when compared
to other forms of timely responses such as
alternative legal stay arrangements under
national and regional frameworks. While
some of these measures succeeded in
temporarily ensuring access to basic
services for about 1 million Venezuelans,
they did not necessarily contain protection
safeguards against return, access to shelter,
health, education, employment, freedom
of movement and family reunification,
among others.
While countries in the region generously
maintained open door policies, their
reception capacities were overwhelmed.
More than a million asylum-seekers were
awaiting a response to their claims at the
end of 2018. Spiking numbers of asylum
requests, coupled with significant limitations
in States’ abilities to process claims in a
timely and qualitative manner, highlighted
the need for improved registration and
case management systems. Signs of
rising tension were observed in some
host communities, where mass arrivals
exacerbated existing situations of
socioeconomic exclusion and mounting
inequality. This prompted UNHCR to
increase its efforts to counteract rising
discriminatory and xenophobic attitudes
towards asylum-seekers among the
communities.

86 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Faced with such a demanding and complex
environment, UNHCR worked with other
agencies to respond to pressing humanitarian
needs and to complement the efforts of the
main receiving governments. Country-led
processes such as the 2018 “Declaration
of Quito on human mobility of Venezuelan
citizens in the region” and its subsequent
action plan were important steps in
harmonizing States’ policies and practices,
scaling up and coordinating the humanitarian
response, and improving access and
enjoyment of rights for refugees and migrants
from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Belize, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico and Panama worked together
on the implementation of the regional
Comprehensive Refugee Response
Framework for Central America and Mexico
(MIRPS in Spanish) to foster regional
cooperation between countries of origin,
transit and destination for greater
responsibility-sharing on prevention,
protection and solutions. The MIRPS
promoted an inclusive approach, encouraging
engagement with development actors in
developing a common strategy to address
displacement at its root causes of structural
violence in the sub-region.
Renata Dubini

Resettlement
The Americas is the 2nd region of destination of resettled people
2 countries in the Americas are the top 2 resettlement countries worldwide
People resettled to the Americas in 2018

24,827

resettled worldwide
45% ofwentpeople
to the Americas

26%

compared to 2017

The top 2 resettlement countries in the Americas
1 the United States

17,112

2 Canada 7,704

Biometric registration

66,689 individuals biometrically enrolled by the end of 2018
1% of total individuals biometrically registered
Cash-based interventions
Variation

$8M
$5M
2017

2018

Refugees living in/out of camps
Refugees*

Data as of 31st December 2018

% accommodation known % private accommodation**

643,300

95.3%

Director of UNHCR’s Regional Bureau for the Americas

GLOBAL WORKFORCE
IN THE AMERICAS*: 1,245

37%
MALE

60%

$3M

% camps + other

100%

0%

* includes refugees and people in refugee-like situations
** out of total number of refugees and refugee-like

Emergency deployments

Partners and budget allocated

(UNHCR and standby partners)

USD millions

63 %

100

$40.5 million allocated to 171 partners
(30% of regional expenditure)

FEMALE

134 National NGO partners

57

LOCATIONS

1%

BASED IN
HARDSHIP LOCATIONS

$12.5M

9
2017

2018

$26.5M

22 International NGO partners
12 Government partners

*including 520 affiliate workforce staff.

3 UN agencies/IOM

$0.9M
$0.6M

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 87

R E G REGIONAL
I O N A L S U SUMMARIES
MMARIES I | THE AMERICAS

I CEARSI C A S
RREGIONAL
E G I O N A L SUMMARIES
S U M M A R I E|ST HI E TAHM
E EARM

The Americas faced a displacement crisis not seen in decades. The year ended with more than 12.8 million
people of concern. Of the 1.5 million asylum requests, a million applications were still pending at the end of the
year. Almost 140,000 people were internally displaced in 2018 alone.

MAJOR SITUATIONS IN THE AMERICAS IN 2018
VENEZUELA

Over
3 million
almost
1 million

The exodus from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is the largest in
the recent history of the region. Venezuelans fled their homes at an
average of 5,000 people a day. Over 460,000 asylum claims were
filed globally by Venezuelans, more than half of which were submitted
in 2018.

with regular status

COLOMBIA

7.8 million

As the implementation of the peace agreement remained challenging,
forced displacement, restrictions of movements affecting increasingly
vulnerable populations and attacks on community leaders persisted.
Grappling with its own internal displacement, Colombia is also the
primary host for Venezuelans on the move.

1.1 million

MEXICO

in Colombia

To SPAIN
BELIZE

NORTH OF CENTRAL AMERICA
Organized crime, drug cartels and urban gangs, combined with
limited state capacity to provide protection and basic services,
contributed to escalating violence, forcing people to flee their
countries.

HONDURAS
GUATEMALA
EL SALVADOR NICARAGUA

70,625
282,899 asylum-seekers

COSTA
RICA PANAMA

245,500

NICARAGUA

BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC
OF VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA
L2

ECUADOR

32,269

Political and social tensions triggered several episodes of violence
in Nicaragua in April 2018, leading to a large influx of people, mainly
into Costa Rica, but also to the North of Central America and
Panama.

TRINIDAD
AND TOBAGO

BRAZIL

PERU

AGE AND GENDER BREAKDOWN

To the UNITED STATES of AMERICA

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS

12.8
million
PEOPLE OF CONCERN IN THE AMERICAS
REFUGEES

MEXICO

643,000

1.3 million

ASYLUM-SEEKERS
RETURNED REFUGEES

To SPAIN

80%

STATELESS PERSONS

7,000

OTHERS OF CONCERN

60+

209,000

2.6 million

in global populations of concern map

8%

UNDER 18

5-11

24%

COSTA RICA
PANAMA
North of Central America situation and Nicaragua

Situation

Refugees

Venezuelans
abroad

Negative trend compared with 2017

MIRPS country

IDPs

Asylum-seekers

Positve trend compared with 2017

MYMP country

Venezuelans with
regular status

Venezuelan
outflow
11 UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018
88 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Nicaraguan outflow

L2

ARGENTINA

NICARAGUA

12-17

0-4

HONDURAS

EL SALVADOR

18-59

VENEZUELANS
DISPLACED ABROAD*
(6)

GUATEMALA

24%

CHILE

BELIZE

24,000

8 million

IDPs

* See footnote

40%

COLOMBIA

Level of emergency
NCA outflow

UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018 12
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 89

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

ACHIEVEMENTS
AND IMPACT
Safeguarding
fundamental rights
Read the
100 Points
of Brasilia.

In February 2018, countries from the region
agreed on the 100 Points of Brasilia during
the first triennial evaluation of the 2014
Brazil Declaration and Plan of Action. The
document lists one hundred of the best
practices for ensuring the protection of and
solutions for asylum-seekers, refugees,
returnees, displaced and stateless persons.
It also represents an important contribution
on behalf of Latin American and Caribbean
States to the Global Compact on Refugees.

Despite a few States adopting restrictive
measures–including deportation and denial
of access to territory–most governments in
the region showed commendable solidarity
towards refugees, asylum-seekers and
migrants, affording them access to territory,
protection and assistance. The broader
criteria for refugee status, set out in the
Cartagena Declaration—incorporated into
national legislation by 15 States in the
region—added an extra layer of protection
for Venezuelan asylum-seekers, who are
eligible under these criteria, including for
group recognition. UNHCR supported and
encouraged States to adopt protectionoriented arrangements to enable legal stay
for Venezuelans, as well as access to asylum
procedures.
As the refugee status determination (RSD)
procedures of many States struggled to
provide appropriate protection responses

90 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Resolving statelessness

within an adequate timeframe, UNHCR
stepped in to support States in developing
simplified and accelerated procedures to
increase asylum system efficiencies. This
included strengthening registration, data
management and documentation capacities
to sustain work in a regionally harmonized
way and avoid discrepancies in the
response that might have resulted in
onward movements.
The main vehicle for such support had
been the progressively expanding
Quality Assurance Initiative (QAI).
UNHCR facilitated the second QAI regional
roundtable, providing regional asylum
authorities an opportunity to exchange
and share information on existing asylum
procedures, enhancing efficiency in
processing large numbers of applications
from Venezuelans, as well as Guatemalans,
Hondurans, Nicaraguans and Salvadorians.
Belize and Paraguay signed on to the QAI
and more States expressed interest in
joining.
UNHCR’s regional response plan for the
Nicaragua situation also focused on
strengthening reception capacities in
Costa Rica, as well as in El Salvador and
Honduras. In Costa Rica, where the
majority of Nicaraguan asylum claims
were filed, UNHCR supported admission
to territory, enhancing reception conditions
as well as RSD processing and cash-based
interventions (CBIs). CBIs were increased
inside Nicaragua, where UNHCR
strengthened its cooperation with the
Council of Protestant Churches to
assist more than 800 Central American
asylum-seekers and refugees in the country.

2018 was a year of achievements towards
the eradication of statelessness in the
Americas with both Chile and Haiti acceding
to statelessness conventions. Three years
after its adoption, countries evaluated the
progresses and the challenges in
implementing the Brazil Plan of Action, with
many States taking legal steps to prevent
statelessness in national systems and
facilitate naturalization.

migrant through a simplified procedure after
adopting a new regulation on facilitated
naturalization. In the Dominican Republic,
UNHCR welcomed steps taken by the
Government to facilitate naturalization for
individuals born in the country to two
migrant parents. Panama approved the
establishment of a statelessness status
determination procedure, as did Paraguay,
which also approved a bill in favour of
developing pathways for facilitated
naturalization.

In 2018,

Chile and
Haiti acceded
to the 1954 and
1961 Conventions
on the Status of
Stateless Persons
and the Reduction
of Statelessness.

Costa Rica became the first country in the
region to grant citizenship to a stateless

© UNHCR/Susan Hopper

Access to asylum and acceptable
reception conditions

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

TEDx event highlights
the right to citizenship
The activist Maha Mamo, born stateless in Lebanon in 1988
and granted Brazilian citizenship in 2018, was among the
speakers at TEDxPlaceDesNationsWomen in Geneva,
addressing the theme of “empowerment”–particularly
women’s empowerment and gender equality.
“We need to change discrimination in the law. Today I am
Brazilian. Today I belong. And everyone has the
right to belong.”
—Maha Mamo, activist for the right to
citizenship.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 91

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

Responding to internal displacement in the Americas
In Colombia, the conduct of armed groups resulted in new and recurrent
displacement, as well as restrictions on freedom of movement throughout 2018.
UNHCR concentrated its presence in the border areas with Ecuador and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as well as along the Pacific Coast where there were
high levels of displacement and human rights violations. In 2018 alone, more than
138,000 people were displaced and over 430 human rights defenders were killed.
UNHCR advocated the implementation of a strong legal framework and durable
solutions for the 7.8 million IDPs through the Victims and Land Restitution Law.
The situation of insecurity at Colombia´s border with Ecuador, combined with the
instability that followed the demobilization process, prompted increased refugee
movements to Ecuador. In turn, the spillover into Ecuador triggered internal
displacement there. With few opportunities for education, recreation and livelihoods,
the recruitment of young people to engage in illicit activities was a major concern.
UNHCR worked with the Government of Ecuador to enhance its capacity to provide a
strengthened response and provided training on the identification and referral of
vulnerable people.

Responding with lifesaving support

The Regional
Inter-Agency
Coordination
Platform.

UNHCR implemented lifesaving
programmes with more than 140 partners
in the spirit of solidarity, sharing and mutual
support in line with the Global Compact on
Refugees. Inter-agency coordination
between UNHCR and IOM was key to the
response for Venezuelan refugees and
migrants. Enhanced partnership with other
UN agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as coordination and complementarity
at the regional level, were strengthened to
include asylum-seekers and refugees in the
activities of the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean towards
the achievement of the SDGs.
The Regional Inter-Agency Coordination
Platform was established to lead the
regional strategic response to the
Venezuela situation and provide support
to country-level inter-agency coordination,

92 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

planning, operational response, resource
mobilisation, and information management
and communication initiatives.
In December 2018, the platform’s
95 partners launched the Regional
Response Plan for Refugees and Migrants
from Venezuela (the RMRP). It aims to
respond to the population’s needs in an
integrated and comprehensive manner,
complementing national efforts with key
humanitarian interventions in line with
governments’ priorities and in support
of their regional and national response.
Complementing these efforts, eight
States—Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru and
Uruguay—adopted an action plan based on
the “Declaration of Quito” and called for the
UNHCR-IOM Joint Special Representative
to assist in the implementation of the
commitments in the “Quito Process”.

UNHCR supported governments respond to
the needs of Venezuelans with site planning
and provision of safe shelter, legal aid and
counselling on access to refugee status
and alternative forms of stay, in line with
the RMRP objectives. Technical assistance
was also provided to ensure effective
coordination, including through the
preparation of local response plans by,
for example, the establishment of referral
pathways with hospitals in Lima, Peru and
the construction of a primary health centre
in Cucuta, Colombia.
In line with the “Brazil Plan of Action’s Border
of Solidarity” programme, UNHCR opened
new offices and strengthened existing ones
in the border areas on the routes taken
by Venezuelans. It also stepped up its
presence in border areas across the region
to improve reception conditions and
respond to the basic needs of Venezuelan
refugees and other people of concern.
UNHCR provided much needed
humanitarian assistance throughout the
region: distributing drinking water, hygiene
and dignity kits, blankets and food at main
border points. Inside the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, UNHCR implemented similar
activities in line with the UN country’s
“Scale-up strategy”.
In addition to direct assistance, UNHCR
expanded its use of cash and provided
almost $8 million, mainly in unrestricted
grants. In Mexico, the Office distributed
approximately $2.5 million of cash
assistance, almost double the amount
from 2017, providing over 3,200 vulnerable
families with reloadable prepaid cards,
helping them to provide for their shelter,

water and hygiene, food and clothing
needs. This in turn helped in establishing
livelihoods and reducing protection risks
derived from negative coping mechanisms.
Cash assistance was also increased in
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Ecuador, Panama, Peru and
Trinidad and Tobago to respond to the
needs of increasing numbers of displaced
Venezuelans.
In addition to responding to the most urgent
needs, UNHCR started to identify avenues
for solutions from the very onset of the
Venezuela situation. For example, UNHCR
supported the voluntary relocation of over
4,000 Venezuelans from border areas in
Brazil to other cities with greater
employment opportunities and services,
as a strategy for socioeconomic integration.
In line with the MIRPS, UNHCR responded
to mixed movements in the NCA, supporting
more than 70 strategic alliances and
involving more than 47 development actors
and 10 private sector initiatives. These
partnerships achieved milestones such as
the decentralization of asylum systems at
border crossings, the establishment and
strengthening of shelters and other safe
spaces, and many local integration initiatives
such as language courses, granting
work permits and vocational training for
asylum-seekers and refugees. In 2018,
94,000 people were assisted through the
protection network and safe spaces and over
18,200 households were supported with
cash-based interventions (particularly in
cities in the NCA).

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 93

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

Preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence in the
Americas
Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV), child protection, and exploitation-related
risks were a prominent feature in displacement trends in the Americas. Intimate
partner violence, femicide, sexual exploitation, child recruitment and family separation
were of great concern, disproportionally affecting women, girls, and people with
diverse sexual orientation and gender identity. However, high displacement rates and
fluid human mobility often hindered the ability of protection actors to reach out to
those most vulnerable with timely and appropriate services.
To address the specific needs of people affected by SGBV, UNHCR established a
regional protection from sexual exploitation and abuse network and promoted the
coordination and standardization of service provision along the displacement cycle in
the Americas. Countries affected by the Venezuela situation and by increased mixed
migration towards the north of the continent were prioritised.

“I consider myself a survivor, because I have moved forward.”

Building better
futures
Comprehensive solutions
UNHCR supported the leadership that
MIRPS States, together with strategic
partners such as the Organization of
American States, showed and encouraged
other States to participate through
political or financial support. The MIRPS
engaged financial institutions, such
as the Inter-American Development
Bank, established synergies with the
Comprehensive Development Plan led
by Mexico with the NCA countries and
supported by the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean.

—Leonor, displaced Colombian and SGBV survivor
Read her
story

UNHCR also launched the “Best Interests Procedures Guidelines”, which will be rolled
out in the region in 2019. Two specific projects on education and protection for
children on the move were implemented as part of the MIRPS in Guatemala and
Mexico. The second annual workshop of the regional safe spaces network (RSSN)
launched a “Lessons Learned and Toolkit”. In addition to the existing members (Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela), participants from other countries such as Brazil, Ecuador, El Salvador
and the United States of America made steps to join the RSSN initiative.
Two RSSN bi-national workshops were organized in Colombia and Mexico and UNHCR
together with the Human Rights Center of the Berkeley School of Law co-published
“The Silence I Carry: Disclosing gender-based violence in forced displacement”,
an exploratory report on ways to facilitate safe access of survivors to emergency
protection services.

94 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

The Government of Mexico took steps to
include refugees and asylum-seekers in
the 2030 Agenda and the 2018 Voluntary
National Review mechanism that assesses
States’ implementation of the SDGs. The
Voluntary National Review report also
captured how refugees and asylum-seekers
can contribute to achieving the SDGs.
Building on the success of a well-established
local integration initiative in Mexico, UNHCR
and partners provided job placement
services and psychosocial and legal
support to refugees who were relocated
from southern Mexico to local integration
zones in Coahuila and Jalisco States, where
many were employed in local manufacturing.

UNHCR and partners also supported nearly
600 people through a workshop on
employment and labour rights. More
than 200 people were provided with
job-matching services through a network
of private sector employers in Mexico City.
Over 300 people were provided with
training, mentoring and other livelihood
opportunities.
Costa Rica made progress in local
integration through initiatives such as
the “living integration quality seal”, an
integration initiative that focuses on
livelihood opportunities. The Government
issued guidance on refugees in the public
education system, addressed barriers to
equal access to education, and promoted
specific procedures for enrolment as well as
for the recognition and validation of studies.
In Ecuador, the “graduation model”
provided livelihood opportunities and
fostered the social protection of around
600 families in 2018 (400 of which were
supported by UNHCR and 200 by the
United States of America). In Brazil,
the voluntary relocation programme for
Venezuelans managed by the Government
with the support of UNHCR and other
UN agencies relocated nearly
2,000 Venezuelans from Roraima to
shelters in 13 municipalities in different
States. A recent survey showed that 43%
of the relocated Venezuelans of working
age had succeeded in finding a job in the
city of relocation.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 95

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

These were aired on radio and widely
shared on digital ads, mass media
publications, free press, massive mailings,
organic content in social media, as well as
events such as workshops for journalists
or initiatives at community level.
Innovation was key to strengthening
protection through participatory and
community-based approaches. In 2018,
UNHCR designed, piloted and rolled out a
protection monitoring tool for the Americas
to collect, process and analyse comparable
data on protection risks and specific needs,
which then guided referral of individual

© UNHCR/Victoria Hugueney

Venezuelan asylum-seekers
strengthen Brazil’s workforce
An innovative voluntary relocation programme helps
Venezuelans and their hosts thrive in cities like São Paulo
and Brasilia.
“It’s great to feel that they accept us and to see that we
can be part of the future of the country.”
—Rolando, Venezuelan participating in a
UNHCR-supported employment programme.

Resettlement

In 2018, 1,456 people were submitted for
ressettlement to the United States of
America, Australia, Brazil and Uruguay.
Of these, 150 people were resettled through
the Protection Transfer Arrangement,
a regional mechanism that facilitates
resettlement procedures for people at risk
of serious harm or death (see the chapter
on Building better futures).

96 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

In an effort to curb instances of xenophobia
against Venezuelans and promote solidarity
with people forced to flee, UNHCR together
with IOM and other UN partners launched
awareness campaigns throughout the
region such as the “Somos lo Mismo”
campaign in Panama, the “Tu Causa Es Mi
Causa” in Peru, and the “Países Hermanos”
campaign and “Somos Panas” in Colombia.

© UNHCR/ Ritzau Scanpix

2018 closed with a historically low number
of resettlement departures. At a time
when needs were dramatically high, only
24,827 refugees found a durable solution
through resettlement, primarily in the United
States of America and Canada, as a result of
particularly restrictive selection criteria and
diminishing places. At the same time, four
countries in the Southern Cone—Argentina,
Brazil, Chile and Uruguay—made progress
in setting up community-based sponsorship
and resettlement programmes, with the
support of the Emerging Resettlement
Countries Joint Support Mechanism.

Strengthening participatory and
community-based approaches

cases and informed programming. The tool
was adopted in Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Peru and
Uruguay, as well as in other countries of
the Southern Cone, for the response to the
Venezuela situation and was also adapted
for use in Mexico and Central America.
By enabling real time input of survey data
to manage profiles and record protection
needs (as well as level of access and
enjoyment of rights) in an online platform,
the tool allows risks to be addressed in
a timely and adequate fashion (see below).

Harnessing big data for protection
monitoring in the Venezuela situation
In 2018, with the support of UN Global Pulse, UNHCR
launched a new project to improve media monitoring
analysis for protection monitoring purposes. The “Venezuela
media monitoring analysis report” flagged protectionrelated incidents, specific profiles or at-risk groups that
were targeted (such as indigenous groups, or faith-based
organizations) and other sociopolitical developments prior
and during the development of the humanitarian crisis.
The big data project worked across UNHCR’s information
management, protection and public information teams to
collect and classify more than 6,900 news
clippings, media articles and more than
1.2 million social media posts to improve
UNHCR’s protection monitoring.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 97

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

FINANCIAL
INFORMATION

Budget

Consequences of underfunding

• Final budget: $205.9

The fluidity of the Venezuela situation called
for flexibility in responding to the needs of
people on the move. Critical needs in key
sectors, such as protection, registration and
emergency assistance, or in geographic
areas, such as border crossings, were a
priority for support. Inadequate funding
impaired UNHCR’s ability to maintain and
establish presence in certain areas, as well
as to strengthen protection networks to
ensure access to territory, and support
registration. In such a situation, needs, such
as access to financial services, sustainable
livelihood, health and education were not
adequately addressed. Only about 20% to
30% of services for people with specific
needs, including cash-based interventions,
were delivered by partners.

• Budget increase: $53.4 million / +35%, mainly due to the Venezuela situation for critical
needs of displaced people, with particular emphasis on protection issues.

In Colombia, the arrival of significant
numbers of Venezuelan refugees and migrants
meant reprogramming, reprioritization and
adjustments of pre-planned activities. This
had an impact on the capacity to maintain
adequate attention to the needs of IDPs,
especially at times of influx.
Unmet needs in Central America, in
particular in the NCA countries, prevented
operations from expanding to strengthen
border monitoring, establish case

• ExCom original budget: $152.5

million.

million.

Expenditure
SOURCE OF EXPENDITURE

Earmarked
Unearmarked
Earmarked
Softly earmarked
Unearmarked
In-kind

Carry-over from prior years

Voluntary contributions

Programme support costs
Other income

management systems and support safe
spaces to the extent required. Lack of
funding further prevented some of the
planned interventions under the MIRPS,
such as strengthening shelter capacities,
social protection and employment,
access to education, or strengthening
community-based projects in countries
of origin.
In Costa Rica and Mexico, the initial unmet
needs during the first half of the year
required adjustments to the operations,
in particular to CBIs and integration
programming, impacting the type, quantity
and length of assistance for people of
concern.

TOTAL

• Expenditure in the Americas represented
•

As % of
expenditure
within the region

As % of global
expenditure by
source of funding

3,411
23,087
49,854
35,005
16,252
289
2,039
3,742

3%
17%
37%
26%
12%
Less than 1%
2%
3%

2%
12%
2%
6%
5%
1%
1%
2%

133,679

100%

3%

USD | thousands

3% of UNHCR global expenditure.

37% of expenditure was funded from earmarked voluntary contributions.

• Highest percentage of expenditure funded from unearmarked voluntary contributions,
at 12%.
• Voluntary earmarked contributions to the Americas increased by
$68.5 million / + 162% compared to 2017.

EXPENDITURE IN THE AMERICAS 2014-2018 | USD
140
120
100
80
60
Pillar 1
Pillar 2

40

Pillar 3
Pillar 4

Millions

20

98 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

0
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 99

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I THE AMERICAS

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE AMERICAS | USD

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN THE AMERICAS | USD

OPERATION

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

United States of America Regional Office1

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

1,836,756
1,696,763
23,978,001
12,899,215

50,595
34,154
7,915,022
4,675,327

-

-

European Union

1,887,351
1,730,917
31,893,024
17,574,542

Central Emergency Response Fund
Private donors in Mexico
Sweden
Spain

Budget

25,814,757

7,965,618

-

-

33,780,375

16%

Expenditure

14,595,979

4,709,481

-

-

19,305,460

14%

168,745
90,475
175,992
167,383
831,118
318,119
-

-

21,556,495
11,863,357
-

12,900,432
10,603,157
15,972,889
12,318,509
34,128,378
22,892,527
12,085,994
8,338,937
4,802,136
2,778,583
21,343,547
12,452,143
24,309,789
16,911,728
27,001,119
19,026,621
15,480,616
6,499,021
4,190,460
2,551,959

Expenditure

149,483,010
101,933,850

1,175,855
575,977

-

21,556,495
11,863,357

172,215,360
114,373,184

84%
86%

Budget
Expenditure

175,297,767
116,529,829

9,141,473
5,285,458

-

21,556,495
11,863,357

205,995,735
133,678,644

100%

Budget
Expenditure

Colombia

Budget
Expenditure

Costa Rica

Budget
Expenditure

Regional Legal Unit Costa Rica

Budget
Expenditure

Ecuador

Budget
Expenditure

Mexico

Budget
Expenditure

Panama Regional Office3

Budget
Expenditure

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Budget
Expenditure

Regional activities4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

IDP
projects

30,025,571

600,000

6,786,878
4,795,941
866,217
2,206,045
1,714,286
13,169
1,712,357
1,572,797

599,010

ALL PILLARS

31,600,000
7,954,545

Private donors in Spain
Denmark
Private donors in the United States of America

330,247
3,236,618
285,714
1,771,653
32,851
1,571,092

Budget
Expenditure

1,390,412

Republic of Korea

12,731,687
10,512,681
15,796,898
12,151,125
12,571,882
11,029,170
12,085,994
8,338,937
3,971,018
2,460,465
21,343,547
12,452,143
24,309,789
16,911,728
27,001,119
19,026,621
15,480,616
6,499,021
4,190,460
2,551,959

Budget
Expenditure

Brazil

PILLAR 4

Canada

LATIN AMERICA
Argentina Regional Office2

United States of America

PILLAR 2

Germany

NORTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Canada

DONOR

PILLAR 1

Norway
Switzerland
Private donors in Germany
Private donors in Brazil
Japan
IOM
Private donors in Canada
UN Peacebuilding Fund
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Italy
France
Private donors in Australia
Private donors in Switzerland

1,291,921
717,554
988,537
1,441
941,708
922,525
821
676,536
261,506
603,865
592,417
500,000
422,590
268,891

508,130
960,331

706,749
366,109

100,000
311,604

UN Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Colombia
Private donors in France
Private donors in Japan

284,960
161,348
107,100
44,000
33,235
22,334

Argentina
UNAIDS
Brazil

SUBTOTAL

TOTAL

1

Budget

Includes Dominican Republic, Haiti and Trinidad and Tobago.						
Includes activities in Argentina and Peru.						
Includes activities in Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.					
4
Regional activities cover the entire Americas region.								
2
3

100%

Private donors worldwide
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Private donors in Thailand
Private donors in China
Holy See
Private donors in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Private donors in Italy
Private donors in the Netherlands

TOTAL*

3,914
16,182
7,204
5,362
5,000

41

3,503

62,225,571
7,954,545
7,716,135
4,795,941
4,102,836
2,206,045
2,000,000
1,784,822
1,712,357
1,605,649
1,571,092
1,390,412
1,291,921
1,225,684
988,537
961,772
941,708
922,525
707,570
676,536
627,615
603,865
592,417
500,000
422,590
368,891
311,604
284,960
161,348
107,100
44,000
33,235
26,248
16,182
7,204
5,403
5,000
3,503

85
1,504
58,372,635

TOTAL

1,199,010

2,926,107

2,250

2,335
1,504

48,408,909

110,906,661

*Notes:
1
Contributions include 7% programme support costs.					
2
Includes a total of $55,560 acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $1.8 million acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.
3
Includes contributions earmarked at a situation overall level to North of Central America and Venezuela situations.					

100 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 101

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I T
AH
S IEAAAMNEDR ITCHAES PAC I F I C

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

FOREWORD
Millions of people remained forcibly
displaced by conflict across Asia and the
Pacific, without a nationality, documentation,
or a place to call home. By the end of 2018,
there were some 9.5 million people of
concern to UNHCR in the region—including
4.2 million refugees, 2.7 million IDPs, and
2.2 million stateless persons. States across
the region maintained their long-standing
tradition of hospitality towards refugees in
2018, despite the fact that only 20 of the
45 countries and territories in the region had
acceded to the 1951 Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol.

Asia and
the Pacific

Afghans remained the largest refugee
population in the region. With this situation
nearing its fourth decade, it also remains
the largest protracted refugee situation
for UNHCR globally. Renewed insecurity
and conflict inside Afghanistan continued
to drive displacement in 2018, with an
estimated 270,000 newly displaced people
in the country. A severe drought caused
the displacement of an additional
230,000 people over the course of the year.
Increased support from the international
community remained crucial for the
Government of Afghanistan, as well as for
the Governments of the Islamic Republics
of Iran and Pakistan, in order to maintain
their generous support for the 2.4 million
Afghan refugees that they hosted. The
Geneva Conference on Afghanistan
in November 2018 provided an opportunity
for the international community to assess
progress made towards sustainable
economic growth and development in
Afghanistan in the context of the 2015-2024
“transformation decade”.
Discussions also reaffirmed the importance
of a regional approach to the Afghan
refugee situation, as reflected in the
existing regional framework, the “Solutions
strategy for Afghan refugees” (SSAR). In July
2018, the Government of Afghanistan joined
© UNHCR/Jim Huylebroek

102 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Refugees returning from Pakistan rebuild despite
challenges in Dasht-e Tarakhil, Kabul, Afghanistan.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 103

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

Key data and achievements in Asia and the Pacific
the Comprehensive Refugee Response
Framework (CRRF), as a country of origin.
The application of the CRRF in Afghanistan
will provide an opportunity to showcase and
further build on good practices developed
in the context of the SSAR, especially with
regard to the sustainable reintegration and
inclusion of returnees in Afghanistan’s
national policies and priorities. It also
serves as an important platform to
ensure more equitable and predictable
responsibility-sharing within the region.
The Rohingya refugee emergency in Cox’s
Bazar, Bangladesh, represented the second
major operational focus for UNHCR in the
region. The crisis remained a Level 3
emergency, with UNHCR and its partners
supporting the Government of Bangladesh
to provide protection and lifesaving
assistance to over 906,600 stateless
Rohingya refugees, including an estimated
200,000 who fled Rakhine State in previous
waves of displacement. In the spirit of the
Global Compact on Refugees, UNHCR
promoted solidarity amongst stakeholders,
bringing together a broad range of partners
to address the root causes of this situation
and secure sustainable solutions for the
people of Rakhine State.

forced displacement is not just a humanitarian
but also a political, peacebuilding, and
development challenge, the Global
Compact expressly provides for a stronger
collaboration with a wide array of actors.
UNHCR consequently scaled up its
partnerships with, for example, development
actors, including the Asian Development
Bank and the World Bank, specifically in
Afghanistan and Bangladesh.
Against this backdrop, limited humanitarian
access in Afghanistan and Myanmar
impeded UNHCR’s work, with the safety of
humanitarian workers in Afghanistan of
grave concern, particularly for national staff.
Insufficient resources constrained the range
of protection, assistance and solutions
interventions provided in major operations
such as the Afghanistan situation.
The Office was thankful to the international
community for its financial and political
support to host governments and UNHCR’s
operations in the region in 2018. As the
world confronted some of the greatest
challenges in the field of displacement,
UNHCR appealed for continued solidarity
and support for refugee, stateless and
displaced populations in the region.

104 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Asia and the Pacific is the 4th region in terms of resettlement needs and
departures worldwide

Director of UNHCR’s Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific

UNHCR-facilitated departures from
Asia and the Pacific

UNHCR resettlement submissions in 2018

5,796
Resettlement submissions
worldwide in 2018

8,057

27%

compared to 2017

33%

compared to 2017

Major countries of origin of resettled
people from Asia and the Pacific

Departures worldwide in 2018

7%

14%

1 Myanmar

4,750

3 Bhutan 919
358
4 Iran

2 Afghanistan 1,425

Biometric registration

922,741 enrolled by the end of 2018

13% biometrically registered
of total individuals

individuals biometrically

South Asia

South-East Asia

South-West Asia

41,089

822,663

58,989

Cash-based interventions
Variation

$30M

$17M

$13M
2017

56%

2018

Refugees living in/out of camps
Refugees*

Indrika Ratwatte

With 2.2 million stateless persons in the
Asia and the Pacific region, addressing
statelessness remained a key strategic
priority for UNHCR. During the year, the
region witnessed significant progress in
this regard, with a number of countries
reviewing laws and policies to address
and prevent statelessness.
There is general optimism that the adoption
of the Global Compact will enhance the
management of the region’s complex
displacement situations. In the context of
the Afghan situation, for example, the
Compact complements the existing regional
framework–the SSAR. Recognising that

Resettlement

Data as of 31st December 2018

% accommodation known % private accommodation**

4,214,600

98.3%

% camps + other

59.5%

40.5%

* includes refugees and people in refugee-like situations
** out of total number of refugees and refugee-like

GLOBAL WORKFORCE IN ASIA
AND THE PACIFIC*: 1,958

Emergency deployments

Partners and budget allocated

(UNHCR and standby partners)

USD millions

122

56 %

44 %

65

46 %

MALE

LOCATIONS

$151.3 million allocated to 159 partners
(41% of regional expenditure)
102
106 National NGO partners

FEMALE

BASED IN
HARDSHIP LOCATIONS

$47M
2017

2018

29 international
NGO partners

$68.4M

$29.9

21 Government partners
3 UN agencies

$5.9M

*including 626 affiliate workforce staff.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 105

A C IIFFIICC
R EREGIONAL
G I O N A L SSUMMARIES
U M M A R I E S |I AASSI A
I A AANNDD TTHHEE PPAC

REGIONAL
IFICIFIC
R E G I O N A LSUMMARIES
S U M M A R I E| A
S SII AAASN
I AD ATNHDE TPHAEC PAC

In 2018, the Asia and the Pacific encompassed a set of complex and diverse situations ranging from
emergencies, such as in Bangladesh, to protracted situations where longer-term solutions are
needed, such as the Afghan refugee situation. The region also hosts a significant number of stateless
persons—2.2 million—including displaced Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh and IDPs in Myanmar.

MAJOR SITUATIONS IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC IN 2018
AFGHANISTAN
Nearing its 4ʰ decade, it was the region’s largest and most protracted
refugee situation. Renewed insecurity, conflict and drought drove
displacement in Afghanistan in 2018, with an estimated 270,000
conflict-displaced IDPs and 230,000 drought-displaced. UNHCR
implemented community-based protection projects in Afghanistan to
support sustainable returns and reintegration, while also supporting the
Islamic Republics of Iran and Pakistan in hosting Afghan refugees. In
2018, 400,000 registered Afghan refugees had access to primary
education in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In Pakistan, the Government
registered nearly 880,000 undocumented Afghans providing them with
Afghan Citizen Cards which regularize their temporary stay.

2.4 million
1.4 in Pakistan
1.0 in the Isl. Rep. of Iran

2.1 million
270,000 in 2018

16,220

Refugee returnees
5.2 million since 2002

ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC
OF IRAN AFGHANISTAN

MYANMAR
906,600

Targeted violence in 2017 forced hundreds of thousands of Rohingya into
exile in Bangladesh, and into internal displacement in Myanmar. At the end
of 2018, there were 906,600 stateless Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh,
of whom 75% were women and children while 16% of households were
headed by a single mother. In Myanmar, there were 600,000 stateless
Rohingya in Rakhine State by the year's end, including 128,000 IDPs.
UNHCR supported the Government of Bangladesh in the humanitarian
response to 1.3 million people, including Rohingya refugees, and the most

PAKISTAN
BANGLADESH
L3

52%

55%

80% arrived in 2017

MYANMAR

128,000
in Rakhine State

600,000

the humanitarian community has scaled up its operations beyond
emergency response.

in Rakhine State

Kachin State

AGE AND GENDER BREAKDOWN
REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS

Cox's Bazar

9.5
million
PEOPLE OF CONCERN IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Shan State
(North)

BANGLADESH

25%

MYANMAR

Rakhine State

REFUGEES
ASYLUM-SEEKERS

50%

RETURNEES (REFUGEES AND IDPs)
IDPs
STATELESS PERSONS*
OTHERS OF CONCERN

15%

60+
18-59

* The stateless population includes 906,635 Myanmar refugees in
Bangladesh and an estimated 125,000 stateless IDPs in Myanmar who
are also counted in refugee and IDP populations.

12-17
5-11
5%

0-4

UNDER 18

48%
L3

11 UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018
106 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 20 1 8

Situation

Refugees

Stateless persons

Negative trend
compared with 2017

CRRF country

IDPs

Children

Positive trend
compared with 2017

Level of emergency

Returnees

Women

Stable trend
compared with 2017

Refugee camp

IDP camp

Rohingya refugee
outflow

UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018 12
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 20 1 8 107

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

Safeguarding
fundamental rights
Promoting a favourable protection
environment

880,000
undocumented
Afghans were
registered by the
Government of
Pakistan.

850,000
undocumented
Afghans had their
status regularized
by the Government
of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

Host to more than 1.4 million registered
Afghan refugees, the Government of
Pakistan approved the extension of “proof
of registration” (PoR) cards until the end of
June 2019. In line with Pakistan’s 2017
“Comprehensive policy on voluntary
repatriation and management of Afghan
nationals”, some 880,000 undocumented
Afghans were registered by the Government
of Pakistan in collaboration with the Afghan
Government and given an “Afghan citizen
card”. UNHCR supported the Government
of Pakistan to implement various aspects of
this policy, including a flexible regime for
PoR cardholders to be able to obtain Afghan
passports and Pakistani visas in Pakistan.

As talks intensify over the prospect of repatriation,
refugees in what has become the world’s largest refugee
settlement have held a number of demonstrations.
Their message is clear: There can be no returns without
the questions of citizenship, rights and restitution being
addressed.
“If I go back...I want freedom of movement and to play
an active part in daily life, I want access to all
services like a normal citizen of Myanmar.”

In the Myanmar refugee emergency
response in Bangladesh, UNHCR reminded
States of their obligations to provide
protection and safety to stateless Rohingya
refugees and asylum-seekers, and to
prevent forced returns to Myanmar.
In Bangladesh, where protection activities
were central to the refugee response,
UNHCR expanded the capacity of partners,
particularly in providing specialised
protection services such as mental health
and psychosocial support.

—Nurul, Rohingya refugee in Bangladesh.

In Central Asia, as part of ongoing efforts to
safeguard access to asylum procedures,
UNHCR and IOM supported the Chair of
the Almaty Process, working with border
officials from the five Central Asian countries
to strengthen border management systems.

The process of registering refugees is
a critical component of the protection
response, as it allows staff to identify
individuals with specific needs, ensures
access to essential services, and generates
data for pursuing durable solutions.
From June 2018, UNHCR together with the
Government of Bangladesh registered
35,400 refugees with biometric ID cards,
strengthening the protection of Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh.

Rohingya say rights guarantees are
key to Myanmar return
Refugees in Bangladesh camps say there can be no return
without questions of citizenship, rights and restitution
being addressed first.

While India continues to be a generous host
State, protection space for refugees and
asylum-seekers came under pressure in
2018. A government advisory issued in
August 2017—aimed at identifying illegal
migrants—resulted in reduced freedom of
movement and access to services for

© UNHCR/Andrew Kelly

The Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran hosts close to 1 million registered
Afghan refugees, as well as a sizeable
number of Iraqis. The Government took
steps over the year to regularize the status
of some 850,000 undocumented Afghans
by conducting a headcount exercise and
issuing slips to eligible individuals. In 2018,
approximately 400,000 registered Afghan
refugees had access to primary education,
and the Government continued to implement
inclusive social protection policies in the
sectors of education and health.

All refugees registered in the country are
able to enrol in the national universal public
health insurance scheme, similar to Iranian
nationals, which covers both hospitalization
and para-clinical services (medicine,
doctor’s visits, radiology etc.). During the
year, UNHCR worked with the Government
to ensure the continuity of this programme,
by covering the premium fees of up to
92,000 vulnerable refugees and their
families.

© UNHCR/Roger Arnold

ACHIEVEMENTS
AND IMPACT

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

people of concern to UNHCR, including
Rohingya refugees.
In early 2018, within the span of a few
months, over 500 Yemeni asylum-seekers
arrived on South Korea’s Jeju Island.
UNHCR provided technical advice,
including background information to the
authorities in support of the Government’s
efforts to receive and consider the asylum
requests. South Korea’s Ministry of Justice
had granted humanitarian status to
412 asylum-seekers from Yemen by the
year’s end.

Cate Blanchett speaks out about
Rohingya refugees at United Nations
Security Council
“I am a mother, and I saw my children in the eyes of every
single refugee child I met. I saw myself in every parent…
their experiences will never leave me…but Rohingya
refugees need more than just food and water, informal
schools, temporary shelter. They need a
future.”
—Cate Blanchett, UNHCR Goodwill Ambassador.

108 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 109

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

© UNHCR/Althea Gonzales

Seeking durable solutions for IDPs
Solutions are needed for the region’s
2.7 million internally displaced people, who
are mainly concentrated in Afghanistan,
Myanmar, Pakistan, and the Philippines.
In Afghanistan, there were an estimated
2.1 million IDPs, 270,000 of whom were
displaced in 2018 alone. UNHCR assisted
the most vulnerable through cash-based
and in-kind assistance, and led the
An indigenous woman performs a song of gratitude,
protection and the emergency shelter/
using her boat lute (faglung), during a UNHCR
protection monitoring visit in the community
non-food item clusters. The Office also
of Elbebe, Datu Paglas, in the province of
Maguindanao, in the Philippines.
participated in the Humanitarian Country
Team’s response to the country’s severe
drought, providing 15,000 tents for IDPs in western Afghanistan.
In Myanmar, in the context of the inter-agency response, and as lead of the protection,
shelter, and camp coordination and camp management clusters, UNHCR worked with
partners and the Government to provide protection and assistance to approximately
106,000 IDPs in Kachin and northern Shan States. A sharp increase in armed conflict
in Kachin State in early 2018 led to an alarming rise in newly displaced people, with
8,000 people estimated to have fled. Due to constrained access, UNHCR’s activities in
Kachin and northern Shan States were mostly carried out by implementing partners. In
central Rakhine State, an estimated 128,000 IDPs have been largely confined in camps
since 2012. UNHCR continued to advocate with the Government for the camps to be
closed, in line with international human rights standards.
After having supported the Government of Pakistan with the voluntary return of some
1.8 million IDPs since 2015, UNHCR responsibly disengaged from the programme.
The Office had provided support through protection monitoring and the provision
of targeted assistance to vulnerable individuals, and provided technical support to
the authorities through the Protection Cluster.
UNHCR led humanitarian efforts in the Philippines to assist 77,650 IDPs in Mindanao,
including people from the city of Marawi. UNHCR worked to address various challenges
stemming from protracted and recurring displacement, while leading the implementation
of the protection strategy for Mindanao as the lead agency for protection. UNHCR
staff further trained over 350 representatives of the local government and key
stakeholders to enhance protection responses to displacement across Mindanao.

110 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Reducing and preventing
statelessness and protecting
stateless persons
With 2.2 million stateless persons,
addressing statelessness remained a key
strategic priority in the region. The Office
strengthened its engagement with States
and other partners, building on examples of
success in the region and working towards
the goals of the #IBelong Campaign to End
Statelessness by 2024.
The Rohingya, one of the largest stateless
populations in the world, are subject to the
restrictive provisions and application of
Myanmar’s laws, which confers nationality
on the basis of ethnicity–resulting in a lack
of documentation and denial of their
citizenship. As a direct result of their
statelessness, the Rohingya in Myanmar
suffer entrenched discrimination,
marginalization, and the denial of a wide
range of basic human rights, including risk
of violence. UNHCR advocated the
promotion and protection of rights of
stateless persons in Myanmar in line with
the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State.
In Central Asia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
made significant progress on reducing
statelessness, with over 15,200 people
finally seeing an end to their statelessness.
This brought the number of people who
have found a solution in the sub-region to
57,200 since the start of the #IBelong
Campaign in 2014.

Elsewhere in the region, approximately
18,000 people had their statelessness
situation resolved, with Malaysia, the
Philippines, Thailand, and Viet Nam
granting citizenship to many previously
stateless persons. Cambodia, the
Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam also
effected law and policy reforms to prevent
and reduce statelessness, including
measures to enhance civil status
registration.

57,200
people have
found a solution
in Central Asia
since the start
of the #IBelong
Campaign and

18,000
people had their
statelessness
situation resolved
elsewhere in the
region.

In Cambodia, the Government reviewed its
civil registration law to enhance the process
for all populations in the country. UNHCR
provided technical assistance to the
Government to ensure that the changes
increase access to legal documents for
populations at risk of statelessness.
There are nearly 480,000 stateless persons
in Thailand. Since the start of the #IBelong
Campaign, Thailand has granted citizenship
to over 40,000 previously stateless
persons, and has put in place progressive
measures over the last year to address
statelessness, including through
registration exercises.
In Viet Nam, the Government reviewed its
law and policies, including nationality laws,
to prevent and reduce statelessness. In
December 2018, it granted citizenship to
nearly 140 previously stateless persons.

Final Report of
the Advisory
Commission on
Rakhine State is
available here.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 111

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

Emergency response

UNHCR
supplementary
appeal for the
Myanmar refugee
emergency
response and the
Joint Response
Plan for Rohingya
Humanitarian Crisis
are available here.

Although at a slower pace, refugees from
Myanmar continued to cross into Bangladesh
in 2018, with more than 16,300 refugees
arriving during the year. UNHCR prioritized
the provision of essential and lifesaving
services in Cox’s Bazar, whilst increasing
efforts to improve living conditions in the
settlements through basic infrastructure and
service delivery.
UNHCR launched a supplementary appeal for
the Myanmar refugee emergency response
in Bangladesh. This constituted part of the
Joint Response Plan to channel resources
for critical interventions directly and through
partners for the Rohingya humanitarian
crisis, covering March-December 2018.
By the end of 2018, although the appeal
was 73% funded, late availability of funding
impeded comprehensive planning for
the year.

UNHCR worked closely with the authorities
in Bangladesh and other partners to
mitigate the impact of the monsoon season,
which left many refugees vulnerable to
landslides, flooding and disease.
This included establishing contingency
stockpiles, relocating refugees living in
high-risk areas, as well as responding with
emergency interventions through the
distribution of shelter kits and development of
infrastructure within the camps (see chapter
on Responding with lifesaving support).

“Improved eyesight is empowering refugees to secure a
‘future in focus’.”
—Dr Kanai, 2006 Nansen Refugee Award winner.
Last year, the number of eye screenings was over 3,000, the highest number of people reached since the start
of these missions 36 years ago. In 2018, Fuji Optical donated 1,500 high quality optic eyeglasses in-kind
for refugees and IDPs in Iraq as well as 4,200 pairs of eyeglasses in Azerbaijan. In addition to the
2013-2022 grant of $1 million to UNHCR, Fuji Optical pledged two additional multi-year grants
totaling $2 million from 2018 to 2027. Dr Kanai’s personal commitment and passion for improving
the lives of displaced people stems from his childhood when war forced him to flee his home.

Meeting basic needs

© Fuji Optical Co. Ltd.

Dr Akio Kanai, 2006 Nansen Refugee Award winner, and his
company, Fuji Optical, continued their long-term support to
UNHCR and the refugee cause. In July 2018, Dr Kanai led a
team of six Fuji Optical optometrists for their annual Vision
Aid Mission to Azerbaijan where they arranged free of charge
eye screenings and distributions of eyeglasses for refugees.

Innovative and green technologies
bring water to Rohingya refugees in
Bangladesh
In the crowded refugee settlements in Cox’s Bazar, UNHCR
is supporting the first solar-powered safe water systems.
The project is part of a broader shift in the humanitarian
response towards the expanded use of green and
non-polluting technologies. The new safe
water systems run entirely on electricity
generated through solar panels, improving the
daily supply of safe, clean drinking water to
Rohingya refugees.

UNHCR responded to the earthquake and
tsunami in Sulawesi, Indonesia, with three
airlifts of family tents and core relief items.
With the support of generous donors,
mainly the private sector, the Office was
able to provide over $4.1 million in
assistance.

Japanese optometrists give free
eye checks and glasses to refugees
and IDPs

112 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Roger Arnol

Responding with lifesaving
support

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

In Bangladesh, UNHCR led the protection
response for refugees in addition to
providing support to meeting their basic
needs, including in the areas of shelter/site
planning, WASH, and health. Innovative
interventions were promoted through the
development of macro-site planning, WASH
master plans, and the use of transitional
shelter designs. Initiatives promoting the
sustainable use of energy and respectful
environmental practices including solar
lighting, elephant conservation, and the
distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas
reduced dependency on more destructive
methods (such as compressed rice husks or
firewood and deforestation). UNHCR also
supported host communities through quick
impact projects, infrastructure support and
small-scale livelihood projects targeting the
most in need.
In Afghanistan, UNHCR provided
emergency shelter and core relief items to
people displaced by conflict and natural
disasters. Some 2.2 million Afghans were
affected by the country’s drought, with
approximately 230,000 Afghans displaced
in 2018. An inter-cluster contingency plan
was established for the drought response in
Badghis and Herat, with protection closely

integrated with WASH, health, nutrition and
food security interventions. As part of the
UN’s drought response, UNHCR delivered
15,100 tents, which were distributed by the
Shelter/NFI NGO Cluster members to
displaced families. UNHCR also provided
tents, kitchen sets, hygiene kits, and core
relief items to 13,940 families displaced by
conflict.
Winterization assistance was delivered to
over 26,109 households, including refugees,
IDPs and vulnerable households from
host communities across Afghanistan.
The response was coordinated with the
Shelter/NFI Cluster to ensure a consistent
approach for targeting and beneficiary
selection and a standardized amount of
assistance ($200 per household).

Over

10,000
Indonesian
earthquake
survivors
benefitted from
shelters provided
by UNHCR.

In Pakistan, UNHCR supported the provision
of basic health services in refugee villages in
Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and
Punjab Provinces. Refugee women and
children who enrolled in preventive and
reproductive health care programmes
received antenatal, prenatal and postnatal
care, as well as routine immunisation
services. Polio eradication campaigns were
conducted in refugee villages by UNICEF,
WHO and the local authorities, with
assistance from UNHCR’s partners.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 113

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

In 2018, UNHCR disbursed around $13 million in cash to
people of concern across the region, particularly at larger
scale in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and the Islamic Republic
of Iran. UNHCR, in coordination with the Government
of Bangladesh, together with the Bangladesh Rural
Advancement Committee and the Bangladesh Red Crescent
Society, provided 45,000 refugees with cash assistance in
the Kutupalong settlement. With an estimated 80% of the
Rohingya population in Cox’s Bazaar refugee settlements
relying on lifesaving assistance, a one-off payment of
2,500 Bangladesh taka (around $30) allowed refugees
some autonomy in covering their most basic needs.
Close monitoring of the assistance revealed that cash was
a safe and effective way of addressing urgent needs.
Host communities also welcomed cash assistance for
refugees as it bolstered local markets.

Building better futures
Voluntary repatriation
Despite ongoing challenges and new
displacement in parts of the region,
solutions were found for thousands of
refugees in 2018.
The Office supported the reintegration of
over 16,220 Afghan refugees who returned
home in 2018, despite a situation of ongoing
violence that impeded larger-scale returns.
UNHCR worked in partnership across
sectors, including with development actors
and the private sector, to reinforce assistance
throughout the humanitarian development
continuum in 15 areas of high refugee return.

8,000
refugees were
resettled
against 5,800
resettlement
submissions
placed in 2018
alone.

In Bangladesh, UNHCR and the Government
signed a memorandum of understanding for
cooperation on the voluntary return of
Rohingya refugees—in line with
international standards—once conditions in
Myanmar are conducive for returns. With
that aim in mind, UNHCR, UNDP and the
Government of Myanmar signed a tripartite
memorandum of understanding to support

114 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Jim Huylebroek

© UNHCR/Andrew McConnell

Cash helps refugees address their
most urgent needs while bolstering
local markets

Returning Afghan refugees rebuild
their lives despite challenges
UNHCR and partners are helping returnees access
basic services, land and jobs upon return, but further
international support is needed.
“We may not be here tomorrow, but our children will be.”
—Zardad, Afghan returnee.

Myanmar create conditions conducive
to the safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable repatriation of Rohingya
refugees to their places of origin or an area
of their choosing. A bilateral arrangement
between Bangladesh and Myanmar to start
repatriation in November 2018 did not
result in any refugees voluntarily returning
to Rakhine State.
Sri Lanka saw the voluntary return of
some 1,420 Sri Lankan refugees, and
UNHCR worked closely with the Sri Lankan
and Indian authorities to enhance
opportunities for further returns.

Resettlement and exploring
complementary pathways
Around 8,000 refugees from the region
were resettled in 2018 against
5,800 resettlement submissions placed
in 2018 alone. In terms of resettlement
capacity in the region, Australia, Japan,
New Zealand, and the Republic of Korea
welcomed over 4,750 refugees.

In Nepal, the large-scale resettlement
programme of Bhutanese refugees came to
an end, with more than 113,000 Bhutanese
refugees resettled (85% of whom went to
the United States of America) from 2007 to
2018. A final effort is required from UNHCR,
the Governments of Bhutan and Nepal and
development actors to secure solutions for
some 6,600 who remain in Nepal.

UNHCR advocated and explored
complementary pathways of admission for
refugees to third countries as part of its
comprehensive solutions strategy. The
Office worked with the Government of
Japan to support scholarship programmes
that enabled Syrian refugees to begin
post-graduate studies (see the chapter on
Building better futures).

Refugee Affected and Hosting Areas (RAHA) initiative in Pakistan
Since 2009, the Government of Pakistan has implemented the RAHA initiative, which
serves as a cornerstone for the implementation of the SSAR.
The programme seeks to increase tolerance towards Afghan refugees in Pakistan;
improve social cohesion to promote co-existence; provide both the host Pakistani
communities and Afghans with development and humanitarian assistance; and
empower youth to make their own decisions.
A wide variety of education, health, livelihoods, infrastructure, water, sanitation and
social protection projects are implemented through the RAHA to ensure Afghan
refugees access to public facilities. These include the construction of latrines and
hand-washing facilities; the construction and rehabilitation of waste management
systems, education and health facilities; the provision of health care kits; the
facilitation of skills, entrepreneurship and vocational (including teacher) trainings.
Over the past ten years, the RAHA has played a major role in fostering social cohesion
between refugees and the Pakistani communities that host them. Some
12.4 million people have benefitted from the initiative since its inception,
through more than 4,200 projects (21 of which were in 2018).

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 115

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

FINANCIAL INFORMATION

Budget
• ExCom original budget: $492.3
• Final budget: $700.5
© UNIQLO

Unlocking the power of clothes
for refugees
In 2018, leading Japanese retail company Fast Retailing
(FR)—the owner of fashion retailer UNIQLO—made its
largest ever in-kind donation of clothing for the benefit of
14 UNHCR operations. A record in-kind donation of more
than 5.3 million pieces of clothing worth $6.2 million were
delivered to refugees and other people of concern.

million.

million.

• Budget increase: $208.2
for the Myanmar situation.

million / +42%, mainly due to operations in Bangladesh

Expenditure
SOURCE OF EXPENDITURE

FR is one of UNHCR’s longest-serving private partners,
providing annual contributions to livelihoods programmes
worldwide ($1.9 million in 2018) and employing
refugees in UNIQLO stores in Europe, Japan
and the United States.

Earmarked
Unearmarked
Earmarked
Softly earmarked
Unearmarked
In-kind

Carry-over from prior years

Voluntary contributions

Programme support costs
Other income

TOTAL

Consequences of underfunding
Diminishing financial resources hampered
UNHCR’s ability to carry out comprehensive
protection interventions and to find
solutions for different populations of
concern, with unpredictability in the timing
of funding and funds received late in the
year particularly inhibiting the Office’s ability
to deliver key assistance as needed.

The Afghanistan situation was one of
UNHCR’s most underfunded situations
worldwide in 2018, with community
protection activities and the provision of
education and basic health services in the
two main hosting countries, as well as
inside Afghanistan, especially affected by
the lack of funding.

As % of
expenditure
within the region

As % of global
expenditure by
source of funding

29,475
25,890
206,152
84,274
18,225
940
2,286
1,958

8%
7%
56%
23%
5%
Less than 1%
1%
1%

18%
13%
8%
15%
5%
3%
1%
1%

369,200

100%

9%

USD | thousands

• Expenditure in Asia and the Pacific represented 9% of UNHCR’s global expenditure.
•

56% of expenditure was funded from earmarked voluntary contributions.

• Voluntary contributions increased by

$51.3 million/+18% compared to 2017.

EXPENDITURE IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC 2014-2018 | USD
400
350
300
250
200
Pillar 1

150

Pillar 2
Pillar 3

100

Pillar 4

Millions

50

116 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 117

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC | USD
PILLAR 1
Refugee
programme

OPERATION

PILLAR 2
Stateless
programme

PILLAR 3

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC | USD
PILLAR 4

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

SOUTH-WEST ASIA
Afghanistan

Budget
Expenditure

Pakistan

Budget
Expenditure

35,933,202
16,784,225
98,756,622
27,875,643
68,620,451
26,681,176

599,000
112,947

60,243,961
23,785,165
28,982,218
9,888,770

29,656,971
21,490,463
1,000,000
-

125,834,134
62,059,853
98,756,622
27,875,643
99,201,669
36,682,893

203,310,275
71,341,044

599,000
112,947

89,226,179
33,673,935

30,656,971
21,490,463

323,792,426
126,618,390

Australia Regional Office2

Budget
Expenditure

China Regional Office
Japan

Budget
Budget
Expenditure

Tajikistan

Budget
Expenditure

46%
34%

Budget
Expenditure

Regional activities

4,406,661
2,026,440
554,366
521,227
1,568,862
1,170,426

1,113,712
707,320
359,533
354,011
612,865
540,701

-

-

5,520,373
2,733,760
913,899
875,238
2,181,727
1,711,127

6,529,889
3,718,094

2,086,110
1,602,031

-

-

8,615,999
5,320,124

15,633,434
5,643,824
6,188,108
5,470,464
5,033,776
2,674,213

181,000
75,678
538,995
460,328
108,053
76,828

-

-

15,814,434
5,719,502
6,727,104
5,930,792
5,141,830
2,751,042

26,855,319
13,788,502

828,049
612,834

-

-

27,683,367
14,401,336

220,442,812
159,895,165
4,984,049
4,185,975
15,841,742
8,175,262
9,780,517
2,247,392
616,766
380,922
21,893,478
11,713,328
6,666,371
3,821,795

31,500
4,859
751,655
134,021
25,051,370
11,055,803
333,817
57,027
1,039,191
764,402
593,928
474,322

-

4,175,368
4,163,129
11,284,674
3,385,081
3,100,819
2,446,563
-

220,442,812
159,895,165
9,190,917
8,353,962
16,593,397
8,309,283
46,116,560
16,688,276
4,051,402
2,884,512
22,932,669
12,477,730
7,260,299
4,296,117

280,225,734
190,419,838

27,801,462
12,490,434

-

18,560,861
9,994,773

326,588,056
212,905,045

SUBTOTAL

Budget

Budget
Expenditure

Budget
Expenditure

TOTAL

1
2

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

Expenditure

Expenditure
Kyrgyzstan

Budget
Expenditure

CENTRAL ASIA
Kazakhstan Regional Office

Budget
Expenditure

Republic of Korea
SUBTOTAL

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
Budget
Expenditure

Islamic Republic of Iran

OPERATION

PILLAR 1

1%
1%

Budget
Expenditure

3,055,019
2,056,455
4,719,936
2,980,193
3,430,040
2,973,058
1,654,653
1,594,651
673,360
71,223

19,472
9,005
151,714
131,885
74,072
58,536
79,874
80,662
-

-

-

3,074,491
2,065,460
4,871,650
3,112,078
3,504,112
3,031,594
1,734,528
1,675,313
673,360
71,223

13,533,008
9,675,581

325,133
280,087

-

-

13,858,141
9,955,668

2%
3%

530,454,224
288,943,060

31,639,753
15,098,333

89,226,179
33,673,935

49,217,832
31,485,235

700,537,989
369,200,563

100%
100%

Thailand Regional Office covers Mongolia and Viet Nam.
Australia Regional Office covers New Zealand, Pacific Islands, and Papua New Guinea.

SOUTH ASIA
India

Budget
Expenditure

Nepal

Budget
Expenditure

Sri Lanka

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

4%
4%

SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Bangladesh

Budget
Expenditure

Indonesia

Budget
Expenditure

Malaysia

Budget
Expenditure

Myanmar

Budget
Expenditure

Philippines

Budget
Expenditure

Thailand

Budget
Expenditure

Thailand Regional Office1

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

118 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

47%
58%

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 119

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I A S I A A N D T H E PAC I F I C

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO ASIA AND THE PACIFIC | USD

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO ASIA AND THE PACIFIC | USD

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

DONOR
United States of America

55,184,040

European Union

15,820,292

Australia

15,005,255

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

13,089,005

Norway
Japan
Germany
Denmark
Private donors in Qatar

4,424,851
7,143,451
5,799,584
6,845,060
9,343,654

26,750
544,444

Canada
Private donors in the United States of America
Private donors in Thailand
Central Emergency Response Fund
Switzerland
Italy
UNOPS
Sweden
Private donors in Japan
Private donors in Germany
Qatar
United Arab Emirates
Saudi Arabia
Private donors worldwide
Private donors in Australia

1,346,785

3,400,000
2,196,666
4,763,262
4,346,268
2,926,734
3,067,397
2,413,243
3,754,796
3,508,081
3,195,075
2,411,252
2,387,304
2,084,700
1,754,329
1,475,373
1,433,269

Luxembourg
France
Ireland
Private donors in China
Private donors in Kuwait
Private donors in Singapore
Private donors in the United Arab Emirates

1,405,481
261,506
525,000
1,142,857
328,846
645,264
452,165
370,867

Private donors in Canada
Private donors in the Philippines
Private donors in Saudi Arabia
Private donors in the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
Private donors in Sweden
Education Cannot Wait
Private donors in the Republic of Korea

120 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

22,228
344,966
20,326
31,306
282,807
117,213

93,800,000

149,010,790

4,960,388

21,644,877

Kazakhstan

766,284

4,883,596

20,655,134

UNAIDS

64,200

200,000

100,000
8,014
8,758,844

508,130
1,374,546

256,000
44,770
1,570,000
508,130

289,464
68,182

7,491,237
2,489,469
5,287,274
3,503,185

3,500,000
4,516,889
198,368
181,299

289,100

251,000
42,420
45,008
1,123,708

193
348,332
1,046,025

525,000

DONOR

319,753

321,000

Private donors in Spain
New Zealand

TOTAL

13,089,005

Country-based pooled funds
Republic of Korea

ALL PILLARS

200,000
411,922
14,236
155,570
90,266
44,284
385,896
54,242
44,521
227,471
119,077

8,468
366,882

317,822
34,748

11,916,088
11,364,904
11,086,858
10,648,245
9,351,668
8,758,844
6,900,000
6,713,555
5,217,630
4,572,337
4,496,734
4,083,657
3,787,789
3,754,796
3,508,081
3,484,539
2,768,533
2,387,304
2,335,700
1,754,329
1,517,986
1,478,277
1,472,040
1,405,481
1,307,531
1,250,000
1,142,857
740,768
659,500
607,735
469,600
411,166
408,124
399,208

ALL PILLARS

Czechia

Private donors in Lebanon
Private donors in Denmark
Thailand
Russian Federation
Private donors in Italy

33,085
116,685
100,000
100,000
38,283

76,645

41,203

Private donors in Monaco
Estonia

Private donors in the Netherlands
Private donors in France
Private donors in Oman
Spain

60,256
59,696
33,611
7,292
7,162
7,779

12,698
28,499
7,515
4,545

Private donors in Egypt

687
2,810

5,973
3,382
2,144

Private donors in Indonesia

177

Private donors in Austria
Private donors in South Africa

10

93
81

Private donors in Switzerland
Private donors in Mexico
Private donors in Kenya

TOTAL*

2,867

9,385

China
Private donors in India

5,106
70,971

61,728

Kyrgyzstan
IOM

228,206
161,949
140,650
12,940
4,865

61
10
184,292,671

49
2,416,229

2,630,603

15,946,006

133,920,550

TOTAL

228,206
161,949
140,650
122,670
121,550
100,000
100,000
84,592
70,971
61,728
60,256
59,696
46,309
38,658
14,677
12,325
9,385
6,660
6,192
2,144
177
102
81
61
58
339,206,059

*Notes:
1 Contributions include 7% programme support costs.						
2 Includes a total of $1.6 million acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $3.4 million acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.
3 Includes contributions earmarked at a situation overall level to Afghan situation and Myanmar situation.

382,668
293,525
282,807
236,290

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 121

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

Europe

FOREWORD
In 2018, people fleeing their countries due
to conflict, human rights violations and
persecution continued to seek protection
in Europe. At the end of the year, there
were more than 6.4 million refugees in the
region. Turkey hosted the largest refugee
population, including some 3.6 million
Syrian refugees, while inside Ukraine,
the conflict had displaced 1.5 million people.
The developing countries hosting 85%
of the world’s refugees in 2018 received
insufficient support, compounding an
already complex situation amplified by the
lack of common approaches to achieving
asylum and durable solutions–including
access to legal pathways. This situation led
to irregular movements towards and within
the continent, and posed a range of
protection challenges.
The year saw significant changes in
movement patterns to Europe with, overall,
a significant reduction of arrivals compared
to previous years, and a return to pre-2014
levels. However, fewer people making the
dangerous journey did not reduce its risks
nor reduce casualties. On the contrary, the
journey became deadlier as overall search
and rescue capacity at sea declined and
push-backs and violence at land borders
continued. One life was lost for every
50 people who attempted the sea journey,
an average of six deaths per day in 2018.
While sea arrivals to Italy dropped
considerably, asylum-seekers continued
to arrive in the Greek islands, and Spain
became the main entry point for refugees
and migrants travelling along the
Mediterranean routes.

© UNHCR/Anastasia Vlasova

122 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

A resident of East Ukraine, forced to move into
a basement after his house was bombed.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 123

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

Key data and achievements in Europe
Despite efforts to develop and offer
pragmatic solutions to the situation in the
Mediterranean, ad hoc, boat-by-boat
approaches to each new search and rescue
situation became the norm, and UNHCR
correspondingly strengthened its
partnerships to advocate safe and
predictable disembarkation mechanisms
and responsibility-sharing.
Reception conditions were inadequate in
some States, leading to additional
protection challenges, particularly for
unaccompanied children and survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV).
Despite reduced arrival rates, divergent
views on asylum persisted across Europe,
with restrictive policies coupled with a
challenging legal and political environment.
This resulted in concrete obstacles to
protection for people of concern and
contributed to irregular onward movements
within Europe. In some cases, public and
political discourse and rhetoric was toxic
or xenophobic, severely hampering
results-focused protection policy
development.

Nevertheless, many States committed to
the Global Compact on Refugees and
maintained asylum policies and systems of
high standard. There were also generous
measures of solidarity towards refugees
and host communities, both within Europe
and beyond the region. These included
safeguarding access to asylum, legal
pathways and durable solutions, especially
integration. European citizens, civil society
organizations, cities and local governments
showed remarkable support to refugees
and asylum-seekers, with more than
45 European cities joining the #WithRefugees
campaign (see chapter on Working in
partnership).
Against this environment, UNHCR focused
on safeguarding the asylum space in Europe
by promoting direct access to asylum
procedures and acceptable reception
conditions. It also worked, together with
partners, to strengthen participatory and
community-based approaches to protection
and solutions. Despite difficult working
environments and pending durable political
solutions, UNHCR and partners provided
support to vulnerable IDP populations.

Resettlement
Europe is the 1st region of destination of resettled people worldwide
19 out of 29 resettlement countries are in Europe
People resettled to Europe in 2018

26,081

resettled worldwide
47% ofwentpeople
to Europe

2%

compared to 2017

Top 5 resettlement countries in Europe
1 The United Kingdom of Great Britain 5,698
and Northern Ireland

2 France

5,109

4 Germany 3,217

3 Sweden 4,871

5 Norway

2,324

Biometric registration

3,837 individuals biometrically enrolled by the end of 2018
0.1%

of total individuals biometrically registered

Cash-based interventions
Variation

$74M

$79M

$5M
2017

7%

2018

Refugees living in/out of camps

Pascale Moreau

Refugees*

Director of UNHCR’s Regional Bureau for Europe

Data as of 31st December 2018

% accommodation known % private accommodation**

6,474,600

64.1%

% camps + other

99.9%

0.1%

* includes refugees and people in refugee-like situations
** out of total number of refugees and refugee-like

GLOBAL WORKFORCE
IN EUROPE*: 1,407

40%
MALE

65

LOCATIONS

60 %
FEMALE

2%

BASED IN
HARDSHIP LOCATIONS

*Excluding Headquarters and including 491 affiliate workforce staff.

124 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Child protection

42% of refugee arrivals

Partners and budget allocated
USD millions

$199.7 million allocated to 193 partners
(41% of regional expenditure)

12,700 children who arrived in
Europe in 2018 were unaccompanied
and separated

14,600 refugee children
were resettled in Europe in 2018,
mostly to the United Kingdom,
France and Sweden

141 National NGO partners

$35.4M

$125.4M

$36.5M

20 International NGO partners
30 Government partners
2 UN agencies

$2.4M

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 125

SUMMARIES
R E G IREGIONAL
ONAL SUM
MARIES I | E
EU
UR
RO
OP
PE
E

RREGIONAL
E G I O N A L SUMMARIES
S U M M A R I E|SE UI REOUPREO P E

Despite a significant drop of arrival rates, with a return to pre-2014 levels, divergent views on asylum and
restrictive policies coupled with a challenging legal and political environment persisted across Europe.
714,800 asylum applications were received, a drop of 11% compared to 2017.

MAJOR SITUATIONS IN EUROPE IN 2018
UKRAINE
Continued fighting or tension affected many communities and vital
infrastructure, such as water and power near the line of contact.
Residents of non-government controlled areas faced a range of
restrictions on their freedom of movement. UNHCR maintained its
emergency response as part of the Humanitarian Country Team,
providing lifesaving support and leading the Protection and the Shelter
and NFI Clusters.

1.5 million
ICELAND

MEDITERRANEAN ROUTES
There was a significant reduction of arrivals (both by sea and land) compared
to previous years, however, the journey became more deadly: 2,277 lost
their lives at sea.
Main countries of arrival
2017
2018
Italy
119,400 23,400
Spain
28,300 65,400
Greece 35,400 50,500

FINLAND
NORWAY

141,500

SWEDEN

Arrived in Europe via
the Mediterranean routes

ESTONIA
LATVIA

DENMARK

LITHUANIA

TURKEY
Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees worldwide.

3.6 million
As more than 90% of refugees in Turkey live among the host community,
efforts to boost the integration capacity of national institutions started to
have a positive impact in the resilience of the communities in Turkey and
the region at large.

UKRAINE

Syrian refugees

ITALY

TURKEY
SPAIN

AGE AND GENDER BREAKDOWN

GREECE

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS

11
million
PEOPLE OF CONCERN IN EUROPE
REFUGEES
ASYLUM-SEEKERS
RETURNEES (REFUGEES AND IDPs)
IDPs
STATELESS PERSONS
OTHERS OF CONCERN

LEBANON

MOROCCO

35%

6.5 million
1.2 million

SYRIAN
ARAB
REP.

ALGERIA

TUNISIA
LIBYA

70%

250

2.7 million

21%

60+

533,000

18-59

72,000

12-17
5-11
7%

0-4

UNDER 18

40%
Ukraine situation

Refugees and migrants

Negative Trend compared with 2017

MYMP country

IDPs

Positive trend compared with 2017

Mediterranean routes:
main country of arrival

11 UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018
126 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018 12
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 127

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

ACHIEVEMENTS
AND IMPACT
Safeguarding
fundamental rights
Ensuring access to asylum
UNHCR supported the right to asylum by
working at both the legal and advisory
level through enhanced and systematic
monitoring, and proactive advocacy on
legislation or policy developments affecting
asylum-seekers and refugees, as well
as strategic litigation, individual legal
counselling and legal representation.

“Fair and Fast:
UNHCR discussion
paper on
accelerated and
simplified
procedures in the
European Union”.

In the Western Balkans, UNHCR addressed
cross-regional movements by strengthening
information-sharing and consolidating
interventions between offices. At the
country level, activities included supported
screening and referral mechanisms for
refugees and migrants, as well as the
provision of basic assistance and access
to services.

128 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

It also included greater protection for
unaccompanied children and survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence, and
tougher measures against the perpetrators
of crimes against refugees and migrants,
including traffickers and smugglers.

In Greece, UNHCR and its partners assisted
some 10,000 asylum-seekers and
beneficiaries of international protection with
counselling and legal representation. More
than 600 people were supported with legal
aid at the appeal stage of the asylum
procedure.

UNHCR and IOM submitted a proposal to
the European Council for a regional
mechanism for the swift disembarkation and
processing of rescued people. Although
agreement among Member States on such
a concerted approach was not reached,
UNHCR welcomed the contributions of
some States who demonstrated solidarity
and committed to saving lives and finding
solutions, delivering on fundamental
humanitarian principles.

In Eastern Europe, the “quality initiative”
provided a regional forum for capacity
development. Participating countries
(Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine)
shared common challenges regarding
asylum procedures, including the balancing
of national security considerations with
relevant provisions in international
refugee law.

Downloaded 367,000 times, UNHCR’s
“Desperate Journeys” was a key advocacy
product, calling for a coordinated and
predictable regional mechanism to
strengthen rescue at sea, access to asylum
procedures, early identification of
unaccompanied and separated children
seeking asylum, and access to safe and
legal pathways for people of concern.

UNHCR worked closely with local
authorities towards ensuring an effective
response to movements involving people
of concern by developing methodologies
to reinforce the identification and referral of
people with specific needs. This resulted in
“Fair and Fast”, a paper outlining concrete
steps to establish accelerated and simplified
asylum procedures that allow for a quick
determination of who is in need of
international protection and should receive
support to integrate, and who is not and can
thus be channelled into return procedures.

Ensuring protection in mixed
movements
UNHCR advocated the establishment of
a coordinated and predictable regional
response to rescue at sea, as well as greater
responsibility-sharing. This included
increased rescue capacity, predictable
disembarkation points, greater support for
those countries where most refugees and
migrants arrive, and improved access to
safe and legal pathways (such as
resettlement, family reunification, education
and labour schemes).

© UNHCR/Anthi Pazianou

Read the fact
sheets on
UNHCR’s data
portal.

In Western and Central Europe, for instance,
UNHCR supported the enhanced and
systematic monitoring of data collection
capacity to engage strategically in national
legislative developments. This was key in
providing strong data analysis for successful
evidence-based strategic advocacy
initiatives, providing insights on a range
of issues including access to territory,
reception conditions, pushbacks and related
violence and risks associated with onward
journeys. The most notable example of
such evidence-based advocacy was the
“Desperate Journeys” report (see opposite
page). Other examples included improved
public factsheets about resettlement and
arrivals of people of concern available
on UNHCR data portal.

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

Promoting acceptable reception
conditions
UNHCR remained concerned by the
inadequacy of reception conditions in
many countries, despite working closely
with governments and other partners
to enhance response capacity and
contingency planning, in particular
regarding reception arrangements. For
instance, the reception centre in Cyprus
operated at its maximum capacity while
experiencing critical gaps in its capacity to
provide access to information and to legal
and social welfare services, particularly
for people with specific needs.
Reception and identification centres on the
Greek islands were overcrowded, forcing
many to live in tents outside and making
unaccompanied children particularly
vulnerable to sexual violence, abuse and
exploitation. UNHCR secured more than
27,000 spaces under Greece’s urban
accommodation scheme, providing
thousands of vulnerable asylum-seekers
with better shelter options. The Office
worked closely with the Government
towards transitioning the complex urban
accommodation and cash programmes to
national institutions, building their capacity
to take over and integrate these services
within national structures.

Read the full
“Desperate
Journeys”
report.

Thousands of asylum-seekers moved
off Greek islands
UNHCR helped the Government move vulnerable
asylum-seekers from reception centres on the Aegean
Islands to shelter on the mainland.
“I hope and pray that the situation at Volvi will be better.”
—Mohammed Al Ahmad,
Syrian refugee in Lesvos, Greece.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 129

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

In Italy, restrictive measures to reform the
reception system were adopted, ostensibly
to reduce costs and improve efficiency and
accountability. A two-tier reception system
was established, with “first-line” reception
facilities reserved for asylum-seekers
throughout the whole duration of the
procedure, and “second-line” facilities
reserved exclusively for beneficiaries of
international protection and unaccompanied
children. UNHCR advocated basic safeguards
and reiterated its offer of support to ensure
that these are maintained, in particular for
vulnerable people.

Child protection

Read more about
the “Together for
the Result”
forum.

UNHCR focused on child protection with
pilot projects supporting strengthened
procedures and services for unaccompanied
and separated children in Italy, Serbia,
Sweden and Switzerland. Another project to
strengthen procedures for such children in
Western Europe led to initiatives including
training for guardians, mapping of services
and related gaps, reception monitoring and
stakeholder engagement on best interests’
procedures.
Working with IOM and UNICEF, UNHCR
developed recommendations to the EU on
data collection in relation to children, and
“Refugee and Migrant Children in Europe”
factsheets.

130 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

The three agencies also provided child
protection technical support to a Lumos
Foundation research initiative on care
arrangements for unaccompanied children
in Bulgaria, France, Greece, Italy, the
Netherlands and Spain.

© UNHCR/Nikita Yurenev

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, reception
capacity was not sufficient to accommodate
all people in need, leaving them exposed to
the elements and obstructing their access
to asylum procedures as formal administrative
residency is a pre-requisite for submitting
an application. As a result, UNHCR
supported the screening and referral
mechanisms for refugees and migrants,
and provided assistance and access to
basic services.

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

Supreme Court of Ukraine takes
landmark decision to protect pension
rights of IDPs
For hundreds of thousands of IDPs and other conflictaffected people, their state pension is the only form
of income.

Resolving internal displacement

“It is time to de-link IDP registration and pensions
and create a simple mechanism to pay pensions on
government-controlled territory, through Ukrainian banks,
to pensioners regardless of their place of
permanent residence.”

Challenges persisted in securing protection
and durable solutions for IDPs and others
affected by unresolved conflicts in the
region.
In Ukraine, UNHCR expressed specific
concern about living conditions and access
to fundamental rights for residents of
non-government controlled areas,
particularly for those with specific needs.
UNHCR-coordinated protection monitoring
was key in identifying and responding to
human rights violations and protection
risks encountered by IDPs and the
conflict-affected population at large.
UNHCR and its partners provided
individual case management, legal
assistance, protection counselling, and
individual cash-based assistance. At the
national level, UNHCR monitored legislative
developments affecting IDPs and advocated
changes in policy and practice to address
their protection needs and rights. This
included, for example, IDPs’ equal access to
pensions and social benefits on the same
ground as other citizens, in view of linking
social assistance to an individual’s
vulnerability regardless of his or her
individual IDP registration status. In October
2018, UNHCR supported the “Together for
the Result” forum on internal displacement
in Kyiv, Ukraine, where 150 civil society
representatives, members of NGOs, IDPs,
and people from conflict-affected areas
sought to address the most pressing
problems for IDPs, and present solutions.

—Ms. Noel Calhoun, UNHCR Deputy
Representative in Ukraine.

Resolving statelessness
Throughout the region, UNHCR assisted
States find solutions to statelessness,
focusing on removing obstacles to birth
registration so that no child is born stateless
in Europe. The European Parliament
adopted a resolution on the protection of
children in migration, calling on Member
States to ensure that childhood
statelessness be adequately addressed in
national laws. Following a baseline study
carried out by UNHCR with its partner—the
Tirana Legal Aid Society—and a period of
consultation with the “Friends of Children
Parliamentary Group” facilitated by UNCHR
with UNICEF and national NGO partners,
Albania removed barriers to birth
registration, particularly for children of
Albanian parents born abroad and for
children from the Roma and Egyptian
communities.
Enhancing the identification of solutions to
specific statelessness situations, UNHCR,
together with governments and other
stakeholders, published two mapping
studies on statelessness in Portugal and
in Switzerland.

The Office also provided technical advice
to Armenia, Iceland, Montenegro, the
Netherlands and Ukraine in drafting
or improving existing statelessness
determination procedures. Iceland aligned
its legislation with the standards set out in
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness, and Montenegro adopted
a new law, establishing a statelessness
determination procedure.

Spain
acceded to the
1961 Convention
on the Reduction
of Statelessness.

UNHCR supported Kosovo (Security Council
Resolution 1244 (1999)) and Montenegro in
resolving civil registration issues and
identifying solutions, while gradually
looking to transfer this activity to regular
consular services.
Together with OSCE, UNHCR organized the
second practical seminar on sharing good
practices on statelessness in Vienna, and
started a series of regional preparatory
meetings in Europe in the lead-up to the
High-Level Event on Statelessness in
October 2019, which will mark the mid-point
of the #IBelong Campaign to End
Statelessness by 2024.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 131

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

Responding with lifesaving
support
Internal displacement in Ukraine
Continued fighting or tension affected many
communities and vital infrastructure such as
water and power near the line of contact.
Civilians were at constant risk of being
injured or killed. Mines and unexploded
ordnance posed a daily danger. The armed
forces occupied civilian property, and in
many cases, civilians had no documentation
regarding the requisition of their property.

The Office
provided over

$1.7 million in
cash assistance
to more than
5,500 IDPs and
nearly 400
refugees and
asylum-seekers.

In line with its five-year strategy for IDPs in
Ukraine, UNHCR maintained its emergency
response as part of the Humanitarian
Country Team, providing shelter and
protection, including support to people with
specific needs, and leading the Protection
and Shelter and NFI Clusters. As part of its
winterization programme, UNHCR stepped
up the distribution of clothing, fuel and cash
to thousands of displaced households in
eastern Ukraine, where winter temperatures
reach as low as –30° Celsius, and reinforced
shelters and heated tents at checkpoints
along the contact line. The Office provided
over $1.7 million in cash assistance to more
than 5,500 IDPs and nearly 400 refugees
and asylum-seekers. An agreement with
the national postal service allowed the
distribution of cash through pre-existing
systems for the payment of social benefits
in the national system.
UNHCR and its partners also implemented
86 community support initiatives to mobilize
existing capacities within the internally
displaced and refugee communities,
empowering them to organize emergency
response activities, protect themselves and
identify solutions.

132 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

The Office also launched some 60 projects
to promote peaceful co-existence on both
sides of the contact line.
As part of the “16 Days of Activism campaign
against sexual and gender-based violence”,
UNHCR organized a community-based
forum on SGBV in the context of forced
displacement in eastern Ukraine. The
forum provided an opportunity for IDPs,
community-based organizations, NGOs,
international organizations, and state actors
to share practical experiences, network
and raise awareness on issues of SGBV.
The event concluded with a list of
recommendations.

Responding to the needs
of new arrivals.
UNHCR distributed some $79 million to
respond to the immediate needs of people
of concern in Europe, with the majority of
distributions taking place in Greece and
Ukraine. In Greece, UNHCR partnered with
two international NGOs, through the Greece
Cash Alliance (GCA), to provide monthly cash
assistance to more than 52,000 refugees
and asylum-seekers.
In the Western Balkans, UNHCR collaborated
with the authorities and other key
stakeholders to respond to the most urgent
humanitarian and protection needs, with a
particular attention to unaccompanied and
separated children, victims of SGBV and
other people with specific needs. With IOM,
UNHCR ensured the overall coordination of
the humanitarian response, and supported
health referrals to public institution and the
integration of children into public education.
Additionally, UNHCR identified the most
vulnerable asylum-seekers and refugees
and supported them with shelter, core relief
items, legal counselling and psychosocial
services.

Harmonization of cash assistance in Greece
Cash assistance is part of the emergency support to integration and accommodation
programme, implemented by the Greece Cash Alliance (GCA) in coordination with the
Greek Ministry of Migration Policy.
UNHCR’s partnership through the GCA enabled a harmonized cash programme,
allowing refugees to receive cash assistance on one single card. The GCA also uses
a single monitoring framework and the same financial service provider through a
common cash facility approach adapted to the Greek context, bringing together the
humanitarian cash volumes to achieve economies of scale.
By the end of 2018, over 90,300 people of concern had received cash assistance on
at least one occasion since April 2017 through the GCA—in October 2018 alone, nearly
56,700 people received about $6 million in cash. Recipients of cash assistance were
largely Afghan, Iranian, Iraqi and Syrian refugees.
To support the cash programme, UNHCR deployed its cash assistance
management system, CashAssist. The system allows UNHCR and its
partners to deliver cash assistance in an automated, timely and
accountable manner to refugees and asylum-seekers through the
Office’s global registration and case management system database,
proGres v4.
A 2018 case study on the GCA as an operational model, conducted by
the Cash Learning Partnership, confirmed the general effectiveness of
the GCA’s delivery model.

In Serbia, UNHCR and partners provided
specific training for guardians to properly
identify unaccompanied children at risk,
and to facilitate their transfer to specialized
accommodation.
In Spain, UNHCR supported the national
authorities to address obstacles for
asylum-seekers in accessing
accommodation and asylum procedures,
and filled gaps by providing emergency
shelters for vulnerable people. Through the
partnership with the Spanish Refugees
Council, UNHCR enhanced access to

information on international protection to
people arriving by sea, reaching over
15,300 people of concern, about 49% of the
sea arrivals to the Andalusian coast from
July to the end of 2018. UNHCR maintained
a presence at the main entry points for sea
and land arrivals to Spain, conducting
monitoring, extensive capacity-building for
authorities and civil societies on access to
territory and asylum and prevention of
refoulement, identification and referrals of
people with specific needs, and timely data
collection for advocacy purposes.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 133

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

Building better futures
Durable solutions for refugees
and IDPs
Encouraging developments were made
towards durable solutions across Europe.
Many States demonstrated solidarity
through commitments to receiving refugees
through resettlement and establishing
complementary pathways. An impressive
number of cities and local governments
played their part in fully committing to the
integration of refugees.
Resettlement to Europe was an essential
component of the global resettlement
programme. Some 20 European Union
Member States pledged over
50,000 resettlement places for 2018-2019
and took steps to admit larger numbers of
resettled refugees. UNHCR supported the
European Union in negotiating a European
Commission proposal for the establishment
of a resettlement framework, providing
practical and policy expertise on
resettlement and humanitarian admission.

Following the adoption of a “Strategy of
integration of internally displaced persons
and of implementation of durable solutions
on the internal displacement for the period
up to 2020”, the Government of Ukraine
developed an action plan that envisages

134 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Strengthening participatory and
community-based approaches

the elaboration of local integration
plans and mechanisms to access social,
temporary and affordable housing.

While engaging with governments in
protection, advocacy and legal
interventions, UNHCR worked to integrate
age, gender and diversity considerations
both in operational planning and
programme implementation. This led to a
series of participatory assessments, while
further efforts were made to establish
effective feedback mechanisms to UNHCR
regarding programming and interventions.
In Cyprus, for instance, the articulation
of refugees’ own experiences was
incorporated into UNHCR’s country
advocacy strategy.

In Azerbaijan and Georgia, UNHCR
supported IDPs to access legal assistance.
In Azerbaijan alone, close to 8,000 IDPs
benefitted from legal aid and counselling
services.
UNHCR engaged with traditional actors
in promoting the integration of refugees,
developing new partnerships for solutions
in cooperation with the OECD. A joint action
plan was launched in April 2018 to expand
employment opportunities for refugees and
identify key actions to ensure their
successful integration in labour markets.
The plan led to a series of employment
workshops that brought together potential
employers, authorities and people of
concern in Bulgaria, Hungary and Malta.

The Global Youth Advisory Council was
involved in the drafting process of the
Global Compact on Refugees. It conducted
community consultations in ten countries
with over 250 young refugees, community
leaders, members of the host country and
service providers.

Complementary pathways
Complementary pathways—including
through humanitarian admission,
humanitarian visas or family
reunification—were established in Austria,
France, Germany, Italy and Switzerland,
contributing to greater responsibilitysharing. UNHCR supported these efforts
through coordination, implementation and
evaluation. Community-based sponsorship
approaches were well received, including
through the Global Refugee Sponsorship
Initiative, with a pilot programme in the
United Kingdom, and commitments made in
other countries such as Ireland and Spain.

The first European youth initiative fund was
launched in 2018 by UNHCR and its partner,
the European Youth Forum, awarding ten
small grants to youth-led projects that

© UNHCR/Nikita Yurenev

The Global
Refugee
Sponsorship
Initiative.

Several States also received people
evacuated from Libya, either through the
Evacuation Transit Mechanism in Niger or
directly. In Eastern Europe, a changed
context did not allow for the continuation
of resettlement activities.

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

promote social cohesion activities across
Europe. In 11 countries in Western and
Central Europe, utilizing a community-based
approach, UNHCR developed a toolkit for
teachers to raise awareness about
asylum-seekers and refugees in schools,
and to provide guidance on psychosocial
support for displaced children displaying
behavioural signs of stress or trauma in
the classroom.
In line with SDG commitments, UNHCR
actively participated in the regional UN
Sustainable Development Group in Europe
and Central Asia, co-chairing (together with
UNDP) the Issue-Based Coalition on large
movements of people, displacement and
resilience towards the principle to “leave
no one behind”.

The European
Youth Initiative
Fund 2018.

In Turkey, together with the Government
and concerned communities, UNHCR
developed and implemented a social
cohesion strategy to strengthen social
interaction between refugees and host
communities. Platforms for dialogue were
established to alleviate causes of social
tension between refugees and local
communities.

Changing perceptions about refugees
through cultural activities in schools
In 2018, UNHCR partnered with the Refugee Food
Festival and schools in Normandy, France, to
educate children on the culture and experiences
of refugees. The Refugee Food Festival is a
citizen-led initiative by “Food Sweet Food” NGO.
The packed programme included bringing refugees
in to present to children in their classrooms, an
interactive visit to Za’atari camp in Jordan, lunch
prepared by refugee chefs, a chance to meet two
Syrian rappers, and a tour of the UNHCR exhibition,
“The Most Important Thing”.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 135

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

FINANCIAL INFORMATION

Budget
• ExCom original budget: $876.3

© UNHCR/Xavier Bourgois

Dutch and Swedish Postcode
Lotteries support millions of
refugees worldwide
The Dutch and Swedish Postcode Lotteries are two of the
longest-serving and loyal partners to UNHCR. Millions
of refugees have benefited from the lifesaving support
provided thanks to their funding. The two partnerships date
back to 2002 and 2009 respectively. In 2018, support from
both lotteries totaled more than $6 million, combining an
annual core unearmarked contribution and
project-based grants focusing on
supporting refugee education and
improved environmental sustainability.

million.

• Final budget: $881.4

million.

• Budget increase: $5.1

million mainly due to CBI operations in Greece.

Expenditure
SOURCE OF EXPENDITURE

Earmarked
Unearmarked
Earmarked
Softly earmarked
Unearmarked
In-kind

Carry-over from prior years

Voluntary contributions

Programme support costs
Other income

TOTAL

In 2018, Europe received the second
highest portion of any region of tightly
earmarked funding, mostly for the response
in Greece and Ukraine. Outside of those
areas, however, UNHCR was reliant on the
use of flexible funding to efficiently respond
to new and ongoing needs in emergency-like

or post-emergency situations, bolstering
efforts or scaling up assistance where
needed. Thanks to flexible funding, UNHCR
was able to maintain activities benefiting
refugees, IDPs and other people of concern
in operations across Europe.

As % of
expenditure
within the region

As % of global
expenditure by
source of funding

20,563
24,967
366,128
52,104
17,576
1,685
2,205
217

4%
5%
75%
11%
4%
Less than 1%
Less than 1%
Less than 1%

12%
13%
15%
9%
5%
5%
1%
Less than 1%

485,445

100%

11%

USD | thousands

• Expenditure in Europe represented 11% of UNHCR global expenditure.
•

75% of expenditure was funded from earmarked voluntary contributions.

• Voluntary contributions to Europe were stable compared to 2017 with a slight increase of
$10 million or 2% while expenditure decreased by 2%.

EXPENDITURE IN EUROPE 2014-2018 | USD
600

500

400

300
Pillar 1

200

Pillar 2
Pillar 3
Pillar 4

Millions

100

136 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

0

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 137

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I EUROPE

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO EUROPE | USD

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN EUROPE | USD
PILLAR 1
Refugee
programme

OPERATION

PILLAR 2
Stateless
programme

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% TOTAL

Belarus

Budget
Expenditure
1

Georgia Regional Office

Budget
Expenditure

Russian Federation

Budget
Expenditure

Turkey

Budget
Expenditure

Ukraine

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

1,591,045
1,286,325
11,042,657
6,866,444

82,209
81,901
507,122
385,228

-

4,972,920
3,248,727

1,673,254
1,368,226
16,522,700
10,500,398

5,271,751

893,181

-

6,164,933

3,811,390
436,064,688
123,088,034
6,029,065
4,398,284

730,354
2,790
620
813,963
459,691

-

24,240,897
14,441,812

4,541,744
436,067,478
123,088,654
31,083,924
19,299,788

459,999,206
139,450,477

2,299,266
1,657,795

-

29,213,817
17,690,539

491,512,289
158,798,810

Expenditure

39,690,538
22,978,237

5,433,290
3,156,395

-

-

ALL PILLARS

1,020,278
1,581,199

595,451

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

1,449,037

Germany
Japan
Canada

1,136,364
700,000

Norway

56%
33%

455,063
849,099
444,524
597,407

39,690,538

5,433,290

-

-

45,123,828

5%

Private donors in Germany

Expenditure

22,978,237

3,156,395

-

-

26,134,632

5%

Austria

366,783
300,000

Russian Federation

Budget

250,000

505,051
420,933

29,481
394,871
332,728

Hungary

NORTHERN, WESTERN, CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN EUROPE
Belgium Regional Office3

Budget
Expenditure

Germany

Budget
Expenditure

Greece

Budget
Expenditure

Hungary Regional Office4

Budget
Expenditure

Italy Regional Office5

Budget
Expenditure

Sweden Regional Office6

Budget
Expenditure

Regional activities

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

TOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

1
2
3
4
5
6

Private donors in Spain

19,284,431
16,327,801
2,733,089
2,353,891
247,271,335
236,671,538
15,025,357
11,388,871
30,832,822
24,002,172
4,903,227
3,560,834
21,478,144
3,760,936

1,037,850
725,797
237,541
143,581
88,953
50,837
541,539
512,948
196,709
184,868
482,208
399,023
448,000
306,483

162,653
121,938
-

-

20,322,280
17,053,598
2,970,630
2,497,472
247,360,288
236,722,375
15,729,550
12,023,757
31,029,531
24,187,040
5,385,435
3,959,857
21,926,144
4,067,419

341,528,404
298,066,043

3,032,800
2,323,538

162,653
121,938

-

344,723,858
300,511,519

39%
62%

841,218,149
460,494,757

10,765,356
7,137,727

162,653
121,938

29,213,817
17,690,539

881,359,975
485,444,961

100%

Private donors in China

100%

Private donors in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

Includes activities in Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Includes activities in Albania, Kosovo (Security Council Resolution 1244 [1999]), Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia.
Includes activities in Austria, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, the liaison office in Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
Includes activities in Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Republic of Moldova, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Includes activities in Cyprus, Malta and Spain.
Includes activities in Latvia and Lithuania.

IOM
Ireland

319,429
295,057
267,230

1,292

235,849

Estonia

192,071

UNDP

182,484

Private donors in Japan

123,333
103,521
98,000
87,000
82,745
38,100

Serbia
Romania
Armenia
Poland
Montenegro
Czechia
Slovenia
Private donors in Greece
Private donors in Italy

34,091
27,712
26,662
12,479

Croatia
Azerbaijan
Private donors worldwide

Private donors in Canada
Private donors in Austria

TOTAL*

455,065

867,413

Central Emergency Response Fund
Private donors in France

45,123,828
26,134,632

1,000,000

Luxembourg
Switzerland

TOTAL

307,441,205
114,800,000
8,843,527
5,278,916
2,800,000
2,475,952
2,286,934
1,615,729
1,581,199
1,449,037

1,269,036

Sweden
Republic of Korea

73,600,000
196,344
663,569
589,159
2,286,934

Denmark

Private donors in Switzerland
SUBTOTAL

IDP
projects

France

Italy

SOUTH-EASTERN EUROPE
Budget

PILLAR 4

Stateless
programme

2,675,388

United States of America

Spain
2

PILLAR 2

Refugee
programme

304,765,818
41,200,000
8,647,183
3,478,984
2,100,000
1,886,792

European Union

EASTERN EUROPE

Bosnia and Herzegovina Regional Office

DONOR

PILLAR 1

7,200
6,347
1,574

18

1,269,036
1,000,000
910,128
867,413
849,099
811,307
597,407
550,000
505,051
450,414
394,871
332,728
320,721
295,057
267,230
235,849
192,071
182,484
123,333
103,521
98,000
87,000
82,745
38,100
34,091
27,712
26,662
12,479
7,200
6,365
1,574

1,009

1,009

515
88

515
88

370,951,531

300,000

8,350,024

79,652,203

459,253,757

*Notes:
1 Contributions include 7% programme support costs.					
2 Includes a total of $607,732 acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $136,603 acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.		
3 Includes contributions earmarked at a situation overall level to Central Mediterranean route situation.				

138 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 139

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES

FOREWORD
In 2018, there were some 15 million people
of concern to UNHCR in the Middle East
and North Africa region, including almost
2.7 million refugees and 10.3 million IDPs.
The majority—10.1 million—were internally
displaced from conflicts in Iraq, the Syrian
Arab Republic (Syria) and Yemen, three of
the largest and most violent humanitarian
and displacement crises in the world. Some
7.2 million refugees and asylum-seekers
from those same conflicts found protection
and assistance in countries across the
region and further abroad.
As fighting continued throughout the year,
the Syria situation remained the world’s
largest refugee crisis, with humanitarian
needs and protection risks staggering in
scale and severity. This resulted in a context
of complex and overlapping displacements.
Some 13 million Syrians were in need of, or
sought, protection, including 6.2 million IDPs
and 6.6 million refugees. Some 210,950 Syrian
refugees from across the region, and
1.4 million IDPs (OCHA figures), returned to
their areas of origin, often in very difficult
circumstances.

140 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Jamal Al-Barea

Middle East and
North Africa

In Iraq, while the scale and severity of
humanitarian needs remained high, almost
945,000 IDPs returned throughout the
year. Despite their optimism, however,
returnees faced obstacles in accessing
basic services, all the while contending
with a range of protection risks, damaged
property and infrastructure, as well as a
lack of livelihood opportunities and financial
resources. In some instances return was
not possible or sustainable, leading to
secondary displacement or re-admittance

Moheeb is an 8-year-old IDP from Sa’ada
Governorate, Yemen. He wears a flower crown known
as an Omama, or a Tawq, which is traditional among
men and boys in his community.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 141

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Key data and achievements in Middle East and North Africa
to camps, and many IDPs continued to find
themselves in a protracted displacement
situation.
The conflict in Yemen took a turn for the
worse towards the end of 2018, resulting in
further large-scale displacement and severe
food insecurity as the country faced the
persistent risk of famine. Political progress
was made, with Yemen’s internationally
recognized Government and Houthi rebels
concluding the Stockholm Agreements
(a UN-brokered ceasefire) in December 2018.
Many of the other contexts across the
region were characterised by situations of
violence. Frequent periods of instability
were experienced in Libya—particularly in
Tripoli where militia groups clashed
repeatedly, resulting in the displacement
of more than 5,000 families. Violence was
pervasive in areas affected by movements
to Europe from North Africa. Although
Mediterranean crossings decreased over
the year, thousands continued to risk their
lives in dangerous sea journeys from Libya
and Tunisia, often exposed to severe abuse
from criminal groups, smugglers and
traffickers. Those rescued by authorities
faced additional hardship—including arrest
and detention—often in appalling
conditions.

While arrivals from Algeria and Morocco to
Spain rose significantly over the year, with
over 76,000 irregular crossings prevented
by Moroccan authorities, the overall number
of arrivals from North Africa to Europe
decreased considerably in 2018.
Despite the challenges, solid results were
achieved on multiple fronts, including
access and assistance to people of concern
and the achievement of durable solutions.
Most borders across the region remained
open and asylum space was generally
favourable with governments and host
populations displaying commendable
hospitality despite increasingly limited
resources. Progress was also noted with
the ratification of the Global Compact on
Refugees, highlighting the importance of
responsibility-sharing as well as establishing
a framework through which to achieve
sustainable solutions in collaboration with
governments, international organizations,
and other relevant stakeholders. UNHCR
is confident that its efforts will continue to
have encouraging outcomes for those
displaced by conflict and violence, and will
maintain its unwavering resolve to achieve
comprehensive solutions.

Resettlement
The Middle East and North Africa is the 2nd region with the highest resettlement needs worldwide
Syria is the 1st country of origin of people resettled worldwide: 42% of total departures
UNHCR-facilitated departures in 2018 from the
Middle East and North Africa

UNHCR resettlement submissions in 2018

21,542

18,424

21%

compared to 2017

Resettlement submissions
worldwide in 2018

Departures worldwide in 2018

26%

33%

13%

compared to 2017

Major countries of origin of resettled people
from the Middle East and North Africa
1 Syria 23,409

2 Iraq 1,238

Biometric registration

2,744,363

individuals biometrically
enrolled by the end of 2018

38% biometrically registered
of total individuals

The Middle East

North Africa

2,402,062

342,301

Cash-based interventions
Variation

$314M

2017

$408M

$94M

30%

2018

Refugees living in/out of camps
Refugees*

Data as of 31st December 2018

% accommodation known % private accommodation**

% camps + other

Amin Awad
Director of UNHCR’s Regional Bureau for the Middle East and North Africa

2,692,700

60.9%

90.4%

9.6%

* includes refugees and people in refugee-like situations
** out of total number of refugees and refugee-like

GLOBAL WORKFORCE
IN MENA* 3,684

57%

43 %

65

39 %

MALE

LOCATIONS

*including 1,173 affiliate workforce staff.

142 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Emergency deployments

Partners and budget allocated

(UNHCR and standby partners)

USD millions

22

FEMALE

BASED IN
HARDSHIP LOCATIONS

$362.8 million allocated to 161 partners
(29% of regional expenditure)
18
25 International NGO partners

$170.6M
2017

2018

$158.4M

108 National NGO partners
24 Government partners

$32.3

4 UN agencies $1.5

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 143

REGIONAL
R E G I O N ASUMMARIES
L S U M M A R I |ETSH EI M
MIID
DD
DLLEE EE A
ASSTT A
AN
ND
D N
NO
OR
RT
TH
H A
AF
FR
R II C
CA
A

MI IDDDDLLEE EEAASSTT AANNDD NNOORRTTHH AAFFRRI C
I CAA
RREGIONAL
E G I O N A LSUMMARIES
S U M M A R I E|ST HI E M

MAJOR SITUATIONS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND
NORTH AFRICA IN 2018

In 2018, the Middle East and North Africa continued to see some of the most severe and protracted refugee
crises in the world. More than 10.1 million were internally displaced from conflicts in
Iraq, Syria and Yemen—three of the direst humanitarian situations globally.

SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
In its 8ʰ year of conflict, humanitarian needs were staggering with
13 million refugees and IDPs in need of assistance. Some 70% of the
population in Syria lived in extreme poverty, while unemployment
increased to 55%. More than 4.2 million people remained in need of
shelter, as many shelters in return areas were damaged. In the midst
of ongoing hostilities, UNHCR provided lifesaving assistance and
protection to people of concern, reaching more than 2.3 million IDPs,
returnees and host communities.

6.6 million
6.2 million1
1.4 million1

SYRIAN ARAB
REPUBLIC
L3
IRAQ

IDP returnees

210,9502

Refugee returnees

IRAQ
Though the number of IDP returnees reached nearly 1 million, they faced
constrained access to basic services and a lack of livelihood opportunities
and financial resources. This led to secondary displacement or
re-admittance to camps where return was not possible or sustainable. The
number of IDPs at the end of 2018 decreased to 1.8 million, down from
2.6 million in 2017. In 2018 the number of Syrian refugees in Iraq rose to
252,520. Some 99% of Syrian refugees in Iraq were found in the Kurdistan
region, 37% resided in 9 camps, while the reminder lived in urban areas.

ALGERIA

LIBYA
L2

277,800

3

1.8 million
945,000

MAURITANIA

IDP returnees

YEMEN
L3

YEMEN
The world’s worst humanitarian conflict in 2018, with some 22.2 million
people assessed as being in need of some kind of humanitarian
assistance. A brutal armed conflict displaced more people in 2018,
although 133,600 IDPs returned home. Yemenis also faced outbreaks of
cholera and diphtheria, and the pervasive risk of famine. Despite this,
over 264,370 people—mainly Eritreans, Ethiopians and Somalis—sought
asylum in the country, which represents a slight decrease from 2017.

264,370
2.1 million
133,600

IDP returnees

AGE AND GENDER BREAKDOWN

LIBYA
Fighting between forces linked to the Government of National
Accord, local tribes, foreign armed groups, and the Libyan National
Army led to continued displacement, and difficulties in accessing
people in need of protection. While in 2018 the number of sea
crossings diminished considerably, the Libyan Coast Guard rescued
or intercepted nearly 15,000 refugees and migrants during 120
operations. A growing reliance on detention by Libyan authorities
was observed, with 6,200 people being detained. Through UNHCR’s
intervention, 2,700 people in need of international protection were
released from detention.

REFUGEES AND ASYLUM-SEEKERS

56,2103
170,500
43,680

IDP returnees

15
million
PEOPLE OF CONCERN

IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
REFUGEES
2.7 million
ASYLUM-SEEKERS
RETURNEES (REFUGEES AND IDPs)
IDPs

1 OCHA figures
2 Of whom 56,000 verified by UNHCR
3 Including asylum-seekers

25%

50%

284,000

1.3 million
10.3 million

STATELESS PERSONS
OTHERS OF CONCERN

15%

60+

371,000

18-59

13,000

12-17
5-11
5%

L 2/3

11 UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018
144 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Situation

Refugees

Negative trend
compared with 2017

MYMP country

IDPs

Positive trend
compared with 2017

Level of emergency

Returnees

Stable trend
compared with 2017

0-4

UNDER 18

46%

UNHCR GLOBAL REPORT 2018 12
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 145

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

ACHIEVEMENTS
AND IMPACT
Safeguarding
fundamental rights
Maintaining protection space and
supporting access to national asylum
systems

Malian refugees in
Mbera camp,
Mauritania, were
issued national
identity cards.

Throughout the year, UNHCR engaged with
governments on the development of draft
national asylum legislation, with both

Mauritania and Morocco making good
progress, and Qatar adopting a national
asylum framework following its accession to
the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The
Office worked across the region, notably
with the Governments of Algeria and Egypt,
towards the implementation of asylum laws.
Key support for registration of refugees and
asylum-seekers was reinforced through
improved technology and practices.
Egypt registered 31,000 new people
through biometric systems, and UNHCR
advocated with the Government to extend
residence permits and regionalize
registration centers for simplified access.
Following advocacy with the Government,
Mauritania began issuing national identity
cards for the 57,000 Malian refugees in
Mbera camp, and birth registration began
for all refugee children born in the camp
since 2012.

A “self-renewal methodology” in registration procedures was
introduced in Jordan in 2018—the first operation worldwide
to implement this project which aims to empower people
of concern as data owners by enabling them to validate
and update data previously collected during registration.
“Self-renewal” will save time during the registration
process and in renewing documents, allowing refugees and
asylum-seekers to avoid the often lengthy queues at UNHCR
registration centres.
In the long-term, the project will enable refugees to update
their data remotely with access to a unique, portable,
authenticated digital identity, which is compatible with
State population registries, civil registration and vital statistics systems. The self-renewal process
will be managed through kiosks that include an iris camera (for biometric verification), a monitor
and a printer. The booths were initially tested in the Khalda registration centre, with 30 more kiosks
planned for Amman, 10 in Irbid and 10 in Mafraq.

146 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Annie Sakkab

Empowering refugees as
data-owners through registration

Community-based protection played
a pivotal role in UNHCR’s response.
Community-led initiatives and outreach
volunteers were central to UNHCR’s
approach in working with both people
of concern and host communities to
deliver multi-sectoral support to people in
need, including survivors of sexual and

© UNHCR/Bathoul Ahmed

57,000

The year was marked by continued efforts
at the global level, most notably the Global
Compact, to promote and safeguard
principles of international law to expand
protections for those displaced. UNHCR
worked with authorities to ensure the
principle of non-refoulement was upheld
in the region, where ongoing arrests and
deportations threatened the most basic
of human rights.

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

gender-based violence (SGBV) and children
at risk. Across the region, UNHCR delivered
skills-training, legal support, and information
services to meet the needs and concerns of
displaced people through a large network
of more than 250 community centres.

Providing protection and solutions to IDPs
in the region
Most people of concern to UNHCR in the Middle East and
North Africa region were internally displaced from conflict
in Iraq, Syria and Yemen. In responding to the needs of IDPs
in the region, UNHCR focused on providing protection,
monitoring, shelter support, delivery of non-food items,
social cohesion projects, and distribution of cash assistance.
With the largest IDP population in the region, UNHCR
provided protection services to some 2.3 million people in
community and satellite centres across Syria. Some 1.75 million protection interventions
were recorded, involving material assistance, legal support, education, and awareness
raising. Winterization items were distributed to more than 762,000 IDPs across
13 governorates.
UNHCR stepped up its community-based protection networks strategy in Yemen to
monitor protection risks, identify and address vulnerable protection cases for the
2.1 million IDPs and 133,600 IDP returnees across the country. Through eight
established IDP community centres, the Office assisted over 103,000 people through
psychosocial or social counselling and legal assistance. UNHCR strengthened its
protection (including cash-based) interventions, with a focus on SGBV to respond to the
needs of IDP populations, half of whom are female, including 27% aged 18 and under.
In Iraq, one year after the Government declared victory over extremists, nearly
1 million IDPs were deemed to have returned during the year, while more than
150,000 people were newly displaced. Multi-purpose cash assistance helped nearly
170,000 vulnerable IDPs and returnees cover their most basic needs, and UNHCR
promoted social cohesion through quick impact projects for families and communities
heavily impacted by the conflict.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 147

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

© UNHCR/Diego Ibarra Sánchez

In Lebanon, a young Iraqi refugee with
autism finds escape from isolation
Samer, 10, spent most of his life cut-off from the outside
world, until a UNHCR-funded community centre in Lebanon
helped him to connect with other children.
“He has improved since he joined the activities at Caritas.”
—Catrina Youssef, Samer’s mother.

the multi-sectoral best practices in the 3RP
to ensure all refugee children are registered
and documented at birth.
UNHCR positively engaged with
communities, maternal health providers,
lawyers, the judiciary and other government
counterparts in child protection matters,

including advocacy for simplified procedures
and waiving fines for late registration. These
partnerships fostered a marked reduction in
the percentage of Syrian refugee children
born in the region each year without any
form of identity documents (either a birth
certificate or medical birth notification).

Syrian refugee
children
without identity
documents
dropped from
35% in 2012 to

1.8% in 2018.

The 3RP for the Syria crisis: a humanitarian and development response plan

Child protection

92,000
girls and boys
received child
protection
services.

839,000
children
participated in
child protection
programmes.

Over 2.5 million Syrian children were
refugees in the countries falling under the
Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan
(3RP)—Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey—whilst an additional 2.5 million were
IDPs within Syria. In Iraq, 3.3 million children
required humanitarian assistance and
protection. In addition to immediate
protection assistance, many children
required longer-term interventions,
including mental health and psychosocial
services as well as family tracing and
reunification. UNHCR and partners
supported advocacy and capacity-building
efforts to ensure all interventions prioritised
the best interests of the child, whilst
improving the quality and accessibility of
mental health and psychosocial services for
children contending with psychosocial
distress. In 2018, more than 92,000 girls
and boys across these five countries
received specialised child protection
services, and over 839,000 children
participated in child protection or
psychosocial support programmes.
UNHCR maintained a robust legal aid and
community engagement programme
in the region, to promote access to civil
documentation, including birth and marriage
certificates. This resulted in the prompt
registration of new births in camps, as well

148 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

as the documentation of informal marriages;
enhancing the protection and enjoyment of
rights by women and children alike.
Similarly, in Lebanon, the Government
issued an exception to a one-year deadline
for registering new births by which Syrian
children who were already over the age of
one, but who had not completed the birth
registration process, could obtain a birth
certificate, thereby avoiding a lengthy
legal procedure. It is anticipated that some
50,000 children may benefit from this
initiative. The Government also waived the
requirement of legal residency status as a
precondition to completing birth registration
procedures.
The development and adoption by the
League of Arab States (LAS) of the “Arab
Declaration on belonging and legal identity”
was achieved following years of advocacy
by UNHCR and partners to reduce the
percentage of undocumented children
across the region, and represented a
significant commitment to addressing
statelessness.
The Declaration calls for all children to be
able to enjoy their right to a legal identity,
including a name, family relations and a
nationality, and reaffirmed the shared
commitment of LAS Member States to
promote gender equality in their nationality
laws. This Declaration follows and reinforces

An integrated humanitarian and development strategy and response plan coordinated
by UNDP and UNHCR, the 3RP involves over 270 partners—including UN Agencies,
local actors, national and international NGOs, municipalities, academia, charities and
foundations—who play a key role in shaping the response.
In 2018, 3RP achievements included: the enrolment of over 1.2 million children aged
5 to 17 years in formal education; support to over 50,000 people to access employment
such as training, internships, job placement and language courses; food assistance
to over 2.3 million people; the engagement of almost 800,000 individuals in
community-led initiatives; and emergency cash assistance to over 450,000 households.
3RP partners also worked with host governments on the issue of work
permits, in line with the commitments made during the London and Brussels
Syria Conferences.
Notwithstanding a challenging funding environment, donors remained
generous, providing some $3.5 billion (62% of requirements). However,
despite the generosity of host countries, communities, and donors, the
plight of Syrian refugees continued to worsen. Poverty rates remained
high, as did protection challenges. Access to education was limited.
Host communities also faced their own challenges, including strained
resources, limited services, and high unemployment.

Addressing and responding to mixed
movements
Movements from the Middle East and
North Africa continued to diminish with
141,500 people reaching Europe in 2018,
representing a decrease of 23.5% when
compared with 2017 (185,139). Some
2,277 people lost their lives, or were
declared missing while trying to cross
the Mediterranean Sea. The Libyan Coast

Guard rescued or intercepted nearly
15,000 refugees and migrants during
120 operations over the year. UNHCR
provided protection monitoring, dedicated
health posts, water and sanitation facilities,
and amenities to shelter refugees and
migrants from the elements.
UNHCR and partners were present at
disembarkation points throughout
north-western Libya, conducting protection

141,500
people reached
Europe in 2018

15,000
refugees and
migrants were
rescued

2,277
were declared
missing at sea.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 149

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

monitoring, providing 9,700 non-food items
packages and 1,600 medical consultations.
Reception and processing arrangements
were also in place in Tunisia, where the
authorities rescued 290 people at sea.
Enhancing protection at sea in the context
of mixed migration flows, UNHCR carried
out regular capacity-building activities on
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law with local authorities, including
with the Libyan Coast Guard. Given persistent
challenges, UNHCR and IOM worked
together with States on a regional mechanism
for a sustainable approach to search, rescue
and disembarkation based on cooperation
and coordination among States.

UNHCR secured
the release of over

2,700
refugees and
asylum-seekers.

Elsewhere, despite the worsening
humanitarian and security situation in the
country, mixed movements continued of
refugees and migrants from the Horn of
Africa to Yemen. Some 150,000 people
reached Yemen in 2018 according to
IOM, where UNHCR registered over
5,800 people of concern and counselled
more than 2,200 through three return
help-desks. Nearly 2,600 Somalis chose
to return home in 2018 through UNHCR’s
assisted spontaneous return programme.
The introduction of restrictive measures
across the region to address irregular
migration greatly impacted people of

Over the course of 2018, UNHCR evacuated more than
2,200 vulnerable refugees to Niger from detention
centres in Libya.
“My life starts today, I want to study hard and make
a difference in the world.”

concern to UNHCR. Significant changes
were observed in movement patterns, with
Spain becoming the primary point for entry
by sea in the second half of 2018 (see the
Europe summary). Access to territory and
asylum procedures were made harder, and
greater protection responses were needed
against forced returns. In a number of
countries, asylum-seekers and refugees
were refused entry at the border or were
caught in collective arrest operations,
resulting in their forced deportation to
third countries.

In December 2018, UNHCR launched the
gathering and departure facility in Tripoli,
the first programme of its kind, ensuring a
safe environment for vulnerable people
while solutions such as resettlement, family
reunification, or evacuation were established.
Managed in cooperation with UNHCR’s
partner LibAid and the Libyan Ministry
of Interior, the facility is one of a range of
measures intended to offer a viable
alternative to detention.

Responding with lifesaving
support

Alternatives to detention

Cash-based interventions

Alternatives to detention and the release of
refugees and asylum-seekers was a priority
for UNHCR, particularly given the number
of people of concern detained under harsh
conditions in Libya where more than
15,000 people were transferred to detention
facilities following interception by the Libyan
Coast Guard. UNHCR and its partners
conducted more than 1,370 visits to detention
centres, securing the release of over
2,700 refugees and asylum-seekers, mainly
for evacuation to third countries. UNHCR
provided basic humanitarian assistance, and
advocated enhanced access to screening,
identification, and registration of refugees
both at disembarkation points and in
detention centres. Special measures were
also developed to advocate against SGBV.

UNHCR provided nearly $408 million in
cash assistance—a slight increase compared
with 2017 ($314 million)—to more than
2 million refugees and displaced people
across the region. Protection and cash
programmes worked in tandem to ensure
that vulnerable people were successfully
identified, providing individuals with cash for
their most basic needs, or with multi-purpose
cash assistance.

© UNHCR/Farah Harwida

UNHCR flight evacuates 132 refugees
from detention in Libya

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Cash remained at the forefront of UNHCR’s
assistance in Yemen, with $48 million
disbursed to over 800,000 IDPs and
returnees, and 130,000 refugees. Cash
assistance targeted people with specific
protection needs and those lacking
adequate shelter or winter materials and
was provided through phone-based money
transfers in cooperation with Al Amal Bank.
With the support of the Yemen Shelter/NFI/
CCCM Cluster, UNHCR provided cash
assistance for winterization to those living
in areas facing especially low temperatures.
Emergency cases were processed through
UNHCR-managed community centres,
which allowed for direct payments.

A Lebanese study on the effectiveness of
cash assistance in preventing, mitigating
and addressing SGBV risks found it be an
efficient tool and especially appropriate for
SGBV survivors due to its discreet nature.
Examples of positive outcomes included
enabling survivors to move away from
abusers and to rent for themselves and any
children, and to undergo surgery or support
a family member during recovery. Findings
suggest that factors enabling the success
of cash assistance in SGBV programming
include functioning complementary
services, individual case management
plans, counselling on safety and
empowerment issues, and effective
monitoring mechanisms.
In Iraq, multi-purpose cash assistance was
distributed through mobile money transfer
mechanisms to some 170,000 vulnerable
IDPs, with over 345,000 IDPs receiving
winter cash support. In Egypt, approximately
86,000 people were reached monthly with
cash programming, as were 10,800 in Libya.
In Jordan and Lebanon, some 520,000 of
the most vulnerable refugees benefited
from multi-purpose allowances monthly.
Some 1.16 million benefited from
winter-specific cash assistance support.
Challenges were faced in Syria, where more
than 1.4 million people were identified as
being eligible for cash assistance, but only
450,000 were assisted due to funding
constraints. Pilot initiatives, including the
use of cash assistance to prevent and
mitigate child protection risks such as child
labour and child marriage.

UNHCR provided

$408

million
in cash
benefitting

2

million people
across the region.

—Abdul Karim, Somali refugee in Libya.

150 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 151

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Between 2016 and 2018, private donors in the Middle East
and North Africa region contributed $14.4 million in Zakat
contributions. $11.8 million were received in 2018 alone,
$10 million of which were donated by Qatar Charity,
qualifying as the largest private partner in 2018 globally.

© UNHCR/Claire Thomas

© UNHCR

Private donors boost their support
in favour of refugees and IDPs

Yazidi doctor brings former ISIS
captives’ souls back to life
Having treated more than a thousand Yazidi women who
escaped captivity, this gynaecologist dedicates herself to
helping them rebuild their shattered lives.
“Medically, most of them suffered from pain. Many had
sexually transmitted infections as a result of numerous
rapes. But psychologically, the state of survivors
was extremely bad.”

Qatar Charity significantly increased its overall contribution
compared to 2017, with a total of $26 million in 2018.
Globally, more than 1 million refugees and IDPs have
benefitted from this partnership.

—Nagham Nawzat Hasan, Yazidi gynaecologist.

UNHCR became the first UN Agency to provide a secure mechanism for people to fulfil Zakat obligations through
the Zakat Initiative. Channelled through innovative cash assistance programmes, 100% of contributions go to
vulnerable refugees and IDPs. The initiative is subject to rigorous governance, and has been recognized by five
respected scholars and institutions.

Building better futures
Resettlement

Sexual and gender-based violence

127,000
survivors and
people at risk of
SGBV benefitted
from multi-sectoral
services in 2018.

Preventing and responding to SGBV was a
priority within the 3RP context. UNHCR
strengthened the mainstreaming of SGBV
prevention and response across all areas of
programming through the development of
national action plans in 3RP operations.
Additional funding was secured from the
“Safe from the start” initiative for three
projects in 3RP operations: women’s
leadership, empowerment, access and
protection in Egypt; mitigating SGBV risks
with the help of a mobile app in Jordan; and
combatting SGBV through cash and
livelihoods assistance in Turkey.
UNHCR implemented referral systems for
SGBV survivors in operations such as Libya,
Morocco and Yemen, ensuring access to
medical care, social/psychological counselling,
and legal assistance.

152 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

UNHCR also conducted trainings and
capacity-building exercises for partners,
local authorities and members of civil society
in addressing protection and assistance
gaps. Prevention interventions were as
well ensured through community-based
activities, building links between service
providers and increasing engagement
among refugee communities. Protection and
prevention efforts included men and boys,
who were engaged as agents of positive
change to address unequal power
dynamics, also serving as sensitization
function informing about access to services
in situations where they became survivors
of SGBV.

There were 37,560 refugees submitted
for resettlement from the region (21,542)
and Turkey. Some 27,400 were actually
resettled, of which 18,420 in the region
itself. The largest number of referred
refugees was from Syria (nearly 28,200),
with almost 2,800 from Iraq. Reductions in
resettlement quota allocations within the
region and Turkey were noted, with a
decrease of 6,500 people from the 2017
resettlement submission figures. In 2018,
approximately 37% of submissions were for
legal and physical protection needs, 31%
were for survivors of violence and torture,
16% were for children and adolescents at
risk, and 13% for women and girls at risk. An
overall 54% of all resettlement submissions
were for children.

number of resettlement places and
complementary pathways to admission
available to refugees. In addition, UNHCR
worked with the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland as chair of the
Syrian Resettlement Core Group, and with
France as chair of the Central
Mediterranean Core Group to share good
practices, demonstrating the strategic
impact of resettlement and identifying
durable solutions, including the evacuation
and resettlement of refugees from Libya.

54%

of all
resettlement
submissions in
2018 were
for children.

UNHCR encouraged States to develop new
resettlement programmes or to expand
existing ones to improve burden- and
responsibility-sharing with host countries,
in line with the Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework commitments. In
particular, the Office engaged with new
resettlement States to try to increase the

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 153

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

© UNHCR/Natalie Schmidthaeussler

Where circumstances allowed, UNHCR
worked with its partners to facilitate the
return of people displaced across the
region. Entering its second year in Yemen,
the assisted spontaneous return
programme has helped more than 3,400
Somalis return home since October 2017.
The programme provides information and
counselling through three local UNHCR
help desks across southern Yemen. An estimated 5,000 are expected to return to
Berbera in north-west Somalia in the coming year, with UNHCR exploring similar
programmes for refugees of other nationalities wishing to return home.

More than 11,600 students are estimated to
have received scholarships in 2018,
reflecting UNHCR’s strong engagement
with partners to ensure the availability of
tertiary education. Refugee university
enrolment reached 5% across Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey, signifying an
improvement in the global average for
refugees. Some 154 refugees from Jordan
and Lebanon benefitted from third country
scholarships outside the region (see
chapter on Building better futures).

Whilst neither promoting nor facilitating the return of Syrian refugees in 2018, UNHCR
supported those taking the decision to voluntarily return, upon departure in host
countries as well as inside Syria. UNHCR and partners worked with the Government
and other stakeholders in Syria to address the issues that refugees said inhibited their
return, including through legislation, protection advocacy, and strengthening existing
programmes. UNHCR also worked with host governments in countries neighbouring
Syria to strengthen their capacity to help with refugee returns. Examples included
helping refugees’ access documentation, addressing the specific needs of particularly
vulnerable individuals, identifying and finding solutions for unaccompanied and
separated children, and counselling refugees on the implications of returning.

A wide range of protection and
socioeconomic challenges, such as child
labour, child marriage, and recruitment by

154 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

armed forces contributed to negative
coping mechanisms and hindered access to
education in 2018. The Syria crisis continued
to impose pressure on host-community
children and youth in the five main host
countries, especially in those where
academic resources were exceedingly
stretched.
The absorption capacity (for example,
the infrastructure, available teachers, and
learning materials) of national education
systems that have expanded through the
addition of second-shift classes is reaching
its limits, and concerns about the quality of
education are mounting as a result of
increased pupil/teacher ratios.

Goodwill Ambassadors meet with
Syrian refugees in Jordan and Yemeni
refugees in Djibouti
UNHCR Goodwill Ambassadors Atom Araullo and Emi
Mahmoud visited Jordan to strengthen the public attention
on the Syria refugee crisis. Regional supporters such as
Kinda Alloush, Lojain Omran and Saba Mubarak generated
almost 1 million video views for the Ramadan #HandInHand
project.

© UNHCR/Jordi Matas

in 2018.

UNHCR partnered with other UN Agencies
and regional entities to advocate expanded
opportunities and foster education solutions
for refugee children and youth. Within
the framework of the 3RP and “No lost
generation” (a regional partnership focused
on education and protection), UNHCR and
partners promoted access for refugees to
national education systems and advocated
with governments for increased access to
post-basic and higher education.

Hosting countries around the region made
an important commitment in keeping
their schools open to Syrian refugee
children. This had a particular impact
on primary-aged children, many of whom
were born outside of Syria. Due to
population growth, school-age refugees
increased from 1.81 million in December
2017 to 1.92 million in December 2018.
Enrolment in formal education increased
by some 200,000 during the same period,
while the number of children enrolled in
regulated non-formal education fell by

© UNHCR/Veejay Villafranca

1.92 million

40,000. As a result, over 675,600 (36%) of
Syrian refugee children received no form of
regulated education.

Promote enabling conditions for
voluntary repatriation

Education

School-age
refugees increased
from 1.81 million
in 2017 to

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

Jung Woo-sung advocated powerfully for
Yemeni refugees via field trips to Djibouti
and Malaysia, resulting in two exclusive
interviews from the field and an op-ed piece
in the Kyunghyang Sinmun newspaper.
Watch more on Atom Araullo in Jordan here
and Jung Woo-sung’s visit to Yemeni
refugees and his work as UNHCR National
Goodwill Ambassador since June 2015 here.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 155

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
Consequences
of underfunding
All situations, including the ones for Iraq,
Syria and Yemen, were underfunded, with
difficult decisions made about the priorities
given the resources available. In addition,
much of the funding to the region was
earmarked (reducing its flexibility); came
with rigid reporting requirements; and
arrived in the second half of the year,
leaving less time for implementation.
UNHCR’s appeal for the Syria situation was
only 49% funded against a requirement of
just under $2 billion, while the Iraq situation
saw only 38% funding against its required
$559.8 million, causing significant hardship
for thousands of vulnerable Syrian and Iraqi
IDPs and refugees. More than 1.1 million
Syrian IDPs went without winterization
assistance, 635,000 people did not receive
emergency core relief items in Iraq and
Syria, and approximately 42,000 Syrian
refugees did not have access to health care
support, particularly in Jordan and Lebanon.
Due to lack of funding, cash assistance
could not be dispersed to nearly
522,000 vulnerable Syrians in Jordan and
Lebanon, where the majority of families
were already below the poverty line.
In Yemen, funds were insufficient to meet
the needs of even the most vulnerable.

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

The situation suffered from a lack of
resources to support cash assistance
programmes that were desperately needed
given the heightened cost of living and the
fact that many had exhausted all personal
means living in situations of protracted
displacement. For many people cash
assistance was the only lifeline. UNHCR also
lacked resources for crucial rehabilitation
plans in Basateen and Kharaz camps,
including vital water and sanitation networks
and critical solarisation projects.

Budget

Elsewhere across the region, critical
underfunding in Algeria led to unmet needs
in the health, education, and livelihoods
sectors of the Tindouf camps, where some
30% of essential drugs were not provided
and nearly 50% of medical staff received
no incentives. Financial constraints led
to decreased capacity to meet the needs
of children at risk in Egypt, including
unidentified and separated children.
In Mauritania, funds were insufficient to
respond to the shelter needs of new arrivals
from Mali, leaving thousands of households
with inadequate shelter. Lack of funds also
hindered UNHCR’s ability to effectively
support the most vulnerable refugees in
urban contexts, including accommodation,
education, and psychosocial support.
With increased mixed movements across
the region, the lack of funding translated
into specific protection gaps not being
addressed, both for people in transit and
those seeking asylum in the region
and beyond.

Carry-over from prior years

• ExCom original budget: $2.168
• Final budget: $2.481

billion.

billion.

• Budget increase: $313.6 million / +14% due mainly to the Syria and the Central
Mediterranean route situations.

Expenditure
SOURCE OF EXPENDITURE

As % of
expenditure
within the region

As % of global
expenditure by
source of funding

56,799
34,274
1,020,405
115,994
11,218
1,460
1,896
13,005

5%
3%
81%
9%
1%
Less than 1%
Less than 1%
1%

34%
17%
41%
20%
3%
4%
1%
7%

1,255,051

100%

30%

USD | thousands

Earmarked
Unearmarked
Earmarked
Softly earmarked
Unearmarked
In-kind

Voluntary contributions

Programme support costs
Other income

TOTAL

• Expenditure represented 30% of UNHCR global expenditure.
• Highest amount of expenditure funded from earmarked voluntary contributions, at 81%.
• Voluntary contributions to the region increased slightly by $18.9
compared to 2017.

million / + 2%

EXPENDITURE IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
2014-2018 | USD
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
Pillar 1
Pillar 2

400

Pillar 3
Pillar 4

Millions

200

156 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

0
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 157

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA | USD
PILLAR 1
Refugee
programme

OPERATION

PILLAR 2
Stateless
programme

PILLAR 3
Reintegration
projects

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA | USD

PILLAR 4
IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

MIDDLE EAST
Iraq

Budget
Expenditure

Jordan

Budget
Expenditure

Lebanon

Budget
Expenditure

Saudi Arabia

Budget
Expenditure

Syrian Arab Republic

Budget
Expenditure

Syrian Regional Refugee Coordination Office Budget
Expenditure
United Arab Emirates

Budget
Expenditure

Yemen

Budget
Expenditure

Sub-regional activities1

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

158 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Stateless
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

TOTAL

% OF
REGIONAL
TOTAL

NORTH AFRICA
Budget
Expenditure

Israel

OPERATION

PILLAR 1

Budget
Expenditure

135,891,731
72,248,201
3,957,076
2,776,011
274,896,607
224,593,201
462,444,318
313,241,213
5,895,669
5,097,503
47,246,066
14,802,304
29,027,926
26,528,865
4,808,914
3,292,456
95,145,669
33,770,397
54,349,725
310,548

307,821
236,963
590,906
473,281
216,077
146,147
198,641
7,887
-

259,200,000
29,369,636
-

423,626,565
141,441,697
305,544,293
142,518,063
30,000,000
14,195,647
103,597,968
101,563,498
-

559,826,117
213,926,861
3,957,076
2,776,011
274,896,607
224,593,201
463,035,224
313,714,493
6,111,745
5,243,649
612,189,000
186,697,890
59,027,926
40,724,512
4,808,914
3,292,456
198,743,637
135,333,896
54,349,725
310,548

1,113,663,700
696,660,699

1,313,445
864,277

259,200,000
29,369,636

862,768,826 2,236,945,971
399,718,905 1,126,613,517

Algeria

Budget
Expenditure

Egypt

Budget
Expenditure

Libya

Budget
Expenditure

Mauritania

Budget
Expenditure

Morocco

Budget
Expenditure

Tunisia

Budget
Expenditure

Western Sahara: Confidence Building Measures Budget
Expenditure
Sub-regional Activities2

Budget
Expenditure

SUBTOTAL

Budget
Expenditure

TOTAL
90%
90%

Budget
Expenditure

36,363,088
14,167,520
74,468,653
42,821,421
74,341,433
34,227,951
20,264,194
13,860,248
7,989,546
6,164,710
5,694,843
4,032,898
8,478,237
2,389,203
6,562,525
764,182

-

-

10,658,565
10,010,351
-

36,363,088
14,167,520
74,468,653
42,821,421
84,999,998
44,238,302
20,264,194
13,860,248
7,989,546
6,164,710
5,694,843
4,032,898
8,478,237
2,389,203
6,562,525
764,182

234,162,521
118,428,132

-

-

10,658,565
10,010,351

244,821,086
128,438,483

10%
10%

1,347,826,221
815,088,831

1,313,445
864,277

259,200,000
29,369,636

873,427,391 2,481,767,057
409,729,256 1,255,052,000

100%
100%

1 Regional activities in the Middle East
2 Regional activities in North Africa

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 159

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

REGIONAL SUMMARIES I MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA | USD

DONOR
United States of America
Germany
European Union
Saudi Arabia
Japan
Canada
Norway
United Arab Emirates
Italy
Kuwait
Country-based pooled funds
Netherlands
Private donors in Qatar
Sweden
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Private donors in Germany
Finland
France
Australia
Denmark
Switzerland

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

Refugee
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

Refugee
programme

Reintegration
projects

IDP
projects

260,926,452
160,695,254
48,242,497
11,120,210
13,893,020
24,905,660
16,930,002
7,425,000
16,462,685
7,390,000
2,403,501
13,536,353
10,005,097
4,441,624
5,592,557
117,925
4,320,988
6,352,265
8,303,035
2,350,663
2,156,390

74,300,000
20,255,682
9,324,009
32,992,119
25,667,068
7,473,842
6,376,738
23,336,120
3,744,701
7,000,000
14,572,971
2,000,000
3,403,210
3,172,589
4,669,493
1,234,568
250,000

2,032,520
3,000,000
5,970,599
600,010
284,414
1,179,655
452,243

Qatar
Central Emergency Response Fund
Private donors in the United States of America
Belgium
Private donors in the Netherlands
Spain
Republic of Korea
Private donors worldwide
Austria

1,297,950
5,515,247
2,734,500
3,477,330
1,250,000
1,320,816
1,321,706

756

Private donors in the Republic of Korea
Czechia
Luxembourg
Private donors in Switzerland
Private donors in the United Arab Emirates
Private donors in Australia
China

1,895,735
568,828
12,394
554,771
316,598
1,164,667

120,375

Russian Federation
Private donors in Kuwait
Private donors in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Private donors in Lebanon
Private donors in Canada

857,143
300,000
603,771

500,000

6,684

7,052

420,407
46,548

160 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

186,850,000
64,349,044
5,293,717

344,922

907

TOTAL

38,060

522,076,452
245,299,980
62,860,223
44,112,329
41,541,796
38,250,198
30,978,311
30,861,120
20,207,386
19,479,490
16,976,473
15,536,353
13,956,904
12,563,452
10,262,050
8,727,708
8,641,975
8,604,849
8,303,035
8,026,032
6,221,431
6,000,000
5,970,599
5,820,635
5,799,661
4,063,069
3,929,574
3,450,000
2,819,635
2,487,207
2,169,764
2,122,286
1,876,360
1,577,372
1,518,979
1,190,488
1,164,667
1,064,218
857,143
800,000
641,830

574,824

588,561

149,773
506,754

570,180
553,302
500,000
469,415

1,981,708
5,870,696
7,671,572
100,000
5,089,490

548,597
4,949,239
8,609,784
3,086,420
2,002,584
5,675,369
2,032,520
3,000,000
3,922,675
148,915
2,200,000
1,498,062
1,165,501
2,169,764
226,552
1,307,531
1,564,978
843,832
873,891

500,000

OPEC Fund for International Development
Private donors in Italy

ALL PILLARS

1,064,218

Private donors in Sweden
Ireland

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA | USD

123,586

DONOR

ALL PILLARS
11,685

TOTAL

Private donors in Japan

425,063

Private donors in Indonesia

400,000

Poland

372,823

372,823

Monaco

363,948

363,948

Slovakia
UNICEF

236,967
224,000

113,766

96,862

Iceland
101,523
16,409

Private donors in Saudi Arabia

33,550

Bulgaria
89,606

Private donors in Brazil

76,947

Private donors in China

7,009

274,390

101,523

203,046

165,582

181,991

86,603

120,153

92,025

Estonia

350,732
320,862

274,390

Liechtenstein
Private donors in Spain

436,748
400,000

92,025
89,606

3,159

80,106
58,665

Romania

65,674

60,386

60,386

34,659

54,079

UNAIDS

50,000

50,000

Slovenia

47,790

47,790

Lithuania

47,574

Private donors in Singapore

3,750

Malta

46,784

Private donors in Oman

15,896

15,671

28,119

Private donors in France
Cyprus

47,574
46,784

40,750
34,130

44,015
40,750
34,130

Private donors in the Philippines

33,371

33,371

Morocco

25,598

25,598

Private donors in Egypt

7,202

Private donors in Thailand
Private donors in India

626

Private donors in Ireland
Holy See

11,530

18,733

18,420

18,420

8,577

9,203

5,764
5,000

5,764
5,000

Private donors in Jordan

3,951

Private donors in Kenya

3,741

3,741

Private donors in Ghana

2,937

2,937

Private donors in Austria

1,394

1,394

Private donors in Turkey

33

33

Private donors in Denmark

18

18

TOTAL*

653,703,936

500,000

254,467,847

3,951

326,726,482 1,235,398,265

Notes:
1 Contributions include 7% programme support costs.					
2 Includes a total of $14.9 million acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $31.8 million acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation
in 2019 and beyond.
3 Includes contributions earmarked at a situation overall level to Iraq situation response, Syria situation response and Yemen situation.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 161

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

HEADQUARTERS

Operational support
and management

UNHCR’s Headquarters staff in Geneva,
Budapest, Copenhagen and other regional
capitals ensured the Office carried out its
mandate in an effective, coherent and
transparent manner. Over the year,
Headquarters’ divisions and bureaux
provided leadership and support to field
operations through executive direction,
organizational policy and evaluation,
external relations, information technology
and administration.

GLOBAL PROGRAMMES
Managed by divisions at Headquarters,
global programmes support field operations
through policy development and technical
support in priority areas. They are designed
to be implemented at the field level, but are
budgeted for and managed at Headquarters.
With a strong protection and solutions
orientation, the programmes strengthen
delivery and ensure equity, access and
community empowerment through the
utilization of the age, gender and diversity
approach. The technical interventions range
from lifesaving responses and measures to
mitigate sexual and gender-based violence
to strengthening the attainment of durable
solutions for refugees and other people of
concern in both urban and camp settings.
The programmes encourage linkages
between humanitarian interventions and
development efforts to support both
refugees and host communities, in line with
the SDGs and the Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework.

© UNHCR/Antwan Chnkdji

Tables and charts showing budget,
expenditure and voluntary contributions
in 2018 for global programmes and
Headquarters are presented on the
following pages.

162 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

A detailed description of Headquarters functions and
activities can be found on the Global Focus website,
and the roles and results achieved by global
programmes are contextualised throughout this
Global Report in the regional summaries and thematic
chapters.
Internally displaced Syrians in rural Aleppo
collect vital aid supplies.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 163

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE FOR GLOBAL PROGRAMMES | USD

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE FOR GLOBAL PROGRAMMES | USD

PILLAR 1 - REFUGEE PROGRAMME
Budget

Expenditure

OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES
Cash-based interventions
Durable solutions
Education-related projects
Emergency-related projects (including stockpiles)
Environment-related projects
Global Clusters
Health-related projects (including HIV/AIDS, anaemia, water and sanitation)
Innovation project
Protection-related projects
Private sector fundraising
Public information and media projects
Refugee women, children and adolescents
Registration, data and knowledge management
Research, evaluation and documentation
Resettlement
Shelter-related projects
Training-related projects
Miscellaneous
SUBTOTAL

831,831
1,587,895
21,614,038
40,057,334
241,777
3,444,141
3,269,822
2,594,591
5,005,303
116,006,910
8,971,296
1,344,967
7,009,440
1,924,009
11,217,897
21,680,992
1,406,534
790,342

269,143,493

248,999,120

EXECUTIVE DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT
Inspector General’s Office field activities
Legal Affairs Section field activities
Risk Management 2.0

ACTIVITIES

Budget

1,601,170
1,752,947
517,662
1,656,834

1,272,832
1,591,643
512,525
552,126

8,549,575
14,229,197
6,474,265
33,079,261
13,067,008
11,654,835

7,978,208
12,902,166
4,780,088
32,745,010
12,304,701
11,036,417

4,879,294
12,993,830
22,113,938

4,804,981
12,742,423
21,627,233

28,212,722
7,884,858

26,893,048
7,696,857

5,000,000

4,960,870

2,003,075

1,981,111

700,261
1,043,589
9,262,804
1,590,034
8,107,835

679,043
1,031,647
9,084,066
1,573,676
7,819,764

SUBTOTAL

196,374,994

186,570,435

TOTAL

465,518,487

435,569,556

Division of Emergency, Security and Supply

COPENHAGEN GLOBAL SERVICE CENTER
Division of International Protection
Division of Resilience and Solutions
Division of Programme Support and Management
Division of Information Systems and Telecommunications
Division of External Relations

EXPENDITURE FOR GLOBAL PROGRAMMES
AND HEADQUARTERS | 2014-2018

500

436
450

Private sector fundraising - investment funds and activities

DIVISION OF INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION
DIVISION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
DIVISION OF RESILIENCE AND SOLUTIONS
DIVISION OF PROGRAMME SUPPORT AND MANAGEMENT
DIVISION OF EMERGENCY, SECURITY AND SUPPLY
Emergency Capacity Management Section
Field Safety Section and field security support
Supply Management - field strenghtening and support

366

400

338
350

DIVISION OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS
Division of External Relations Service

Expenditure

BUDAPEST GLOBAL SERVICE CENTER
840,188
3,023,903
21,828,324
43,653,443
266,946
3,754,847
5,452,867
2,782,785
7,201,544
118,578,042
10,139,422
2,000,600
7,282,173
4,500,000
13,328,068
22,131,028
1,534,763
844,549

PROGRAMME SUPPORT ACTIVITIES
Innovation project

PILLAR 1 - REFUGEE PROGRAMME

USD MILLIONS

ACTIVITIES

279

266

205

213

222

231

235

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

300
250
200
150
100

DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Special staff costs
Training of UNHCR staff

DIVISION OF FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT
Audit IPMS

50

Global Programmes
Headquarters

164 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 165

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE FOR HEADQUARTERS | USD

BUDGET AND EXPENDITURE FOR HEADQUARTERS | USD
PILLAR 1 - REFUGEE PROGRAMME

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

Budget1

PILLAR 1 - REFUGEE PROGRAMME

Expenditure1

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

Budget1

Expenditure1

EXECUTIVE DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT
Executive Office
Liaison Office New York
Inspector General's Office
Legal Affairs Section
Office of the Ombudsman
Ethics Office
Enterprise Risk Management
Evaluation Service
Organizational Development and Management Service
Office of the Director for Change Management
Governance Service
SUBTOTAL

5,996,619
4,330,211
11,959,604
4,055,105
703,006
2,564,364
1,110,578
2,072,307
1,129,200
2,414,709
2,542,451

5,889,131
4,250,156
11,762,732
4,035,597
698,935
2,516,964
865,654
1,907,897
1,054,570
2,377,549
2,500,716

REGIONAL BUREAUX

38,878,154

37,859,902

Office of the Director and ICT fixed costs

Office of the Director for Africa
Office of the Director for the Middle East and North Africa
Special Envoy for the Central Mediterranean situation
Office of the Director for Asia and the Pacific
Emergency Response for Europe
Office of the Director for Europe (includes office in Brussels)
Office of the Director for the Americas
SUBTOTAL

Office of the Director
Donor Relations and Resource Mobilization Service
Private Sector Partnership Service
Global Communications Service
Records and Archives Section
Partnership and Coordination Service
Digital Engagement
Public Outreach and Campaigns
Joint UN Activity Contributions

2,410,613
7,092,643
1,287,813
4,898,453
1,875,930
2,096,076
401,123
1,227,171
1,239,394

2,380,036
7,030,804
1,212,481
4,802,267
1,864,940
2,080,342
395,989
1,217,243
1,239,394

SUBTOTAL

22,529,217

22,223,496

Office of the Director
Specialized sections
SUBTOTAL

Office of the Director
Specialized sections
SUBTOTAL

Office of the Controller and Director
Audit
Headquarters running costs (including security and safety at Headquarters)

3,236,066
13,728,888

3,156,995
13,063,030

SUBTOTAL

16,964,954

16,220,025

GLOBAL SERVICE CENTRE (BUDAPEST)
Management Unit

DIVISION OF RESILIENCE AND SOLUTIONS
Office of the Director
Specialized sections
SUBTOTAL

Ombudsman Office

275,427
891,658

269,956
847,721

1,167,085

1,117,678

Division of Financial and Administrative Management
Division of Human Resources
Division of Information Systems and Telecommunications
Division of Emergency, Security and Supply

DIVISION OF PROGRAMME SUPPORT AND MANAGEMENT
Office of the Director
Specialized sections
SUBTOTAL

2,780,540
5,053,481

2,720,448
4,917,525

7,834,022

7,637,974

Office of the Director
SUBTOTAL

SUBTOTAL

1,930,325

1,910,125

1,930,325

1,910,125

Management Unit

Staff Council

TOTAL
1

166 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

5,949,656
19,244,246

5,906,921
19,231,286

25,193,902

25,138,208

3,661,754
10,624,502

3,651,063
10,562,355

14,286,256

14,213,417

5,830,933
5,904,181
789,052
1,150,000
17,476,313

5,829,832
5,893,686
789,052
1,149,900
17,474,949

31,150,479

31,137,418

4,189,993
114,467
3,477,247
17,019,284
2,823,081
6,471,037

4,169,548
113,160
3,430,810
16,775,335
2,794,206
6,405,892

34,095,109

33,688,951

5,045,050

5,013,994

5,045,050
936,902

5,013,994
927,705

239,972,187

235,075,917

GLOBAL SERVICE CENTRE (COPENHAGEN)
SUBTOTAL

DIVISION OF EMERGENCY, SECURITY AND SUPPLY

37,987,025

DIVISION OF FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT

UN Finance Division

DIVISION OF INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION

39,960,732

DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCES

Specialized sections and services
SUBTOTAL

12,485,778
7,339,033
1,052,554
5,943,715
3,269,597
3,898,470
3,997,879

DIVISION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Infrastructure and Telecommunications Service

DIVISION OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS

12,696,552
7,612,819
1,588,973
6,247,534
3,568,004
4,209,465
4,037,385

Includes allocations from the UN Regular Budget as follows: $42,997,200 (budget) and $42,954,251 (expenditure).

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 167

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO GLOBAL PROGRAMMES | USD

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO GLOBAL PROGRAMMES | USD

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

DONOR

PILLAR 1

DONORS

Refugee
programme

ALL PILLARS

TOTAL

UNHCR e-Centre
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts
Safe from the Start project
Mosquito nets
Mosquito nets
Emergency preparedness and response
Emergency preparedness and response
Safe Road Use workshop

UPS Corporate
Japan
Ireland
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Norwegian Refugee Council
RedR
Danish Refugee Council
iMMAP
United States of America
United Nations Foundation
UN Fund for International Partnerships
Luxembourg
United Arab Emirates
UPS Corporate
SUBTOTAL

94,000
119,900
136,000
827,000
2,199,000

282,512

94,000
402,412
136,000
827,000
2,199,000

505,000

505,000

2,263,000
597,000
1,012,500
89,500
199,020
393,388
30,679
313,808
2,349,226
50,000
11,179,020

2,263,000
597,000
1,012,500
89,500
199,020
393,388
30,679
313,808
2,349,226
50,000
11,461,532

282,512

DIVISION OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS
Private Sector Partnerships
Private Sector Partnerships
Private Sector Partnerships
Private Sector Partnerships
Deployment of standby experts
High-Level Meeting on Statelessness and
Related Activities
Nansen Refugee Award
Nansen Refugee Award
Nansen Refugee Award
This is a Woman's World, photo exhibition
Monitoring and visibility
Urban Outreach: Telling the Real Story project
Urban Outreach: Telling the Real Story project

China
Fast Retailing (UNIQLO)
IKEA Foundation
Dutch Postcode Lottery
Norwegian Refugee Council
Germany
Norway
Switzerland
IKEA Foundation
European Union
European Union
European Union
Norway
SUBTOTAL

103,238
24,610

Prevention of detention of children
Renewable energy

SUBTOTAL

168 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Resettlement case law
Safe from the Start project
Global Protection Cluster
Global Protection Cluster
Global Protection Cluster
High-Level Meeting on Statelessness and
Related Activities
Prevention of detention of children
Climate change project
Climate change project
Enhancing resettlement activities
Enhancing resettlement activities
Protection Advisor

Refugee
programme

ALL PILLARS

TOTAL

19,635

Global Shelter Cluster

100,000
225,077
100,000
17,773
25,019
1,152,624
242,984
2,378,604

100,000
225,077
100,000
17,773
25,019
1,152,624
242,984
2,506,453

Alternatives to camps

323,825
70,648
303,730
698,203

50,597
50,597

323,825
121,245
303,730
748,799

HIV/AIDS
HIV/AIDS
Shelter and settlement
Deployment of standby experts
Deployment of standby experts

Energy and environment
Energy and environment
Global Protection Cluster

UltiSat Inc.

29,531

29,531

29,531

29,531

European Union
Monaco
Switzerland
Norway
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Switzerland

UNAIDS
United States of America
Switzerland
Switzerland
Norwegian Refugee Council
European Union
European Union
Switzerland
IKEA Foundation
European Union

Informing response to support durable solutions
United States of America
for IDPs
Enhancing resettlement activities
Credit guarantee facility
Identity management
Refugee Housing Units
Saving newborn lives and from waste to water
projects
Improving nutritional conditions
Improving nutritional conditions

SUBTOTAL

Germany

534,503

534,503

61,000
182,500
32,342
4,719,316
680,434
102,987
646,132

61,000
182,500
32,342
4,719,316
680,434
102,987
646,132

20,100

20,100

179,384
23,697
44,940
968,495

179,384
23,697
44,940
968,495

595,565

595,565

212,993
9,004,387

212,993
9,004,387

1,380,000
154,821
212,993
182,500
92,000
848,699
144,020
425,985
75,323
451,873

1,380,000
154,821
212,993
182,500
92,000
848,699
144,020
425,985
75,323
451,873

452,375

452,375

300,670

300,670

125,396
78,555
992,249
897,540

125,396
78,555
992,249
897,540

752,148

752,148

53,829
3,621
7,624,596

53,829
3,621
7,624,596

DIVISION OF PROGRAMME SUPPORT AND MANAGEMENT

19,635

127,848

Norwegian Refugee Council
Allen & Overy LLP
United States of America
European Union
Switzerland
United States of America

SUBTOTAL

15,600
299,893
180,000

DIVISION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Satellite equipment

Deployment of standby experts

Identity management

United States of America
European Union
Norway

DONORS

Emerging Resettlement Countries Joint Support
IOM
Mechanism
Deployment of standby experts
Switzerland

103,238
24,610
15,600
299,893
180,000

DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Global Protection Cluster

PILLAR 1

DIVISION OF INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION

DIVISION OF EMERGENCY, SECURITY AND SUPPLY
Global fleet management

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

DONOR

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Sweden
Canada
United States of America
Poland
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
La Caixa Banking Foundation
Laboratorios Viñas
SUBTOTAL

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 169

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

R E G I O N A L S U M M A R I E S I O P E R AT I O N A L S U P P O R T A N D M A N AG E M E N T

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO GLOBAL PROGRAMMES | USD

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

DONOR

PILLAR 1

DONORS

Refugee
programme

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO HEADQUARTERS | USD

ALL PILLARS

TOTAL

DIVISION OF RESILIENCE AND SOLUTIONS
Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

Germany

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

HEADQUARTERS OVERALL
18,417,862

18,417,862

Said Foundation

891,970

891,970

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

The Hands Up Foundation

588,328

588,328

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

Asfari Foundation

304,164

304,164

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

UNO-Fluechtlingshilfe

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)
Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

245,399

245,399

USA for UNHCR

35,000

35,000

Private donors in the Republic of Korea

22,217

22,217

Private donors in the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

SAP (UK) Ltd.
NCSOFT Cultural Foundation

Global Compact on Refugees

UNICEF
Educate A Child (EAC) Programme - Education
Above All (EAA) Foundation
Google
European Union

Global Compact on Refugees

Germany

Global Compact on Refugees

Japan

Innovative solutions
Innovative solutions

Denmark
Luxembourg
Sweden

Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework

Netherlands

Education for All
Education for All
Education for All

Innovative solutions

SUBTOTAL

4,237

4,237

50,000

50,000

20,361

20,361

390,302

390,302

1,031,876

1,031,876

117,396
653,664

117,396
653,664
380,022

380,022

2,825,125

2,825,125

2,619,316
645,991
85,182

DONORS

Refugee
programme

United Nations Regular Budget

EXECUTIVE DIRECTION AND
MANAGEMENT

42,997,200
42,997,200

Denmark
Hungary

Switzerland
SUBTOTAL

European Union
SUBTOTAL

DIVISION OF INTERNATIONAL
PROTECTION

Germany
United States of America
SUBTOTAL

DIVISION OF PROGRAMME SUPPORT
AND MANAGEMENT
DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TOTAL*

Norway
SUBTOTAL

TOTAL

42,997,200
42,997,200
2,598,459
3,057,612
5,656,071

SUBTOTAL

DIVISION OF FINANCIAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT

ALL PILLARS

2,598,459
3,057,612
5,656,071

3,892,459
3,892,459

3,892,459
3,892,459

279,892
279,892

279,892
279,892
104,535

112,000
112,000

104,535

182,637
182,637

104,535
112,000
216,535
182,637
182,637

European Union

9,370

9,370

SUBTOTAL

9,370

9,370

5,769,976

53,234,164

47,464,188

*Notes:
1
Contributions include 7% programme support costs.
2
Includes a total of $112,000 acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $331,875 acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.

2,619,316
645,991
85,182
290,224

290,224

3,495,371

29,618,637

3,376
117,196
87,240

3,376
117,196
87,240

645,809
30,225
763,274

120,572

645,809
30,225
883,847

42,200,000
42,200,000

42,200,000
42,200,000

46,276,900

104,077,782

26,123,266

PILLAR 1

SUBTOTAL

REGIONAL BUREAUX

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

Albert Einstein German Academic Refugee
Initiative (DAFI)

DIVISIONS/DEPARTMENTS

DONOR

EXECUTIVE DIRECTION AND MANAGEMENT
Executive Office
Instant Network Schools programmes
Enhancing refugee education
Education in emergencies
Connectivity for refugees

Japan
UN Fund for International Partnerships
Vodafone Foundation
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
USA for UNHCR
SUBTOTAL

Global operations

United States of America
SUBTOTAL

TOTAL*

57,800,882

Notes:
1
Contributions include 7% programme support costs.
2 Includes a total of $7.1 million acknowledged in 2017 for activities with implementation in 2018 and excludes $14.2 million acknowledged in 2018 for activities with implementation in 2019 and beyond.

170 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 171

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S

Safeguarding
fundamental rights

© UNHCR/Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo

Supporting disembarked refugees in Libya.

Conflict, violence and persecution
continued to drive unprecedented levels
of forced displacement with some
74.8 million people of concern to UNHCR
affected worldwide—in particular in the
regions and countries that neighbour
today’s conflicts, where the majority of
the world’s refugees live.
The changing scale and scope of forced
displacement generated a spike in global
attention, characterized by fluctuating
political and public support. There are
persistent challenges in connection with
complex, irregular movements of refugees

172 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

and migrants, including proper identification
of protection needs and addressing
smuggling and trafficking. In recent years,
a growing focus on border control and
damaging narratives around people on the
move have had a direct and negative
impact on refugees. Many host countries
have generally maintained access, showing
remarkable commitment and generosity
towards those in need of international
protection. In some instances, however,
protection space has shrunk, and serious
gaps have emerged in asylum and
reception systems.
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 173

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

The Global Compact on Refugees
provides a framework for fair and
predictable arrangements for
burden- and responsibility-sharing. It also
addresses the underlying root causes and
drivers of displacement, as well as the need
to advance as early as possible on solutions
to avoid creating situations of protracted
displacement. These needs include
strengthening the rule of law, promoting
good governance systems based on
inclusivity, ensuring access to justice,
supporting legislative frameworks that

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

are applied fairly, building effective and
accountable institutions, and undertaking
reforms in the security sector.

Throughout 2018, UNHCR engaged with the
United Nations human rights machinery to
advocate greater respect for the rights of all
people of concern, including through individual
complaint procedures, treaty-monitoring
bodies, Universal Periodic Review, and
Special Rapporteurs.

None of this is easy. It requires far-sighted
leadership, collaboration and comprehensive
approaches, by all involved, to overcome
the challenges and seize the opportunities
associated with human mobility. This
chapter outlines the challenges UNHCR
faced, and the key achievements it made,
in providing international protection for
refugees and other people of concern.

ENSURING ACCESS TO PROTECTION
© UNHCR/Fabio Cuttica

Recommendations from these mechanisms
affected a broad range of forced
displacement and statelessness issues
that touch the human rights framework,
such as: reference to accession to the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees (1951 Convention), the 1954 and
1961 Statelessness Conventions, refugee
status determination, sexual and gender-based
violence, detention of asylum-seekers,
respect for the principle of non-refoulement,
and universal birth registration.
These achievements at the global level had
a direct impact at the national level. Canada,
for example, reconsidered its detention
policy for children irregularly entering the
territory; Chile acceded to the Statelessness
Conventions; Cyprus amended its refugee
legislation to extend disability assistance
schemes to refugees; and Spain granted
refugee status to victims of human trafficking
in need of international protection.
With the support of UNHCR and partners,
2018 saw positive legislative developments
in Afghanistan, which facilitated the
sustainable reintegration of refugee
returnees and IDPs; in France, where

refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary
protection were issued four-year residence
permits; and in Ireland, where asylum-seekers
can now access the labour market nine
months after having submitted their claim
for asylum.

140
UN Member States
have domestic
laws or decrees
pertaining to
refugee protection.

UNHCR issued detailed comments on
proposed revisions of several EU asylum
instruments; published legal considerations
on state responsibilities for people seeking
international protection in transit areas or
international zones at airports; and examined
state practice on refugee law and cross-border
movement in the context of conflict and/or
situations of violence as well as the adverse
effects of climate change. In addition to
providing authoritative legal guidelines,
UNHCR played an important role, engaging
with the judiciary and legal community,
and provided tailored advice and comments
on legislation and policy where needed.
UNHCR’s judicial interventions in 2018
touched upon a vast array of issues
including: the detention and the reception of
asylum-seekers; the effectiveness of asylum
procedures; eligibility for international
protection based on persecution related
to membership in a particular social group;
discretion or concealment of religious
faith or gender identity in order to avoid
persecution; statelessness; non-penalization
of refugees for irregular entry or stay; as well
as the cardinal international legal principle
of non-refoulement.

UNHCR staff member Rocio Castaneda talks to Venezuelan refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants at the Divine Providence community
kitchen in Cúcuta, Colombia.

174 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 175

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Building and strengthening fair and
efficient asylum procedures
During 2018, as asylum systems the world
over were challenged by increasing numbers
of arrivals, UNCHR supported States to
implement or strengthen fair, efficient and
adaptable national asylum processes.
Particular assistance was provided to States
interested in establishing national asylum
systems through, for example, support in
drafting legislation, advice on asylum system
institution building, as well as assistance in
developing the capacity of government staff,
all while ensuring that such refugee status
determination (RSD) transitions were
undertaken in a sustainable manner.
For States with national asylum systems
whose capacity needed strengthening,
UNHCR supported them in assessing their
capacity needs as well as effectively
managing their case processing by providing
advice and support on differentiated case
processing methodologies (including
simplified and/or accelerated RSD) and
providing refugee law trainings.

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

UNHCR also supported national asylums
systems in defining procedural safeguards,
implementing quality assurance mechanisms
and initiatives (particularly in Eastern
Europe and Central and South America)
as well as provided advice on staffing
structures, file and data management,
and case scheduling procedures.
In situations where a State was not a party
to the 1951 Refugee Convention and/or did
not have a fair and efficient national asylum
procedure in place, UNHCR continued to
conduct RSD under its mandate where
there was an identified protection benefit
in doing so, while seeking to enhance the
quality of its procedures as it registered
250,216 applications in 2018.
To assist RSD decision-makers (including
State officials and UNHCR staff) in assessing
international protection needs, UNHCR
issued several country-specific policy
guidance documents and engaged with a
variety of partners on their implementation.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

FAVOURABLE PROTECTION ENVIRONMENT
LAW AND POLICY DEVELOPED OR STRENGTHENED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Advocate the adoption or revision of laws
consistent with international standards

Provided technical advice to 53 States or regional legislative entities to enact new or
revised legislation and policy guidance incorporating international protection standards.
Intervened in 22 cases, across 12 jurisdictions, providing its interpretation of the
relevant principles of international refugee and human rights law.
Commented on:

Develop, publish and disseminate
guidance on international refugee
protection

•

33 country reports to the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) and 117 reports to
treaty-monitoring bodies.

•
•

7 written reports to brief Special Rapporteurs in advance of their country visits.
Delivered 10 webinars to support UNHCR field operations’ engagement with human
rights mechanisms.

Issued legal guidance on State responsibilities for people seeking international
protection in transit areas or international zones at airports.

FAIR PROTECTION PROCESS AND DOCUMENTATION
ACCESS TO, AND QUALITY OF, STATUS DETERMINATION PROCEDURES IMPROVED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Further develop and oversee the
implementation of policies, guidance,
standards and procedures relating to RSD

Undertook a comprehensive review of procedural standards for RSD under UNHCR’s
mandate to reflect the latest developments in UNHCR’s policies, guidance and practice.
Conducted a pilot project on staff welfare in individual case processing with key
outcomes identified.
Maintained engagement with civil society (legal aid providers and NGOs) to promote
collaboration and understanding of UNHCR policies, procedures and processes.
Built capacity of UNHCR staff and partners to support national asylum systems,
including through technical missions and the development of policy guidance.
Engaged with governments and other stakeholders on RSD eligibility standards and
procedures, including in the areas of exclusion, cancellation, extradition and matters
relating to the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum.

Strengthen the capacity of UNHCR RSD
staff and operations, including through
deployments

Launched the “Introduction to RSD e-learning” programme, available to UNHCR staff
and external partners, and conducted RSD-specific trainings.
Rolled out the interview learning programme for 5 cohorts at country (2) and regional
(3) level, benefiting 113 UNHCR, partner and government staff involved in interviewing
in RSD and resettlement processing.
Deployed 6 RSD experts to operations and 2 remote reviewing experts to increase
quality and consistency in 8 UNHCR mandate RSD operations.

Provide access to decision-makers on
asylum claims with up-to-date country of
origin information and country-specific
policy guidance

Published country-specific policy guidance on Afghanistan, Guatemala, Libya,
Nicaragua, and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as well as other legal and policy
documents.
Provided, with partners, 15 country of origin information products for use in asylum
procedures.
Finalized the first phase of the redesign of Refworld, the online RSD decision-making
support platform.

176 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 177

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Alternatives to detention
While many countries continue to routinely
use immigration detention as a deterrent,
sometimes using it in an indiscriminate
manner and for long periods in often
unsuitable conditions, UNHCR and its
partners maintained their advocacy for
alternatives to detention. Distinct results
were noted in relation to the detention of

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

A range of advocacy and guidance tools
were finalized, including guidance on
assessing and implementing alternatives to
detention, guidance on monitoring stateless
persons in detention, a checklist for
practitioners, as well as a compilation of
legal norms and standards applicable to the
immigration detention of people of concern.

children and the importance of appropriate
care arrangements. This has led to the
reduction, in some contexts, of children in
detention, and in others the prohibition of
the practice altogether. In other contexts,
the length of immigration detention
was significantly reduced, with specific
groups—such as children, young girls and
women, or families—benefiting from
alternate arrangements.

During the year, UNHCR continued to
implement technical assistance and
capacity building to prevent detention of
children and to protect children and other
asylum-seekers in detention through the

European Instrument for Democracy and
Human Rights (EIDHR) Project in Indonesia,
Iraq, Malaysia, Mexico and the Republic of
North Macedonia. There were positive
developments in these countries in
reducing the number of children detained.
Important partnerships, in particular with
IOM, OHCHR and UNICEF, as well as the
International Detention Coalition, the
Association for the Prevention of Torture
and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, were critical to progressing the
alternatives to detention agenda.

© UNHCR/Rocco Nuri

Fleeing Horn of Africa, new arrivals
find more peril in Yemen
On arrival in the war-torn country, refugees and migrants
are routinely subjected to detention and abuse as UNHCR
calls for unhindered access to detainees.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

“I landed in Yemen about a month ago. I was dragged by
armed men who held me captive for over a month. They
beat me so badly that I lost track of what was happening.”

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

FAVOURABLE PROTECTION ENVIRONMENT
LAW AND POLICY DEVELOPED OR STRENGTHENED. IN 2018, UNHCR:

—Jon*, Ethiopian refugee in Aden, Yemen.

Advocate relevant legal and policy
frameworks related to detention and
alternatives to detention, in accordance
with international standards

*Name changed for protection purposes.

Provided technical advice to support the enactment of new legislation, policy or practice
related to alternatives to detention in 20 focus countries and other operations, in line
with the 2014-2019 global strategy “Beyond detention”.
Continued implementation of EIDHR in 5 participating countries.
Developed 1 e-learning programme on the fundamentals of immigration detention
and 2 self-study modules on monitoring immigration detention and reception,
care arrangements and alternatives to detention for children and families.

Working with governments and other
partners, UNHCR pursued three main goals:
to end the detention of children; to ensure
alternatives to detention are available in law
and implemented in practice; and to ensure
conditions of detention, where unavoidable,
met international standards.
At the country level, the implementation of
the strategy had an impact in strengthening
the monitoring of places of detention,
including accessing places where refugees
and migrants were held. Monitoring allowed
UNHCR and partners to influence the

178 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

conditions and treatment of detainees by
engaging in better dialogue with authorities,
for example by facilitating access to asylum.
Much of this rested not only on active
advocacy and monitoring, but on training,
for both UNHCR staff and with partners, and
for authorities to sensitize them and support
use of alternatives.
With three new learning programmes related
to immigration detention now online and
available to all staff and partners, a significant
leap in knowledge and implementation
capacity is expected in the next few years.

Rolled out learning programmes through 5 regional workshops, reaching over 300 staff
and partners, and consolidated pool of 20 training-of-trainers on immigration detention.
Work towards ending the detention
of children

Convened global roundtable on reception and care arrangements for children in
Thailand to advance thinking and awareness on reception and care arrangements
for children and families within asylum and migration systems without recourse
to detention.
Supported development of the immigration detention chapter of the “UN Global study
on children deprived of liberty”.
Provided technical advice to government and other stakeholders on alternatives
to detention and care arrangements for children.
Supported the implementation on practice of pilot projects and programmes
of alternatives for families and children.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 179

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Addressing and responding to mixed movements
© UNHCR/Sufyan Ararah

The UNHCR Central Mediterranean Risk
Mitigation Strategy, launched in
October 2017, outlined a cross-regional
approach with activities in countries of
origin, transit and destination across North
and sub-Saharan Africa to Europe. UNHCR
and its partners were able to demonstrate
added value in enhancing the protection of
people in need of international protection
in mixed movements.
UNHCR worked with IOM to develop a
Regional Disembarkation Mechanism,
a regional arrangement to ensure cooperation
for the predictable disembarkation and
processing of people rescued at sea.
It offered support to States in addressing
the ongoing protection challenges in
the Mediterranean Sea.

Venezuelan refugees and migrants cross the Simon Bolivar International Bridge into Colombia.

The adoption of the Global Compact on
Refugees and the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration marked
a significant step forward in effective
cooperation to address the plight of
refugees and migrants.
Given its mandate and expertise, UNHCR
participated in the process leading to the
establishment of the UN Migration Network,
and will continue to do so, as a member of
its Executive Committee.
People, including those moving in mixed
flows, are at great risk of exploitation, such
as trafficking for the purpose of forced
marriage, sexual exploitation, forced
begging, debt bondage (including domestic
servitude), and forced recruitment or
abduction by armed forces. In order to
assist staff in responding to these risks,
UNHCR worked with the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group Against Trafficking in
180 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Persons as well as IOM and the Hartland
Alliance, through the Global Protection
Cluster, to analyze the needs of
practitioners in the field and to develop
tools that will be valuable to them.
(For more information on mixed movement
contexts, please see the regional
summaries for the Americas, Europe,
and the Middle East and North Africa.)

Central Mediterranean route
Sea arrivals to Europe across the
Mediterranean decreased in 2018, and
for the first half of the year, more people
arrived in Greece than Italy or Spain. In the
second half, however, the primary entry
point became Spain. Elsewhere in Europe,
Bosnia and Herzegovina recorded some
24,000 arrivals as refugees and migrants
searched for new routes into the EU.

In response to an appeal for
40,000 resettlement places to benefit
refugees hosted in 15 priority countries
along the Central Mediterranean route,
25,000 places were committed. Between
1 September 2017 and 31 December 2018,

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

23,873 refugees have been submitted for
resettlement from these 15 countries (of which
11,352 departed). This has increased access to
safe and legal alternatives to the dangerous
journey via Libya. The Emergency Transit
Mechanism in Niger is one such alternative,
through which 995 people departed for
resettlement in 2018.
UNHCR also expanded its outreach,
including the provision of services directly
or through partners, to people moving along
the routes towards Libya. This outreach led
to more people in need of international
protection, referrals, or assistance being
identified. UNHCR mapped the primary
protection risks along the different routes
and identified key areas where refugees
and migrants—in particular, children—face
higher risks. This helped offices in the
region identify how best to respond,
depending on security conditions. Because
of insecurity, UNHCR faced restricted
access to people of concern in Libya, and
along the routes.

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

FAVOURABLE PROTECTION ENVIRONMENT
LAW AND POLICY DEVELOPED OR STRENGTHENED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Advocate migration management policies,
practices and debates to consider the
particular needs and rights of people in
need of international protection

Advocated appropriate references to mixed movements in the Global Compact on
Refugees and in the Global Compact for Migration.

Develop the capacity of States and
partners to meet asylum and mixed flow
management challenges in a protectionsensitive manner

Developed guidance and technical advice on mixed movements including through
active participation in inter-agency fora such as the Inter Agency Coordination Group
Against Trafficking in Persons, publishing issue briefs on Trafficking in Children and the
Role of the Sustainable Development Goals in Combatting Trafficking in Persons.
Participated actively in the work of the Global Forum on Migration and Development,
Alliance 8.7, and the Global Protection Cluster’s Task Team on Anti-trafficking in
Humanitarian Action.
Delivered trainings on law and policy issues related to mixed movements, such as the
mixed movement learning programme and its sub-modules on protection-at-sea and
trafficking in persons.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 181

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Engaging in climate change and disaster displacement
© The New Humanitarian/Stefanie Glinski

Juggling insecurity and drought, tens of thousands of residents of Badghis Province have fled either to the provincial capital Qala-i-Naw,
or further west to Herat city, capital of neighbouring Herat Province in Afghanistan.

UNHCR also conducted research and
analysis on the applicability of refugee law
frameworks for people displaced across
borders in the context of conflict or
violence, disaster, or climate change.
“In Harm’s Way” examined how destination
States have used refugee law to provide
international protection in nexus situations.
The study was well received by the State-led
Platform on Disaster Displacement (PDD)
and will pave the way for further guidance
on the applicability of refugee protection
in climate change and disaster contexts.
UNHCR participated actively in the PDD,
amplifying the message that people fleeing
the effects of climate change and disasters
must be adequately protected, and
ensuring that human mobility stayed firmly
on the global policy agenda. The Office
contributed to implementing core PDD
workplan activities such as addressing
knowledge and data gaps, enhancing the
use of identified effective practices, and
promoting policy coherence and normative
development in gap areas.

displacement, climate change and disasters
in Latin America and the Caribbean, building
the evidence base for further normative
development in the region.
Contributions were also made to
“Words into Action”, guidelines on disaster
displacement under Target E of the
2015-2030 Sendai Framework which will
help to reduce risk, address impacts and
strengthen the resilience of affected
populations, mainstreaming human mobility
challenges in disaster risk reduction strategies.

In Harm’s Way

Words into Action

UNHCR played an instrumental role in
the Task Force on Displacement under
the leadership of UNFCCC, contributing
to recommendations on integrated
approaches to avert, minimize and address
displacement related to the adverse
impacts of climate change, endorsed by
Parties at the COP 24 meeting in December
2018. Throughout the Conference, UNHCR
worked with partners to advocate for
the mainstreaming of human mobility
challenges across relevant policy and
action areas.

Linked to the 2014 Brazil Declaration and
Plan of Action, UNHCR provided substantive
inputs to a study on cross-border
Many of the people of concern to UNHCR
reside in climate change hotspots, exposed
to the risk of secondary or multiple
displacement due to disasters linked to
natural hazards and the effects of climate
change. This can also inhibit their ability
to safely return home. In some contexts,
disaster displacement may be interrelated
with situations of conflict or violence,
whereby climate change acts as a “threat
multiplier”, compounding pre-existing
vulnerabilities or exacerbating tensions over
depleted resources. Ensuring the protection
of people displaced across borders in the

182 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

context of climate change and disasters,
and enhancing the resilience of
communities is thus a concern to UNHCR.
In 2018, UNHCR responded to climate
change, disasters and displacement by
advancing legal, policy and practical
solutions to protect people displaced by
the effects of climate change and disasters,
in line with commitments articulated in
UNHCR’s 2017-2021 Strategic Directions.
The inclusion of key references to climate
change and disaster displacement in the
final texts of both Global Compacts reflects
States’ concerns.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 183

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

PROTECTION RESPONSES
© UNHCR/Roger Burks

Achieving AGD goals requires a
community-based protection (CBP)
approach, working collaboratively with
women, girls, men and boys as equal
partners to enhance their protection.
This approach has proven effective
in promoting social cohesion among

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

communities, advancing AAP, enhancing
the identification of people and communities
at heightened risk, and engaging
communities in addressing sexual and
gender-based violence (SGBV), gender
inequality, child protection issues, and the
exclusion of marginalized groups.

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

PROTECTION OF PEOPLE WITH SPECIFIC NEEDS
ENHANCE COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND EMPOWERMENT. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Strengthen country operation capacity to
design, implement, monitor and evaluate
protection and assistance programmes, in
close collaboration with people of concern

Delivered community-based protection (CBP) learning programme to a global cohort,
of 28 staff from 21 operations. Operations subsequently developed action plans to
advance participation, community ownership and inclusive programming.
Piloted CBP training of trainers in the Middle East and North Africa region, expanding
capacity to deliver contextualized learning on CBP at country and regional levels.
Disseminated annual AGD Accountability Report highlighting progress made towards
inclusion and targeted protection of different AGD groups.

Ethiopia, Nguenyyiel Camp. Four-year-old Mary and her caregiver, who found her alone on the road to the Ethiopian border
and who has taken care of and protected her ever since.

Identifying and meeting the needs
of people at heightened risk
Age, Gender and
Diversity Policy

UNHCR applies an age, gender and
diversity (AGD) approach in all its work.
This approach is situated within human rights
frameworks and implemented through
community engagement at all stages. The
AGD approach allows for the inclusion and
equal enjoyment of rights by all people of
concern with diverse age, gender, disability,
ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, gender
identity and other characteristics.

184 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

UNHCR’s updated AGD Policy aims to
ensure that the voices, perspectives and
priorities of people of concern are at the
centre of decisions that affect their lives.
The Policy outlines ten core actions,
strengthens accountability to affected
people (AAP), and advances gender equality.
It also includes enhanced monitoring and
reporting mechanisms and assigns clear
responsibilities from the highest levels of
management through to field operations.

Developed CBP mandatory online module as part of the certification programme
on international protection.
Strengthen UNHCR’s participatory
approach and promote methods for
meeting commitments to accountability
to affected populations

Launched updated AGD Policy in March, including work streams reflecting: AGD
inclusive programming, AAP, and gender equality. Supported roll-out of the Policy
with multi-functional teams conducting support missions to Algeria, Chad, Morocco,
Poland and Uganda.
Conducted survey on the 4 AAP core actions with UNHCR representatives with
responses received from 42 operations highlighting key areas of focus for planned
support on AAP.
Engaged in IASC Task Team on AAP/PSEA which concluded a key tool on including
AAP in multisector needs assessment that allows for communication, feedback
and response actions based on community preferences to be accounted for from
the beginning of a response.
Engaged with the Grand Bargain participation revolution work stream on a framework
for the measurement of progress in including affected populations in responses at
an organizational and inter-agency level, producing draft indicators.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 185

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Children have specific rights and needs,
but refugee and displaced children often
found themselves without the protection
mechanisms that they enjoyed at home,
and more exposed to violence, exploitation,
abuse and neglect. UNHCR strengthened
its application of the principle of the best
interests of the child, ensuring safe and
appropriate care and protection for children
of concern. Identifying and supporting
unaccompanied and separated children to
be reunified with their parents remained
a challenge and priority for many UNHCR
operations, especially in emergency
situations. Working with States, UNHCR
operations supported the development or
strengthening of best interests’ procedures
for separated and unaccompanied children
as well as other children at risk, and their
integration into national child protection
systems. In support of these efforts, UNHCR
issued new global guidance on best
interests’ procedures and trained over
300 staff and partners.
UNHCR worked with diverse groups of
young people to identify creative solutions
to the protection problems they faced
in displacement, including SGBV and

Determined to get an education, Syrian teenager Alaa
made the most of a gift from a relative to overcome
communication barriers and thrive at school in Lebanon.
“I don’t really feel different from others. I can do things
that others can’t do.”
—Alaa, Syrian refugee in Lebanon.

186 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

discrimination, integration with host
communities, and the lack of education
and livelihoods opportunities. Moreover,
UNHCR’s Global Youth Advisory Council
actively contributed to the drafting process
for the Global Compact, resulting in specific
commitments on refugee children and youth.
In addition, the global Youth Initiative Fund
supported 25 projects led by refugee and
host community youth groups in 22 countries.
The International Disability Alliance also had
an important role in providing input to the
development of the Compact.
Participation by persons with disabilities in
programming is central to a rights-based
approach, which recognizes their role as
actors for protection. Such persons face
heightened risks of violence, exploitation
and abuse; are often excluded from
education and work opportunities; and are
disproportionately represented among
people living in poverty. These risks are
compounded in forced displacement:
persons with disabilities can be separated
from supportive communities, or be
excluded from services in host countries.

© UNHCR/Houssam Hariri

With resolve and a cell phone,
blind refugee resumes school

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

One key priority for UNHCR was improving
the collection and use of data on persons
with disabilities to better inform inclusive
planning, and better monitor how they
accessed services and assistance. As part
of this effort, UNHCR worked towards
improving identification of persons with
disabilities at the stage of registration.
In addition to severe discrimination and
violence in their countries of origin,
asylum-seekers and refugees of diverse
sexual orientation or gender identity, such
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
intersex (LGBTI) individuals are frequently
subject to continued harm while in forced
displacement, including from within their
own communities. UNHCR built the capacity
of staff and partners and operations
expanded collaboration with local and
international partners, including LGBTI
organisations, creating safe spaces,
strengthening response capacity and
seeking solutions.
UNHCR promoted gender equality through
strengthened implementation of the AGD
Policy and the renewed commitments to
women and girls, which include concrete
and measurable actions to promote gender
equality. Capacity building of UNHCR
staff, development of gender equality
tools and technical support to operations
also supported strengthened gender
equality programing.

Integrity
UNHCR enhanced the integrity of its
programmes in line with its Policy on
Addressing Fraud Committed by Persons
of Concern (Anti-fraud Policy), launched
in 2017. The Policy promotes the highest
standards of integrity throughout the
individual case management continuum
by providing guidance to staff in preventing,
identifying, and responding to fraud
committed by persons of concern from the
initial stages of registration, in all protection
and assistance activities, and in implementing
solutions.

More than

215 staff in
35 operations
were trained and
supported on
implementing the
Anti-fraud Policy
in 2018.

The “Learning programme on addressing
fraud committed by persons of concern”
was launched to provide staff with the
knowledge to implement the Policy and
enhance the measures taken to prevent,
detect and respond to fraud in the field.
Engagement and coordination on anti-fraud
efforts were strengthened in the context
of the Risk Management 2.0 initiative, with
newly appointed “risk managers” briefed
on the Anti-fraud Policy and the most critical
components of its implementation prior to
their deployments. By the end of 2018,
some 80 dedicated anti-fraud focal points
were operational in the field, strengthening
the integrity of protection processes and
the operational capacity to proactively and
effectively respond to fraud.
Multi-functional integrity support missions
to several operations assessed procedural
and operational vulnerabilities to fraud in
protection programming, implementing
proactive responses and safeguards
accordingly. Additional tailored guidance
and training on the Anti-fraud Policy and its
implementation were provided as required.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 187

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

PROTECTION OF PEOPLE WITH SPECIFIC NEEDS
PEOPLE WITH SPECIFIC NEEDS HAVE EQUAL ACCESS TO PROTECTION AND ASSISTANCE. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Strengthen child protection programming
in emergencies

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

Build capacity of UNHCR staff and partners
to ensure equal access to protection and
assistance and address protection risks
facing people with specific needs

Translated LGBTI learning programme into French and Spanish and developed content
for an LGBTI online course as part of protection certification programme in UNHCR, with
31 staff having completed the first cohort of the francophone version.

Deployed 2 roving child protection officers for 35 weeks to emergencies including
Bangladesh, Uganda, and the Venezuela situation.
Provided regional support (verifications, action plans) to operations in Southern Africa
on unaccompanied and separated children, including in relation to the influx from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

Strengthen capacity for the protection of
children

Reinforce programming for adolescents
and youths

Advocate and strengthen partnerships
around children on the move

Finalized e-learning on inclusion of persons with disabilities.
Established new partnership with UNICEF to strengthen inclusion of persons with
disabilities in humanitarian action by promoting disability inclusion in humanitarian
response plans under the DFID Humanitarian Investment Programme, working jointly
with IOM, OCHA, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO.

Developed and implemented child protection plans in 29 UNHCR operations.
Organized 5 training of trainers on UNHCR’s revised best interests procedure guidance
and caseworker training package and trained 24 staff in UNHCR’s francophone
Child Protection Learning Programme.

Participated in the first Global Disability Summit, committing to strengthen identification
of persons with disabilities at registration; enhancing their participation throughout
UNHCR’s operations management cycle; and improving their access to education and
livelihood opportunities.

Implemented 25 Youth Initiative Fund projects in 22 countries.

Participated in the IASC Task Team on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in
Humanitarian Action.

6 operations incorporated strategies for engaging and empowering youth as part of the
roll out of the AGD Policy.
Facilitated participation of 15 delegates of the Global Youth Advisory Council in Global
Compact on Refugees consultations, the NGO consultation, and the High Commissioner’s
Dialogue. Delegates conducted in-country consultations with over 250 young people
and community members, drafted strategic recommendation papers, and spoke at or
chaired global advocacy events and panels.
Observed 4 partnership countries demonstrate efforts to include children of concern
to UNHCR in their national action plans.

Published “Cash assistance and gender”, outlining key considerations throughout the
operations management cycle to ensure safe and equitable access to cash assistance
for diverse groups of women and girls.
STRENGTHEN GENDER EQUALITY KNOWLEDGE, SUPPORT AND CAPACITY. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Develop and implement gender equality
policy, guidance and good practices

Advocated the inclusion of strong commitments to children and youth in the
Global Compact on Refugees.

Self-assessment tools developed as part of the roll-out of the updated AGD policy to
support priority countries selected for in-depth analysis (Algeria, Chad, Morocco,
Poland, and Uganda).
Completed report documenting promising practices on gender equality programming
(“Learning from Experience to Advance Gender Equality: Promising Practices
in Asia), and disseminated report on gender equality (“Gender Equality Promising
Practices–Syrian Refugees in the Middle East and North Africa”).

Worked closely with the Alliance for Child Protection in Humanitarian Action to
include considerations specific to refugee children in the Minimum Standards
for Child Protection in Humanitarian Action.
Strengthen active participation of people
with specific needs—LGBTI people, people
with disabilities, older people, ethnic,
religious, linguistic minorities among other
groups—in programming

Developed and disseminated awareness-raising activities and material for the inclusion
of LGBTI people of concern around the International Day against Homophobia,
Transphobia and Biphobia.

Implemented project in Niger and South Sudan identifying barriers to, and recommending
solutions for, the full and meaningful participation and leadership of IDP women and
girls in national policy and legal mechanisms and solutions.

Facilitated representative organizations of persons with disabilities and older persons to
provide input to the Global Compact on Refugees, including through consultations and
written submissions.

Supported the updating of the IASC Gender Handbook in Humanitarian Action, the
revision of the IASC Gender Policy, and the development and roll-out of the Gender and
Age Marker, which has been linked to the roll-out of the AGD Policy.
Provide gender equality capacity-building
to UNHCR staff

Second cohort of the gender equality learning programme completed with a focus on
gender equality programming in the Americas.
Provided training to UNHCR staff to strengthen links between work on gender equality
and SGBV.

Provide gender equality technical expertise

Gender equality materials incorporated into the programming for protection trainings,
rolled out in Nigeria, Pakistan and Ukraine.
Technical support provided to field operations and the deployment of surge capacity
and support coordinated through the GenCap project to various emergencies.

188 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 189

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Identity management, registration and profiling
© UNHCR/Siegfried Modola

A newly arrived South Sudanese refugee child is registered at the Aru transit centre, in the DRC.

UNHCR now holds
the biometric
records of

7.2 million
people of concern.

International protection for asylum-seekers
and refugees begins with admission to a
country of asylum, and with the registration
of refugees by national authorities or
UNHCR. The process of registration not
only facilitates access to basic assistance
and protection, but also enables the early
identification of individuals with specific
needs and their referral to an available and
appropriate protection response. The very
fact of being registered can, in many
contexts, protect against refoulement,
arbitrary arrest and detention. It can
keep families together, or assist UNHCR
in reuniting separated children with
their families.

190 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

The roll-out of UNHCR’s digital identity
management system—the Population
Registration and Identity Management
Ecosystem (PRIMES)—intensified in 2018,
with over 3,000 users currently accessing
and contributing to the system, including
members from 32 governments and
external partners. The system comprises a
single, centralized database with population
registry and case management modules
(proGres v4), UNHCR’s Biometric Identity
Management System (BIMS), and the
newly-developed Rapid Application tool
(RApp) that allows for refugees and other
displaced people to be registered off-line.

By the end of 2018, proGres v4 had been
rolled out across 58 UNHCR operations and
regional offices. Biometric records for
2.4 million people of concern were captured,
raising the total number of individuals with
biometric records in BIMS and IrisGuard
(the iris scanning equipment used across
operations in the Syria situation) to
7.2 million across 60 operations. Biometric
enrolment is a core component of UNHCR’s
registration processes; it helps to ensure
that an individual’s identity is unique and
cannot be lost, stolen or misrepresented.
The use of biometrics at registration and
during other protection functions supports
UNHCR’s targeted assistance.
Identity management at food and other
assistance distribution points was also
enhanced by the Global Distribution Tool
(GDT), another element of PRIMES, which
ensures the integrity and efficiency of
the distribution process. Eight operations
used this tool in distribution environments
in 2018. In places like Uganda, it helped
ensure the integrity of aid delivery through
smoother verification of beneficiaries’
identity, faster and more secure distribution
processes, and better real-time management
of information.
The complementarity of PRIMES tools,
including providing partners with secure
access to data for continuity of identity in
resettlement case management, digital
distribution processes and biometric

identity verification, has had tangible
benefits. Incidents of misrepresentation,
recycling of identities and multiple
distributions have been mitigated, leading
to the assurance that assistance is being
provided to the intended beneficiaries.
UNHCR increased its engagement with
strategic partners to ensure that these
digital identities further enable refugees
to access services from humanitarian
partners as well as the private sector.
Working closely with the World Bank’s
Identity For Development programme to
ensure inclusion in action plans to realise
SDG Target 16.9 of a legal identity for all by
2030, including birth registration, UNHCR
promoted the inclusion of all people of
its concern—including those at risk of
statelessness—in governments’ digital
identity management systems, with a focus
on refugee-hosting countries in Africa.

Identity For
Development

In September 2018, UNHCR and WFP
signed a data-sharing addendum to their
2011 memorandum of understanding,
bringing their commitment to sharing data
and information for specific purposes in line
with data protection principles and robust
information security.
Field operations received support throughout
the year for transition planning, as well
as through training and the deployment
of emergency registration specialists to
operations such as Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chad, Nigeria, Peru and Uganda.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 191

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

QUALITY OF REGISTRATION AND PROFILING IMPROVED OR MAINTAINED. IN 2018, UNHCR:

PREVENTING AND ENDING STATELESSNESS
© UNHCR/Patrick Brown

FAVOURABLE PROTECTION ENVIRONMENT
Improve data for evidence-based
decision-making

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Rolled out case management database across 17 operations in 2018, bringing to
58 the number of country operations and regional offices with web-based system.
Migrated records of 4.1 million people of concern in proGres v4.

Provide/strengthen support to field
operations in emergencies, as well as in
ongoing registration and verification
exercises

Built and trained roster of skilled and deployable staff, including trainings on emergency
registration (TER); increased deployment rate for tools, including biometrics; and
continued the management of a stockpile of registration equipment and supplies.
Deployed 21 of the 53 staff on the TER roster to emergencies in Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chad, Peru, Nigeria and Uganda.
Conducted 19 population verification exercises, including in Bangladesh, Rwanda and
Uganda.

Establishing and anchoring identity

Maintained progress to achieve Grand Bargain commitment of 75 country operations
benefiting from biometric identity management system by 2020.
Rolled out biometric systems across 12 operations, bringing to 60 the number of country
operations using BIMS and IrisGuard.
Enrolled 2.4 million people into the biometric systems, 10% more than the preceding
three years, bringing to 7.2 million the number of people enrolled in BIMS and IrisGuard.
Rolled out GDT across 5 operations.
Integrated BIMS with the offline registration tool, RApp, and integrated GDT with
proGres v4.

Established PRIMES User Support Unit

Established multi-functional team to provide PRIMES support.

Update policy and guidance on
Registration and Identity Management

Published four chapters of revised “Guidance on Registration and Identity Management”
(previously the “Handbook for Registration”), reflecting doctrinal, operational and
technological developments, and changing inter-agency collaboration.

Development of a UNHCR Digital Identity
and Inclusion Strategy

Developed and began implementation of Digital Identity and Inclusion Strategy and
strengthening of PRIMES.

Bangladesh. Grieving Rohingya family seek rights, peace and safety before any return to Myanmar.

Achieving solutions
Notable progress was made in 2018 in line
with UNHCR’s #IBelong Campaign to End
Statelessness by 2024—including
accessions to the statelessness conventions
and the passage of important national
legislation—thanks to the dedication of a
range of partners, including stateless
persons themselves. The most important
result of all: thousands of stateless persons
being granted nationality. Significant
progress was made in Central Asia, for
example, where some 57,200 people have
had their situations resolved since the
launch of the #IBelong Campaign in 2014.
With technical support from UNHCR, eleven
States reformed their nationality laws,
policies and procedures to close gaps that

192 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

may lead to statelessness. This included
the introduction of safeguards to prevent
statelessness of children born abroad, the
adoption of provisions to allow for facilitated
naturalization of stateless persons, and the
removal of barriers to birth registration.

A reported

56,400
people who were
formerly stateless
or of undetermined
nationality acquired
nationality or had
their nationality
confirmed in 2018.

Ensuring gender equality in nationality laws
was a major element of UNHCR’s advocacy.
While this resulted in commitments being
made in several regional declarations,
women are still unable to confer their
nationality to their children on an equal
basis with men in some 25 countries
worldwide. Furthermore, over 50 countries
deny women equal rights with men in their
ability to acquire, change or retain their
nationality, or to confer nationality on
non-national spouses.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 193

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

UNHCR continued supporting States in
establishing and improving statelessness
determination procedures, with five
additional States implementing such
procedures. The correct identification of a
person as stateless is a critical first step to

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

ensuring that a person receives the
protection to which he or she is entitled.
The establishment of statelessness
determination procedures also strengthens
data in countries hosting stateless migrants.

© UNHCR/Susan Hopper

Q&A: Head of Kenya’s
Makonde people recounts
long walk from statelessness

The creation of a new inter-agency working
group on statelessness involving IOM,
OHCHR, UNDP, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF,
UN Women, the World Bank, and others
has enhanced inter-agency partnership
in addressing statelessness, including
through advocacy for the reissuance of
the United Nations Secretary-General’s
Guidance Note on statelessness in
November 2018.
Partnerships with civil society were
strengthened with the creation of new

Thomas Nguli, now 62, tells how a life without citizenship
stole his dreams.
“I felt I was not a human being because I had no
documents – no birth certificate, no immigration
paper, no nothing.”

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

—Thomas Nguli.

regional networks and UNHCR’s annual
global retreat with NGOs working on
statelessness. Together with Namati, and
the Open Society Justice Initiative, UNHCR
launched a new “Community-based
practitioner’s guide on documenting
citizenship and other forms of legal
identity”, drawing on the experience of over
30 organizations providing individual legal
and paralegal assistance. The guide is
aimed primarily at capacitating organizations
to help clients to access proof of citizenship
and other documentation of legal identity,
such as birth certificates.

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

FAVOURABLE PROTECTION ENVIRONMENT
LAW AND POLICY DEVELOPED OR STRENGTHENED. IN 2018, UNHCR:

Deepening partnerships to end
statelessness
States engaged in the “Friends of the
#IBelong Campaign” raised awareness on
statelessness, including through their
participation in the Universal Periodic
Review.
In February 2018, a Ministerial meeting was
convened in Tunis, by the League of Arab
States together with UNHCR, leading to
the adoption of the “Arab Declaration on
Belonging and Legal Identity”. In a further
example of regional commitment to take
action in line with the #IBelong Campaign,
the “N’Djamena Initiative on the Eradication
of Statelessness in Central Africa” was
adopted by Member States of the Economic
and Monetary Community of Central Africa.

194 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

UNICEF and UNHCR operations in more
than 15 countries established joint strategies
to address childhood statelessness as part
of the “Coalition on every child’s right to a
nationality”, thus also reinforcing advocacy
around ensuring gender equality in nationality
laws. Coalition efforts in Albania led to the
adoption of amendments to the country’s
civil status law to remove barriers to
birth registration, reducing the risk of
statelessness—particularly for children of
Albanian parents born outside the country
and for children of the Egyptian and Roma
communities. Work through the Coalition
also helped to promote dialogue between
countries in Central Asia to improve
birth registration and include safeguards
to prevent childhood statelessness in
nationality laws.

Advocate and provide technical advice to
governments for reform of nationality laws,
policies and procedures to close gaps that
may lead to statelessness, to ensure that
stateless persons can acquire a nationality

Provided technical advice and guidance to 11 States that reformed their nationality laws,
policies and procedures to prevent and reduce statelessness, including:

•
•

Albania, which removed barriers to birth registration.

•

Brazil, Ecuador, Iceland, Paraguay and Uruguay, which adopted procedures for
facilitated naturalization of stateless persons.

•
•

Côte d’Ivoire, which adopted special procedures for late birth registration.

•

Peru, which passed an amendment to its constitution to facilitate access to citizenship
for persons born abroad to nationals.

•

Lebanon, which adopted simplified birth registration procedures for Syrians born in
the country.

Armenia, which adopted amendments to its nationality law to allow children born to
an Armenian national and a foreigner to obtain Armenian citizenship based on the
consent of only one parent.

Cuba and Paraguay, which adopted safeguards to prevent statelessness of children
born to nationals abroad.

Published “Good practices in nationality laws for the prevention and reduction of
statelessness” with the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Advocate and provide technical advice to
governments for the introduction or
improvement of statelessness
determination procedures

Assisted Brazil, Ecuador, Montenegro, Paraguay and Uruguay establish statelessness
determination procedures.

Advocate and provide technical advice to
governments for the elimination of gender
discrimination in nationality laws

Advocated the removal of gender discriminatory provisions from nationality laws, with
notable progress made in Togo with review of the nationality law to bring it in line with
the Constitution that provides for gender equality in the conferral of nationality to
children.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 195

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

Welcomed 5 accessions to the statelessness conventions; Chile and Haiti acceded
to both conventions and Spain acceded to the 1961 Convention.

ENGAGING IN SITUATIONS OF INTERNAL DISPLACEMENT
© UNHCR/Antwan Chnkdji

INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL INSTRUMENTS ACCEDED TO, RATIFIED OR STRENGTHENED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Promote accession to the 1954 Convention
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons
and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction
of Statelessness

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

FAIR PROTECTION PROCESSES AND DOCUMENTATION
IDENTIFICATION OF STATELESSNESS IMPROVED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Support identification/registration
exercises and surveys to increase
knowledge of the number of stateless
persons, their situation and possible
solutions

Baseline studies conducted in Albania, Burundi, Kenya, Portugal, Rwanda, South Sudan,
Switzerland, in the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda.

Advocate and provide technical advice for
improved statistics on stateless persons

Statistical data made available in 75 countries.

DURABLE SOLUTIONS
GREATER REDUCTION OF STATELESSNESS IS ACHIEVED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Develop and implement strategies to
address protracted situations of
statelessness

Supported operations to reflect statelessness in 3 multi-year solution strategies,
addressing protracted situations of statelessness.
Assisted Burkina Faso and Guinea-Bissau in adopting national action plans on
eradication of statelessness.

Assist stateless persons, and those with
undetermined nationality, to acquire or
confirm their nationality

A reported 56,400 stateless persons acquired nationality or had it confirmed.

Provide training and technical advice to
government officials on statelessness
reduction measures, including the
acquisition or confirmation of nationality
by stateless persons and those with
undetermined nationality

Conducted 3 courses on statelessness at the International Institute of Humanitarian Law
in Sanremo, Italy, and in Antigua, Guatemala.

Internally displaced people collect vital aid supplies in rural Aleppo, the Syrian Arab Republic (Syria).

Many of the large-scale situations of
internal displacement, including in Burundi,
Cameroon, Nigeria, the North of Central
America, Somalia, South Sudan, Syria,
Ukraine and Yemen are characterized by
critical protection and humanitarian

Conducted course on statelessness supported at Tilburg University in the Netherlands.
Conducted 4 trainings on the prevention and eradication of statelessness for
government officials from Central Africa, West Africa, and Europe.

conditions. Situations of internal displacement
require coherent and concerted action from
a broad array of actors, including primarily
the State affected as the entity responsible
for the protection of people internally
displaced on its territory.

© UNHCR/Shadi Abusneida

Yemenis displaced by fresh
violence face bleak winter
Renewed fighting has displaced more than 32,000 Yemenis
in the past two months, adding to the millions already
forced to flee and facing a harsh winter.

“Our hope is for this ugly war to end and the warring
sides to leave us to live in peace.”
—Fatemah Murai*, Yemeni displaced
grandmother.
*Name changed for protection purposes

196 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 197

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

Working across the displacement
continuum

UNHCR led

24

of 26 field
protection clusters
and cluster-like
mechanisms.

In 2018 UNHCR took a range of measures
to engage across the displacement
continuum. Early preparedness and early
engagement in emergencies was improved,
including through pilots in the DRC and
Ethiopia. Evidence on internal displacement
was created by sharing protection
monitoring and analysis in Afghanistan,
Somalia, and Ukraine. Integrated
programming was promoted to remove
internal barriers to achieving protection
outcomes for all people of concern. As an
example, refugees and IDPs in Sudan
benefitted equally from community-based
projects.

Solutions for internally displaced
people

UNHCR led
or co-led

14

CCCM clusters
or cluster-like
structures.

Launched as part of the 20th anniversary
of the “Guiding Principles on internal
displacement” (the Guiding Principles), the
2018-2020 multi-stakeholder “GP20 Plan
of Action”, contributes to system-wide
coherence in preventing, responding to
and resolving internal displacement.
GP20 national plans of action have helped
formulate a draft IDP law in South Sudan,
and the passage of the first law on internal
displacement in line with the Kampala
Convention in Niger; included the voices
of IDPs and IDP leaders in strategic
discussions in the Central African Republic
and Colombia; promoted agreement for
a plan to address protracted internal

198 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

displacement in Ukraine; and supported
efforts to collect data on houses abandoned
by displaced families in Honduras.

approaches, while ensuring coherence with
the Global Shelter Cluster’s Urban
Settlements’ Working Group.

Global Protection Cluster

In 2018, UNHCR completed seven site
management/CCCM field missions,
including, in support of CCCM clusters in
Iraq and the DRC; to collect information
from the cross-border Syria operation
in order to draft remote management
guidance; to provide tailored trainings for
partners and national authorities in Ethiopia
and the Sudan; and to support refugee
operations in Mexico and Brazil.

To maintain a coherent and integrated
protection response, the Cluster and its
Areas of Responsibility jointly held a
protection conference reflecting on the
20th anniversary of the Guiding Principles.
The conference addressed initiatives such
as improving the humanitarian programme
cycle, localization, the Centrality of
Protection in the “new way of working”
and the “GP20 Plan of Action”.
The Cluster marked the 20th anniversary
of the Guiding Principles by convening
round-table discussions with government
and NGO partners in Jordan and Ukraine,
contributing to a stocktaking exercise with
Resident Coordinators, United Nations
agencies and the ICRC on implementation
of IASC protection policy.

Global Camp Coordination and
Camp Management Cluster
The Global Camp Coordination and Camp
Management (CCCM) Cluster continued to
set global standards and policies, build
preparedness and response capacity, and
provide operational support to country-level
CCCM coordination platforms to enable
them to fulfil their core functions. The
Cluster’s Area-based Approaches Working
Group focused on two interrelated streams:
remote management and mobile

In situations where CCCM needs were
identified but the cluster not formally
activated, alternative ad-hoc arrangements
were found. For example, coordination
mechanisms for CCCM were implemented
under the Shelter Cluster in Afghanistan, and
the Protection Cluster in Ethiopia and Niger.

Global Shelter Cluster
UNHCR supported the coordination of more
than 500 partners providing shelter and NFI
support to over 8 million people, with the
Cluster providing 362 days of mission
support, and 269 days of remote support
to 17 country-level clusters and cluster-like
coordination mechanisms.
UNHCR hosted the Cluster’s annual
coordination workshop and meeting, with
partners from 41 different organizations
representing 25 shelter clusters and
cluster-like coordination mechanisms
worldwide, covering conflict, disaster and

preparedness situations. More government
officials attended the meeting than
previously, bringing their perspectives
to global shelter policy.
The annual satisfaction survey showed
87% satisfaction by partners with the
services of the Cluster’s Support Team,
including special appreciation of the team’s
new roving capacity. Achievements were
made in field coordination capacity, with
the Cluster co-leading two cohorts of the
“Humanitarian shelter coordination training”,
a Masters-level certified programme
delivered in partnership with IFRC and
Oxford Brookes University.
Working groups (WG) developed a range of
guidance and tools to enhance the integrity
of shelter responses. Examples include
six market assessments supported by the
Cash WG; the promotion of local building
practices emphasizing indigenous
knowledge and self-reliance in Bangladesh,
the DRC, and Ethiopia by the WG promoting
safer building practices; the publication of
a practitioners’ manual on “Good construction
practice standards in humanitarian settings”
by the Construction Standards WG; and the
finalization of “Shelter projects 2017-2018”,
a collection of shelter projects ranging from
emergency to permanent.

UNHCR led

12

and co-led 1
of the 28 activated
country-level
shelter clusters.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 199

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S

Responding
with lifesaving
support
© UNHCR/Antwan Chnkdji

Internally displaced Syrians in Tal Refaat, rural Aleppo, collect vital
aid supplies from UNHCR teams working on the ground with
local partners.

200 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Over the course of 2018, UNHCR and its
partners responded to the needs of some
30 million displaced people affected by
multiple and simultaneous emergencies
worldwide. Five new emergencies were
declared for the situations in Cameroon,
Central America and Mexico, Chad, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC)
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
UNHCR was quick to respond, deploying
additional resources to protect and assist
people of concern in these new emergencies,
whilst maintaining its engagement in

pre-existing emergencies in Bangladesh,
Libya, Nigeria, the Syrian Arab Republic
(Syria) and Yemen.
In line with the 2017 Policy on Emergency
Preparedness and Response (Emergency
Policy), UNHCR deployed more than
400 staff to lead, coordinate and support
these emergency responses. Altogether, some
48 refugee and IDP operations benefitted
from emergency deployments in 2018, with
most deployments to Bangladesh, Brazil,
the DRC, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Peru and Uganda.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 201

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Emergencies

28 countries
This chapter outlines UNHCR’s response to
emergencies in 2018 and its coordination
of principled, comprehensive and prompt
high-quality lifesaving interventions.
It highlights the progress made, and the
challenges faced, in meeting the most

urgent humanitarian and protection needs
of refugees and IDPs—as well as those of
the communities hosting them—bearing in
mind the end-goal of solutions from the
very onset of a crisis.

with a declared emergency
by the end of 2018

Cameroon
Nigeria
Libya
Niger
Chad
DRC
Uganda
Zambia
Syria
Yemen
Mexico
Guatemala
Honduras
El Salvador

EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
Preparing for emergencies

HALEP
allows country
teams to identify
their strengths and
gaps in key areas
of emergency
preparedness.

In 2018 alone,
UNHCR’s
Emergency
Handbook
was accessed
online by over

143,600
users—more than
half of all users
since its launch
in 2015.

Throughout 2018, UNHCR used its global
High Alert List for Emergency Preparedness
(HALEP) and associated diagnostic tool to
capture and provide an overview of levels
of country operations’ preparedness and
capacity to respond to potential population
displacement, as well as to prioritize
Headquarters’ preparedness support. In
2018, the HALEP compliance rate increased
by 30% from the previous year: 91% of
operations listed on HALEP were compliant
with the reporting instructions and had
completed the preparedness diagnostic tool.
Two Level 1 “proactive preparedness”
emergencies were active for the operations
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Zambia in 2018 to ensure that operations
took a proactive approach to preparedness,
in line with UNHCR’s Emergency Policy. The
declarations resulted in “advance
preparedness missions”, dedicated staffing
support and additional financial resources
for the two operations. Additional
“preparedness” and “contingency planning
missions” were fielded to countries in need
of additional support such as Burundi,
Rwanda and the United Republic of
Tanzania.

To support State-led efforts to plan and
implement a multi-stakeholder approach in
early warning and preparedness, in line with
Global Compact on Refugees, UNHCR
initiated a revision of its preparedness
guidance to integrate development and
other non-traditional partnerships and
approaches. Through its participation in
the IASC’s Reference Group on Risk, Early
Warning and Preparedness, the Office
contributed to an analysis on early warning,
early action and readiness and participated
in the “horizon scanning” sessions of the
IASC Emergency Directors’ Group (EDG) to
identify early actions around risks of very
high concern.
UNHCR designed and implemented
18 workshops on emergency preparedness
and response to train staff as well as
government officials and other operational
partners. In 2018, the Emergency Handbook
was revised through inclusion of 47 new
and amended entries, to incorporate new
policy and operational developments. In
addition to English, by the end of 2018, the
Handbook was made available in Arabic,
French and Spanish.

$34M

Over
worth of core relief items dispatched
from global stockpiles

5.2M
estimated people
reached with CRIs

285

135

Over

Emergency staff
deployed

Deployments made by
emergency standby
partners*

Staff & partners trained in
emergency preparedness
and response

1,130

Types of CRIs distributed to operations in 2018

*

202 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Ecuador
Brazil
Aruba
Colombia
Curacao
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Guyana
Chile
Argentina
Dominican Republic
Costa Rica
Venezuela
Bangladesh

5.2
million
blankets

kitchen sets

4.5million

2.6
million
sleeping mats

2.3
million
buckets

1.5
million
mosquito nets

2.7
million
solar lamps

2.3
million
jerry cans

3.9million

Over

pieces of plastic
sheeting

100,000
tents

There are 18 standby partners. The top contributing in 2018 include: CANADEM, Danish Refugee Council, Dutch Surge Support Water, iMMAP, Irish Aid, Norwegian Refugee Council, RedR Australia, Swedish Civil
Contingencies Agency and Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 203

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Responding to emergencies
Over $34 million-worth of core relief items
were dispatched from global stockpiles to
39 emergency-affected countries in 2018.
There were 19 airlifts of core relief and basic
shelter materials which provided much
needed support to refugees and IDPs in
countries such as Ethiopia, Indonesia and
Uganda. These seven global stockpiles,
maintained by UNHCR in Accra, Amman,
Copenhagen, Douala, Dubai, Kampala, and
Nairobi, ensured the Office and its partners’
capacity to respond to the needs of up to
600,000 displaced people in simultaneous
emergencies around the world within
72 hours. More than 4,000 people were
airlifted through 35 flight rotations as part
of the voluntary repatriation of refugees to

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Burundi and the Central African Republic,
as well as lifesaving evacuations through
the Emergency Transit Mechanism from
Libya to Niger.

UNHCR’s Policy on Emergency Preparedness and Response
The Policy defines three levels of emergency, with clearly demarcated accountability
and coordination roles.

Overall, there were 17% more emergency
deployments than in 2017. About a quarter
were run by standby partners who provided
valuable expert surge capacity to fill critical
unmet needs in both refugee and IDP
operations. At the end of 2018, the recorded
annual in-kind contribution by emergency
standby partners stood at $7.7 million (as
compared to $6.5 million in 2017). However,
it is estimated that the comprehensive
in-kind contribution (including in
deployments of less than 6 months) by
emergency standby partners would be
close to $11 million.

Emergency Level 1: proactive preparedness.
Ensures effective preparation for a likely humanitarian emergency, including targeted
preparedness missions as well as financial, material and technical support.
Emergency Level 2: additional support and resources.
Triggers an additional support response from UNHCR Headquarters, enabling
operations to respond in a timely and effective manner to a sharp increase in needs.
Emergency Level 3: whole-of-UNHCR response.
Allows the Office to respond to exceptionally serious situations in which the scale,
pace, complexity or consequences of the crisis starkly exceed the existing response
capacity of the country operation.
The IASC Humanitarian System-Wide Scale-Up protocols were introduced in 2018
and replaced the 2012 IASC Humanitarian System-Wide Emergency Activation
(“Level-3 Response”).
The Scale-Up activation is issued by the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator in
situations of major sudden-onset crises and/or substantial deterioration of a humanitarian
situation triggered by natural and human-induced hazards or conflict, which require
system-wide mobilization.
In such emergencies, UNHCR usually:

After a visit to Bangladesh, Blanchett says more
international support for displaced and host communities
is urgently needed ahead of monsoon rains.

© UNHCR/Hector Perez

Goodwill Ambassador
Cate Blanchett calls for increased
aid for Rohingya refugees

• Leads the protection, shelter, and camp coordination and
camp management (CCCM) clusters when internal
displacement is conflict-related.
• Determines its interventions and cluster leadership on a
case-by-case basis when internal displacement is due to a
natural disaster.

“The monsoon is coming and I’m scared
that the wind will blow away the roof.”
—Jhura, a Rohingya refugee, with her two
children in Bangladesh.

204 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 205

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Delivering in high-risk security
environments
Many emergency situations were
characterized by violence, civil unrest,
criminality and disregard for civilian life in
2018 which, in some cases, led to the
obstruction of protection activities and the
provision of assistance. UNHCR experienced
over 240 security incidents over the year,
most commonly crime, hazards and civil
unrest, and its personnel faced significant
security risks in Afghanistan, Libya, Nigeria,
Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen.

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

To mitigate these safety and security risks
in operations, the organization maintained
over 90 international and 200 local security
personnel, mostly in areas of high risk.
During 2018, 60 security support missions
were conducted, 47 of which were to field
locations for technical support or emergency
response. Following the adoption of an
administrative instruction on “Measures in
support of personnel serving in high risk
duty stations”, UNHCR undertook efforts to
improve its support to staff before, during
and after deployment to high-risk locations,
including through regular briefings to
ensure staff were aware of the threats and
risks prior to deployment.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
REINFORCE EMERGENCY RESPONSE CAPACITY AND EFFECTIVENESS. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Enhance emergency preparedness

Used HALEP to list 63 countries at medium/high risk of emergency belonging to one or
more of the 23 identified situations of concern.
Issued 29 HALEP updates to alert on emerging refugee and IDP displacement
situations.
Maintained remote support on contingency planning, in particular to the Cameroon and
DRC situations.
Provided targeted support to 25 emergency preparedness focal points in West Africa.

Deploy standby emergency coordination,
preparedness and response teams

Managed 420 new emergency deployments (361 in 2017, +16%). Of these, 285 were
through UNHCR internal rosters and resources and 135 by emergency standby partners.
Deployed for 51,687 mission-days in the field in emergency deployments, as compared
to 32,000 in 2017 (+61%).
Spent more than 1,500 mission days by UNHCR Emergency Management Team in the
field, mainly in Bangladesh, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Niger, Peru and Uganda.
Completed 33 deployments of highly qualified technical specialists through functional
rosters.

Build capacity in emergency
preparedness and response, security and
supply chain management

‘You are dealing with people
who are not giving up, so why
should you?’

Conducted 18 training workshops on emergency preparedness and response, for
558 participants.
Conducted 3 workshops on emergency management for UNHCR staff at the junior and
middle level in Senegal, Norway and Germany; 1 senior emergency leadership
programme; context-specific emergency training for UNHCR staff and external partners
in Benin, Burundi and Tunisia; 3 emergency management trainings; and 2 inter-agency
emergency team leadership programmes.
Conducted 17 training workshops engaging 574 practitioners from 31 countries in Asia
and the Pacific by Regional Centre for Emergency Preparedness (“eCentre”) in Bangkok.

UNHCR has more than 12,000 staff members, most of
whom are based in the field.

Delivered security training to 1,200 UNHCR staff and partners.
Included 47 new or amended entries in the Emergency Handbook, including calculation
tools for supply.

“Parents want to look into their kids’ eyes and see some
hope in the future.”

Completed certification programme for supply chain management for 113 staff.

—Ayman Gharaibeh, UNHCR’s Representative to Yemen.
Reinforce security management as an
organizational culture

Conducted 60 missions by UNHCR Field Security Service to provide technical support
or emergency response to 47 field locations.
Organised a training programme in Tunisia for potential field security advisors proficient
in French and Arabic to meet the needs of diverse workforce.
Trained over 900 UNHCR and partners’ female staff through the women’s security
awareness programme in 34 locations.

206 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 207

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

Inter-agency and strategic partnerships
strengthened

Participated regularly in the Emergency Directors Group (EDG) focusing on specific
emergencies, such as the Ebola outbreak in the DRC, preparedness horizon scanning,
as well as in the face-to-face EDG meeting for the annual review of operations and
humanitarian coordinators’ appraisal.

PREVENTING, MITIGATING AND RESPONDING TO SEXUAL
AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
© UNHCR/Santiago Escobar-Jaramillo

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Deployed security officers in areas where no other security personnel were deployed
to provide support to the UN Security Management System.
Co-chaired sub-working groups of the Inter-agency Security Management Network on
gender inclusion in security and security training, and participated as a member of most
working groups, examining policies and UNSMS processes.
Participated in a range of inter-agency fora on supply chain management, such as the
High Level Committee on Management, the UN Procurement Network, the Common
Procurement Group in Geneva, and the United Nations Global Market place, the Global
Logistics Cluster, Humanitarian Networking, AidEx, and the Dubai International
Humanitarian Aid and Development Conference and Exhibition to increase common
procurement and strengthen inter-agency partnerships in supply chains.
GLOBAL SUPPLY MANAGEMENT OPTIMIZED FOR EFFICIENT DELIVERY. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Optimize supply chain for shelter and core
relief items in emergencies

Dispatched some 8,972 metric tonnes and 41,501 cubic meters of core relief items
to 39 countries affected by emergencies.
Delivered 19 airlifts of core relief items to refugees and IDPs.
Accomplished 35 flights (4,267 passengers) to facilitate voluntary repatriations
to Burundi and the Central African Republic and evacuation of people of concern from
Libya to Niger.
Deployed nearly 30 supply experts to support emergency operations and provide
functional assistance to deliver relief items quickly and facilitate procurement.
Established second emergency supply roster with 20 staff to support supply response
to ongoing crises globally. Deployed senior supply expert to Venezuela situation
to assess the overall supply needs in the region.

The Casa Matilde Foundation for Refugees is a shelter in Ecuador’s capital city Quito that receives women victims of violence
and their children. The centre provides three months of psychological support, activity workshops and legal advice.

Supported tendering for cash-based interventions (CBIs), including joint tendering at the
inter-agency level.
Supported procurement for CBIs by building capacity through 20 webinars and
workshops to equip field staff with the necessary knowledge, tools to carry out CBI
procurement and market assessment related activities.

In 2018, the UPS Foundation supported UNHCR through
emergency funding to provide core relief items to affected
populations in Indonesia, and through in-kind air charter
flights to Uganda, Ethiopia and Bangladesh to deliver
life-saving supplies. Since 2010, the UPS Foundation has
been a leading UNHCR corporate partner, contributing
funds, services and expertise intransportation,
logistics, supply and communications to
support refugees and displaced people across
the globe.

208 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

© UNHCR/Steffen Limboki

Delivering hope:
UPS Foundation transports
critical supplies to refugees

In 2018, massive displacements exposed
people of concern, especially women and
girls, to heightened risk of sexual and
gender-based violence (SGBV). Refugees
often arrived in asylum countries in a state
of extreme distress, requiring specific
assistance, with reported instances of SGBV
particularly high among refugees fleeing
Burundi, the DRC, Myanmar and South
Sudan. Limited resources in reception
facilities or settlements—such as no
communal lighting, limited WASH facilities
and food cuts—exacerbated SGBV risks.
An analysis of UNHCR’s food security data
highlighted that negative coping strategies
employed to meet food and other basic

needs doubled in several sites in Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Tanzania and Uganda over the
past five years. Protection concerns in these
countries included a large number of
reported incidents of rape, domestic
violence, abandonment of women and
children and child marriage.

Ensuring sexual and gender-based
violence coordination and
programming in emergencies
As part of the “Safe from the start” initiative,
UNHCR deployed protection and SGBV
experts and strengthened partnerships to
prevent, mitigate risk and respond to SGBV
in ten countries at the onset of declared

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 209

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Innovating for protection
Addressing the unique risks faced by
women and girls in situations of
displacement required a community-based
and multi-sectoral approach, working with
the livelihoods, WASH and energy sectors
to enhance innovation in programming.

© UNHCR/ Natalia Micevic

Start-up restores hope for
displaced Congolese and local
communities in the DRC
Supported by UNHCR, the start-up uses a communitybased approach to promote menstrual hygiene but also
plays a crucial role in preventing gender-based violence
and empowering displaced women and men at-risk
in North Kivu.

Refugees collect monthly cash assistance at a post office in 6th of October City, Cairo, Egypt.

“Learning to make soap has given me hope because
it will soon give us an income…
I have these skills forever.”
— Elisa, displaced Congolese in North Kivu.

SGBV programming and cash
UNHCR made progress in providing SGBV
survivors with tailored support through
cash-based interventions (CBIs). The Office
finalized a study on the successful impact of
CBIs on protection outcomes in Ecuador,
Lebanon and Morocco.

210 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

EXPANDING CASH-BASED INTERVENTIONS

UNHCR implemented eight innovative
projects in Burkina Faso, the Republic of
the Congo, Kenya, Malaysia, Pakistan and
Tanzania to address risks in accessing
livelihood opportunities, safe access to
energy for cooking, access to technology,
and community lighting. An example of
a successful livelihood initiative was
“MADE51” (see the chapter on Building
better futures). In North Kivu, in the DRC,
UNHCR and partners designed and
implemented a project with the community
to improve the availability of acceptable
menstrual hygiene products and
increase the self-reliance and economic
empowerment of IDP women and girls
(see below).

© UNHCR/Pedro Costa Gomes

emergencies. This helped to establish an
effective response system and services
for survivors and those at risk of SGBV,
including measures for its prevention.
This was done in collaboration with partners,
government authorities, refugees and
other key front-line responders, all
equipped with skills and tools to promote
survivor-centered programming.

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

In Lebanon, cash-based assistance was
found to be an effective SGBV risk-mitigation
and prevention tool, supporting the practice
of providing survivors of SGBV with targeted
assistance (see the Middle East and North
Africa summary).

UNHCR made strategic use of cash
assistance to allow people of concern
to meet essential needs at all phases of
displacement. The amount of cash assistance
increased in 2018, including in emergency
contexts, and was used across sectors such
as education, shelter and livelihoods.
A UNHCR-commissioned study on sectoral
outcomes concluded that multi-purpose cash
has a positive impact in sectors beyond food
security.

Delivering cash assistance
UNHCR delivered $568 million in cash
assistance—mainly as multi-purpose cash
grants—to some of the most vulnerable
people of concern, providing them with
more choice in how to meet needs and
prioritize expenditures, such as clothes,
hygiene, communications, transport and
school supplies. The cash delivered was an
increase of 13% from 2017 and had a wider
impact on increasing self-reliance of
beneficiaries while contributing to the local
economy in host communities.

Through its Policy
on Cash-Based
Interventions,
UNHCR commits
to increase the
use of CBIs by
2020.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 211

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Cash-based interventions at a glance

Cash

AN END-TO-END PROCESS

$568 million
distributed in 93 countries
13% increase

in cash distributed compared to 2017

Over

Third Party Data Set

CashAssist
PAYMENT RECORDS

RECONCILATION
RECORDS

(account number and amount)

Financial service provider

3,800

staff trained in cash assistance
65% increase compared to 2017

UNHCR established CashAssist, a global cash management system to ensure that cash transfers are made in
a timely, efficient and accurate manner, while avoiding duplication and minimizing fraud.

Cash-based interventions
Working in partnership enhanced the
cost-efficiency and effectiveness of cash
delivery, eliminating the duplication of
assessments, targeting and monitoring.
In this light, UNHCR, along with OCHA,
UNICEF and WFP committed to a common
cash system to deliver assistance.
Building on the common cash facility in
Jordan, the Greece cash alliance and the
one unified inter-organisational system for
e-cards in Lebanon, UNHCR promoted
collaborative approaches for cash transfer
mechanisms that maximize efficiency and
predictability, ensure effective coordination,
leverage the expertise of all partners, and
achieve significant economies of scale.

To better deliver cash assistance, UNHCR
negotiated and established cash transfer
services managed by the private sector,
and made them available to all partners on
the same terms and conditions. In 2018,
UNHCR was able to facilitate refugees’
access to formal bank and mobile money
accounts in Cameroon, the DRC, Ethiopia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Niger, Rwanda, Uganda
and Zambia, among others.
Partnering with WFP reduced potential risks
of using private sector service providers in
cash assistance in 24 countries, allowing
UNHCR to ensure that assistance reaches
those who need it the most. In 2018, a project
was launched in Cameroon and the DRC,
to mitigate the risk of abuse by agents
and traders involved in the delivery of
cash assistance.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

BASIC NEEDS AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES
CASH-BASED INTERVENTIONS. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Enable UNHCR operations to
systematically consider and implement
Cash Based Interventions (CBIs)

Implemented CBIs in 93 countries, including in 20 focus countries in 2018.

Further adapt the skills, processes,
systems and tools aimed at clearly
defining duties and maintaining efficiency
of CBI delivery

Finalised a comprehensive CBI monitoring toolkit.

Conducted 13 comprehensive learning programmes (including 7 regional CBI learning
programmes, 2 senior management learning programmes and 4 field support learning
programmes for programme, CBI, protection, supply, and finance officers).

20 operations, accounting for 98% of UNHCR cash assistance, implemented postdistribution monitoring in 2018.
Developed CashAssist from a pilot tool to a common cash facility included
systematically.

Strengthen partnerships and collaborative
approaches for CBIs

Conducted 13 new procurements and 15 new contracts with financial service providers.
35 active contracts with financial service providers were in place in 2018.

Continue to share CBI good practices,
tools and guidance developed with the
broader humanitarian community

Evaluated the cash assistance in Jordan and published “Cash for education: directions
and key considerations”.
Documented lessons learnt on cash and WASH and shelter, including “Cash for shelter
in Kenya: a field experience” and “Cash and WASH: Key learning and checklist”.
Conducted a mapping of social safety nets for refugees to direct cash interventions,
and issued “Cash assistance and the prevention, mitigation and response to sexual and
gender-based violence (SGBV): findings from research in Lebanon, Ecuador and Morocco”.

212 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 213

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

© UNHCR/Georgina Goodwin

© UNHCR/Jean Marc Ferré

MEETING THE BASIC NEEDS OF PEOPLE OF CONCERN

Cities of Light: Protecting the urban
displaced—High Commissioner’s
Dialogue 2018
The High Commissioner’s 2018 Protection Dialogue
focused on the role of cities in protecting the urban
displaced, including their role in implementing the Global
Compact on Refugees. Themes included challenges
and opportunities for the urban displaced,
best practice and innovation to help
and protect them, and foster social and
economic inclusion.

At the onset of emergencies, UNHCR
deployed experts, and increased its use of
new technology and cash to improve
shelter response. For example, UNHCR
scaled up the use of CBIs to respond to
immediate shelter needs of Venezuelans
on the move.

Specific efforts were also made to
strengthen the technical capacity of staff,
partners and people of concern. Cash and
shelter expert missions were carried out in
Bangladesh, Greece and Kenya to assist
transition from emergency to more durable
shelter solutions.

UNHCR expanded the range of shelter
solutions, making sustainable Refugee
Housing Units available in 27 operations.
Congolese refugee Apolina Nyassa, 86, lives alone in a Refugee Housing Unit given to refugees with special needs,
at Nyarugusu camp, Tanzania.

In line with its 2014-2018 Global Settlement
and Shelter Strategy, UNHCR aligned its
response to national, sub-national and local
development plans while linking humanitarian
responses with long-term development
efforts. This “master plan approach” to
settlement planning allowed UNHCR to
better support people of concern in
accessing safe, dignified and sustainable

UNHCR provided shelter to more than
3.4 million refugees in planned settlements,
however, in a context of mounting
displacement, more than half of shelter
needs worldwide went unmet. The Office
also supported the development of
comprehensive strategies to improve the
quality of shelter and settlements in
21 operations, while enhanced strategic
tools were adopted in Bangladesh, Iraq,
Nigeria and Zambia.

© UNHCR/Jean Marc Ferré

Shelter and settlement

Cash assistance and shelter
In north-western Kenya, UNHCR provided 730 refugee households with cash
for shelter to ensure safe and dignified housing, address protection concerns,
while reducing dependency on humanitarian assistance in the long term. This
project allowed refugees to build their own permanent shelter at a lower cost
and had a multiplier effect on the local economy.

settlements and other shelter solutions.

214 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 215

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

ENSURE THAT PEOPLE ARE ABLE TO SATISFY THEIR SETTLEMENT AND SHELTER NEEDS IN A SAFE,
DIGNIFIED AND SUSTAINABLE MANNER. IN 2018, UNHCR:

Public health
© UNHCR/Antwan Chnkdji

SHELTER AND SETTLEMENT

Implement the 2014-2018 “UNHCR global
strategy for settlement and shelter”

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

Launched and disseminated “Master plan approach to settlement planning” guiding
principles to support improved humanitarian settlement development.
Provided country support for shelter strategy development through a tiered prioritized
country system with allocated focal points, putting strategies in place covering
21 operations in 14 countries.
Enhanced the monitoring of country-level strategies against key standards and revised
country-level strategy tools to guide the elaboration of country-level strategies.
Developed dashboard to review country-level strategies and support country focal
points for inclusion in the settlements information portal.

Enhance UNHCR’s ability to respond to
shelter and settlement needs in situations
of urban displacement

Prepared background paper on urban issues relating to shelter and settlement
for HC Dialogue.

Continue professional development of
shelter and settlement staff and partners,
to enable the design of comprehensive
and integrated responses in line with the
master plan approach, CRRF and Policy
on Alternatives to Camps

Distributed 35 settlement planning tool-kits to country operations to enhance
the settlement planning capacity.

Strengthen UNHCR’s ability to implement
technically sound and sustainable cash for
shelter programmes

Conducted shelter and cash expert missions in:

Engaged UN-Habitat on consultancy to develop urban shelter & settlement response
guidelines.

Attributed 142 Autodesk software licenses to technical staff globally, allowing
for web-based learning on shelter issues.
Produced complementary manual as a reference document during regular settlement
planning design activities.

• Kenya (Kalobeyei): enhanced durable housing delivered through CBIs, and
assisted the transition from emergency to more durable shelter solutions.
• Greece: supported transition from fully dependent Emergency Support to
Integration and Accommodation scheme to independent integrated status in the
host community through an unrestricted minimum expenditure basket-type
approach.
• Venezuela situation: set up strategic directions for cash-based interventions in
the Americas for the scale-up of shelter CBIs; set up transitional cash transfers for
basic needs for the most vulnerable; prepared for potential return and
reintegration grants.
• Bangladesh (Cox’s Bazar): supported pilot cash-for-shelter project, incorporating
cash-for-work, vouchers and compound construction committee approach.

Promote diverse and appropriate shelter
solutions in UNHCR operations

Strengthened technical capacity of local responders, staff, partners and people of
concern through winterization guidance and training for use of Refugee Housing Units.
Enhanced shelter and settlement support was provided to UNHCR field operations
through technical missions to field locations (250 days to 8 locations). Provided priority
support to Bangladesh operation and the Venezuela situation.

A resident of Aleppo, Syria, gets a free medical check-up at a UNHCR-supported community centre.

UNHCR advocated inclusion of refugees in
national health systems to ensure all people
of concern can access lifesaving and
essential health care, in line with its
2014-2018 public health strategy.
Its advocacy had some success, with
countries like Kenya, Rwanda and Sudan
establishing refugee-inclusive health
insurance plans to increase equitable
access to health care (including
reproductive and HIV care services).
Innovation was a main driver of health
service quality, with UNHCR rolling out its
new integrated refugee health information
system (iRHIS) to improve the timeliness,
accuracy and use of health data and

216 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

information in 16 countries, reaching about
5 million refugees globally. Other progress
made included the revamping of the
“balanced score card”, a health facility
quality assessment tool, and the launch of
an improved medical referral database to
monitor resource allocation in 12 countries.
UNHCR ensured access to primary health
services for refugees in 21 countries,
meeting the target of one to four visits per
person, per year; delivering HIV prevention
and treatment, as well as reproductive
health programmes within a framework of
public health, protection and community
development. A fourfold increase in
antiretroviral treatment coverage for

76%

of
refugee
women attending
UNHCR-supported
health care
facilities had
attended at least
three antenatal
visits during
pregnancy.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 217

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

UNHCR worked together with host
governments and partners towards the
holistic integration of mental health,
psychological and social support in health
care systems through capacity building.
In 2018, UNHCR organized trainings to
enable nine operations to provide basic
mental health services.

In partnership with UNHCR, the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation is working to improve maternal and newborn
healthcare for refugees and host populations worldwide
through innovation. With the support of the Foundation,
UNHCR concluded the two-year project “Saving Newborn
Lives in Refugee Situations (2016-2018)”, bringing about
noticeable improvements in maternal and child healthcare
in Jordan, Kenya and South Sudan. The partnership
enabled women to seek advice on appropriate treatment
of sick and underweight newborns, access improved
infrastructure and services, and adapt their behaviors to
ensure healthy pregnancies. Building on the project’s
success and learning, it has been extended to refugee
situations in Chad, Cameroon, and Niger (2018-2020).

218 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Food security and nutrition

© UNHCR/Xavier Bourgois

Finding innovative solutions and
delivering impact

UNHCR conducted the first study on
drug-resistant tuberculosis among Afghan
refugees in the Islamic Republics of Iran
and Pakistan and returnees in Afghanistan,
paving the way for better tuberculosis
prevention, care and control through
harmonized service provision in all three
countries. The Office also deployed health
staff and provided funds to support
operations as part of the inter-agency Ebola
preparedness and response. Uganda was
commended for its early identification of
high-risk contacts at its primary entry point,
which was subsequently declared safe.

© UNHCR/Reynesson Damasceno

refugees in camp settings has been
achieved between 2014 and 2018. The
coverage rates of skilled birth attendance
stood at about 94%. One out of 3,000 children
under five died, which was a slight
reduction in the under-five mortality rate.

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

UNHCR workers help Venezuelan families who had been sleeping in Simon Bolivar public square in Boa Vista, Brazil,
to settle in at the Jardim Floresta shelter.

Over the past four years, food insecurity
has deteriorated significantly in many
countries where UNHCR operates, posing
serious nutrition challenges for people of
concern, particularly in Africa. This was
most concerning in contexts where
drought coupled with limited livelihood
opportunities. For instance in Chad, where
food assistance has more than halved due
to funding shortages, a survey found that
refugees resorted to negative coping
strategies more than the host communities,
due to limited livelihood opportunities
in camps.

UNHCR’s global monitoring showed that
more than half of surveyed sites had
unacceptable levels of acute malnutrition.
Stunting was within acceptable limits only
in 30% of sites and exceptionally high in
an equal number of locations. The survey
also revealed unacceptably high levels of
anaemia in most sites. Countries where
the infant and young child framework was
rolled out showed improvements in acute
malnutrition indicators. This was particularly
evident in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Sudan and Uganda, which is likely
attributed to the positive impact of the
multi-sectoral approach.

UNHCR was a key
contributor to the
technical interest
group designing
and reviewing
the analysis on
the relationship
between stunting
and wasting
among
malnourished
children.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 219

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

UNHCR worked with WFP to promote
refugee food security and self-reliance in
particularly dire contexts, including in
Cameroon, Chad and Ethiopia. In line with
the Global Compact on Refugees, the
agencies developed a Joint Self-Reliance
Strategy, recognizing that basic needs have

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

to be met in order to support greater
self-reliance. This partnership was
expanded in 2018 to include joint targeting
principles that will guide common
assessment, analysis and identification of
eligibility criteria to ensure basic assistance
reaches those most in need.

Water, sanitation and hygiene

WASH

8.7M
people with access to clean water
20L

Only

Last Mile Mobile Solutions
helps malnourished children
in Ethiopia

20L
water per person/day

17% of refugees

have access to their own basic
household toilet

59
countries

80% cost savings
on water supply in protracted refugee
situations through conversion of motorized
water pumps to hybrid or solar energy

The Last Mile Mobile Solution initiative of UNHCR
in collaboration with partners in Ethiopia allows for
the electronic, real-time monitoring of individual children
over the course of their treatment for malnutrition.
It also facilitates enhanced care and streamlined
reporting processes.
In 2018, UNHCR supported 8.7 million
people across 59 countries to access safe
water and sanitation services. Despite
overall improvements, people of concern
still lagged behind the global averages
in terms of access to clean water and
sanitation services. According to UNHCR’s
WASH monitoring, only 59% of refugee
situations had reached the SDG 6 “basic
level” of water supply access, well below
the global average, and only 17% of
refugees had access to their own basic
household toilet.
Faced with such challenges, UNHCR invested
in cost-effective and environmentally
sustainable technology in operations

220 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

transitioning from emergencies to
longer-term solutions, increasing the ratio
of renewable to non-renewable sources of
energy to one-third. The Kutupalong camp
in Bangladesh, for instance, moved towards
solar water pumping serving nearly one
million people. Improving the management
of water resources and converting
motorized water pumps to hybrid or solar
energy resulted in cost savings of 80%
on water supply in protracted refugee
situations. UNHCR also worked on reducing
the cost of providing sanitation services in
protracted situations through innovative
“waste-to-value” projects in refugee camps.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 221

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

These not only reduced the cost of services,
but also doubled the lifespan of
infrastructure and generated useful
products such as cooking fuel.
UNHCR advocated access to safe water and
sanitation services for people of concern in
urban and out-of-camp situations, in line
with commitments found in both the Global
Compact and SDG 6, through strategic
partnerships for inclusion in national WASH
systems.
In situations of emergency, the Office
strengthened its emergency response
through capacity-building interventions,
with a particular focus on protection,
through the inclusion of refugees in the

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I R E S P O N D I N G W I T H L I F E S AV I N G S U P P O R T

design and implementation of WASH
programmes.
This resulted, for instance, in specific design
modifications to toilets and positioning of
water points in safe locations to enable
access for people with disabilities and
reduce the risk of SGBV.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

BASIC NEEDS AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES
HEALTH STATUS OF POPULATION IMPROVED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Investing in public health, nutrition and
WASH related data to drive needs-based
responses and evidence based decisionmaking

Developed standardized expanded nutrition survey (SENS) to integrate learning from
latest scientific review and reflect changes in the modus operandi of food assistance.
Reviewed stunting trends in various countries generated from SENS data.
Published assessment, monitoring, analysis and reporting tools on the WASH website
(http://wash.unhcr.org) for country operations to carry out effective needs-based
prioritization of WASH activities in country operations.
WASH indicator monitoring mechanisms (monthly report card and standardized
Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice survey) rolled out to additional countries for
improved gap analysis and resource allocation.

Cash for latrines
Building on lessons learnt from
different contexts, UNHCR developed
and circulated key tools to provide
guidance on how to use cash for
latrines in camp settings.

Ensure the technical integrity and quality
of public health, nutrition and WASH
programmes from emergency to
protracted situations

Cholera outbreak assessment and development of response and monitoring tools,
including in first-time use of oral cholera vaccines in Uganda, with the emergency
refugee influx from the DRC.
Developed and validated public health response in emergencies toolkit for refugee
emergencies in Chad.
Conducted training-of-trainers in management of non-communicable diseases in
5 countries (the DRC, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda) for 141 trainers reaching
818 clinical staff.
Conducted training-of-trainers in the low-dose, high-frequency approach to reinforce
and improve maternal and newborn care conducted in 3 operations.
Published urban WASH review and guidance note on WASH programming for refugees
in urban situations with case studies from Lebanon, Turkey and Uganda.
Developed multi-year WASH strategies and site-level operational plans in 23 countries,
focusing on emergency, post-emergency and protracted situations.

Towards greener solutions
In 2018, UNHCR carried out several projects to expand the use of
solar energy and other innovative sustainable practices in protracted refugee
situations.
Sanitation waste to value projects in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Kenya,
and Mozambique resulted in value-added products, such as
cooking fuel briquettes, biogas, and fertilizer.
The internet of things is a real-time monitoring and reporting
system for water supply in Dadaab camp, Kenya.

Strengthen interagency and strategic
partnerships in public health, nutrition
and WASH

Provided technical support to Djibouti, Kenya, Rwanda and Sudan, among other
countries to review the inclusion of refugees in national health insurance in partnership
with ILO.
Finalised an MoU with the Ministry of Health in Uganda on provision of integrated health
care services for refugees and host populations.
Conducted training sessions for midwives in Cameroon, Chad and Niger.
Engaged with Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, on the “fragility, emergencies and refugees
policy”. As a result, Gavi supported governments and partners in Bangladesh, Rwanda,
and Uganda in providing vaccines to refugees.
Agreed with WFP on joint principles on targeting of assistance as well as an addendum
on data sharing to the MoU (2011).

In addition to being more sustainable for the environment, these
practices provided value for money and reduced the cost of service
provision in the long term.

222 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 223

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I S A F E G UA R D I N G F U N DA M E N TA L R I G H T S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S

Building
better futures
© UNHCR/Marie-Joëlle Jean-Charles

Gladys Acacio, 25, a South Sudanese refugee, living in Pagirinya
settlement in Adjumani, came to Uganda in June 2017 with her
mother and four siblings. Gladys has recently graduated
in motorcycle repair training.

224 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

It can take years before it is safe for forcibly
displaced people to return, or to find a new
place they can call home. For UNHCR, it is
thus crucial to work with people of
concern–and the communities which host
them–to help them retain a sense of
security, belonging and hope for the future;
to enjoy basic services alongside nationals;
to channel their resilience; and to help

displaced people actively contribute to the
countries and communities hosting them.
Building on recent policy shifts in the
international community—the Global
Compact on Refugees and the SDGs to name
two—UNHCR strengthened its work on
resilience and solutions for its people of
concern, striving for more coherence in
its approach throughout 2018.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 225

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

This chapter outlines the initiatives taken by
UNHCR in 2018 to secure comprehensive
and durable solutions for those falling under
its mandate. Throughout the year, the Office
promoted comprehensive approaches to
protection and solutions programming
from the very onset of an emergency.
This included advocating and supporting
one of the three durable solutions: return or

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

voluntary repatriation, local integration,
or resettlement. It also included expanding
the availability and impact of educational
opportunities for people of concern;
facilitating access to, inclusion in, and
contribution to, formal economies;
developing holistic settlements; and
providing sustainable energy solutions for
people in need.

“No country should be left alone to respond to a huge influx of refugees”
—Filippo Grandi, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

For refugees expressing an interest to return,
UNHCR engaged with them on their
intentions for the future, and provided them
with accurate and objective information
on the conditions in their location of origin
for them to make an informed decision.
For instance, UNHCR and the World Bank
conducted research on the living conditions
and settlement decisions of recent returnees
to Afghanistan (some 16,220 in 2018), to
better understand the factors that influenced
return and to enhance the development of
reintegration and livelihood projects.
In Burundi, a joint multi-year programme with
FAO, UNDP and UNFPA supported local
capacities for cross-border monitoring and
access to justice, security and social services
for returnees and local communities along
with livelihoods opportunities. These efforts
aimed to address issues of insecurity,
governance and rule of law and, crucially, the
inability of returnees to reclaim housing, land
and property in alignment with SDG 16
(Peace, justice and strong institutions).

SOLUTIONS
© UNHCR/José Ventura

In other places, such as South Sudan,
UNHCR observed self-organized returns and
monitored their progress where possible.
Such monitoring confirmed a number of
common challenges in returning to unstable
areas of origin, including: ongoing insecurity;

Refugees arrive at Lisbon airport, Portugal. These are some of the first of over 1,000 refugees that Portugal has
pledged to admit within the framework of the EU resettlement programme.

Voluntary repatriation
As the preferred solution of many refugees,
the Office facilitated voluntary repatriation to
multiple countries, including Afghanistan,
Burundi, Chad, Rwanda, Somalia and Sudan.
The number of refugees who returned

226 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

decreased from 667,400 in 2017 to 593,814
in 2018. However, ensuring that conditions
were ripe for return was especially
challenging in 2018, and the number of
those who opted to repatriate was far
outnumbered by those forced into exile
(or who had been in exile for years).

persistent human rights concerns;
unresolved political tensions; limited or
damaged critical infrastructure; destroyed or
occupied housing, land and property; limited
absorption capacity; and a lack of livelihood
opportunities.

593,814
refugees returned
in 2018, a 11%
decrease when
compared with
2017.

UNHCR engaged with other key
stakeholders to address the obstacles to
potential future returns and establishing the
legal frameworks necessary to underpin
voluntary repatriation. Key examples of this
approach were undertaken in the Myanmar
and Syria situations (see the regional
summaries for Asia and the Pacific, and the
Middle East and North Africa).
Cash assistance is a crucial part of ensuring
the sustainability of UNHCR’s voluntary
repatriation programming, providing a safety
net for families until they are able to secure
access to national welfare systems or other
forms of national support. Somali returnees,
for example, were provided with cash
assistance to facilitate their reintegration.
With the assistance being spent in the local
economy, this helped boost markets and
contribute towards peaceful co-existence
between returnees and their communities.

Real-time data from Afghan returnees provides key information
on assistance needs
With returnees and IDPs facing challenges in Afghanistan, UNHCR partnered
with Orange Door Research and Viamo to collect real-time data through mobile
phone surveys, supplemented by surveys with the general population. In addition
to UNHCR’s protection monitoring activities, these 14,000 surveys (conducted
between August 2017 and January 2018) provided a unique perspective
on population mobility trends and important data regarding assistance
needs, protection risks and vulnerability, allowing for a more reliable
response.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 227

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Local market growth and increased efficiency through cash for returnees
The use of cash reduced logistical overhead costs associated with in-kind repatriation assistance
packages, while ensuring returnees had the resources to make their own choices about how they restart their lives.
Cash assistance programmes have also been shown to be effective in stimulating local economies.
In Somalia, UNHCR provided a range of cash assistance through its partner, Amal Bank, to more than
87,000 returnees. These included options such as a one-time cash grant, monthly support, allowances based
on the number of children in a family, and shelter grants. In an important step toward reintegration, returnees were
also provided with their own bank accounts. Post-distribution monitoring found that 98% of returnees were
positive about the distribution process and modality, while 87% indicated that cash assistance had had a positive
impact on their life.

Local integration
Local integration for refugees is a complex
and gradual process with inter-related legal,
economic, sociocultural and civil-political
dimensions, requiring adaptability by
refugees and host communities alike.
To support countries in providing options
for local integration, UNHCR and partners
contributed with financial and technical
support to ensure that integration
programming took into account the needs
of both refugees and host communities.
The ultimate objective of local integration
is that refugees have a long-term legal
basis to stay in a country, accompanied by
equivalent cultural, social, civil-political and
economic opportunities and enjoy their
rights on a similar basis as that country’s
nationals—enabling them to contribute
actively to their country of residence.

8,000 Ivorian
refugees in Liberia
benefitted from
integration
programs.

7,000
Senegalese
refugees received
identification cards
in Guinea-Bissau.

Around the world, there were positive
examples of local integration. In Europe,
for instance, UNHCR nurtured innovative
partnerships to promote access to labour
markets and explore the role of youth and
sport in integration. UNHCR worked closely
with the OECD on a joint action plan to
expand employment opportunities for
refugees, resulting in a series of workshops
that brought together potential employers,

228 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

local authorities and people of concern in
Bulgaria, Hungary and Malta.
In Turkey, refugees were provided with
access to health, education and legal
assistance. However, sustained support
from the international community remained
essential in maintaining the level of service.
In Ukraine, following the adoption of a
strategy on durable solution and integration
for internally displaced people, the
Government finalized an action plan for the
elaboration of local integration plans and
mechanisms to access temporary and
affordable housing for IDPs.
In Africa, local integration was pursued
for Ivorian refugees who chose to remain
in Liberia. Programmes focusing on
naturalization procedures, land acquisition,
social cohesion, employment opportunities
and the provision of basic social services
in communities are already underway to
prepare for the integration of some
8,000 refugees. In Ethiopia, legislative
reform is expected to help facilitate the
possibility of local integration and a more
secure status, as well as allowing refugees
greater freedom of movement and access
to employment. Guinea-Bissau approved
the eligibility for citizenship for Senegalese
refugees who have lived in a state of limbo
as a result of four decades of conflict.

While UNHCR supported the process of
securing identification cards for some
7,000 Senegalese refugees, the
Government reduced the administrative
fees by 80%, thus facilitating greater access
to the naturalization process.
In Asia and the Pacific, UNHCR collaborated
with UNDP’s rule of law programme in
Pakistan to enhance legal aid capacities
to strengthen the national justice and
security sectors. UNHCR directly operated
nine Advice and Legal Aid Centres in
Pakistan providing refugees with legal
support, while engaging with UNDP’s
support to the Pakistan Bar Council,

law schools, community paralegals and
community-oriented policing.
In the Southern Cone of South America a
number of good practices fostered the local
integration of refugees. UNHCR worked
with States and civil society partners to
extend the rights of refugees, including the
right to work, access to health care and free
education—despite an increasing number
of arrivals. In the same region the Cities of
Solidarity concept has, over the past 14 years,
gained recognition for the important role of
cities in facilitating refugees’ inclusion and
integration in national systems.

RESETTLEMENT AND HUMANITARIAN ADMISSIONS

Resettlement

1.2M refugees in need of resettlement in 2018
8% INCREASE
81,337

75,188

RESETTLEMENT SUBMISSIONS

RESETTLEMENT SUBMISSIONS

2017

82

17%

55,680

27

UNHCR operations
submitted refugees

departures

urgent/emergency
submissions

countries

2018

49%

women and girls
submitted

52%

children submitted

14% decrease to 2017
(65,108 refugees)

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 229

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Resettlement is a tangible, lifesaving
mechanism for governments and
communities across the world to share
responsibility for the increasing number
of refugees worldwide. Expanding third
country solutions for refugees is a key
objective of the Global Compact, however,
these solutions are available to only a
fraction of the world’s refugees.
UNHCR’s
resettlement
portal is available
here.

According to data on UNHCR-facilitated
resettlement, about 55,680 of the 1.2 million
refugees in need of resettlement in 2018
were actually resettled—a 14% decrease
compared to equivalent 2017 figures.
The largest number of UNHCR-facilitated
resettlement departures in 2018 were
from major refugee-hosting countries,
including Turkey (16,000) followed by
Lebanon (8,390), the United Republic
of Tanzania (6,490), Jordan (6,390) and
Uganda (5,480). The top five resettlement
countries accepting UNHCR’s submissions
in 2018 were the United States of America,
Canada, the United Kingdom, France and
Sweden.
Out of more than 81,337 resettlement
submissions to 29 resettlement States,
the majority of referred refugees were from
Syria (28,189), the Democratic of the Congo

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

These areas will be relevant to the
development of UNHCR’s 2019-2021
strategy on resettlement and complementary
pathways to help increase the pool of
resettlement places, encourage more
countries to participate in global
resettlement efforts, and increase access
to complementary pathways for refugees.
The development of this consultative
strategy, which started toward the end of
2018, should be completed by mid-2019.

(the DRC, 21,807), Somalia (4,926) Eritrea
(4,288) and Afghanistan (3,995). Although
this represented an 8% increase in
submissions compared to 2017 (75,188), the
total number of places only covered 4.7% of
global refugee resettlement needs in 2018.
Of 2018 submissions, 68% were for
survivors of violence and torture, those
with legal and physical protection needs,
and particularly vulnerable women and
girls. Just over half of all resettlement
submissions were children.

UNHCR strengthened partnerships
with non-traditional actors to expand
resettlement, engaging, for example,
with academia and the private sector.
An example of this was the establishment
in February 2018 of a new working group
on innovative partnerships in resettlement,
which consider the engagement of
communities and citizens in community-based
sponsorship programmes. UNHCR
maintained its involvement in the Global
Refugee Sponsorship Initiative, supporting
community-based sponsorship programmes,
including in Germany, Ireland and Spain.
The Syria Core Group on Resettlement
supported and advocated the resettlement

UNHCR helped States to implement
protection-centred resettlement
programmes, informing the priorities and
composition of States’ resettlement
programmes and advocated legal and
policy reform related to resettlement,
particularly within the European Union.
The Annual Tripartite Consultations on
Resettlement focused on ways of
expanding resettlement programmes
and enhancing their effectiveness.
Innovative approaches and partnerships,
evidence-based communications and
successful integration strategies were
identified as key areas to expanding
resettlement in line with the New York
Declaration and the Global Compact.

of Syrians, including through complementary
pathways (see overleaf), and the Central
Mediterranean Core Group made significant
efforts to advocate increasing resettlement
capacity in countries along the Central
Mediterranean route, as well as serving as
a community of best practices for innovative
processing modalities.
UNHCR and IOM’s work on the Emerging
Resettlement Countries Joint Support
Mechanism (ERCM) supported countries
such as Argentina, Brazil and Chile to
realize their commitments to build
resettlement and community sponsorship
programmes. As a result of an evaluation of
the programme in 2018, focus shifted
towards capacity-building based on a better
understanding of State processes and
timeframes.
The Protection Transfer Arrangement (PTA),
providing people at serious risk of harm or
death in countries from the North of Central
America with safe and legal access to a
resettlement country, now in its third year
of implementation, is another good example
of a lifesaving mechanism.

The Global Refugee
Sponsorship
Initiative –
communities
helping
communities.

An innovative lifesaving mechanism for people at heightened risk

Resettlement gave Bertine Bahige a new chance in life. The
former Congolese refugee, resettled in the United States of
America, would have never imagined he would one day call
Wyoming home.

© UNHCR/Cynthia Hunter

From child refugee in Mozambique to
school principal in the United States

The Protection Transfer Arrangement (PTA) is a unique example of a sub-regional burden- and
responsibility-sharing mechanism providing people with safe and legal access to a resettlement
country. Originally consolidated in El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, it was successfully
expanded in 2018 to new resettlement countries, including Australia, Brazil and Uruguay.
In 2018, 515 cases (1,456 people) were submitted to the United States of America, 36 to Australia,
18 to Uruguay, and six to Brazil. During the year, 150 people were resettled—142 to the
United States and eight to Uruguay.

“All refugees are asking for is an opportunity […] Sometimes
we look at it as, ‘How much is that going to cost me?’ But
we fail to look at it from the other side – ‘What can refugees
bring? How can they enrich our community?’”

Since its inception, UNHCR and partners have identified almost 2,500 people at heightened
risk and in need of international protection to be considered by the PTA. More than 1,000 cases
were submitted to a resettlement country—one third of whom departed.

—Bertine Bahige, Congolese refugee at his
school in Wyoming.

UNHCR hopes that submission capacity will ensure at least 1,000 people per year
depart from the three countries. An evaluation of the effectiveness of the PTA was
completed and the resulting recommendations will guide the PTA action plan in 2019.

230 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 231

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Complementary pathways for
admission to third countries

1.5

million
people have
been granted
either refugee
status or a
complementary
form of protection
since 2010.

Complementary pathways for refugees can
include family reunification, scholarships
and education programmes, opportunities
for labour mobility (including through the
identification of refugees with skills needed
in third countries), community sponsorship
schemes, and special visa and humanitarian
admission programmes.
Complementary pathways for admission
to third countries are an expression of
international solidarity with host countries
and communities, with the concrete effect of
facilitating access to protection and easing
pressures on host countries. However, they
need to be made available to refugees in a
more systematic, organized, sustainable and
gender-responsive basis, incorporating
appropriate protection safeguards.

The joint
UNHCR-OECD
report
“Safe pathways
for refugees”.

With the objective of expanding such
pathways, UNHCR provided guidance to the
Irish Government on its Humanitarian
Admission Programme 2 (IHAP) and to
Sweden on family reunification. The Office
also supported the Government of Japan’s
initiative for the future of Syrian refugees
to allow 30 refugees to complete masters’
degrees. Partnership with the NGO Talent
Beyond Boundaries (TBB) helped to open
up employment opportunities for refugees
in third countries, and United World
Colleges helped to expand secondary
education for refugee students in third
countries. By the end of 2018, some
12,000 people and over 200 professions
were registered in the TBB refugee talent
database in the Middle East and North
Africa region.
There are challenges to achieving
complementary pathways, with refugees
frequently unable to obtain exit permits,

232 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

visa or travel documents, for example.
Some programmes lacked adequate
protection safeguards in hosting countries,
had limited resources to cover refugees’
needs, and others had strict eligibility
criteria that did not take into account
refugees’ specific situations. One of the
most significant concerns is refugees’
inability to remain in the country of the
complementary pathways programme in the
event they are unable to return to the first
country of asylum or their country of origin
after the programme’s completion.
With data crucial to expanding
complementary pathways, UNHCR and
OECD released a joint report on the use of
complementary pathways, focusing on first
entry permits granted to nationals from
Afghanistan, Eritrea, Iraq, Somalia and Syria
from 2010 to 2017. During this period, more
than 1.5 million were granted either refugee
status (890,000 people) or complementary
forms of protection (633,000). This
compares to a total of 566,900 first
residence permits granted for family
(487,300 permits), work (25,400 permits), or
education-related reasons (54,200 permits).
During the same period, some
350,400 people from the five populations
arrived in OECD countries through
resettlement processes. This report
concluded that despite significant recourse
to complementary pathways by the five
nationalities in question, substantial
potential exists for expanding the
programme.
With regular updates, the report will be
issued every two years, with the first one to
be completed in 2020, covering 2018-2019
data. The findings from this report will
contribute to the development of the
2019-2021 strategy to expand resettlement
and complementary pathways as envisaged
by the Global Compact on Refugees.

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

DURABLE SOLUTIONS
POTENTIAL FOR VOLUNTARY RETURN REALIZED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Support voluntary repatriation

Supported returns to countries including Afghanistan, Burundi, Chad, Rwanda,
Somalia and Sudan.

REINTEGRATION MADE MORE SUSTAINABLE. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Make reintegration more sustainable

Contributed to multi-partner durable solutions strategies in situations involving
reintegration of refugees and IDPs, including through analysing and addressing
housing, land and property issues.
Maintained analysis and dialogue with refugees and returnees in countries where there
was potential for return through focus groups, intention/perception surveys and return
monitoring.

COMPREHENSIVE SOLUTIONS STRATEGY DEVELOPED, STRENGTHENED OR UPDATED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Develop and implement strategy

Developed 16 and revised 6 strategies with partners implemented in 22 country operations.
Finalized development of a rights-mapping tool, to be rolled out in 5-8 operations in 2019.

POTENTIAL FOR INTEGRATION REALIZED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Make integration more sustainable

Worked with countries of asylum including Ethiopia and Liberia to identify legal and
administrative barriers to local integration and provided support in addressing them.

POTENTIAL FOR RESETTLEMENT REALIZED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Identify and submit resettlement cases

Submitted 81,337 resettlement dossiers globally to 29 States (target was for
120,000 people).
Submitted 11 resettlement proposals advocating key priority situations to resettlement
States, which led to an 8% increase of resettlement places.

Arrange resettlement departures

Supported the departure of nearly 55,680 refugees to 27 resettlement countries.

Optimize the resettlement process

Rolled out a resettlement performance indicator dashboard to monitor monthly
performance of UNHCR resettlement operations and States’ programmes.

Training and capacity building

Organized 2 resettlement learning programmes in Nairobi, training some
52 resettlement staff to strengthen the quality of resettlement processing in countries
along the central Mediterranean route.
Supported Brazil with the reform of its legal framework to receive refugees as part of its
humanitarian visa program, through the ERCM. The first arrivals are expected in early
2019 from the North of Central America.
Supported Argentina, through the ERCM, to grant residence permits to over 140 Syrian
refugees, who now have access to work and education, and can apply for asylum and
for citizenship after two-years of residence in the country.

Complementary Pathways

Implemented family reunification project facilitating 30 cases of resettlement to Sweden
through the identification, counselling, processing and referral of eligible cases.
Provided guidance to IHAP to allow humanitarian admission for 530 eligible family
members of Irish citizens.
Supported the implementation of a pilot project in Kenya and Lebanon to provide and
improve access to labour mobility opportunities in Canada under the “Economic mobility
pilot project” (the Government of Canada in partnership with RefugePoint and TBB)
which grants refugees permanent residency status.
Supported the Government of Japan’s initiative for the future of Syrian refugees creating
opportunities for Syrian students and their families (30 people in all) from Lebanon and
Jordan to complete masters’ degrees in Japan for the 2018-2019 academic year.
Supported the establishment of the “African Union Protocol on free movement of
persons, right of residence and right of establishment”.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 233

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

ACCESS TO QUALITY EDUCATION
© UNHCR/Roger Arnold

for refugees and host communities in
Uganda. Between 2017 and 2018, the
number of school-age refugee children
increased by 1 million worldwide. With the
combined efforts of governments, UNHCR
and partners succeeded in enrolling over
500,000 children in school in 2018, but
some 4 million refugee children still
remained out of school. By the end of 2018,
targeted programmes resulted in the
enrolment of an additional 200,000 children
(almost 50% of whom were girls) into
primary education across twelve countries.

© UNHCR/Anthony Karumba

234 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

processes. For example, national action
plans were developed in Djibouti, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Uganda and
Zambia together with experts from
ministries of education and civil society
partners to improve collaboration across
humanitarian and development planning
processes for improved quality and access
to education for refugee and host
community children and youth. In East
Africa, a second meeting of IGAD Ministries
of Education worked with UNHCR, the
European Union and other partners to
develop plans to support the systematic
inclusion of refugees into national services
across the region by 2020, guided by the
goals of the Global Compact and the
Djibouti Declaration. This includes
developing costed plans in line with the
September 2018 education response plan

500,000
children were
enrolled in
school in 2018
through the
combined efforts
of governments,
UNHCR and
partners.

Strengthened collaboration and partnerships
with ministries of education has been
central to this endeavour. In Kenya, for
example, all refugee camp schools have
been registered as public entities and
enrolment of host community children has
been fostered. In Ethiopia, the Government
committed to increasing refugee enrolment
in primary, secondary and tertiary education
as part of efforts to positively address
refugee education within the national
system. In Yemen, the Ministry of Education
became an official UNHCR education
partner in implementing the refugee
education programme, an important step
towards national system inclusion.

Sunflower Learning Centre in Kutupalong Extension Camp 4, Bangladesh, is the first two-storey building in the camp
and was designed to save space and reduce overcrowding.

The Global Compact on Refugees and its
integrated global programme of action
provides an opportunity to enhance the
quality and inclusiveness of national
education systems, facilitating access to
education for children and youth from
refugees and host community alike. In line
with SDG 4 (Inclusive and equitable
quality education and lifelong learning
opportunities for all), and as a member
of the SDG Education 2030 steering
committee, UNHCR advocated inclusion
of forcibly displaced people into the agenda
of all regional SDG 4 meetings in 2018.
This resulted in regional and global
commitments for the inclusion of refugees,
IDPs, asylum-seekers and stateless children
and youth in education systems. UNHCR
leveraged a variety of partnerships to
advocate and support refugee-inclusive
multi-year national education planning

UNHCR’s youth education programme in
Kenya, Pakistan, Rwanda and Uganda set
a new benchmark for initiatives by seeking
to ensure that more refugee youth have
access to quality post-primary education.
The four-year programme targets
232,000 youth in all four countries.
Cash-based initiatives have been expanded
due to the costs associated with the
specialized teaching that secondary
education requires, which are a central
barrier to accessing education.

1 million refugee children enrolled
in school thanks to Educate A Child
partnership
Educate A Child (EAC), a global programme of the Qatari
Foundation Education Above All, remained one of UNHCR’s
most valuable private sector partners in 2018, with a
contribution of $14.1 million. 2018 was also the year of
a great milestone, as UNHCR and EAC celebrated one
million children enrolled in primary school
in 12 countries in Africa, Asia and the Middle
East since the beginning of the partnership
in 2012.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 235

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Close to 6,600 students received university
scholarships through the DAFI scholarship
programme for tertiary education in 2018.
With the United Nations Volunteers (UNV),
UNHCR launched a pilot project promoting
refugee engagement and empowerment
through volunteerism. Complementing the
DAFI tertiary scholarship programme, this
joint initiative offers newly graduated

Empowering refugees through cash for education
The ultimate goal of cash for education is to increase access and retention in
national education systems. A UNHCR report, “Cash for Education:
A global review of UNHCR programmes in refugee settings”, concluded
that cash assistance has a positive impact on school enrolment,
attendance and educational outcomes of girls and boys. The size and
duration of the transfer greatly influences its long-term impact.
In the DRC, this approach has proven very useful. Refugees
highlighted that being able to pay for school and teachers themselves
significantly improved their status in the community, and their influence on their
children’s education.

Cash for education

A global review of UNHCR programs
in refugee settings

refugees a volunteer assignment with
development organizations in their country
of asylum. In 2018, 14 DAFI refugee
volunteers were deployed in Ghana and
Senegal with various UN Agencies (IOM,
UNCDF, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIDO,
UN Women, and the UN University Institute
for Natural Resources in Africa).

1

“Her turn” –
making refugee
girls’ education
a priority.

In partnership with Jigsaw Consult, UNHCR
initiated a youth-led research programme in
Pakistan and Rwanda aimed at training
young refugees in participatory research to
systematically identify barriers to transition
from primary to secondary education and
develop solutions. With the support of
UNHCR’s partner—LDS Charities, the
humanitarian arm of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints—schoolrooms
were built and refurbished across Kenya,
Pakistan, Rwanda and Uganda; a youth
centre was established; and specific support
provided to ensure that educational
environments were places of safety for
adolescent girls.
UNHCR supported flexible and certified
accelerated education options for refugee
children and youth who have missed out on
schooling. To design effective and
coordinated responses, UNHCR led the
accelerated education working group, which
included the Education and Conflict Crisis
Network, International Rescue Committee,

236 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Norwegian Refugee Council, Plan
International, Save the Children, UNESCO,
UNICEF, USAID and War Child Holland. The
Group worked with governments, partners
and national education institutions in
Burundi, the DRC, Kenya, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Sudan and Uganda to
develop action plans to expand certified
accelerated education programming for
both refugee and host community youth.
For millions of women and girls among the
world’s growing refugee population,
education remains an aspiration, not a
reality. “Her turn”, a UNHCR report launched
on International Women’s Day, revealed that
refugee girls at secondary level are only half
as likely to enrol in school as their male
peers, even though girls make up 50% of
the school-age refugee population. The
report documented barriers to education
faced by girls, and recommended seven
practical ways to enhance girls participation
and attendance at school.

© UNHCR/Antoine Tardy

“Cash for Education: direction and key considerations” includes guidance on
a range of strategies, such as use of cash for education as part of cash for
basic needs; the monetization of school material and a move from
conditional to unconditional cash for education, where appropriate;
and from indirect to direct implementation, using UNHCR’s existing
cash delivery mechanisms.

evidence-base of effective
methods to scale and evaluate
programs for refugee education.

Working in partnership to support
innovative education programmes
UNHCR partnered with the United
Kingdom’s Department for International
Development (DFID) and UNICEF to
establish the first Humanitarian Education
Accelerator (HEA). The programme
builds on UNICEF and UNHCR’s earlier
collaboration with DFID’s Amplify
programme, which sought to nurture and
test innovative ideas in the earliest
stages of development, helping
understand how to transform good pilot
projects into scalable educational
initiatives for refugees and displaced
communities worldwide. By developing a
cohort of successful humanitarian
innovators, the goal is to build a strong

The HEA supported innovative education
programmes through education
partners—including Caritas Switzerland,
Kepler, Libraries Without Borders, War
Child Holland and World University
Service Canada—across Africa, Asia,
Eastern Europe, and the Middle East.
As a result of HEA-facilitated work,
education partners developed solid
business models for scaling and rigorous
monitoring and evaluation plans, to build
on evidence on what does or does not
work in their education programming.
By extension, these new skills and
processes are allowing partners to reach
more refugee children and improve overall
learning outcomes. Data analysis and
validation of findings for these evaluations
and the larger HEA meta-evaluation
began in the last quarter of 2018,
with key learnings and recommendations
to be developed for 2019.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 237

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

Connected learning

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

© UNHCR/Anthony Karumba

BASIC NEEDS AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES
IMPROVE ACCESS TO QUALITY EDUCATION. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Leverage partnerships and strengthen
capacity for refugee inclusion in national
education systems

Supported sector planning in Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, the Republic of
the Congo, the DRC, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Uganda and Zambia.
Worked with the Inter-agency Network for Education in Emergencies and the Global
Education Cluster to strengthen education coordination and response including in
Ethiopia, the DRC and Syria to inform joint responses for education in emergencies and
in supporting the inclusion of refugees in national education systems.

Enhance access to quality primary,
secondary and tertiary education

Supported the enrolment of over 200,000 children (94,000 girls) in primary education
by the end of 2018.
Supported over 6,500 refugees at the tertiary level through the DAFI scholarship
programme in 51 countries of asylum, with a new programme opening in Malawi in 2018.

Increase enrolment and retention of girls
in education

Supported the enrolment of 94,000 girls in primary education, with 2,600 female
students awarded a DAFI scholarship.

Strengthen education data and knowledge
management capacity

Developed country-based action plans in 12 countries to improve the availability of
education refugee data through the new Refugee Education Management Information
System, together with ministries of education, UNICEF and partners.

Expand innovation in education to improve
access to quality education

Supported (through the Connected Learning Consortium in Crisis) over 7,500
participants to study through accredited connected learning programmes in over
12 countries.

Somali refugees pursuing a Bachelors in Education at York University (Canada) with UNHCR’s education partner, Windle International
Kenya - Borderless Higher Education, at work in a computer lab in Dadaab refugee camp.

Guided Jigsaw Consult on impact evaluation of the instant network schools,
a partnership between UNHCR and Vodafone Foundation.
POPULATION HAS OPTIMAL ACCESS TO EDUCATION

35 instant
network schools
were established
across Africa
benefitting over

86,000
students.

In partnership with the Vodafone
Foundation, 35 instant network schools
were established in the DRC, Kenya,
South Sudan and Tanzania—transforming
traditional classrooms into vibrant
multimedia learning hubs. This expanding
partnership has now benefited over
86,000 students and 1,000 teachers.
Another example of innovative
programming is the partnership between
UNHCR, Google and Learning Equality
aimed at enabling refugee and host
communities around the globe to actively
participate in the digital education
movement. Through this three-year
collaboration that commenced in 2018,
refugee communities in Jordan, Kenya,
Uganda and Tanzania, for example, are
helping to adapt an open source, offline
platform (Kolibri) for more effective use in
refugee contexts, and enabling secondary

238 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

students to leverage cutting-edge digital
resources focused on science, technology,
engineering and maths, and life skills.

Advocate increased admissions in national
education systems at all levels

Provided country teams with capacity training to develop action plans to improve
refugee access to quality education by including them in national systems across
several countries.

UNHCR worked with ministries and
universities to host two roundtables in
Jordan and Lebanon on the opportunities
and constraints of connected tertiary
education. These meetings fostered
partnerships between local and
international universities, building on the
growth of the Connected Learning in Crises
Consortium, which doubled its membership
in 2018. Co-led by UNHCR and the
University of Geneva, the Consortium
includes 23 university and higher education
partners dedicated to increasing access to
blended higher education opportunities
throughout the world, and specifically within
the Middle East and North Africa region.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 239

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

providers operating in developing countries
in order to strengthen their capacity to
reach people of concern to UNHCR,
including host communities. The facility
extends grants, loans and technical
assistance including remittance services,
mobile money operators, mobile network
operators and aggregators, and initially
targeted eight countries–Cameroon, Chad,
the DRC, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda
and Zambia.

LIVELIHOODS AND ECONOMIC INCLUSION

Livelihoods and Economic Inclusion

75

operations implemented livelihoods
and economic inclusion activities

1.8M
people of concern and host

Benefitting

community members

64 operations
engaged with
development actors

engaged with private
sector

In line with objective two of the Global
Compact on Refugees, in 2018 UNHCR
promoted the economic inclusion of those
who had been forced to flee their homes,
advocating their right to work and earn
a livelihood through market-oriented
programmes. The Office placed due
emphasis on refugees’ resilience,
knowledge and skills, recognizing the
contribution they can make to the
development of their host societies.
This work required strong collaboration
with development actors, the private sector,
government and civil society partners, and
mostly with refugees themselves. UNHCR
focused on ensuring the sustainability and
efficacy of its economic inclusion and
livelihoods initiatives across 75 countries,
which benefitted some 1.8 million people
of concern and host community members.

240 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

53 operations
facilitated access to
financial inclusion

Working towards the financial
inclusion of refugees in host
countries
UNHCR and the Swedish International
Development Agency (Sida) made progress
in implementing the credit guarantee
facility in Jordan and Uganda through the
Grameen Credit Agricole Foundation. Local
microfinance institutions were selected,
and preparations made to initiate lending
operations to refugees. In addition, market
assessments were conducted through the
consulting firm Microfinanza to inform the
microfinance institutions on how to tailor
their services to the needs and challenges
of the refugees.
Access to affordable financial services is
a key component to ensuring the financial
inclusion of refugees. UNHCR and the
UNCDF launched a technical assistance
facility supporting financial service

© UNHCR/Anthony Karumba

UNHCR, Sida and
the Grameen
Credit Agricole
Foundation
together for the
financial inclusion
of refugees.

57operations

UNHCR also increased the engagement of
local financial service providers resulting in
enhanced recognition of the refugee
population as a viable target segment for
financial services. It became clear that
service providers were unaware of the
potential of refugees and members of host
communities as likely clients, who are
reliable and trustworthy, as supported by
multiple studies. UNHCR’s engagement as
a convenor and facilitator resulted in greater
access to qualified providers.

Kigali sees economic sense in
helping refugee entrepreneurs
Nearly 500 Congolese refugee
entrepreneurs were trained in business
skills and received strategic business
consulting services from INKOMOKO,
a business consulting firm that works with
micro, small and medium enterprises in

Microfund for Women (in Jordan) and
Al Majmoua (in Lebanon) now serve more
than 12,000 refugee clients with individual
and group loans, while microfinance
institutions in Morocco (Inmaa and Attil) and
Tunisia (Enda Tamweel) are introducing pilot
lending schemes for refugee entrepreneurs.
The Office’s collaboration with ILO saw a
series of market systems and value chain
analyses of economic opportunities for
refugee communities in 15 countries
(Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Costa Rica,
Djibouti, the DRC, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Mexico, Niger, Pakistan, South Africa,
Tunisia and Zambia) over the last three
years. Assessments for three of them—
Ethiopia, Pakistan and Zambia—were
published in 2018 and the report of three
additional assessments in Brazil, Kenya
and Niger will be released in 2019.

Rwanda. After conducting
their due diligence,
INKOMOKO provided 5,400,000 Rwf
($5.9 million) loans to 14 Congolese
refugees to grow their businesses.
Previous loans provided to refugee
entrepreneurs had a 98% successful
repayment rate. Working to increase
refugee livelihood opportunities is a
priority of the comprehensive refugee
response in Rwanda. Strategic
partnerships with UNHCR and private
sector companies like INKOMOKO have
shown their worth. Refugees come
into the country with
knowledge, skills and a
different culture which
could be of added value.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 241

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

The assessments identified potential
sectors or value chains for the inclusion of
refugees and corresponding interventions
were recommended to achieve this.
Building upon this work, ILO and UNHCR
developed the “Systemic approach to
inclusive markets for refugees and host

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Building the economic self-reliance
of the poorest refugees through the
“graduation approach”

communities”, an approach adjusted to local
contexts, legal frameworks and market
realities. It promotes target group-focused
socioeconomic and market assessments
to determine what is needed to tackle
identified constraints and promote refugee
livelihoods sustainably.

© U. Litscher

The graduation approach targets families in
extreme poverty—those living on less than
$1.25 a day—who are often marginalized
within their communities, and lack access
to much needed services and programmes.

MADE51 – Linking refugees to global markets
Whenever refugees flee, they leave behind their
livelihoods, their prospects and, critically, their capacity
for self-reliance. But what many refugees do retain are
their traditional skills and craftsmanship, from the
leatherworking of the Tuareg in Burkina Faso to the fine
embroidery of the Syrians in Jordan.
MADE51 helps refugees harness their skills for their own
advancement, enabling them to participate in the growing
global economy. By partnering with social enterprises,
retail brands and buyers, UNHCR can connect refugee-made
artisanal products with international markets where they
are in demand.

The level of buyer and visitor interest
exceeded expectations, with follow-up on
over 200 serious business contacts made as
a result of the show and initial, trial orders
placed at the event.
Goodwill Ambassadors emphasized UNHCR’s
work around education and livelihoods with
actress Gugu Mbatha-Raw meeting artisans in
Rwanda working with the MADE51 project.

Rwanda
Humanitarian assistance for refugees has a positive impact on the economies of surrounding host communities.
Every dollar’s worth of food for refugees increased real income for the community around a camp by $1.20. In
two other camps where refugees received monthly cash assistance instead of food, each dollar they received
translated into $1.51 to $1.95 in the local economy.
Uganda
Cash assistance given to refugees produces an income multiplier for host communities. Each dollar increased
real income in and around the settlements by an additional $1 to $1.50.
Lebanon
An evaluation of the winterization cash programme for Syrian refugees in Lebanon showed that cash assistance
had a significant multiplier effect on the local economy. For each dollar spent, the programme generated about
$2.13 in gross domestic product for the Lebanese economy and had no significant impact on inflation.

Promoting climate-smart and
nutrition-sensitive agricultural
programmes
The effects of climate change on agriculture
and supporting resilience for livelihoods are
an increasing challenge for refugees, and to
UNHCR’s work with them. To increase the
inclusion of refugees and host communities
in agriculture-based activities, UNHCR
strengthened its partnership with FAO,

242 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

There is increasing interest in adopting the
graduation approach. UNHCR intends to
build upon the success to date, for instance,
by the Ministry of Social and Economic
Inclusion in Ecuador, the Poverty Alleviation
Fund in Pakistan, and the Food for Peace
multi-year program in Uganda where the
approach has already been adopted.

7,000
refugee
households in
ten countries
moved out of
poverty thanks to
the graduation
approach.

Studies show cash assistance benefits refugees and generous host countries

In MADE51, UNHCR collaborates with select social
enterprises around the world, each of which works
directly with refugee artisans to develop and
produce a unique line in the MADE51 collection.
In Tanzania, Burundian refugees are working with
WomenCraft, one of 11 MADE51 social enterprise
partners, on a special collection of baskets and
wall hangings.

© UNHCR/Jordi Matas

MADE51 products exude a real essence of humanity. They
tell the timely and important story that refugees can be a
vital contributing force within the word economy. The
products of refugees engaged in the MADE51 project hit
global markets in 2018 through the Ambiente Trade Show,
in Frankfurt, which featured 12 export-ready product lines.

In 2018, Argentina, Ecuador, Malawi,
Mozambique, Sudan, Zambia and Zimbabwe
implemented the “graduation approach”,
with Argentina as a new pilot and Ecuador
progressing to its second cycle.
Evaluations conducted in the four completed
pilots—Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Ecuador
and Egypt—showed evidence of the
effectiveness of this approach in facilitating
the economic inclusion of refugees.

Targeting for graduation approach
programmes is context-specific and draws
on the socioeconomic criteria established
for existing cash-based interventions and
other assistance programmes. Providing a
regular and time-bound cash transfer to
enable refugees to meet basic needs is a
key component of the graduation approach.

increasing food security and income
opportunities for refugees in countries
where both agencies are present. Through
this collaboration, technical support was
facilitated for the development of regional
response plans in Ethiopia, Mozambique
and Uganda.
UNHCR coordinated closely with WFP and
relevant agencies to mitigate the impact of
reduced food rations on the well-being of
U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 243

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

the refugees across many operations, most
recently in Nigeria. Food assistance ration
reductions of 18%-50% in WFP interventions
nevertheless affected people of concern in
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Djibouti, the
DRC, Ethiopia, Niger, Mauritania, Rwanda,
South Sudan and Tanzania. The two
agencies implemented their “Joint strategy
on enhancing self-reliance in food security
and nutrition in protracted refugee
situations”, synchronizing the phase-out of
food assistance with greater economic
empowerment and inclusion. In this sense,
UNHCR advocated that short-term
humanitarian assistance be complemented
by longer-term development interventions in
order to build self-reliance and encourage
economic inclusion. This also reduces the
resource burden on host countries, allowing
refugees to become productive contributors
in their host communities.

Promoting the right to work
The 10-point
multi-stakeholder
action plan is
available here.

The right to work is essential to the
economic inclusion of refugees. Despite the
evidence of this, refugees are not allowed to
work in approximately 50% of asylum
countries. Even when the legal right to work
is granted, other barriers hinder the de facto
access to work. The absence of other close
or related rights (such as freedom of

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

movement, housing, land, education, access
to justice and property rights) or the lack of
access to relevant services (such as financial
services, training, certification, social
protection, or employment and business
registration) effectively hinders refugees
from fully enjoying the right to work.

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

DURABLE SOLUTIONS
LIVELIHOODS AND ECONOMIC INCLUSION IMPROVED. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Build institutional capacity to develop
market-oriented and results-driven
livelihood programming

Various studies have identified additional
barriers to work, including limited resources
or skills, exorbitant permit fees, and the
physical location of refugees and refugee
settlements. These barriers mean that many
refugees end up working in the informal
economy, at risk of exploitation,
discrimination, arrest and other abuses.

Released a new Concept Note for the 2019-2023 “Global livelihoods and economic
inclusion strategy” as updated guidance for field operations. 75 country operations
participated in an annual data collection exercise, feeding into the evaluation of
UNHCR’s 2014-2018 livelihoods strategies and approaches and development of the
forthcoming strategy.
Completed, in partnership with ILO, market assessments and value chain analyses
in Brazil, Kenya and Niger.
Rolled out revised livelihoods indicators in 28 country operations.
Carried out 44 missions in 36 countries to support different areas of livelihoods and
economic inclusion programming. Expanded the roster of livelihoods experts with
28 new deployees.
Held trainings on livelihoods and economic inclusion in 16 countries, with participation
of 500 UNHCR staff, government counterparts, development agencies, private sector
and NGOs.
Conducted annual training with ILO on market-based livelihoods interventions with
40 global participants from various humanitarian/development organizations.

UNHCR and ILO promoted decent work
opportunities for Syrian refugees and host
communities in Jordan in line with efforts to
advance SDG 8 (Decent work and economic
growth). The partnership aims to support
both Syrian refugees and Jordanians in
communities hosting the refugees.

Promote the financial inclusion of refugees

Identified microfinance institution partners in Jordan and Uganda to roll out the credit
guarantee facility with the Grameen Credit Agricole Foundation.
Created technical assistance and financial incentives package with UNCDF to encourage
providers to extend their services to refugees in 8 countries within 4 years.
Worked with Financial Sector Deepening Africa in Rwanda, to incentivize financial service
providers to develop market-based financial solutions for refugees. Accelerator grants
were awarded to 5 selected financial service providers.

In 2018, more than 150 employers engaged
in consultations in Brussels, Copenhagen,
Munich, and Toronto to address the barriers
to employment for refugees in OECD
member countries, resulting in a 10-point
multi-stakeholder action plan for employers,
refugees, governments and civil society.

Facilitated 4 workshops between financial service providers (FSP) and refugees resulting
in increased access of refugees to financial services. 16 FSPs in 10 countries are currently
offering financial services to refugees.
Increase access to livelihood for
refugees, through the development
of refugee-inclusive value chains

Provided technical assistance to over 1,000 refugee artisans in 11 countries in partnership
with 12 local social enterprises. 3 global exhibitions were displayed to showcase the
refugee-made product lines. 9 strategic partners were engaged to provide specific
expertise in areas such as legal services, branding/marketing, ethical compliance
clearance processes and trade shows.
Developed, through the partnership with FAO, joint proposals in Ethiopia, Kenya and
Uganda to expand agriculture related activities for refugees.

Having fled to Jordan after losing her son and her home,
a small act of kindness helped Najwa build a successful
business and transform her life in exile.

© UNHCR/Mohammad Hawari

Soap-making offers a fresh start
to grieving Syrian refugee

Initiated discussions with multilateral agencies, private sector entities and research
institutions in Kenya to establish a community of practice to share best practices and
lessons learnt in agriculture in displacement contexts.
Promote an enabling environment to
enhance economic participation and
self-reliance of refugees

Engaged 150 employers in dialogues on employing refugees in Copenhagen, Brussels,
Munich and Toronto. The resulting 10-point multi-stakeholder action plan was published
in 2018.

“My story starts with 20 dinars ($28) and
a can of olive oil… I feel that this is a real
achievement and a miracle.”
—Najwa, Syrian Refugee in Jordan.

244 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 245

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

approach, the Dialogue also provided
an opportunity for different segments
of society to showcase their unique
contributions to comprehensive refugee
responses in urban settings. The Dialogue
was instrumental in renewing the Office’s
commitment to working closely with
organizations such as UN-Habitat on urban
shelter and settlement guidance in 2019.

FINDING ALTERNATIVES TO CAMPS

Finding Alternatives to Camps

61%

of refugees reside outside
of camps

39%

of refugees reside in camps
or camp-like settings

95% of refugees

79% of refugees

in urban locations were living in individual
accommodation

in rural areas were living in some kind
of camp location

In contrast to trends from previous years,
the proportion of refugees living in urban
areas increased slightly from 58% in 2017 to
61% in 2018. Of those in urban areas, 95%
were in individual accommodation of some
kind. In rural areas, however, about 79% of
refugees were living in some kind of camp.

246 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

Recognizing the intrinsic link between urban
and out of camp responses, and building
upon existing infrastructure and ensuring
strong links with host communities, UNHCR
tackled challenges on the policy and
operational fronts, looking to provide
integrated support to national and local
governments.
The High Commissioner’s 2018 Dialogue
focused on protection and solutions in
urban settings and was organized around
the key areas of focus of the Global
Compact. The Dialogue broadened
the focus of discussions to encompass
both humanitarian and development
perspectives on displacement in urban
areas. In the spirit of a “whole-of-society”

The master plan approach to settlement
planning provides a framework for the
spatial design of humanitarian settlements.
It establishes a unique response vision
aligned to national, sub-national and local
development plans and recognizes that
well-planned and designed cities and

© UNHCR/Enoch Kavindele Jr

The High
Commissioner’s
2018 Dialogue
focused on
protection and
solutions in urban
settings, with a
particular focus
on cities.

The most recent figures show that 61% of
refugees worldwide reside outside of
camps while 39% reside in camps or
camp-like settings. With more than half of
the world’s refugees living in urban areas,
city or municipal administrations are being
recognized as some of the most important
stakeholders in the delivery of protection
and assistance to people of concern to
UNHCR.

The operationalization of alternatives to
camps is extremely contextualised, and
differs worldwide. In order to provide
practical guidance on how to achieve a
more integrated settlements approach,
UNHCR developed the “Master plan guiding
principles” which supplements UNHCR’s
Policy on Alternatives to Camps.

human settlements can optimize economies
of agglomeration, protect the natural and
built environment, as well as encourage
social inclusion.
Concrete steps have been taken by a
number of operations to implement the
master plan’s guiding principles. In Kenya
and Uganda, improved processes included
strong engagement with local government
and development partners. This resulted in
multi-year funding and additional technical
expertise helping to create longer-term
approaches to land use and the planning
of social and physical infrastructure
interventions by governments and
development partners. These approaches
also benefited host communities and
helped improve social cohesion with
displaced populations. Through enhancing
area-based approaches and utilizing the skills
of multi-functional teams, comprehensive
medium-term planning helped engage
partners around economic, social
and spatial/land use issues around
a common understanding.

New clinic and schools save lives and
build futures in Zambia
Refugees and their hosts are sharing services as
part of a new approach in Zambia.
“It’s made a big difference because previously this local
community were going 25-30 kilometres [for treatment].
We are saving lives with this institution.”
—Patricia Sampule, a Zambian nurse
working at the temporary clinic in Mantapala
Settlement.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 247

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

ACCESS TO ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Environmental protection
© UNHCR/Xavier Bourgois

The tragedy of forced displacement should
not be exacerbated by damage to the local
environment. A major focus of UNHCR’s
work was addressing environmental
hazards that threaten refugees and host
communities, as well as mitigating
environmental damage in refugees hosting
areas. In Bangladesh, for example, the
mapping of landslide hazard zones was
completed in Kutupalong refugee camp,
resulting in the subsequent relocation of
45,000 people out of very high-risk zones.
Forest preservation was a priority, with
pressure on forests caused by the needs
of both refugees and host communities for
wood in many operations across the world.
In Cameroon, the reforestation project with
Land Life Company exceeded its forest
restoration target by more than 100%, and

A man tends to saplings in a tree nursery at Borgop refugee site, Cameroon, home to 18,000 people who fled violence
in the Central African Republic.

Improving refugees’ access to sustainable
sources of energy, in 2018 UNHCR
collaborated with Engineers Without
Borders USA to build two solar mini-grids
in Mahama camp, Rwanda, which provided
lighting for sports fields and electricity to
other community facilities within the camp.
In Jordan, additions to the solar power
plant now mean the Azraq refugee camp
supplies 55% of electricity for shelter, and
refugees now have 14 hours of power a day.
The plant also benefits Jordan’s national

248 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

objective of reaching 20% of renewable
energy by 2025.
Partnerships were also strengthened with
NORCAP (a standby roster operated by
the Norwegian Refugee Council), and
GIZ (Germany’s Agency for International
Cooperation) to support country offices in
programming and implementing energy
related projects across the globe. These
partnerships will improve delivery of energy
programming in the field, benefiting both
refugees and host communities, in line with
the Comprehensive Refugee Response
Framework.

© UNHCR/Xavier Bourgois

Providing access to energy

in Uganda UNHCR and FAO collaborated
on forest management plans which are
now being used to inform the World Bank’s
environmental investments under the
International Development Association
(IDA18) regional sub-window for refugees
and host communities. Cooperation with
FAO continued on valuation and
management plans for non-timber forest
products that will inform land management
decisions in northern Uganda.
Some of the most successful projects,
such as the reforestation programme in
Cameroon with cocoon technology (see
previous Global Reports for details) are
now being replicated in places like Sudan,
where UNHCR worked with UNEP, UNICEF
and WFP in West Nile and Darfur states to
address the pressure on the environment
caused by the needs of refugees and host
communities for wood.

45,000
people were
moved out of
high-risk zones
in Kutupalong
refugee camp.

Innovative project in Cameroon will
benefit refugees and hosts
A World Bank-funded programme is designed to provide
refugees and residents in poor areas with better health
care, schools and infrastructure.
“Most refugees live side-by-side with Cameroonians in the
regions that are already the poorest and most fragile in
Cameroon, including the area subject to Boko
Haram attacks.”
—Elisabeth Huybens, World Bank country
director for Cameroon.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 249

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

AREAS OF INTERVENTION

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS

BASIC NEEDS AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES
POPULATION HAS INCREASED ACCESS TO CLEAN ENERGY. IN 2018, UNHCR:
Create lighting solutions to improve safety
during hours of darkness

Provided 2,764,505 solar lamps to several operations. Supported the Rwanda operation
with the construction of two off-grid solar systems in camps, as well as the provision
of portable solar lanterns to more than 10,000 households.

Increase access to energy products and
services

Conducted consultations in Cameroon, Chad, the DRC, Ethiopia, Kenya, Niger, Rwanda,
Somalia, Sudan and Tanzania on using cash-based interventions for energy and
provided necessary technical guidance.

Reduce carbon emissions and lower
operational costs

Offset more than 7,800 tons of CO2 from 10 operations including Algeria, Australia,
Canada, Denmark, Geneva Headquarters, Hungary, Kenya, the Republic of the Congo,
Tanzania and Zimbabwe, making those operations climate-neutral for 2018.
Completed first phase of the 2 megawatt solar plant in the vicinity of the Azraq
refugee camp.

Improve health and wellbeing of refugees

Developed field guide for safe access to cooking fuel.

Build capacity and expertise and
strengthen partnerships

Partnered with International Renewable Energy Agency on technical expertise
information on cleaner energy technologies, markets and financing mechanisms
in Ethiopia and Iraq.
Collaborated with Engineers Without Borders USA on technical support in the
implementation of the 2 solar mini-grids project in Mahama camp, Rwanda, and quality
control in the installations of solar street lights.
Partnered with NORCAP to strengthen technical expertise and capacity-building of
UNHCR field operations in energy sector. 10 energy experts will be deployed.

Refine and improve energy interventions
through monitoring and evaluation

250 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

T H E M AT I C C H A P T E R S I B U I L D I N G B E T T E R F U T U R E S

Developed new energy indicators in 10 operations, out of 2, that budgeted for energy
programming in 2018 and launched the online platform of this monitoring tool, which
provides real-time energy data (https://eis.unhcr.org/home).

PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE PROMOTED
SHARED ENVIRONMENT BETTER MANAGED
Prevent or remediate erosion in
camp setting

Supported environmental management plans in Tanzania and erosion control measures,
including checked dams to slow water movement in all camps.
Reduced landslide hazards in Kutupalong camp, Bangladesh, through soil stabilization:
1,155,880 seedlings and grass clumps planted and placed to stabilize ground at risk.

Enhance community-based reforestation
and forest management

Achieved 100 hectares of land restored with economically and ecologically beneficial
trees through the reforestation project with Land Life Company in Cameroon, exceeding
the target of 40 hectares.
Developed forest management plans in Uganda with FAO to inform World Bank
environmental investments under IDA18.

Prevent or remediate unsustainable use
of surface water resources

Helped protect waterways in Tanzania through reforestation around the edges of rivers.
Developed environment section of the shelter section master planning guidelines and
the master plan checklist to ensure inclusion of environmental considerations and
redlines.
Updated checklists for protection in emergencies to take account of environmental
considerations, including ensuring surface water protection.

Support refugees and host communities
to build resilience to climate change

Awarded a grant to undertake a 2-year climate change adaption project in Burundi and
Sudan. The grant value is for land and forest restoration and energy efficiency activities.
Submitted a proposal with Land Life Company to support the restoration of 100 hectares
of degraded land in the White Nile Region in Sudan.
Developed a proposal for submission to Green Climate Fund on climate change
adaptation in the Tanzania, in partnership with UNEP.

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 251

EXCOM MEMBERS
AND PARTIES TO CONVENTIONS

ANNEXES
MEMBERS OF UNHCR’s EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
AND STATES PARTIES TO THE REFUGEE AND
STATELESSNESS CONVENTIONS
UNHCR is governed by the United Nations General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). In 1958,
ECOSOC established the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’s Programme (ExCom), pursuant to a resolution
of the General Assembly. Its main tasks are to approve the High Commissioner’s programmes, advise the High
Commissioner in the exercise of his functions (mainly on protection issues), and oversee the Office’s finances and
administration.
ExCom holds an annual session in Geneva every October. The 69th session took place from 1 to 5 October 2018. Meetings
of the Executive Committee’s Standing Committee are held at various dates throughout the year to carry on the work
between plenary sessions.
ExCom membership is on the widest possible geographical basis from those States (Members of the United Nations) with
a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the solution of refugee problems. By the end of 2018, there were 102 ExCom
members in the following table - in blue - which also shows the State Parties to the 1951 Refugee Convention relating to
the Status of Refugees and its Protocol of 1967 and to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness.

ExCom members (in blue)
and other States parties
to the Conventions

Conventions on
the Status of
Stateless Persons and
Convention
relating to the Status the Reduction of
Statelessness
of Refugees and its
Protocol

1954 1961
1951 1967

Chile and Haïti acceded
to the 1954 and 1961
Conventions on
statelessness in 2018.

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas (the)
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of)

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon

252 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

1951 1967

1992 1992

2003 2003

Canada
Central African Republic

1963 1967

1964

(the)

2005 2005

1981 1981
1995 1995

1988

1961 1967

1972 2014

1993 1993

1994 1994

1954 1973

1973 1973

1954 1973

2008 1972

1993 1993

1996 1996

1993 1993
1972
2001 2001
1953 1969

1960 2014

1990 1990

2006 2015

1962 1970

2011 2011

1982 1982

1983 1983

1993 1993

1993 1996

1969 1969

1969

1960 1972

1996 2007

1993 1993

2012 2012

1980 1980

2012 2017

1963 1971
1987
1992 1992
1961 1967

Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czechia
Dem. Rep. of the Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon

1954 1961

1969 1969

1978

1962 1967
1981 1981

1999 1999

1972 1972

2018 2018

1982 1982

2018 2018

1961 1980

2014

1962 1970
1978 1978

1977 1977

1961 1970

2013 2013

1992 1992

1992 2011

1963 1968
1993 1993

2004 2001

1965 1975
1952 1968

1956 1977

1977 1977
1994 1994
1978 1978
1955 1969

1970 2012

1981 1981
1983 1983

2015

1986 1986
1997 1997
1969 1969
1972 1972

1972

1968 1968

1968 2008

1954 1971

1960

1964 1973

Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea‑Bissau
Haiti
Holy See
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mexico
Monaco
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay

1951 1967

1954 1961

1966 1967

2014 2014

1999 1999

2011 2014

1953 1969

1976 1977

1963 1968
1960 1968
1983 1983

1975
2000 2001

1965 1968

1962 2014

1976 1976

2016 2016

1984 1984

2018 2018

1956 1967
1992 1992

2012 2012

1989 1989

2001 2009

1955 1968
1976 1976
1956 1968

1962 1973

1954 1968

1958

1954 1972

1962 2015

1964 1980

2013

1981 1982
1999 1999
1966 1981
1983 1983
1996 1996
1997 1997
1981 1981
1964 1980

1999 1992
1974 2004
1964 2004
1989 1989

1957 1968

2009 2009

1997 1997

2000 2013

1953 1971

1960 2017

1967
1987 1987

2009

1973 1973

2016 2016

1971 1971
1987 1987
2000 2000

2000

1954 2010
2006 2006

2006 2013

1956 1971
1983 1989

2014 2014

1995 1995
2011 2011
1956 1968

1962 1985

1960 1973

2006

1980 1980

2013 2013

1961 1970

2014 1985

1967 1968

2011 2011

1953 1967

1956 1971

1978 1978

2011 2011

1986 1986
1970 1970

2014 2012

Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Korea
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Thailand
the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Timor-Leste
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom of
Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay

1951 1967

1954 1961

1964 1983

2014 2014

1981 1981

2011

1991 1991
1960 1976

1962

2002 2002

2012 2012

1991 1991

2006 2006

1993 1993
1980 1980

1993 2003

1999

1988 1994
1978 1978
1963 1967

2005 2005

2001 2001

2001 2011

1980 1980
1981 1981

2016 2016

1993 1993

2000 2000

1992 1992

1992

1995 1995
1978 1978
1996 1996
2018 2018
1978 1978

1997 2018

1974 1974
1978 1978
2000 1969

1999 1999

1954 1967

1965 1969

1955 1968

1972

1993 1993

1994 1994

South Sudan acceded
to the 1951 Refugee
Convention and to
its Protocol of 1967
in December 2018.
Spain signed the
1961 Convention on
the Reduction of
Statelessness in 2018.

1994

2003 2003
1962 1969
2000 2000

1966

1957 1968

1969 2000

1962 1968

2015

1998 1998

2011 2012

1986 1986
1976 1976

1965

2002 2002

2013 2013

1954 1968

1959 1966

1964 1968
1968
1970 1970

2004 2001

1986

(Bolivarian Republic of)

Total Parties

2006 2006

2002

Venezuela
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2012 2012

1992 1992

1980 1980
1969 1969

1974

1981 1981

1998

146.

147

91.

73

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 253

ACRONYMS
3RP Regional Refugee and
Resilience Plan in response to the
Syria crisis
AAP Accountability to affected
people (for UNHCR)
AU African Union
BIMS Biometric Identity
Management System
CAR (the) The Central African
Republic
CBIs Cash-based interventions
CBP Community-based protection
[approach] (for UNHCR)
CCCM Camp coordination and
camp management (Cluster)
CERF Central Emergency
Response Fund
COP 24 24th United Nations
Climate Change Conference
CRIs Core relief items
CRRF Comprehensive Refugee
Response Framework
DAFI German Albert Einstein
Academic Scholarship Programme
for Refugees
DFID Department for International
Development (United Kingdom)
DRC (the) The Democratic
Republic of the Congo
ECOSOC Economic and Social
Council (UN)
ERCM Emerging Resettlement
Countries Joint Support
Mechanism
EU European Union
ExCom Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner’s
Programme

HIV and AIDS Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and
Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
IASC Inter-Agency Standing
Committee
ICT Information and
communications technology
IDA International Development
Association (World Bank)
IDP Internally displaced person/
people
IFRC International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies
IGAD Intergovernmental Authority
on Development
ILO International Labour
Organization
IOM International Organization for
Migration
JPO Junior Professional Officer
LGBTI Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex
MSB Swedish Civil Contingencies
Agency
MYMP Multi-year, multi-partner
(for UNHCR)
NCA North of Central America
NFIs Non-food items
NGO Non-governmental
organization
OCHA Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (UN)
ODA Official Development
Assistance
OECD Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development

FAO Food and Agriculture
Organization (UN)

OSCE Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe

GSP Global Strategic Priority
(for UNHCR)

QAI Quality assurance initiative

HALEP High Alert List for
Emergency Preparedness

254 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

RBM Results-based management
(for UNHCR)
RRP Refugee Response Plan

RSD Refugee status
determination
SDC Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation
SDG Sustainable Development
Goal(s)
SGBV Sexual and gender-based
violence
Sida Swedish International
Development Cooperation
Agency
UN Women United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women
UNAIDS Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNCDF United Nations Capital
Development Fund
UNDAF United Nations
Development Assistance
Framework
UNDP United Nations
Development Programme
UNEP United Nations
Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
UNFCCC United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change
UNFPA United Nations Population
Fund
UN-Habitat United Nations
Human Settlements Programme
UNICEF United Nations Children’s
Fund
UNVs United Nations Volunteers
UPR Universal Periodic Review
(by the Human Rights Council)
USAID United States Agency for
International Development
WASH Water, sanitation and
hygiene
WFP World Food Programme
WHO World Health Organization

U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8 255

CREDITS
UNHCR wishes to acknowledge the contributions of all staff and consultants at Headquarters
and in the field who have participated in the preparation of the narrative, financial
and graphic components of this document.
Concept design: UNHCR
Layout design, production and printing: Printing Section, Production and Support Service,
United Nations Office – Geneva. (1906514E).
The maps in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of
UNHCR concerning the legal status of any country or territory or area, of its authorities,
or the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.
Data in this report are drawn from the most recent statistics available to UNHCR, and from
other United Nations agencies. For any corrigenda found subsequent to printing, please visit
the Publications page on the Global Focus website (http://reporting.unhcr.org).
All amounts are in US dollars unless otherwise specified.
UNHCR
PO BOX 2500
1211 Geneva 2
Switzerland
Tel: 0041 22 739 81 35
Email: HQGARS@unhcr.org
http://reporting.unhcr.org and www.unhcr.org
Twitter@UNHCRgov | Twitter@refugees | Facebook | Instagram
Cover photo:
Five-year-old Somali refugee Filsan looks out from her home in Dadaab, Kenya, with her
three-year-old sister Sundus. The siblings were born in Ifo refugee camp and the elder
has ambitions she is already trying to fulfil through school.
© UNHCR/Vania Turner

256 U N H C R G LO B A L R E P O R T 2 0 1 8

reporting.unhcr.org
www.unhcr.org

Published by UNHCR
PO Box 2500
1211 Geneva 2
Switzerland
For information and inquiries
please contact:
DRRM
hqfr00@unhcr.org
HQGARS@unhcr.org
Twitter@UNHCRgov | Twitter@refugees
Facebook | Instagram

