COMMITTED TO
IMPROVING THE STATE
OF THE WORLD

Global Risks 2007
A Global Risk Network Report

A World Economic Forum Report
in collaboration with

Citigroup
Marsh & McLennan Companies (MMC)
Swiss Re
Wharton School Risk Center

World Economic Forum
January 2007

The information in this report, or on which this report is based, has been obtained from sources that the authors believe to
be reliable and accurate. However, it has not been independently verified and no representation or warranty, express or
implied, is made as to the accuracy or completeness of any information obtained from third parties. In addition, the
statements in this report may provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any
statement that does not directly relate to a historical fact or a current fact. These statements involve known and unknown
risks, uncertainties and other factors which are not exhaustive. The companies contributing to this report operate in a
continually changing environment and new risks emerge continually. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
these statements. The companies contributing to this report undertake no obligation to publicly revise or update any
statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise and they shall in no event be liable for any
loss or damage arising in connection with the use of the information in this report.
This work was prepared by the Global Risk Network of the World Economic Forum.
World Economic Forum
91-93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland
Tel.: +41 (0)22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0)22 786 2744
E-mail: charles.emmerson@weforum.org
www.weforum.org
© 2007 World Economic Forum
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying and recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system.

REF: 150107

Contents

Introduction

4

Risk Assessment

6

Scenarios

13

Understanding the Nature of Global Risks

19

Risk Mitigation

21

Contributors

31

Participants

32

3

Introduction

At the core of this year’s overview of risks to the
global community over the next decade is a
fundamental disconnect between risk and mitigation.
Expert opinion suggests that levels of risk are rising
in almost all of the 23 risks on which the Global Risk
Network has been focused over the last year – but
mechanisms in place to manage and mitigate risk at
the level of businesses, governments and global
governance are inadequate. The global economy
has been expanding faster than at any time in
history – but it remains vulnerable.
Some tactical gains have been made in specific
areas of risk mitigation: despite the raised threat of
terrorism, cooperation on dealing with the threat
continues to improve; fears of a major pandemic
outbreak have driven a major effort to upgrade our
global preparedness to identify and isolate new
diseases; there is a growing recognition of the need
to improve access to mechanisms of risk transfer in
emerging markets, to allow risks to be priced in a
way that allows the potential economic growth of
this century to be fully unlocked.
There has also been major improvement in the
understanding of the interdependencies between
global risks, the importance of taking an integrated
risk management approach to major global
challenges and the necessity of attempting to deal
with root causes of global risks rather than reacting
to the consequences.

4

Climate change is now seen as one of the defining
challenges of the 21st century – and as a global risk
with impacts far beyond the environment. Effective
mitigation of climate change may ultimately have the
consequence of improving resilience to oil price
shocks in developed countries by moving them from
hydrocarbons to alternative energy sources;
ineffective mitigation of climate change will almost
certainly be a factor in major interstate and civil wars
within the next 50 years. The way in which climate
change is dealt with at the global level will be a
leading indicator of the world’s capacity to manage
globalization in an equitable and sustainable way.
But the tactical gains may be illusory and are
certainly temporary. The manifestation of any
number of global risks in the way described in the
plausible scenarios in this report could quickly put
those gains into reverse.
Global Risks 2007 suggests two possible
institutional innovations that may help mobilize
businesses and governments to approach the global
risks of the next 10 years. One is the idea of a
Country Risk Officer – an analogy to Chief Risk
Officers in the corporate world – intended as a focal
point for managing a portfolio of risk across
disparate interests, setting national prioritization of
risk and allowing governments to engage in the
forward action needed to begin managing global
risks rather than coping with them. The second is to
create an avant-garde of relevant governments and

companies around different global risks – “coalitions
of the willing” – allowing risk mitigation to be a
process of gradually-expanding alliances rather than
a proposition requiring permanent consensus.
Above all, Global Risks 2007 makes the case for the
active engagement of all sections of the international
community in dealing with global risks. No one group
has the ability to effectively mitigate most global
risks. Interdependency implies not just common
vulnerability, but a shared responsibility to act.
A longer version of this report and further information
on the Global Risk Network can be found at
www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/globalrisk. The
longer report includes further background on
methodology, risk descriptions, numeric
assessments, the process of workshops leading to
this report and additional mitigation and scenario
examples.

5

Risk Assessment

Risks are idiosyncratic – a risk to one group may
present an opportunity to another. The qualification
of global risks lies in their systemic nature: their
impacts challenge the integrity of the system. Their
consequences are harder to predict, frequently
disproportionate, difficult to contain and present
challenges to us all.
The key newcomers to the list for the Global Risks
2007 report include a number of geopolitical risks
which, though difficult to measure, specify and
predict, were considered integral parts of the risk
landscape. The risk of major interstate and civil war
– often inadequately priced in markets – was one
risk considered. Another was the category of failed
and failing states as an underlying risk to systemic
integrity. Both featured in a number of scenarios
developed by the Global Risk Network.
Overall, the Global Risk Network identified 23 core
global risks to the international community over the
next 10 years. A further description of the core
global risks can be found in the longer version of the
report at www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/globalrisk

“Core” Global Risks

Economic
•
•
•
•
•

Oil price shock/energy supply interruptions
US current account deficit/fall in US$
Chinese economic hard landing
Fiscal crises caused by demographic shift
Blow up in asset prices/excessive
indebtedness

Environmental
•
•
•
•
•

Climate change
Loss of freshwater services
Natural catastrophe: Tropical storms
Natural catastrophe: Earthquakes
Natural catastrophe: Inland flooding

Geopolitical
• International terrorism
• Proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD)
• Interstate and civil wars
• Failed and failing states
• Transnational crime and corruption
• Retrenchment from globalization
• Middle East instability
Societal
•
•
•
•

Pandemics
Infectious diseases in the developing world
Chronic disease in the developed world
Liability regimes

Technological
• Breakdown of critical information
infrastructure (CII)
• Emergence of risks associated with
nanotechnology

6

Understanding Geopolitical Risk
The first years of this century have been marked
by the return of geopolitical risks to global
prosperity and stability. In 2006, the deterioration
of the situation in Iraq and the Middle East
occupied the full attention of some governments,
reducing “bandwidth” available for focus on other
global risks and increasing fears of the
fragmentation of the international system. Should
any of the main geopolitical risks outlined here
worsen considerably, the environment for business
and society could be changed beyond recognition.
In the scenarios below, geopolitics frequently
provide the narrative and backdrop to the
emergence of other global risks.
Despite their importance, however, geopolitical
risks are hard to quantify in terms of likelihood and
severity, and therefore difficult to price. While
expert opinion suggests that geopolitical risk
worsened in 2006, market expectations of volatility
tended to fall, indicating a major disconnect. The
concerted action of governments may help to
reduce overall geopolitical risks in 2007 –
improved pricing of these risks may help
businesses to manage their consequences when
they do occur.
The range of different trajectories along which
geopolitical risks can develop – contingent on
human decision-making and a range of other

factors – makes their outcomes hard to predict
with accuracy. For example, while the conditions
for the outbreak of war may be easily identifiable –
militarization, existing disputes, an inflexible
attitude by the parties – the exact sequence of
events which turn conditions into reality are
impossible to predict. The “gambler’s mentality” is
unlikely to succeed.
As a result, geopolitical risk analysts normally
focus on underlying trends – economic decline,
environmental degradation, population density –
which may provide keys to the emergence of a
major event. Defence planners cope with
geopolitical risk on a prudential basis – preparing
for low-probability, high-severity risks (such as
interstate war) which present a sovereign risk, as
well as a range of more immediate challenges.
Though businesses with international exposure
cannot pursue the same catch-all policy, they
should look beyond discrete events and manage
their risk portfolio through an appreciation of
underlying dynamics. The challenge for a geopolitical
risk analyst advising business is to help distinguish
between events with a tactical impact and those
that significantly alter underlying trends and, with
them, the overall calculation of risk.

These core global risks were assessed in terms of
likelihood and severity.

It was only in July 1914, a month before the outbreak of
World War I, that liquidity in global equity markets dried up.
Before then, the markets had not priced the geopolitical risk
of war, one that would kill millions and trigger a retrenchment
from globalization.

In addressing likelihood, actuarial principles were
applied in the few cases where sufficient data
existed; in most cases only qualitative assessments,
based on expert opinion, were possible. In
assessing severity, two indices were considered:
destruction of assets/economic damage and –
where applicable – human lives lost. Although some
risks are inherently long term (such as climate
change), and others (such as an oil-price shock)
could occur in the near term, all risks were evaluated
within a 10-year time frame.

7

The 23 Core Global Risks: Likelihood with Severity by Economic Loss

250 billion - 1 trillion more than 1 trillion
50-250 billion

Retrenchment from
globalization

Asset price collapse

Interstate and
civil wars

Pandemics

Oil price shock
China economic hard landing

Middle East
instability
Coming
fiscal crises
NatCat:
NatCat:

Tropical storms
Earthquakes

NatCat:

Inland flooding

10-50 billion

Severity (in US$)

Increasing consensus around risk

Nanotechnology

Transnational crime and corruption
Breakdown of CII
Fall in $
Chronic disease in
Climate change
developed countries
Liability regimes
Developing world disease
Loss of freshwater services
Failed and failing states
Proliferation of WMD

2-10 billion

International terrorism

below 1%

1-5%

5-10%

10-20%

above 20%

Likelihood

Note: Likelihood was based on actuarial principles where possible. For most risks, however, qualitative assessment was used.

8

16 Core Global Risks: Likelihood with Severity by Number of Deaths

200,000-1,000,000 more than 1,000,000

Developing world disease
Pandemics

40,000-200,000
8,000-40,000

Interstate and civil wars

Chronic disease in
developed countries
Middle East instability

NatCat:

Inland flooding

NatCat:

Earthquakes

NatCat:

Tropical storms

1,600-8,000

Severity (in no. of deaths)

Increasing consensus around risk

Loss of freshwater services
Climate
Failed and failing states
change
Transnational crime and corruption

International terrorism

Nanotechnology

Breakdown of CII
Proliferation of WMD

below 1%

1-5%

5-10%

10-20%

above 20%

Likelihood

Note: For seven of the core global risks, severity by number of deaths was not applicable. Likelihood was based on actuarial principles where possible.
For most risks, however, qualitative assessment was used.

9

In addition to risk assessment in terms of likelihood
and severity, the Global Risk Network developed a
qualitative global risk “barometer”, based on expert
judgement of the outlook for global risks. This is
essentially a forward-looking measure: it does not
look at how the risk has played out over the last
year; rather, it assesses whether the seriousness of

the risk for the next 10 years has become more or
less acute. For example, while 2006 saw fewer
tropical storms than in 2005, expert consensus was
clear that the risk trend is moving upwards, with
growing agreement on the impact of climate change
on severe meteorological events.

A qualitative global risk “barometer”
Key:

Increased overall risk
ECONOMIC

Decreased overall risk

Expert disagreement

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

Oil price shock/energy
supply interruptions

Though some estimate capacity will increase to meet demand (forecast
25% increase by 2015), the energy market remains tight and, as such,
highly vulnerable to both physical and speculative shocks.

US current account
deficit/fall in US$

Although the trade-weighted real exchange rate of the US$ has
depreciated 23% since 2002, many believe this will continue, in order
to limit a widening US current account deficit.

Chinese economic
hard landing

Chinese growth is both investment- and export-led. The expansion of
exports may generate a backlash (particularly in the US); high
investment (over 40% of GDP) has generated excess capacity and
fears of potential bad debts.

Fiscal crises caused by
demographic shift

The deterioration of fiscal balances in G8 countries, combined with
continuing large deficits in other large countries, renders a series of
major fiscal crises possible, exacerbated by the long-term challenges of
ageing and equitable healthcare provision.

Blow up in asset
prices/excessive
indebtedness

House prices have doubled in most mature markets (and in some
emerging markets) in real terms over the last 10 years, putting price-toincome ratios at all-time highs. Many experts fear a major correction,
with differential impacts on consumption, economic growth and other
asset prices.

ENVIRONMENTAL

10

Stable overall risk

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

Climate change

Carbon emissions are growing above trend and there are indications
that feedback mechanisms, particularly increased heat-absorption
caused by Arctic ice-melt, will increase the speed and scale of
warming. New research argues that the increasing intensity of North
Atlantic hurricanes is due to global warming.

Loss of freshwater
services

The mitigation effects of improved water-pricing have yet to have an
effect; economic development and global warming have increased the
risk to the sustainability of many already stressed freshwater systems
worldwide, particularly in Asia.

ECONOMIC

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

Natural catastrophe:
Tropical storms

The increasing risk from tropical storms includes two major components.
The hazard itself may be increasing as global warming drives sea surface
temperatures higher. Global vulnerability to tropical storms may also be
increasing as a result of coastal development.

Natural catastrophe:
Earthquakes

The threat of earthquakes, in terms of likelihood and severity, remains the
same, driven by basic geophysics. Meanwhile, slight increases in the exposure
of populations are matched by slight reductions in the vulnerability of assets.

Natural catastrophe:
Inland flooding

Increasing floodplain development and an expected increase in climate
change-driven extreme weather events increase the risk of disruptive and
costly inland flooding.

GEOPOLITICAL

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

International terrorism

The risk of future attacks has risen: according to official threat assessments in
Britain, an attack is “highly likely”; the US National Intelligence Estimate
report has argued the Iraq war has heightened risks, while the situations in
Afghanistan, Somalia and Pakistan continue to cause concern.

Proliferation of WMD

North Korea tested a nuclear device in 2006, Iran continued its programme,
the US weakened its commitment to non-proliferation in a controversial
deal with India, while some Middle East states said they would seek
civilian nuclear technologies. All increase the risk of proliferation for 2007.

Interstate and civil wars

Civil war took hold in Iraq in 2006 while tensions fluctuated on the Korean
peninsula and in the Middle East. The International Crisis Group identified
November 2006 as the worst month for conflict prevention in 40 months.
The risk of any of a number of hotspots causing a major conflagration in
2007 increased.

Failed and failing
states

There is little prospect of immediate improvement in serial failed and
failing states – notably Somalia, Afghanistan and Pakistan. The creation of
the UN peacebuilding commission may improve mitigation in 2007 but
risks are increasing.

Transnational crime
and corruption

Transnational crime and corruption remain endemic in a number of
developing and developed countries, damaging state authority, economic
prosperity and weakening the ability to deal with other global risks.

Retrenchment from
globalization

Progress on the Doha trade round appears distant, while failures will be difficult
to reverse after expiry of Presidential negotiation authority. Populist sentiment
in Europe and the US is set to increase. (See the Europe@Risk report.)

Middle East instability

Overall stability is deteriorating, despite rapid growth and moves towards
stability in some Gulf countries. Grand bargains to stabilize the region may
be possible in 2007, but underlying problems of Islamist extremism,
political succession (as in Egypt) and fragile economic structures will make
the region highly volatile.

11

SOCIETAL

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

Pandemics

Some measures (e.g. improved research and cooperation on early warnings)
have improved response capability. However, the aggregate risk is constant
as uncertainty remains over the timing and nature of any outbreak.

Infectious diseases in
the developing world

Although infection rates have stabilized in some countries, infection rates
for HIV and other diseases are rising in others, presenting major risks to
future prosperity. India passed South Africa as the country hosting the largest
population of HIV/AIDS infected people. (See the India@Risk briefing.)

Chronic disease in the
developed world

Experts were divided on the balance between potential advances in
medical science over the next 10 years and the increasing prevalence
of “life-style” diseases.

Liability regimes

Experts were divided on the risks to global prosperity from liability regimes
over the next 10 years: some argue liability regimes represent a legitimate
policy choice, others suggest they represent a growing cost to business,
yet others suggest that US-style liability regimes are unlikely to make
headway in other parts of the world.

TECHNOLOGICAL

Key:

Reason for increased, stable or decreased overall risk

Breakdown of critical
information
infrastructure (CII)

Expert judgement suggested a balance between increasing vulnerability
arising from interconnectivity and growing awareness of security issues
surrounding CII with investments in resilience and spare capacity in some
key infrastructure areas.

Emergence of risks
associated with
nanotechnology

In the absence of any major scientific discovery, experts estimated the
potential risks arising from nanotechnology were unchanged.

Increased overall risk

Stable overall risk

Generally, the picture provided by the risk barometer
of expert opinion on the year-on-year assessment of
global risks is one of rising risks. Expert consensus
was that none of the 23 global risk issues identified
had improved since 2006. However, experts noted
that awareness on a number of risks – the first step
to effective risk mitigation – had improved in a
number of areas.

12

Decreased overall risk

Expert disagreement

Scenarios

It is a central tenet of work conducted by the Global
Risk Network that global risks do not manifest
themselves in isolation: their drivers, triggers and
consequences are interconnected. This was
apparent in 2005 when the domino effects of
Hurricane Katrina briefly shook the global system.
More recently, the connections between two of the
major issues for public policy and private enterprise
– energy security and climate change – have
reinforced the sense that global risks share a
common lineage.
How can one best think about interconnectedness?
One approach is to assess correlation. This provides
a simple measure of static interconnectedness. In
2006 the Global Risk Network engaged in an
ongoing survey of academics and experts to build
up a picture of correlation between the 23 core

risks. Many of the risk issues have multiple causes
and consequences beyond the risk list itself – the
matrix is not supposed to be a comprehensive
explanation of causality. However, the correlation
matrix portrays the strength of the macro
correlations perceived by experts to exist between
the risk issues identified and studied in this report. In
the graphic below, the numerical strength of
correlation between risk issues is reflected in the
thickness of the lines connecting them.
Correlation provides an excellent overall view of links
between risks, but may not capture the dynamics of
interconnectedness: even when causation or
consequence can be determined with confidence,
the context in which risks emerge and interact as
they play out may lead to different assessments of
probability and impact.

The Correlation Matrix

Key:

Oil price shock
Stronger
correlation

Proliferation of WMD

Current account
deficit/ Fall in US$
International terrorism

Spread of
liability regimes

Pandemics

Loss of freshwater
services

Climate change

Breakdown of CII
Retrenchment from
globalization
Coming
fiscal crises
China economic
hard landing

Failed and
failing states

Middle East instability
NatCat: Tropical storms
Developing world disease
(HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria)

Emergence of
nanotech risks

NatCat: Inland flooding
Asset prices/ excessive
indebtedness
Transnational crime
and corruption

NatCat: Earthquakes
Interstate and
civil wars

Chronic disease in
developed countries

13

In order to provide this context, the Global Risk
Network looked at how key risks could play out in
narrative scenarios. These scenarios do not
represent “best”, “worst” or even “base” cases, nor
are they predictions. Instead, they are possible,
plausible global risk features in which the challenges
of interconnectedness become plain.
The scenarios below contain a number of surprises
– some of them disturbing – but understanding the
possible surprises ahead may allow policy-makers
and business people to make decisions that will
avert the worst consequences of surprise and turn
risk into opportunity. While all the scenarios are
plausible, none is likely to play out in precisely the
way described. The short-term outlook for the global
economy remains good: one Citigroup Global
Capital Markets report (22 November 2006) predicts
global GDP growth of 3.4% in 2007 and 3.8% in
2008. But these scenarios show how short-term
central expectations may plausibly deteriorate.
One of the key lessons that emerged from all the
risk scenarios developed by the Global Risk Network
was the absolute centrality of cooperation between
the United States and China in dealing with a
number of major global risks – from mitigating
climate change, to managing pandemics. Without
the full engagement of both the US and China,
global risks will be extremely difficult to manage
successfully. The accelerating shift in influence,
power and prosperity to the countries of Asia
represents a generational opportunity to rethink
governance and creates the necessity to forge
common approaches to global risks.

Global Risk Scenario A:
Pandemic and Its Discontents
The following scenario illustrates the impacts
on business, the financial system and political
and economic conditions that could follow
from the emergence of a new pandemic.
It also illustrates the amplifying role played
by “infodemics”, where the rapid spread of
inaccurate or incomplete information can
amplify the effects of the core risk event.
In January 2008, reports of a new virus emerge in
Asia. Its properties are not well understood, but its
roots may lie in the high viral loads present in the
heavily vaccinated Asian chicken population.
From the outset, speculation about the virus spreads
faster than essential facts. Expert commentators
suggest the virus is more deadly than SARS, while
governmental data is widely questioned. Fear
spreads ahead of the disease, and some neighbouring
countries close their borders immediately.
By February 2008, the disease has claimed fewer
than 50 lives. Before the end of the month, Australia
and Germany report infections carried out of Bangkok
International Airport. Many passenger aircraft
travelling to South-East Asia are grounded. But the
effect on air freight companies is worse: a number
are forced to declare force majeure on significant
contracts, pushing them towards bankruptcy.
The knock-on effects on just-in-time inventories
appear by the beginning of March, with
longshoremen refusing to unload cargoes from
infected countries. The oil price crashes.
In late February, a large hedge fund fails due to
sudden asset devaluations. Herd behaviour causes
global liquidity to dry up. Neither the G8 nor the G20
is able to coordinate a response. Central banks
inject liquidity ad hoc, creating inflationary risks. As
black box models fail to adjust, financial contagion
continues.
By late March, there are several hundred confirmed
deaths outside South-East Asia, but the virus
remains poorly understood. Conspiracy theories
abound, with ethnic minorities a frequent target.

14

By November 2008 the disease is a full-blown
pandemic, with one million deaths worldwide.
Centralized containment measures are of limited
efficacy, but private and decentralized efforts help
slow the spread. By January 2009, a partially
effective vaccine is produced, with distribution from
March. However, internationally, there are questions
of who should distribute the vaccine, to whom and
at what cost. Domestically, active militaries step into
a crisis-management role helping to distribute
vaccines.

Bird flu outbreak at the Norfolk road farm, Britain, April 2006

By summer 2009, vaccination and natural immunity
have stemmed the spread of the disease. Globally,
normalcy returns, though increased militarism and
authoritarian tendencies have reshaped global
geopolitics.

By early June consensus emerges that the virus has
been spreading for a year. Yet characterization of the
virus continues to move slowly and the ineffectiveness
of existing anti-virals has led to a containment crisis.
Liability fears among pharmaceutical companies
threaten eventual vaccine production, while
governments fail to credibly signal exemptions.
A scaled-up response looks unlikely.

Global Risk Scenario B:
Out of the Global Warming Frying Pan
(and Into the Fiscal Fire)

In some Asian countries, widespread discontent at
the authorities’ response to the pandemic –
particularly in inland regions – leads to the
centralization and militarization of government
services. In developed democracies, armies become
key emergency service providers.

Events in 2007 trigger an inflection point in global
concern over the consequences of climate change.

Failed and failing states, particularly Myanmar, Nepal
and Pakistan, end up completely isolated and
deteriorate quickly, although for different reasons. In
Myanmar, different factions scramble to maintain
their relative positions. In Pakistan, rumours of
inequitable mobilization of government resources
cause tensions between central and border regions
and between the Sunni majority and Shiite minority.
In Nepal, the country is shut from all sides, affecting
the provision of stabilization assistance and
sharpening political divisions.
Globally, increased fear of cross-border movement
and trade feed an emerging backlash against
globalization, which in turn compounds the hit on
global demand.

Information asymmetry also plays a key role in
this scenario, which illustrates the knock-on
effects of a major shift in risk perception:
namely, that climate change has arrived.

First, massive inland flooding in South Asia resulting
from a late monsoon leads to crop failure, as well as
mass migrations. Tensions rise on the BangladeshIndia border as thousands flee humanitarian disaster.
In the Americas, oil supply is still disrupted from 2007
tropical storms; an unprecedented cold snap in the
north-east of the US leads to a spike in heating-fuel
prices as domestic and local supplies are exhausted.
Finally, figures released in December 2007 show an
unprecedented spike in the global temperature of
1.5 degrees Celsius for the year as a whole.
China’s remarkable story of 28 years of economic
growth – a Citigroup Global Capital Markets report
(22 November 2006) predicts real GDP growth of
9.8% in 2007 and 10.7% in 2008 – is disturbed by
awareness of environmental degradation and
inequality between “many Chinas”. Some 150 million
surplus rural workers drift between villages and cities
by 2008, with many subsisting through part-time,

15

Meanwhile, China concludes the only practical
option for the country’s future energy needs is
nuclear, with coal-fired electricity as a bridging
source. The government announces large-scale
infrastructure spending and concludes negotiations
with major suppliers of uranium.

A farmer gathers the rice crop from his paddy field after
Typhoon “Prapiroon” hit Southern China in August 2006.

low-paying jobs. This dislocation is masked by
unreliable official figures, but eventually causes
widespread civil unrest. In part due to the Beijing
Olympics, the government is initially unable to calm
demonstrations resulting from viral text-message
campaigns. The protests seize the mood of global
discontent and speak loudly on the issue of
environmental degradation.
In North America, public concern over climate
change leapfrogs scientific consensus. High oil
prices cause a pull back from US asset markets,
bursting that country’s “housing bubble”. Popular
discontent results in calls for radical action.

While supply constraints and elevated demand keep
oil prices high over 2007 to 2010, other developing
countries follow China’s lead, and demand the right
to sovereign control of the nuclear fuel cycle. This
puts increasing pressure on the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, causing it to reach a tipping
point. The continued failure of the international
community to halt Iran’s nuclear programme leads
that country to proclaim successful enrichment in
early 2015.
Global concerns cause risk premiums to rise, and
equities to slide. In North America and Europe,
retirement funds are impacted. Governments are put
under pressure to increase state financial support,
causing fiscal positions to worsen, particularly in
Europe. At the same time, the bursting of the US
housing bubble and declines in equity markets
cause private savings in major developed economies
to rise – beginning a process of correcting longstanding global economic imbalances.

In the United States, legislators follow California's
populist lead, establishing a national carbon trading
scheme and creating industry incentives for
conservation and alternative energy. In late 2008, the
US administration releases a white paper entitled
"From Addiction to Oil, to Blessed by Biofuel",
signalling an enhanced focus in US energy policy on
biofuels, particularly relevant to farming communities
in the American Mid-West. The white paper wins
political support both from “hawks” seeking US
energy independence and those fearing climate
change.
This policy response has the unintended
consequence of setting up acute competition for
productive land, between food, fuel, forests and
fibre, with increased carbon sequestration and
mining activities competing at the margin. Prices rise
for agricultural commodities and land.

16

Gas emissions at a plant near downtown Toronto, November
2006. Current per capita CO2 emissions in Canada and the
United States are approximately 5 times Chinese levels. If
China were to emit at the North American per capita rate, its
total emissions would be more than 4 times greater than those
of the US.

Global Risk Scenario C:
Oil Shock and Its Consequences

Continuing with the scenario, the collapse of
Pakistan is averted in mid-2008 by redirected oil
revenues, resulting in a geopolitical realignment with
Arab OPEC nations. Other blocs, similarly structured
around commodity exporters, emerge in other parts
of the world: between Venezuela, Bolivia and poor
Latin American countries; between Russia and
former Soviet republics with major energy deficits
(notably Uzbekistan, Georgia and Armenia); between
African commodity exporters and their neighbours.
While some alignments cause concern in the West,
they also help to avert state failure.

This scenario also illustrates the ways in which
policy responses to a single shock can either
create opportunities for change or facilitate a
chain reaction of global risks.
In early 2008, terrorists attack multiple tankers in
the Malacca Straits, sparking a major supply-side oil
price shock. The initial shock drives oil above US$
150 per barrel. Producing countries, acting in
concert, choose to “close the tap”; a global slowdown
does not reduce demand for oil products enough to
counteract the supply shock. The short-term price
elasticity of demand for oil proves itself to be low.

But the emergence of the ChavPec block does not
go unanswered.
A countervailing OECD bloc emerges. The Malacca
events cause an immediate slowdown, but the 2008
slowdown quickly turns into a recession in 2009 as
OECD governments and central banks have used
up their ability to inject liquidity. The recession is worse
in the US than elsewhere. In the US, falling asset
prices drive down consumption while the unwinding
of long-term current account imbalances to which the
US is particularly exposed causes a deep recession. In
Japan, while higher energy prices help Japan escape
deflation, growth is destroyed by the decline in
European and American demand for finished goods.

A secondary reaction of oil-producing countries is to
match economic weight with a permanent increase
in international political weight. Oil-producing
countries aim to achieve this by setting up parallel
alliances known collectively as ChavPec. The
operational mode of these alliances is the expansion
of development assistance from oil producers to
politically sympathetic and economically vulnerable
countries, in return for political support. Rather than
windfall gains from high hydrocarbon prices flowing
to the developed world, the windfalls generate
political goodwill among developing countries.

Oil Shocks (Using Hamilton Filter), 1961-3Q.06

140%

140%

120%

120%

100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%
61

65

69

73

77

81

85

89

93

97

01

05

Note: The filter measures an oil shock as the greater of zero or the percent change of the inflation-adjusted US$ oil price over the peak price of the
previous three years. Shaded areas are U.S. recessions.
Sources: BLS, NBER and The Wall Street Journal

17

In the US, Europe and Japan, events are marked by
retrenchment from globalization in general,
characterized by populism (in Europe and the United
States), regionalism (in the emerging OECD bloc as
a whole) and militarism (in the US and Japan).
But the most problematic response to high oil prices
comes from China, which experiences its own
economic hard landing in 2009, primarily due to the
collapse in OECD consumption. The speed with
which longstanding global imbalances unwind
affects China more than OECD bloc countries. But
the major consequence is political. China’s
leadership emphasizes militarism in an effort to
consolidate power. Tensions over Taiwan are
inflamed. An emboldened military builds up power
projection capacities from a relatively low base and
turns its attentions south, with an eventual aspiration
to control the sea lanes and approaches to major
choke-points (including the Malacca Straits). India is

isolated by these events, failing to find its place in
any of the emerging major blocs. Over a period of
time, tensions with Pakistan – particularly after
Pakistan’s realignment with Arab OPEC countries –
worsen, leading to heightened fears of a nuclear
exchange over Kashmir.
The final major casualty of the oil price shock is the
prospect for collective action to mitigate climate
change. Though the high oil price causes the rate of
increase of oil consumption to fall, its major impact
is to delegitimize proposals for a global carbon tax.
The effect of higher oil prices on alternative energy
substitutes only plays out in a 10-year time-horizon.
In the short to medium term, the chief substitute for
oil – where this is possible – is an increase in the
consumption of coal. The fracturing of the international
community means that a framework that would
make carbon capture and storage attractive
politically or economically does not emerge.

Financial market scenario

Short-Term
Interest Rates

Long-Term
Interest Rates

Equities
(Changes)

Currency (TradeWeighted Basis)
Changes

Investment Grade
Corporate Credit
Spreads

4.75
1.50
4.50
5.00
5.75

-15%
-15%
-15%
-12%
+5%

-3%
-3%
+5%
+3%
+0%

+40bp
+20bp
+40bp
+40bp
+30bp

Stress case, Oil Shock, 3-month horizon

United States
Japan
Euro area
UK
Australia

5.25
0.25
3.50
5.50
6.25

Note: Over a 3-month time horizon of oil prices above US$ 100, equities in the United States and other markets are expected to decline by over 10%.
Source: Citigroup Global Capital Markets report, 22 November 2006

18

Understanding the Nature of Global Risks

This section of the report provides a brief exploration
of three fundamental aspects of global risks:
interdependency, heuristic biases and policy
mistakes. The first provides an insight into the nature
of interdependency and provides an example of how
interdependency affects the way in which we
manage and mitigate global risks. The second
reflects a human approach to risk in general.
Humans operate with incomplete information
through the use of heuristics. The third, often
connected to the second, explores how policy, often
intended to mitigate risk, can actually exacerbate it.

Why Interdependence
Matters for Security
A major challenge for policy-makers is how to
encourage firms to invest in risk-reducing measures
in a world where there are growing interdependencies
between different parts of the system. Since 9/11

Setting policy under conditions of
interdependency: Reducing the risk
of power outages
Consider a utility that is part of an integrated
system – the power grid – and wants to determine
whether to invest in additional capacity or security
measures (such as taking care of growing
vegetation near distribution lines) to reduce the
chance that it will cause a power outage. In any
highly interdependent system, such as the power
grid, there is a systemic tendency to underinvest in
reliability. A consequence of interdependency is
that a part of the cost of a failure is passed on to
competitors and their customers.
Since 2002 several outages in individual European
countries (France, Italy, Germany, Switzerland)
have had cross-border impacts. An agreement
between different European grid operators already
exists, defining who should provide back-up
power when an outage in one country risks
undermining the stability of the European
transmission system as a whole. Although this
agreement was able to avoid larger damage, it
could not prevent the spread of the problem.

there has been a focus by researchers and
practitioners on strategies for dealing with this issue
under the heading of interdependent security (IDS).
An interdependent security setting is one in which
each individual or firm that is part of an
interconnected system must decide independently
whether to adopt protective strategies that mitigate
future losses. These measures can reduce the risk of
a direct loss to a country, firm or individual, but there
is still some chance of suffering damage from others
who do not take similar actions.
The economic incentive of a decision-maker to
invest in protective actions depends on whether
others are expected to follow suit. The fact that the
risk is often determined in part by the behaviour of
others gives a complex structure to the incentives
that individuals or firms face to reduce or invest in
risk mitigation measures.

There are a number of alternative approaches.
One is based in the provision of the service as a
right for the customer, under which a utility would
be held responsible for the full costs of a service
failure, wherever it occurs. This is only possible,
however, if the grid is set up in such a way that
additional costs for providing transmission services
are not directly passed on to customers. A second
approach, more explicitly based in regulation, is to
mandate minimum reliability standards with
monitoring and serious penalties for noncompliance.
The first approach provides a clear incentive on
the part of service providers to avoid failures. But it
is only a valid option when accompanied by
oversight. If customers are made to bear the cost,
the distribution of incentives would be asymmetric.
The transaction expenses (information, proving
responsibility, legal fees) would be prohibitive for
individual customers to seek to recover outage
costs. The second seeks to prevent them through
explicit regulatory action.
Further examples of interdependency can be found
in the longer version of the current report at
www.weforum.org/en/initiatives/globalrisk

19

In many interdependent security problems, if one
actor believes others will not invest in security, the
incentive to do so is reduced. The end result may be
that no one invests in protection, although all would
have been better off if all had incurred the cost of a
protection strategy. On the other hand, should each
decision-maker believe others will also undertake
mitigation measures, the optimal strategy will be to
do the same.

Heuristics
The world is increasingly complex and uncertain.
With imperfect information, humans cannot make
fully-informed decisions; contrary to neo-classical
theory, humans do not make fully rational decisions
either. Our decisions frequently depend on
approximations of the world around us – short cuts
that allow quick decisions by resorting to learned
behaviours. These short cuts and “rule-of-thumb”
practices are known as heuristics, derived from the
Greek word “to find”.
To a large extent, the existence of heuristics stems
from the fact that human brains have evolved to
specialize in rapid decision-making at the expense of
processing complexity. In our original condition,
survival depended upon the rapid appreciation of
threat and an effective response. Heuristics are often
useful, making decisions quicker and easier. But
they can also lead to inaccurate judgements,
particularly in risk perception.
There are approximately 80 specific heuristic biases
that distort our ability to assess risk effectively. Most
are not independent of one another, but exacerbate
the effects of others. The use of highly diversified
networks can help overcome a number of biases:
interpreting a story of events through the lens of
superficially similar accounts (availability), focusing
on instances which seem to confirm our initial
assumptions rather than those that question them
(confirmation bias), overestimating our own abilities
to assess (overconfidence) and clinging mentally to
facts or figures heard in a particular context (anchoring).

20

Policy Errors in Risk Management
Historically, public policy in financial markets has
both mitigated and exacerbated risk. Global risks,
difficult to understand and dependent on a range of
interconnected factors, are particularly susceptible to
policy errors, whether on the part of governments,
regulators or central banks.
In some cases, policy has dampened the effects of
the market and thereby reduced volatility –
automatic stabilizers in welfare economies, for
example, have helped to flatten economic cycles. In
others, however, policy has seriously exacerbated
risk: most initial government responses to the stockmarket crash of 1929 – combining mercantilism with
a classical approach to wages and prices –
sharpened the consequences of the event rather
than mitigated them. More recently, errors of
regulatory or monetary policy have either reduced
the ability of the market to mitigate risk, or
exacerbated risks within the market itself.
Policy errors are generally obvious in retrospect but
rarely obvious at the time – decisions made by
governments and regulators depend on judgement,
experience, incomplete information and the balancing
of alternative paths of action. However, the awareness
of potential policy mistakes may offer the best
mitigation strategy for avoiding errors in the future.

Policy decisions by governments and central banks can help
improve resilience and prevent the contagion of financial risk.
In 1929, however, policy in the US and elsewhere exacerbated
the impacts of the equity crash.

Risk Mitigation

The aim of risk identification and risk assessment is
to provide the tools to mitigate exposure to global
risk. But the step from the assessment of individual
global risks to the mitigation of global risks under
conditions of uncertainty, interdependency and
competing interests is far from simple.

Mitigation involves a constant balance between
action and reaction, between preventing a risk from
occurring and dealing with its consequences when it
does, between acting rashly and acting too late.

Risk Mitigation

REACTION

ACTION

Degree of Uncertainty

Room for Action

Number of Indicators

Options for Action

Time
Note: As time progresses, the information surrounding a given risk event may increase. But as it does, the options available for effective mitigation are
bound to reduce. Risk mitigation – as with risk itself – involves degrees of uncertainty. Taking proactive mitigation policies implies operating under
considerable uncertainty, with incomplete indicators.
Source: Crisis and Risk Network, Swiss Federal Institute for Technology

21

Prioritizing Risk
Resources for risk mitigation are necessarily
limited; prioritization among risks is a necessary
step for deciding how mitigation resources should
best be spent.
The normal basis for prioritization is, firstly, an
assessment of the likelihood of the risk occurring
and the severity of the consequences of the risk
occurring. These assessments are necessarily
idiosyncratic and distorted by a range of heuristics
– for example, perceived likelihood is affected by
“recency” and “availability” biases while severity
depends on “vividness” and perceived vulnerability.
A second element to prioritization is values – the
different values of an organization may determine
its perception of vulnerability, as well as its
perception of responsibility for mitigation. A third
and final element is openness to mitigation – risks
where there are clear strategies for mitigation will
tend to be mitigated before those where strategies
are more diffuse, even if the assessment of
likelihood and severity is less acute.
At the global level, these key elements of risk
mitigation are problematic. First, the potential
consequences of combinations of risks affect all
organizations, even if global risks are often
perceived by individual organizations and countries
as exogenous. Second, global risks may produce
consequences outside the central expectations of
risk managers – they represent low-probability,
The approach taken to mitigate an individual global
risk will depend on prioritization, resources and
understanding. Some risks can effectively be
mitigated with relatively few resources by changing
individual mindsets and altering behaviours – others
require strong institutional processes and actions.
What is common to the mitigation of all global risks
is that they require alignment on priorities, common
understanding and common efforts to overcome
problems of collective action.
One approach involves acting to prevent the
manifestation of a specific risk. The advantage of
“upstream mitigation”, if successful, is that it allows
the disruption of the risk event itself to be avoided.

22

high-impact events which cannot necessarily be
well understood through classic cost-benefit
analysis. Third, global risks (such as climate
change) may emerge over a multi-decade timeframe, making it necessary to compare mitigation
over different generations to ensure equity. Fourth,
interconnections between global risks complicate
prioritization – looking at global risks in isolation
may increase the perceived costs of mitigation: as
this report argues, interdependencies are the key
factor in the global risk environment. Finally,
mitigating global risks often requires the
cooperation of different groups – issues of how to
manage collective action impact heavily on how
individual and global risk mitigation priorities can
be successfully aligned (the “tragedy of the
commons”). Most global risks are not open to
effective mitigation by any individual organization.
The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change offers one approach to managing risk
prioritization on the multi-decade and global scale,
suggesting a low discount rate for calculating the
net present value of future costs from not acting to
mitigate climate change. It is an approach that
aims to get beyond national vulnerabilities to
assess the systemic costs. An alternative
approach, explicitly stating a limitation on available
mitigation resources, is that undertaken by the
Copenhagen Consensus project. Risk prioritization
at the global level is a major task – but a
necessary prerequisite to efficient mitigation.

However, this assumes a degree of certainty about
the manifestation of the risk, and the expectation
that it can be managed in isolation. The scenarios in
this report suggest that interdependency between
global risks is hard to manage in this way. An
alternative is to attempt to understand nodes of
interconnectedness between global risks, and focus
mitigation efforts on them.
A final approach is to improve resilience,
allowing the system to cope with a range of
unexpected manifestations. Such “downstream
mitigation” recognizes that not all events can be
predicted and prevented.

Why are organizations not more
proactive in mitigating risk?
The following is a list of common reactions to
risk, which prevent a proactive approach to risk
mitigation:
• Someone else will manage my risk.
• The risk is not relevant to my organization.
• Won’t taking action just slow me down?
• No one is telling me that I must act.
• What reward do I get from mitigating risk?
• It is too costly to mitigate.
• Why worry about it?
It could never happen to me.
• It is too large to manage, and success
is not guaranteed.

In reality, these approaches are not mutually
exclusive. Mitigation strategies tend to involve parts
of both – like global risks themselves they are
dynamic and complex.
In the 2006 report, the Global Risk Network
developed the idea of the “5 pathways” to
mitigation, defining five elements of risk mitigation
strategies: improving insight, enhancing information
flow, refocusing incentives, improving investment
and implementing through institutions. In the 2007
report, these “5 pathways” have been applied to the
“core global risks” to achieve an understanding of
where mitigation efforts should focus.

The “5 Pathways” to Mitigation
• Improving insight: moving risks from the
unknown to the known through research. The
best mitigation strategies often derive from
the changed mindset which can result from
enhanced knowledge and information.
• Enhancing information flow: allowing
information to flow effectively between
decision-makers and those experiencing the
risk first-hand, to provide early warning,
inform the public and exchange best practice.
• Refocusing incentives: creating the incentive
frameworks that will allow decisions to be
made to reduce risks previously considered
exogenous.
• Improving investment: providing the
investments necessary to mitigate risk.
• Implementing through institutions: improving
(or creating) the framework needed to
mitigate risks for which an institutional
response is required.

23

Applying the “Five Pathways” to the 23 “Core” Global Risks

Global Risk

Oil price shock/energy supply
interruptions
US current account deficit/fall
in US$
Chinese economic
hard landing
Fiscal crises caused
by demographic shift
Blow up in asset prices/
excessive indebtedness
Climate change
Loss of freshwater services
Natural catastrophe:
Tropical storms
Natural catastrophe:
Earthquakes
Natural catastrophe:
Inland flooding
International terrorism
Proliferation of WMD
Interstate and civil wars
Failed and failing states
Transnational crime
and corruption
Retrenchment from
globalization
Middle East instability
Pandemics
Infectious diseases
in the developing world
Chronic disease in the
developed world
Liability regimes
Breakdown of critical
information infrastructure (CII)
Emergence of risks associated
with nanotechnology

24

Improving
insight

Enhancing
information
flow

Re-focusing
incentives

Improving
investment

Implementing
through
institutions

Two Possible Institutional Innovations
for Managing Global Risks
Country Risk Officer
The Country Risk Officer concept would require
governments to appoint a single Country Risk
Officer, prioritizing risks on a cross-sectoral basis,
exploring private sector techniques of risk
assessment, management and transference.
In the corporate sector, the Chief Risk Officer
(CRO) is responsible for all categories of risk,
particularly risk reporting, consolidation and
aggregation. Enterprise CROs take a portfolio view
of risk – a Country Risk Officer would serve a
similar function, acting as a focus point for
strategic thinking (rather than day-to-day
management) and forward action within
government on how global risks can be effectively
managed and mitigated.
The principal advantage of the CRO concept
domestically would be to allow effective trade-offs
between the priorities of different ministries, and to
allow governments to escape silo-thinking. This is
particularly relevant when thinking of
“downstream” resilience strategies as similar
measures can help mitigate the consequences of
different risks: buildings which are protected
against earthquakes are also likely to better
withstand an explosion.

require consensus to act and that their objectives
are frequently sidelined by institutional conflicts. At
a time of acute global risks, the lack of
decisiveness may have severe costs.
An alternative may be so-called “coalitions of the
willing” whereby a number of individual, interested
and vital states cooperate in a non-exclusive
fashion on a specific global risk issue for a specific
period of time, acting as an avant-garde for risk
mitigation. Other countries will join the initiative as
it progresses towards a statement of policy
actions. The incentive to join is to influence a
successful global policy. The incentive to pursue
the risk mitigation goals seriously once inside
would be a “naming and shaming” of those
countries that do not meet the specific, agreed,
commitments and the possible risk of expulsion.
The principal advantage of the “coalition of the
willing” structure is its flexibility and the
involvement of only interested states, thereby
reducing the possibilities for obstruction and
gradually drawing less interested states into a
dialogue. The principal disadvantage of such an
approach would be the inability to effectively
negotiate trade-offs between different countries’
approaches to different global risks. For “grand
bargains” between states a coordinating role
would still be required.

At the international level, the meeting of national
CROs could provide a coordination body for global
risk mitigation efforts.

“Coalition of the Willing”
An alternative institutional solution to the
management of global risks is the setting up of
“coalitions of the willing” regarding individual global
risks involving different groups of countries in a
system of flexible geometry. A common criticism of
current international approaches to major risk
issues is that they depend on bureaucracies that

The World Economic Forum can play a key role in
facilitating dialogue on risk issues, helping to achieve
consensus around the need for change and possible
mitigation solutions.

25

Focus on Mitigation: Oil Price
Shock/Energy Supply Interruptions
The recent progress on mitigating the risk of an oil
price shock includes reductions in oil subsidies,
higher investment in energy efficiency and
increased strategic oil inventories:
• Energy price subsidies have been reduced
in some countries, for example,
Indonesia and Russia.
• High oil prices have increased investments in
the oil and gas sector, public and private
investment in energy efficiency and alternative
energy sources.
• Reserves have been added to Strategic
Petroleum Stockpiles, in, for example,
the US and China.
Future mitigation needs can be divided into those
which address the question of interruptions
specifically, and those that broadly address the
question of demand and supply.
• Remove the silo-based approach to risk
management and link energy security with
considerations on climate change.
• Promote marketing of energy-efficient products
and clean energy sources and attempt to promote
sustainable economic growth as a positive
economic choice in the developed world and as
a long-term policy for emerging markets.

26

• Reduce legal and political uncertainties related
to emissions-trading schemes and renewable
energies to allow markets to fully develop their
potential.
• Develop nuclear energy and coal-fired electric
utility plants in a manner that is mindful of the
risks and environmental concerns.
• Increase investment in refinery capacity and in
Liquid Natural Gas plants, off-loading and
processing terminals.
• Increase taxes progressively on fuel in the
United States to European levels, made more
politically palatable with an equal value cut in
income tax.
• Eliminate remaining energy-price subsidies. This
is particularly necessary to encourage energy
efficiency in emerging markets and
hydrocarbon-rich nations.
• Stockpile oil in Strategic Petroleum Reserves,
but release supplies unpredictably when
necessary to undercut speculative psychology
in the markets.
• Promote intergovernmental cooperation on
energy security policies in defined geographies
– such as the European Union.
• Promote and ensure common standards for
energy transit.

Focus on Mitigation:
International Terrorism
Despite the increase in the overall strategic threat
from international terrorism (particularly in Iraq,
Afghanistan and Somalia), there have been a
considerable number of tactical advances in the
mitigation of terrorism risk. These range from
improved security controls, to improved political
understanding and better management of
terrorism events when they occur, including
development of terrorism insurance markets to
cover some of the economic consequences of
attacks and facilitate the recovery process.
On pre-event mitigation:
• In the United Kingdom, a plot to blow up
aircraft between Britain and the United States
was disrupted.
• The European Union is improving its security
information-sharing system, through work on an
EU-wide counter-terrorism database.
• The United States is improving its tracking of
imports and exports, through its Automated
Commercial Environment system.
• In Saudi Arabia, over 20 senior Al Qaeda
operatives have been killed. A few years ago,
fears that the Saudi regime was under threat
were widespread – these fears are now
reduced.
• The Philippine authorities are re-establishing
control over Basilan and the Jolo Islands,
operational centres for the Abu Sayyaf and
Jemaa Islamiyah terrorism organizations.
• In Indonesia, the government’s multipillar
counter-terrorism campaign is being
strengthened, with considerable new counterterror legislation, the prosecution of a number
of major terrorists and the support and
promotion of moderate Islam as an alternative
to radical theology.
• The private sector has improved physical
security measures and screening.

In post-event mitigation:
• The private sector has continued progress on
diversifying operations and building up
resilience, for example, by establishing a
second computer backbone.
• Terrorism insurance schemes have been
established to spread the risk among the
different stakeholders in some markets through
public-private partnerships: NHT in the
Netherlands, Pool Re in the UK, Gareat in
France, Extremus in Germany and TRIA in the
US.
• Terrorism insurance has risen: one survey of
Marsh clients revealed that terrorism coverage
rose from 23% in mid-2003 to 64% by the end
of 2005.
Future specific needs for mitigating the terrorism
risk:
• Renew terrorism insurance schemes scheduled
to sunset in 2007 in some form; improve
framework for public-private arrangements in
other countries.
• Reach an internationally-agreed definition of
terrorism and terrorist acts and build a body of
transcultural values to help combat terrorism.
• Expand intelligence capabilities, while reenforcing oversight functions to ensure that
privacy is maintained.
• Improve cooperation between intelligence
agencies. In regions where bilateral cooperation
is already good and a level of trust has been
established, transition to a more dynamic and
efficient multilateral mode of cooperation.
• Improve tracking of financial flows to cut off
funding to dispersed terrorist cells.
• Strengthen the monitoring of the shipment of
goods to allow for the detection of explosive
devices and nuclear/biological/chemical/
radiological material.

27

Focus on Mitigation: Climate Change
As the science surrounding global climate change
continues to unfold, a range of public and private
mitigation measures are critical both in the
immediate term and over the long term.
Some steps are already under way:
• Awareness of the impacts of climate change is
rising quickly (particularly in the developed
world), building public support for mitigation.
Ultimately, changes in the mindset of
consumers – altering their behaviour as a result
– may produce considerable mitigation.
• The European Union launched an Emissions
Trading Scheme in 2005.
• California has passed a law aiming to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 25% by 2020.
But there are a number of mitigation needs which
should be introduced, updated or implemented
more fully:
• Raise awareness in the developing world of the
impacts of climate change.
• Involve major developing countries in new
frameworks for limiting future emissions’ growth
(particularly China and India).
• Urgently begin work on a successor to the
Kyoto agreement with three central principles:
• Involvement of the United States and major
developing countries (particularly China and
India);
• Differential responsibilities for future
emissions’ reduction dependent upon past
emissions and stage of economic
development; and,
• Common overall responsibility for climate
change.
• Allow transfer of technologies which may help
reduce climate change, or mitigate its impacts.
• Expand market mechanisms – such as carbon
emissions’ credit trading – which encourage
innovation, reward efficiency and ease the
development of insurance and other financial
tools to manage risks inherent in emissions’
reduction projects.

28

• Strengthen current market mechanisms by
ensuring a stable and predictable legal
environment and ensuring ambitious overall
limits on emissions.
• Create strong incentive structures and provide
research funds to foster possible “breakthrough
technologies” such as hydrogen fuel cells or
advanced thin film photovoltaics, particularly in
the power-generation sector.
• Provide investment or tax incentives that level
the playing field for capital intensive investments
in clean-coal combustion and carbon
sequestration.
• Improve cost-effective reductions in emissions
at the business and domestic level. Many wellmanaged corporations have already identified
more efficient processes that can lead to cost
savings in their production processes,
transportation and facilities management. These
should be extended.
• Improve the protection of private and public
operations from discontinuities caused by
severe physical risks due to climate change,
including strategic assessments of long-term
vulnerabilities.
• Encourage long-term adaptation in countries
where impacts of climate change are most likely
to be felt, by increasing adaptation aid and
creating financial structures to leverage global
insurance capacities.

A car struck by a tree blown down in the storm on a road
in China’s Guangdong province. Typhoon “Prapiroon”
killed at least 48 and left 15 others missing after crashing
ashore in Southern China.

Focus on Mitigation: Pandemics
The nature of the pandemic threat has become
much more widely understood over the last year:
• A pandemic is not a one-time occurrence, but
occurs as a series of waves.
• An outbreak cannot be predicted – multiple,
simultaneous geographic outbreaks may occur
with concurrent failures in the supply/value
chain.
• The behavioural response to an outbreak – the
“infodemic” element – may be more significant
than the virus itself.
As a result, mitigation measures have advanced,
both for the specific HN51 virus, as well as
preparedness for a pandemic outbreak more
generally:
• There has been an increase in exchange of best
practices between businesses.
• The coordination of international organizations
has improved.
• The awareness of the significance of national
transparency in order to aid any future
international effort makes the control of the
disease more likely.
Some future mitigation needs may only become
available once an outbreak has occurred and its
origins and vector of transmission have been
identified. But many mitigation options remain
incomplete or not fully exploited:
• Strengthen collaborative preparedness
activities, including simulations and decisionmodelling exercises among national, local and
value-chain interdependent parties.

• Manage expectations of what government will
and will not do if an outbreak occurs, endorsing
wider accountability in the event of a pandemic
and driving financial responsibility.
• Improve governmental ability to provide timely,
clear and effective information, and improve
education of first-responders.
• Increase research into the identification of
critical choke-points in the supply/value chain
where skill sets are rare, interdependencies are
greatest and the risk of triggering systemic
failure is highest.
• Invest in surge capacity in healthcare services.
• Encourage private sector investment in surge
capacity for vaccine manufacture.
• Develop effective domestic plans for the
distribution and administration of vaccines and
other medication in a pandemic situation.
• Reach understanding between manufacturing
and consuming countries on an equitable and
agreed basis for international distribution of
vaccines in a pandemic situation.
• Encourage the maintenance of basic supplies
at home.
• Explore the possibility of “work-from-home” for
some businesses, reducing the potential for
infection and spread.
• Undertake an administration-wide skill-set
evaluation to allow planning for replacing skilled
personnel, should they become unavailable.
• Explore the feasibility of alternate financing
schemes to serve as a backstop and transfer
the risk to a larger community, including the
public sector, to avoid systemic failure.

29

All of the four global risks focused on here – oil-price
shocks, international terrorism, climate change and
pandemics – would benefit in different ways from the
institutional innovations suggested in this report: a
Country Risk Officer or the setting up of “coalitions
of the willing” around particular global risks.
A Country Risk Officer would allow prioritization to
be made effectively and resources to be focused on
different risks at different times – creating, for
example, the kind of surge capacity for dealing with
pandemics which is outlined above. A Country Risk
Officer would be equally well placed to understand
the interconnections between many global risks –
understanding how some mitigation measures for
climate change might help improve energy security
while others would transfer the risk, or
understanding how improvements in preparedness
for natural catastrophes could also strengthen
resilience to international terrorism. Faced with a
portfolio of mitigation options, a Country Risk Officer
would be able to shape the necessary strategic
understanding and response to global risks that are
needed.
The “coalition of the willing” idea would allow for
flexibility and clarity in adopting many of the specific
mitigation options suggested above. The appropriate
governance, management and mitigation of global
risks are only likely to emerge from the expanding
participation of interested parties. Some of the
specific mitigation ideas above are already under
way in some parts of the world, but their impact is
reduced by the partial nature of their adoption
elsewhere. Structured “coalitions of the willing”
would allow momentum to build up around
mitigation measures, bringing countries and
businesses into an evolving set of standards, rather
than seek to achieve an overarching arrangement at
the outset. As such, a “coalition of the willing” would
reflect the realities of global politics – and attempt to
derive dynamic advantage from them.

30

In some cases, this approach would not work: a
global definition of terrorism and terrorist acts is
clearly a task which requires cross-cultural
consensus from the outset. However, for others –
such as an oil-price spike – this structure might
create exactly the balance between inclusiveness
and manageability that is required to produce
agreement on appropriate measures for global risk
mitigation.
There is no guarantee of mitigation initiatives
preventing global risks from causing major disruption
to the international system, economic damage and
irreparable human loss. Global risks cannot – for the
most part – be mitigated out of existence. But
inaction in the face of global risks is not an option –
either for businesses or government.

Contributors

This report was prepared by Charles Emmerson of
the Global Risk team of the World Economic Forum,
in conjunction with its partners:

Citigroup
John Ingraham, Managing Director, Head of Risk
Aggregation, Citigroup, USA

Global Risk Team, World Economic Forum
Wharton School
Charles Emmerson, Global Leadership Fellow,
editor Global Risks 2007
Jesse Fahnestock, Global Leadership Fellow
Johanna Lanitis, Team Coordinator
Thierry Malleret, Senior Director
Gareth Shepherd, Global Leadership Fellow
Supported by Sean Cleary, Strategic Adviser
MMC
Sara Dixter, Senior Business Analyst, Marsh,
United Kingdom
John Drzik, President, Mercer Oliver Wyman, USA
David Frediani, Executive Director, MMC International,
Marsh & McLennan Companies, United Kingdom
John Merkovsky, Managing Director, Global
Practice Leader, Marsh Risk Consulting, USA
Roland Rechtsteiner, Director, Corporate Risk
Consulting, Mercer Oliver Wyman, Switzerland

Witold Henisz, Associate Professor of
Management, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, USA
Stephen Kobrin, Professor of Multinational
Management, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, USA
Howard Kunreuther, Cecilia Yen Koo Professor of
Decision Sciences and Public Policy, The Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania, USA
Erwann Michel-Kerjan, Managing Director, Center
for Risk Management and Decision Processes, The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, USA

Swiss Re
Esther Baur, Head, Issue Management, Swiss
Reinsurance Company, Switzerland
Catherine Burger, Head, Networks and Research,
Swiss Re Centre for Global Dialogue, Switzerland
Annabelle Hett, Head, Emerging Risk Management,
Swiss Re, Switzerland
Kurt Karl, Head, Economic Research and Consulting,
Swiss Re Financial Services Corporation, USA
Ivo Menzinger, Head, Sustainability and Emerging
Risk Management, Swiss Re, Switzerland
Christian Mumenthaler, Chief Risk Officer and
Member of the Executive Board, Swiss Re,
Switzerland

31

Participants

Over the past year there have been a number of
workshops associated with the Global Risk work.
Four of these, at the Wharton School in May, in
London in June and October, and in New York in
September, directly contributed to the writing of the
current report. We would like to thank the participants
in these workshops for their time – and above all for
their insights:
Mohammad Hossein Adeli, Chairman, Center for
Economic & International Studies (Iran)
William A. Anderson, National Intelligence Officer,
National Intelligence Council
Dan Ariely, Professor, MIT - Media Laboratory
David Bowers, Joint Managing Director, Absolute
Strategy Research
Christopher Bunting, General Secretary,
International Risk Governance Council
Matthew Burrows, Director of Analysis and
Production Staff, National Intelligence Council
Jon Danielsson, London School of Economics
Frank Diebold, Professor of Economics, Finance
and Statistics, Wharton School
Patrick Dill, Vice-President, Emerging Risk
Management, Swiss Re
Hadi Dowlatabadi, Professor, Sustainable
Development Research Institute, University of British
Columbia
Alex Evans, Senior Research Fellow,
Center on International Cooperation
Jean Fournier, Managing Director, Innovation,
Marsh (MMC)
Leon Fuerth, Research Professor of International
Affairs, George Washington University
Boris Galonske, Senior Manager, Mercer Oliver
Wyman (MMC)
Ian A. Goldin, Director, James Martin 21st Century
School, University of Oxford
Robert L. Grenier, Managing Director, Kroll (MMC)
Gary S. Guzy, Practice Leader, Emerging
Environmental Risk, Marsh (MMC)
Beat Habegger, Senior Researcher,
Crisis and Risk Network
Bruce Hoffman, Professor, Security Studies,
Georgetown University
John P. Holdren, Director, Woods Hole
Research Center
Charles Hollis, Head, Middle East Programme,
Kroll (MMC)
Bob Howe, Chief Risk Officer, Swiss Re Life & Health

32

Sir Paul Judge, Chairman, Royal Society (UK)
Ethan B. Kapstein, Professor, Department of
Economics and Political Science, INSEAD
Stefan H.E. Kaufmann, Founding Director, Max
Planck Institute for Infection Biology
Micheal Keen, Chief, Tax Policy Division,
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Parag Khanna, Fellow, New American Foundation
David Knipe, Director, Mercer Oliver Wyman (MMC)
Gary S. Lynch, Managing Director and Business
Continuity Practice Leader, Marsh (MMC)
Nick Mabey, Chief Executive, E3G
Simon Maxwell, Director, Overseas
Development Institute
Vivian Menna, Managing Director, Marsh (MMC)
Sean M. Mooney, Chief Economist,
Guy Carpenter (MMC)
Berrien Moore, Director, Institute for
the Study of Earth, Oceans and Space,
University of New Hampshire
Geoff Mulgan, Director, The Young Foundation
Neil Doherty, Frederick H. Ecker Professor of
Insurance and Risk Management, Wharton School
Tina Nelson Fordham, Director, Economic and
Political Strategies, Citigroup Global Markets
Herbert Oberhänsli, Head, Economics and
International Relations, Nestlé SA
Martin Parry, Co-Chair, Working Group II (Impacts
and Adaptation), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Hadley Centre, Met Office
Christian Pedersen, Director, Mercer Oliver
Wyman (MMC)
John L. Petersen, President, The Arlington Institute
Erik Peterson, Senior Vice-President and Director,
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS)
Sanjay Purohit, Head, Corporate Planning, Infosys
Technologies Ltd
Danny Quah, Professor of Economics, London
School of Economics
Walter V. Reid, Director, Conservation and Science
Programme, The David and Lucile Packard
Foundation
Uriel Rosenthal, Professor of Government and
Public Administration, Leiden University
David Rothkopf, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Garten Rothkopf LLC
Nouriel Roubini, Professor, New York University
Joanna Rubinstein, Dean, Health and Science
Initiative, Columbia University

Enrique Rueda-Sabater, Director, Strategy and
Integrated Risk Management, World Bank
Michael Ryan, Director, Epidemic and
Pandemic Alert and Response, World Health
Organization (WHO)
David Salisbury, Director, Immunization,
Department of Health of the United Kingdom
Armen Sarkissian, President and Founder, Eurasia
House International
Claire Spencer, Head, Middle East Programme,
Chatham House
Don Sull, Associate Professor of Management
Practice, London Business School
Rolf Tanner, Director, Political & Sustainability Risk
Management, Swiss Re
James Tansey, Deputy Director, James Martin
Institute for Science and Civilization
J. Adair Turner, Chairman, UK Pensions
Commission
Gary G. Venter, Managing Director,
Guy Carpenter (MMC)
David G. Victor, Director, Program on Energy and
Sustainable Development, CESP
Katherine Walker, Vice-President, Europe, Middle
East and Africa, Merrill Lynch Europe, Middle East
and Africa
Alyson C. Warhurst, Chair, Strategy and
International Development, Warwick
Business School
Kevan V. Watts, Chairman, Merrill Lynch
International Inc.
Mark E. Welland, Head of the Laboratory,
Nanoscience Centre
Martin Weymann, Assistant Vice-President,
Emerging Risk Management, Swiss Re
Dickie Whitaker, Managing Director, Guy Carpenter
(MMC)
Angela Wilkinson, Director, Scenario Planning and
Futures Research, James Martin Institute for Science
and Civilization
Gareth Williams, Partner, Worldwide, Mercer
Human Resource Consulting (MMC)
Justin Wolfers, Assistant Professor of Business and
Public Policy, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania
Ngaire Woods, Director, Global Economic
Governance Programme
Keith Woolnough, Actuary, Swiss Re Life & Health

33

The World Economic Forum is an independent
international organization committed to improving
the state of the world by engaging leaders in
partnerships to shape global, regional and
industry agendas.
Incorporated as a foundation in 1971, and based
in Geneva, Switzerland, the World Economic
Forum is impartial and not-for-profit; it is tied to
no political, partisan or national interests.
(www.weforum.org)

